
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 

Contents 
About the Author ............................................................................................ v 
Acknowledgments ........................................................................................ vi 
Preface 
 ................................................................................................ vii 
Chapter 1: 
Setting the Stage ...................................................................... 1 
Chapter 2: 
Core Lessons ......................................................................... 27 
Chapter 3: 
Marketing ................................................................................ 61 
Chapter 4: 
Building a Team ..................................................................... 99 
Chapter 5: 
Communication Matters ....................................................... 119 
Chapter 6: 
Strategic Thinking ................................................................ 131 
Chapter 7: 
Exiting Your Business  ......................................................... 163 
Index 
 ............................................................................................. 177 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
1 
Setting the 
Stage 
 
As we get started on this business adventure together, I want to share with 
you what I mean when I use the word entrepreneur. The following definition 
sums it up succinctly: 
An entrepreneur is a risk-taker who invests his time, energy, and/or 
capital to create a new product, process, or service that has resonance 
within a given community.  
Let’s look at the implications of this idea.  
Entrepreneurship and Resonance  
Let’s flesh this out a bit. An entrepreneur needs to find a way to interact with 
people (preferably lots of people) in a way that resonates with them. This 
means that the product or service attracts their participation and buy-in. In 
physics, resonance occurs when a pattern in one system causes surrounding 
systems to begin to vibrate or move in a similar pattern. This is exactly what 
entrepreneurs do. This can be social entrepreneurship—for example, Presi-
dent Jimmy Carter working with Habitat for Humanity (lots of resonance and 
buy-in there). However, it is usually business oriented, such as Jeff Bezos’ Ama-
zon.com. His creation certainly resonates with people, and they demonstrate 
this with their purchasing power. They keep going back to Amazon again and 
again. 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
2 
Another great example of buy-in and resonance can be seen in San Francisco 
with Blue Bottle Coffee Company. It is an immensely popular coffee business, 
in an already crowded market. Even with Starbucks and numerous other op-
tions available in the marketplace, the 30-minute line of devoted coffee drink-
ers queued up every morning stands as a literal testament to the resonance 
the company created. Where did this resonance come from? A high-quality 
product, delivered in a way that people want. “It's really about an appreciation 
for unnecessary beauty,” founder James Freeman says, “and a willingness to work 
for it.” 1  
■ Note An entrepreneur is a builder of resonance.  
In order to develop resonance, a startup has to start with a product or 
service. Selecting that starting point requires a few perspectives that are vital 
and definitely worth recognizing. Let’s look at each in turn. 
Entrepreneurs Create Something New 
Entrepreneurship always starts with a proposition: you are going to solve 
someone’s problem—specifically: 
• 
You have information or insight that other people don’t 
have.  
• 
You have a unique product. 
• 
You will deliver an existing product to a group that does 
not have it. 
• 
You will deliver an existing product in a new way, which 
could be faster, cheaper, or better. 
                                                 
1 Fortune magazine, September 26, 2011 
 

Startup 
3
It Is Compelling 
The business idea is important enough that, when properly executed, it will 
trigger a specific customer group to reach into their pockets, pull out their 
money, and pay you for it. 
You Can Scale It 
Does your idea structurally have enough potential transactions to make 
enough money? If you buckle down tight and build this business, identify how 
big it can get, and what resources you will need to get there.  
If you are marketing your own time as a consultant, for instance, is it scalable 
to your needs? You only have 24 hours a day to sell—and will occasionally 
need to sleep and eat. So your inventory of product is limited.  
If you are selling products, what are the physical limitations on how much 
product you can get your hands on and connect with customers? These in-
clude the following: 
• 
Product availability: If you are selling large, complex prod-
ucts, how many can you actually manufacture per year?  
• 
Demand: What will the market bear in terms of transac-
tions that you can compete for?  
Play it out, and see what the outer bounds of your idea look like in terms of 
scale, product availability, and demand of the market. 
You Can Control It  
Having chosen a product or service, can you control the vital elements of the 
business? These include things like access to merchandise, licensing, and so 
forth. This is a structural aspect of the business that you are responsible for 
figuring out before you jump in.  
• 
What political, legislative, or economic factors are you de-
pending on to stay in business? For example, building a ve-
hicle emissions testing device as a core product is highly 
dependent on having states legislate that such testing is 
required. 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
4 
• 
If your chosen business model is dependent on a third-
party license or company, what are the risks associated 
with that dependency? What guarantees do you have for 
the long-term stability and availability of that relationship? 
For example, becoming an independent agent of an insur-
ance company creates a clear dependence on that com-
pany’s strength and evolving reputation. 
• 
An example of this is the current fad of serve-yourself 
yogurt shops, which is hitting hard in Austin, Texas. A 
dozen such shops have opened there in the last 18 
months. These market players cannot control how many 
more of these will pop up and eat up local market share 
from them—they just have to watch what happens. 
• 
An example of “control done right” is a car dealership. 
When you are lucky enough to get the go-ahead to open a 
Honda or Lexus dealership, you are given a region wherein 
only you will represent the brand. That is a powerful type 
of control. 
• 
If you are licensing a solar technology from China to build 
a customer base in Europe, can you negotiate an exclusive 
right to do so? Or will any company with an interest in the 
technology be able to do the same thing?  
• 
If you have a novel technology of some kind, can you get 
patents to cover your invention and make it defensible?  
Exercise: Get a whiteboard and visually draw out the relationships between 
your idea, the customers, the dependencies (licenses, product, sales channels), 
your staff, and any other details you can think of. Become fluent in the story 
and explore the relationships thoroughly before committing to any particular 
strategy or business model.  
_________________ 
 

Startup 
5
A Ticket to the Game 
Most folks think that building a product or packaging a great service is the 
hardest part of becoming a successful business owner. The thought is some-
thing along the lines of, “If we can just build the web site, or open the restau-
rant, or create the widget—then we are going to start making money!”  
Building it, opening it, or inventing it is often the easy part. The hard part is 
usually what comes next—connecting with customers, communicating your 
value, and convincing them to pull out their wallets to give you money. 
Figuring out exactly how you will connect the product with enough customers in 
a short enough time span so that you survive, and grow to thrive—that’s 
where the real work awaits.  
To be successful in business you do have to have a great product; a product 
that is developed and ready to go. This alone takes a great deal of time, effort, 
and investment. However, this great achievement is nothing more than a ticket 
to the game. It is the cost of admission that allows you to enter the coliseum 
and fight the battle for the attention of your customers. And this is competi-
tion against those who are already in the market trying to make a dollar in 
your chosen space. This process of connecting your idea with customers is 
your business. Not only that, you have to connect your idea given a rigid set of 
constraints:  
• 
Time: How long can you go before you establish a base 
level of product sales?  
• 
Money: How much money you have for marketing deter-
mines what strategies are available to you. Never use your 
whole budget for product development—make sure to 
allocate a significant amount of money for the marketing 
effort. 
• 
Product Category Awareness: Is there already awareness in 
the market for what your category of product does?  
• 
Brand Awareness: Do you have any market awareness asso-
ciated with your particular product or service that you can 
leverage? Are you starting from scratch? 
• 
Competitive Messaging: How much messaging is already be-
ing directed at your customers by competitors? 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
6 
• 
Non-competitive Messaging: How heavily is your customer 
base being messaged by other businesses that are not re-
lated to what you are offering? (You are in competition 
with them, too, when you are trying to get a customer’s 
attention.) 
Takeaways: Building a product is nothing more than a step in your business. 
For most companies, the hard part—the business part—is the process of con-
necting that product or service with customers given a limited set of re-
sources. 
_________________ 
 
Nobody Cares About Your Business  
When consulting with entrepreneurs that are struggling to get a business off 
the ground, I often end up telling them this: 
            I read a great book on starting your own business. It’s the most 
important book on the subject you could ever read—and it only had 
two words in it.  
Those two words were “nobody cares.”  
To close the story and make the point, I tell them that as an entrepreneur, 
your entire job is to make those two tiny, awful words wrong.  
That’s it. Make people care about what you are doing. 
The fact of the matter is that at first, people won’t care. People are busy. 
People won’t know who you are when you start out, and they won’t go out of 
their way to find out. As you create a business, and move beyond your prod-
uct to the point where you are figuring out how to connect your product with 
the market, you realize that the whole purpose behind your effort is to get 
people to care about what you do. If you are in the computer business, it is 
not just about computers. If you are in the pizza business, it is not just about 
pizza. The best product in the world is just a starting point, and it won’t make 
you a dollar unless you can figure out how to make that product relevant to 

Startup 
7
the lives of your customers and get them to understand that relevance. Having 
a great product helps, but that alone is not enough.  
This bias toward customer indifference is a reality of the market. But to tell 
you the truth, I like the fact that getting into markets is tough, because that 
means that it is tough for my competitors too, and will serve to keep the folks in 
your market that aren’t smart enough or fast enough from hogging the swing 
set for too long.  
_________________ 
 
What Is a Business?  
Too often, business owners, managers, and decision-makers get fooled by the 
way they use language into thinking that their business is a “thing.” It is not. It 
is convenient and even necessary to use a noun to refer to your business when 
communicating with people, but when you visualize it for yourself, make sure 
you don’t ever do so. One of the lessons I have brought along to all of the 
companies that I have worked at and consulted for is the following: 
Your business is not a noun. It is a verb. It is a “happening” and a 
“doing.” It is nothing less than the sum total of the actions and 
thoughts of every employee and customer. It is the result-in-motion of 
all of the things that the people who participate in your business do 
each and every day. 
Mentally framing your business in this way is an easy and useful step toward 
understanding it and how its complexity is organized between ideas, your staff, 
your customers, and the wider market. If you are visualizing the business as a 
noun (an object of some kind), your model of understanding is inherently 
missing much of its complexity. By promoting your visualization from a noun 
(static) to a verb, you automatically give yourself a much more complex mod-
eling paradigm. You will immediately get closer to the reality of dance-like 
complexity found in all businesses as they grow and operate. 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
8 
_________________ 
 
The Boat 
Most people are employees working for other people. This employment may 
chafe them a bit from time to time, but they are sacrificing a bit of freedom for 
the stability. They usually aspire to become leaders in their environment, in 
part to grow their salary, and in part to ease the chafing—and to have more 
control over their own lives. Inherent in this is the idea that you “plug in” to a 
structure that other people have created (a corporation, university, etc.). The 
idea of advanced education (getting an MBA for example), is a way to open op-
tions for plugging in to the structure in some advantageous manner. This is the 
most common work pattern in the developed world—finding a company to 
work for.  
Some make a different choice: to find their own path, and take the burden of 
owning something from top to bottom and being responsible for the outcome 
in a way that others will never understand. Here are the characters in a para-
ble that usefully describes what I am talking about. 
The Employee  
He is riding in a big boat. Cold seas thrash outside, but in the boat’s sturdy, 
rigid interior it feels relatively warm and dry. There are waves and movement 
that can be felt inside the boat, but he feels safe most of the time. He knows 
that there is the threat of the boat sinking or being asked to walk the plank if 
he makes a mistake, but he tries not to worry about that most of the time. He 
has a set of duties onboard that he attends to. He gets health insurance and a 
steady paycheck; his life feels safe, except it is not as stimulating as it could be. 
Looking out of the window at the strange lands outside, he thinks, “I wonder 
what else is out there? Where is this boat going anyway? The captain knows. 
Probably.” 
The Entrepreneur 
He has no boat, but has a dream in mind. He heads to the forest. Once there, 
he makes an axe and then proceeds to cut down trees to make a boat. This is 
tiring, but somehow the work propels him. Next, he has to figure out how to 

Startup 
9
get the boat into the water, how to waterproof it, how to repair it, how to 
steer it—and he does so. Eventually it is safe enough for employees to ride in 
it along with him. When the storms come, all eyes turn to him for answers. 
When treasure is found or blue-sky sailing takes place, it is to his credit. Even-
tually he hires a captain to steer, and he settles on the best of the beaches 
found during his voyage. At night he has vivid dreams of forests, waves, and 
opportunity. 
The major difference between the characters in this tale comes down to two 
words: ownership mentality. Being an entrepreneur forces you to address every 
detail of an operation—to own the details from top to bottom (lest ye be 
owned by them, and fail). Starting from scratch, and having nobody to fall back 
on changes you. Your vision widens and deepens, your sense of resourceful-
ness grows, and your tendency to take action independently without having 
someone else prompt you becomes second nature.  
Because of this, entrepreneurs can make excellent employees. If you can get 
them on staff and keep them interested, they can create a great deal of value 
for you. Truly a rare and valuable commodity.  
_________________ 
Launch Strategies 
There are a number of different strategies for launching a business, and they 
depend primarily on the amount of resources you have available. 
The Soft Launch 
What do you do when you have an idea and no cash? Keep your day job, that’s 
what. Being an entrepreneur is not an all-or-nothing proposition. By doing a 
soft launch of your business, you can scout out the territory with low risk by 
continuing whatever career you have, but starting to put feelers out into the 
market in support of your idea.  
Build a web site, and sell your product or services at a small scale. This allows 
you to gather information about the viability of your plan, satisfy your itch to 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
10 
build something, and experience a good bit of the adventure without putting 
yourself or your family in a dangerous financial position. 
Never underestimate the value of a steady paycheck and the benefits that 
come with a good job, such as health insurance. It takes a lot of progress on a 
startup to get to the point where it can provide comparable security (probably 
years). 
Jumping In  
This kind of business launch is what I think most people think of when starting 
a business: putting all of your chips on the table and playing your hand—win it 
all or lose it all. This is a risky proposition, and not to be taken lightly. The 
benefit of doing this is that you can give your full attention to the project, and 
you can move fast. This is appropriate when the window of opportunity for 
your business will only be open for a short time. The caveat here is that you 
cannot jump in without some pool of resources to draw upon, or a very 
manageable risk profile (such as no family to support). That is how I started—I 
was single and just out of college. I could afford to take the risks, and jumped 
in and made it work. It changed me forever. 
Another example of the “jumping in” can be seen in a fellow entrepreneur, and 
good friend. He is so determined to make his business work, he took out a 
second mortgage on his house to pay for operational expenses—and he has a 
wife and kids.  
Clearly, jumping in is much easier when you have capital reserves to work 
from, whether from investors or your own bank account.  
Joining Someone Else’s Party 
You may end up with an opportunity to join a business venture that is entre-
preneurial, but already funded and in motion. In this scenario, you have the 
benefits of a paycheck and corporate niceties, but also the open environment 
of a startup where your entrepreneurial skills can be applied to define a busi-
ness that is not yet well formed.  
The downside of this is that you will have to negotiate for even a piece of eq-
uity, as opposed to being the founder and deciding equity distributions for oth-
ers. You are also likely to be compensated as an employee for the most part. 

Startup 
11
And depending on the organization, not being the top guy probably means that 
you won’t get much credit for your ideas.  
_________________ 
Different Kinds of Work  
One of the most important pieces of advice I ever got was from my father. He 
told me that it was critical to be paid for your thoughts, and not your labor. This is 
quite obvious to me now, but it was revelatory to me at the time. When you 
think about the options available to you as an employee or business owner, the 
model you choose has structural features, which provide both opportunity and 
limitation. Let’s use the construction business as a storyboard for taking a look 
at some fundamentals of work. 
The Laborer: Shoveling Dirt 
On the construction site, this type of work has the lowest barrier to entry, 
and is the simplest business model known to man. You work and get paid for 
it. You are trading your hours for dollars in a linear sense. Work more hours, 
get more money. When you stop shoveling, you stop getting paid. Here are 
some observations for you to consider: 
• 
You have little control over your own schedule.  
• 
You have little flexibility in how you do your work. 
• 
Your labor does not scale—if you are not shoveling, you 
don’t get paid.  
• 
When you are shoveling, you don’t have time to do 
anything else.  
• 
It’s hard to make your labor unique and thus more 
valuable. Lots of people can shovel, so the wage will be 
low. Compensation goes up as what you do (or how you 
do it) becomes more scarce in the market. 
Some examples of laborers include day laborers, and most programmers and 
creatives (e.g., designers). Many high-status people are in this category as well, 
including most doctors and lawyers. In fact, most people in our society fit into 
this description of work. 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
12 
Like a Boss: Have Other People Shovel Dirt for 
You 
So you are getting smart and you hire a group of guys to shovel dirt for you, 
leaving you responsible for making the deals. You get paid for the job and you 
pay your people for being shovelers. This is the start of entrepreneurship, 
which means 
• 
You have more control over your schedule.  
• 
You have some flexibility over how your team does the 
work.  
• 
Your business nonetheless scales poorly in many cases—
you will often not be able to make a dollar unless you are 
there on the work site to point and explain to the 
shovelers what they have to do. 
• 
You have some amount of time to plan.  
• 
It’s hard to make this unique—lots of people can field a 
team of shovelers, and the fundamental work (shoveling) 
can be obtained easily in the market. 
Examples in this category include contract programming companies, cleaning 
services, creative agencies. These are businesses that usually have a principal 
founder that selectively hires talented employees to scale his or her ability to 
deliver a service. 
The Big Boss: Hire a Team of Managers to 
Manage the Shovelers 
You are moving up in the world now, which means you have lots of control 
over your schedule, but you have to make sure your managers are incentivized 
to protect your interests with your customers.  
• 
At this point, you may be less concerned with how the 
team does the actual work.  
• 
On the plus side, the business scales up to your capacity to 
arrange work for your teams.  
• 
You have lots of time to plan.  

Startup 
13
• 
The fundamental proposition (shoveling) is still constrained 
by its easy availability in the marketplace. 
An example in this category is any service company that has grown a layer of 
managers beneath the owner (software, financial services, construction, legal, 
etc.). 
The Impresario: Invent a New Shovel and Sell 
It to the Shovelers 
Now this is starting to get interesting! You can sell tools to the shovelers and 
then make money from every one of the many people out there who shovel 
either for a living or at home. This is the B to C (business-to-consumer) opera-
tions model. 
Your two main concerns are 
1. Designing a shovel that is different in some fundamental 
way than those already available. Is it lighter? Perhaps it 
is cheaper? Has a better handle? Or is it a different, 
more efficient shape? 
2. Getting this shovel into the hands of the laborers. 
With this model, you have lots of control over your product and your sche-
dule. Marketing may be difficult, however, because you have to reach lots of 
individual customers who are spread out across the market.  
Steve Jobs and Michael Dell are two examples of people in this type of posi-
tion. They both created products that were targeted at a population of con-
sumers—resulting in a large volume of relatively low dollar transactions. 
The Impresario Grande: Invent a Shovel and 
Sell It to the Big Bosses 
You are now directing your marketing at a smaller group of larger customers, 
the big bosses. This is the B to B (business-to-business) operations model. Mar-
keting is more targeted when you have to reach only a few large customers 
instead of a wide population of small customers. This business model carries 
different opportunities and demands than the B to C business model, and al-

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
14 
though it is the last example in a progression of business types, it is not neces-
sarily superior to the others—just different. 
• 
Each transaction may be more difficult to get, but it is 
probably worth much more money and will likely result in 
multiple transactions over time.  
• 
Successful B to B organizations have the capital, relation-
ships, marketing, and manufacturing expertise to get into 
other areas. Moving beyond shovels, how about screw-
drivers, saws, and specialty tools? 
• 
Fewer customers means a less diversified customer base—
which can be a risk.  
• 
Major pivots are sometimes necessary for B to B busi-
nesses. An example of this is IBM, which pivoted from  
being a hardware vendor to being a services provider, 
because after decades of selling businesses computer 
hardware, the market evolved to where this was no longer 
profitable. On the other hand, companies like Procter & 
Gamble (B to C) have a diverse audience, and many 
products and will not likely ever have to pivot into a 
different business focus—there will always be a market for 
shampoo! 
Larry Ellison of Oracle and Marc Benioff of Salesforce.com are two examples 
of this type of entrepreneur. They both created business models that are tar-
geted at other businesses, and as such have fewer transactions at a higher dol-
lar amount when compared with the B to C working model. 
Takeaways: Which of these work models sounds the most satisfying to you? 
Where does your business idea fit into this picture? Will you start in one cate-
gory and deliberately work your way up? 
_________________ 
 

Startup 
15
Grains of Sand 
The only way that we ever accomplish anything of real enduring value is 
through sustained concentrated effort. 
The author Malcolm Gladwell writes about the idea of 10,000 hours. His 
theory states that people who rise to the highest levels of accomplishment in 
any area—be it sports, music, or any profession—do so by spending at least 
10,000 hours focused on it. This equates to about 10 years of intense focus. 
He asserts that the geniuses we watch and admire acquired their skill not 
through any kind of gift from nature or from heaven, but through sheer force 
of sustained and focused attention. I agree with this.  
Building anything, be it skill in a foreign language, ability to play the piano, or 
growing a business, is like building a mountain a few grains of sand at a time. 
The image here is that we are starting with nothing, and have the intention of 
building something of note. Something remarkable. A mountain. You add a 
handful of progress every time you work on your project. If you are distracted 
and don’t continue to add on, when you eventually come back to it you will 
find that your progress, your mountain building, is substantially smaller. How 
many handfuls of attention would you need to put on a large task before you 
have a substantial accomplishment to look at? If you have ever worked on 
something or practiced something enough to become excellent at it, you know 
that it was a long process. Growing a business is also a labor-intensive process 
that will require an investment of sustained attention over what is likely to be a 
long period of time. 
■ Note Being an entrepreneur—raising a business from a mere idea to the level of a successful 
enterprise—is a multifaceted undertaking that will only come to fruition through the coordinated and 
concentrated arrangement of hundreds of thousands of individual decisions and actions on your part.  
As a cautionary tale, some would-be entrepreneurs that I have seen are hot 
and cold on actually doing the work of realizing their business ideas. One fel-
low in particular who I occasionally meet up with here in Austin, Texas, has 
substantial means at his disposal; he is from a wealthy family. He wants to be 
successful outside of his family’s money, and has ideas that he is enthusiastic 
about. He puts his money and his energy into projects—up to a point. He goes 
all-out for a little while, and then cools off. He stops putting in the time, and 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
16 
the projects wilt on the vine. This is disheartening for him, and confusing for 
the people enlisted to help out. I think this is a problem of intrinsic motivation: 
his need is insufficient. In other words, his “why” must not be clear or suffi-
ciently powerful enough to him.  
My experience has been that when the project is right, then substantial 
amounts of work take care of themselves. It is not so much deciding to do it—
in my case I simply find myself pushing toward the objective because I under-
stand my “why” very clearly. Because I make sure I can connect the dots be-
tween the goals of the business and the present moment, my desire to get to 
the destination powers all the thousands of moving parts by itself.  
_________________ 
 
Intrinsic Motivation 
I make it a point to avoid the rah-rah cheerleader approach to coaching would-
be entrepreneurs. I think it is a dangerous waste of time and resources for 
people without sufficient directed, built-in motivation to start their own busi-
nesses. Several of my good friends are extremely interested in getting people 
excited about starting their own businesses, and I frequently chide them about 
this, as I think it is a disservice.  
I am not interested in convincing people that entrepreneuring is a good idea. 
What I am extremely interested in is helping people that already know they 
have to do it to be successful. These are intrinsically motivated would-be entre-
preneurs that are moving forward.2 They may need guidance, but they certainly 
don’t need a pep talk about why they should be trying to build something. 
These folks are the ones that I like to spend my time coaching and assisting. 
Helping this group to efficiently get their ideas out is more useful to society 
than trying to convince otherwise passive people that they should get out 
there and take a chance on starting a business.  
The kind of short-term motivation resulting from a good pep talk is no match 
for the mountain-building task of going out there and doing it. 
                                                 
2 They have a fire burning inside them that makes them move and build something. They 
don’t need a pep talk, but occasionally they need help and advice about how to make their 
vision a reality. 

Startup 
17
_________________ 
 
A Vision to Guide You 
If you have decided that you are going to commit to building a business, or if 
you are already on your way, that is fantastic. Let’s do a quick exercise to-
gether that I think will help you to get more out of your entrepreneurial 
voyage. 
Imagine a sailing ship, white and shining in the sun . . . 
Imagine that you have the boat loaded with supplies and crew, all the is equip-
ment on board, the sails are up, and you are pulling out of port, away from the 
safety of land.  
There you are, standing at the wheel, looking out into the bright expanse 
ahead. Now I will ask you a deceptively simple question: Where are you going? 
Are you just going out? Many entrepreneur sailors do just this—they head out 
to try to see what they can see. Inevitably, everyone in business is doing this to 
some extent—leaving a measure of safety and certainty behind in favor of self-
determination and the excitement of finding out what will happen. You have to 
leave port and throw yourself into the wind and currents to see what you can 
see, find what you can find.  
However, if “sailing” is the beginning and end of your strategy, you might dis-
cover problems along the way that would have been unnecessary and avoida-
ble. What will you use as a compass? How will you interpret what your com-
pass tells you? What decisions will be made, and on what basis?  
As you leave port, which direction are you going to head in? If you are not 
sure, you might head south one day and north the next. Are you out on this 
vessel to get somewhere? If so, where? And how will you know when you get 
there? 
I suggest that the most successful entrepreneur-sailors absorb themselves in 
every moment of the sailing; enjoying it for everything that it is worth. And 
they couple this kinetic mental absorption with a guiding vision. This vision sees 
them in a beautiful destination, a desired future place that they want to inhabit 
and experience.  
The vision I am contemplating is a thing of rich detail, an emotionally charged 
mental construct, vibrant with colors, sounds, smells, and feelings. This destina-

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
18 
tion vision is why the sailor is at sea. The vision is of the place being searched 
for and, in the end, even built by hand if necessary. 
As the entrepreneur-sailor encounters obstacles and challenges during the 
voyage, this vision and all of its detail serves as a beacon to inform them of 
which way feels right. Are we heading south or north? Are we running fast along the 
coast with the prevailing wind, or tacking against it? The vision guides those deci-
sions. It is this vision that will also eventually inform the realization that the 
destination has been reached. The voyage, as all things, will come to an end 
someday—the vision will guide you to the place you want to be when you dis-
embark from the boat and begin your next chapter. 
No matter what kind of business you are starting, be it an Internet, software, 
technology company, or anything else, a vision is something that you as the 
founder must provide. As an illustration of how to apply this, I am going to 
frame it in a simple and accessible business model: a pizza restaurant. This is a 
business that we all understand, so let’s take a look at how vision applies here. 
A Passion for Pizza 
You are going to open a pizza restaurant. As the founder, how are you orga-
nizing your thoughts and purpose to make this restaurant all it can be? In the 
absence of a vision, you may open the doors to your pizza restaurant with the 
calculation of how many customers you need each day to break even, and then 
hope and plan to exceed that amount. This could be a guiding principle for you, 
but it is not very colorful, is it? So, how about a vision that inspires and informs 
your day-to-day actions and gives meaning to every step from the first day all 
the way out to years into the future? Here’s a thought: 
I love making pizza. I love to see people smile when they try my 
grandma’s pizza crust recipe. I know it is better than any other in my 
town. I am going to use this passion to open a restaurant that will be 
the single most popular restaurant in the neighborhood. People will 
wait just to get a table every night. When the time is right I’m going to 
open other restaurants in other neighborhoods, which will provide the 
same quality and experience to our customers. For the rest of their 
lives, anytime my customers think “pizza” they are going to think of 
my restaurant. 
This is a sample narrative that can guide the entrepreneur in making many con-
crete decisions. Because you will do it for the love of it, you will 

Startup 
19
• 
Focus on quality and customer service, driving the 
popularity until it is standing-room only.  
• 
Drive far past break-even or even profitable, heading to a 
future where there is enough capital to open other loca-
tions—yes, a pizza dynasty!  
• 
Know what success looks like. You will also know when 
you don’t have it, which will drive you to change any aspect 
of the business that falls short.  
• 
Know when you are on the right track. Eventually you will 
be rewarded with the satisfaction that comes from seeing 
a specific dream realized. 
_________________ 
The Bootstrap Mentality 
The bootstrap mentality is the state of mind that comes from using your own 
cash to get your business going. Think about that for a second. When the 
money is your own, you can do anything with it that you want. An envelope 
with $10,000 could pay for a new kitchen in your house or a super-fancy vaca-
tion in the Bahamas. Or you could choose to invest it in your business. You 
had better be pretty damn sure of yourself if you are going to take thousands 
of your own dollars out of your wallet, with trembling fingers, and use that 
money to lease a new office, hire a new employee, or buy new equipment. This 
is very real and immediate stuff here. 
Imagine how different it would feel if you were a manager at a big company and 
you had a budget of $10,000 to spend on a little project. You could easily de-
cide to buy equipment or hire a contractor in that case—no problem, right? 
Reframe that as someone knocking on your door and informing you that you 
need to write a check from your own bank account to cover $10,000 or 
$100,000 of office expenses. It feels a little less comfortable, doesn’t it?  
The point is that, mentally, there is a huge difference between spending your 
own money and spending company or investor money. My advice to you is 
that you should always treat investor or company money as if it were your own 
when you decide when, where, and how to spend it. 
_________________ 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
20 
Back in the mid-1990s, I started a company called Meridian Internet Services 
with my business partner, Sterling. We launched this business in pure boot-
strap mode, using our own cash to buy everything. We started quick and lean, 
and began pulling in revenue from customers in only a few months. All of this 
revenue was then rolled back into marketing the product. We were making 
money, but not enough to build the next generation of infrastructure that we 
needed. This meant that when we finally decided that we needed to upgrade, it 
meant scraping together all available cash and credit and then personally com-
mitting to doing it. Imagine two guys sitting at a fold-up card table counting 
pennies and nickels and wadded-up $1 bills mixed with gum wrappers and 
pocket lint. That was us. We knew what we wanted (new Dell rack-mount 
servers), but we could not afford the number of them that we needed. Being 
technically minded bootstrappers, we decided to build our server farm not ma-
chine by machine, but piece by piece. We ordered dual-processor mother-
boards, server cases, network cards, fans, everything. Saving money got down-
right comic when I fashioned the server-mounting rails for our database server 
from raw aluminum bars with a drill press in my garage. One particularly pain-
ful part of this was when we bought server RAM. The market price at that 
time, in the late 1990s was $1,000 per gigabyte—and we needed a lot of it. In 
the end, we outfitted a fleet of new servers, at a time when we had no cash to 
spare. The point here is that this necessity, when combined with lack of re-
sources, and a commitment to being successful in our chosen field, gave us a 
deep and profound respect for every single dollar. 
Later, when money was much less tight, we still clung to that ethos—not 
spending money unless it was really required. Even when working in much 
larger organizations later on, I continued to default to at least examining the 
least expensive way to get every job done.  
The contrary point of view to this is evident all around, however. I worked for 
a startup some years later that spent $80,000 on customer relationship man-
agement (CRM) software that it never used (the company had bought it before 
I came on board). From my point of view, that $80,000 would have been 
enough to start and build an entire new business.  
There is a balance that needs to be found, however. You should not default to 
the least expensive option all of the time. Very often, the cheapest route is not 
the best way. More often, you are going to need to spend money to get what 
you want, and what you need for your business. The task for the entrepreneur 
is learning how to look into the details of a purchase decision and accurately 
project into the future whether there will be any real value created from each 

Startup 
21
and every significant expenditure—especially when you are just getting started. 
As success comes, or investor dollars head your way, cling to the ideal that 
each and every dollar is important and not to be squandered. Your investors 
will appreciate it and your company will benefit from it.  
_________________ 
 
Impact to Your Personal Life 
Starting and running a business will have a profound effect on your personal 
life. For many entrepreneurs, the business actually becomes their personal life. 
A new business is like a young child—it needs constant care. As with having a 
child, the impacts to your life are many and varied. Here are some observa-
tions from my experience that I did not necessarily understand before I got 
started. 
Financial Strings Attached 
When I started my second business, I did it with my friend Sterling. We were 
both surprised when my bank gave me $30,000 of credit on two credit 
cards—and we were not shy about using it. I was single at the time, so it was 
an individual decision that I did not hesitate to make. Fifteen months later, I got 
married. This was now a decision that had impact for my family, not just my-
self. The company was obligated to pay the debt back, which was an uncom-
fortable issue with my wife. She felt weighed down by the debt and poured the 
salary from her job as an IT consultant into the credit cards. It was a certifiably 
huge issue for us, and she is still a bit upset about it, to be honest. 
In my mind, it was company debt, not hers or ours. In her mind, since it was in 
my name, it was our debt and it would drag us both down to the depths of the 
deep blue sea if we did not rid ourselves of it. In the end, we poured ourselves 
into the task of paying off the debt, and were then rewarded with a payback 
when we sold a spin-off business of our company to investors two short years 
later. 
One clear pattern in the entrepreneurial world is that banks and traditional 
lending institutions are rarely, if ever, interested in backing an early-stage or 
small business without having an owner or principal in the company signing on 
the dotted line and taking personal responsibility. Just move forward expecting 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
22 
that banks are not going to loan you money without a personal commitment—
they need somebody willing to put their butt on the line in case the worst 
happens later on. This is a significant barrier to starting a business, and should 
not be taken lightly. 
Bankruptcy is a serious reality, and something that happens frequently enough 
to new business owners that you should consider carefully before plunging in 
and taking on debt.  
Life on Hold 
When you are starting a business you will find that many other important parts 
of your life are put on hold when you are in the early stages. My friends in 
Kansas City, who own an IT services company, are still wondering after seven 
years when they are finally going to get landscaping installed in the front yard 
of their home. Apparently it’s been an embarrassing mess for years now. 
They had a successful and growing business, but that business had been finan-
cially needy for years and is just now pulling them out of the debt they took on 
to start it. For them, it is a reminder of their sacrifice when they come home 
every evening and see that the front of their house remains bare, without the 
simple plants and flowers they have wanted for years. Simple? Yes. Important? 
Yes, of course it is. Little things can add up. 
One entrepreneur that I know very well has spent so much time focused on 
building his business that he has put his social life on hold. He has deeply de-
sired to be married and start a family since I have known him—over 17 years. 
That being the case, in his mind there has never been sufficient time even to 
give himself the opportunity to meet a girlfriend. The chain of business after 
business being set up has been all-consuming for him, and has taken over his 
life. In the month-after-month, year-after-year chase, through the emergencies, 
negotiations, operational problems, and everything else that his businesses de-
mand of him, he emerged over a decade later still chasing the dream, and still 
single. It is not a matter of being blind to the passage of time and the sacrifice, 
but more that he has constructed a mental place where for years dating, finding a 
wife, and starting a family all felt impossible given the depths of the responsibili-
ties he carried.  

Startup 
23
Time 
First off, as an entrepreneur you don’t often have to answer to other people 
for your personal time. You answer to yourself. This is fantastic if you are able 
to focus, and are internally driven to take each day’s step in fulfilling your vision 
of a successful business. However, this can be disastrous if you are a procrasti-
nator. Because you are not going to have the psychological pressure of some-
body looking over your shoulder and telling you what to do, it is easy to lose 
track of what you are supposed to do. Don’t let that happen.  
In a traditional job, employees are expected to work from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 
p.m. with a one-hour lunch break, Monday to Friday. Vacation time will in-
crease as the number of years with the company increases. Sound familiar? The 
pattern is familiar to all of us: get up in the morning, go to the office (busy 
time), come home (free time), and repeat the next day. Figure 1-1 shows what 
your free time looks like in a visual form. 
 
Figure 1-1. How you spend your time when working as an employee 
 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
24 
When you work in a traditional job, it is easy to fantasize about how much free 
time you would have if you worked for yourself. You can show up when you 
want, nobody will bother you if you take a three-hour lunch break, and nobody 
will bother you if you go home early. That’s right! Nobody will care if you 
don’t even show up at all! Sounds fantastic! 
It is true that nobody will care if you are in free-time mode when you go out 
on your own. The problem is that if your business is not yet fully fledged, it will 
shrivel up and die quicker than a tulip in Death Valley if you are not careful. 
The truth of the matter (and something that many first-time entrepreneurs are 
shocked to learn) is that most self-run businesses demand much more time 
than any traditional job (Figure 1-2). 
 
Figure 1-2. How you spend your time as an entrepreneur 
 
The fact is that because in the beginning the business is you, you are never away 
from it. With a nine-to-five job you can usually turn off the noise of the office 
and unplug when you go home. When you own your own company, there is 

Startup 
25
often no such distance to be found by returning home. If you are a full-time 
entrepreneur, psychological distance is very hard to achieve because you have 
to make the business work to pay your rent and put food on the table. It is 
very hard to take the afternoon off and enjoy a movie if you know that that 
time could be spent doing what needs to be done for the business. Always the 
business! The business will perpetually be waiting for you to take care of 
something. This will continue until you reach the milestones of self-regulating 
and self-directing, which I will talk about later in this book.  
Impact to Your Health 
Many people who get on the entrepreneur bandwagon often do so at the ex-
pense of their physical well-being. I know a number of businessmen who let 
the demands of being The Decider serve as an excuse to delay physical activity 
until later on—day after day. This translates into not exercising at all, and 
weight adding on pound by pound. What follows is the familiar refrain that “I 
am too busy, so there is no choice!” Bull. 
Don’t let your business keep you locked up. You are better off deciding to 
take care of yourself. Exercise and a good diet are the fuel for your body and 
mind. The business needs a vibrant and fit leader more than it needs that extra 
90 minutes from you three times a week. Get out of the office and exercise. 
Find something cardiovascular and repetitive that will allow you the quiet time 
to reflect on your business and the market environment from the distance of a 
running track, hiking trail, or lap pool. The time away from the office, along 
with the physical stimulation, is perfect for activating your subconscious mind 
and triggering your creativity. The work that you were focused on in the office 
will come back to you with a new perspective and a new clarity if you delibe-
rately create distance from it. Also, a healthy and vibrant CEO is more likely to 
interact successfully with other businesspeople. Like it or not, the CEO crowd 
at the highest levels tends to be healthy and athletic. Go ahead and join the 
club, and don’t use your busy schedule as another excuse for not taking care of 
yourself. 
Resources 
Anything that is yours might end up in service of your business. The bounda-
ries between office and home blur. Tools from the garage? They are at the 
business, having been used for the thing you were doing last week. Papers on 

Chapter 1 | Setting the Stage 
26 
the kitchen table? Those are from the marketing campaign we are putting 
together.  
In my case, I ran an office out of my home for several years. My partner had 
database servers running in his spare bedroom at one point (the electricity bill 
went up by hundreds of dollars per month that summer). At another time, we 
had my business partner’s garage stacked floor to ceiling with pallets of mer-
chandise that we had manufactured in China. That garage was so full that he 
was worried that the foundation of his house was going to crack. 
So, impact to your personal life can be wide and varied. In fact, seeing the wide 
range of areas in this discussion, we can come to the conclusion that being an 
entrepreneur is apt to affect every aspect of your life. This is not something 
that you can easily compartmentalize. When you are fully committed to a busi-
ness, it will touch and affect every aspect of your life—your health, wealth, re-
lationships, and everything in between. For those of you that are intrinsically 
motivated—that have to do it—it won’t matter. If this list of costs and pain 
points is off-putting for you, then that’s a good thing. Much better to find out 
from a book and decide that it’s worth avoiding than to commit to The Life 
and realize that it’s a bad fit.  
 

C H A P T E R 
2 
Core Lessons 
 
Some things are universal. In life and in business, some things pass the test of 
time and seem to come up again and again as relevant and useful to know. Re-
quired knowledge.  
Core Lessons is a collection of ideas on building a business—ideas that I see as 
universal. If this were a biology book, here is where the author would thought-
fully point out that all life requires water and energy to survive. This chapter 
will survey some universally relevant truths that you can apply to your business 
no matter whether you are in Silicon Valley, in Tokyo, or on Mars. This is also 
where you will find out some of the more painful details of how I have 
screwed up, been blindsided, or otherwise been subjected to a stone-fisted 
kibosh or two. 
These core lessons are the kind of business rules that are of über-impor-
tance—the kind of things that I would carve in stone and erect before the 
townspeople. As I emphasize the importance of carefully constructing a set of 
“frames” with which to view your business, you will find a number of them 
here that will inform your decisions as an entrepreneur. As basic as some of 
these points sound, they may not be as intuitive and automatic as they should 
be; even seasoned and experienced entrepreneurs that have read advance ver-
sions of this book have commented on how a few of these points were things 
that they had not thought about explicitly before, but ended up agreeing with 
wholeheartedly.  
Basics Win Ball Games 
The most successful businesses are those that master the basic transactions of 
their market and execute them with reliability and excellence. 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
28 
Identify what the core operations are for your market, and what the constituent 
parts of those operations are. Then ask yourself if you are executing the mun-
dane details as well as you are capable of. “Winning” is very often the result of 
focusing on the little details, and then doing them well again and again.  
Consider this: the difference between wild success and complete failure may 
be as small as a 3 percent difference in your performance, run out over a pe-
riod of years. With this in mind, the little things start to look more and more 
important. 
Excellence starts with basics. If the basic operations of your business are not 
being handled, then the sexy new stuff, new opportunities, and exciting “next” 
things will mean much less to you. You have to get the basic current opera-
tions down and running well before you spend too much energy grasping for 
the next big thing.  
_________________ 
 
No Partial Credit  
A critical difference between being an employee and running your own busi-
ness is the idea that there’s no partial credit given for your efforts. When you 
are working for a company, in good times and not-so-good times, you can 
count on a paycheck. If you do your job well (or even not so well), you get a 
paycheck. If the company fails to meet its sales figures, or misses a product 
launch window, everyone still gets paid (so long as the company does not go 
out of business). The company assumes the burden of providing security for its 
employees, so in many ways the absolute necessity to perform is present, but 
not pointed. The entrepreneur does not usually have that level of security. 
My business partner Sterling often lamented that it was all or nothing with our 
work. On numerous projects, we would only make money if we got everything 
lined up in perfect fashion. If we got 95 percent done (which is normally an “A” 
in school and most other cases), we would still be in the same state as if we 
had just sat and watched Matlock reruns on the USA Network for the last ten 
months.  
In one case, our company made a play to outrun the competitors by develop-
ing an automated sales engine that would post products such as books and 
DVDs to online marketplaces such as eBay and Amazon. The system would 

Startup 
29
fetch real-time inventory information from supply warehouses across the 
United States, automatically post and audit online sales listings, and com-
municate with online payment services, banks, and an in-house fulfillment 
process—including an automated packing robot. Wow! The problem was that 
huge chunks of this operation were an all-or-nothing proposition. That is to 
say, the company would benefit not a whit until the whole darn thing was fin-
ished, tested, plugged in, and primed with money to start the goods flowing. 99 
percent done? Big whoop, because we still can’t use it. In this case, our normal 
operations, because they were mostly manual and time intensive, were sewing 
up 100 percent of available resources most of the time. We were robbing 
Peter to pay Paul to get more development done, because it meant transac-
tions in progress now, and existing customers had to be deprioritized (just a 
tad) for us to even look at system enhancements (Figure 2-1). 
All or Nothing 
Approach 
          
       
Incremental Value
Approach
Value Created From Project
Project Execution Time
    
*This is bad 
 
. . . , building, building . . . (and nothing to show for it yet) 
Two Approaches to Project Execution
(but sometimes necessary)     
This is preferred
(if you can pull it off)
*
   Small feature releases
   One big product 
       release
 
Figure 2-1. "All or nothing" is the wrong way to structure deliverables: Value should be earned 
throughout your projects 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
30 
Back in 1999, our company Meridian Internet Services was running several op-
erations at once, including a group of branded social networking sites, devel-
oping proprietary search engine optimization systems (getting web sites ranked 
well on search engines), running powerful search engine marketing campaigns 
(efficiently paying for traffic across the Web), and growing a spin-off geographic 
data business. With a social media business, one of the clear value propositions 
is that you have lots of different kinds of people visiting you and sharing infor-
mation with you and with each other. Often, this is potentially valuable infor-
mation that could help you to market to them in an effective way. Years before 
Google AdWords appeared, we designed a business called BannerEdge (back 
when banner ads were important) that would allow a dynamic auction of 
advertising based on deep criteria matching of the people that the advertiser 
wanted to target. This was an ambitious project and had profound implications 
for connecting advertisers with very specific groups of people. Mathematically, 
the project could have made us a great deal of money. (That “could have” in 
the previous sentence sounds ominous, doesn’t it?) 
Brainstorming and development of this project was underway, and we invested 
months of time. We developed new database structures, new user interfaces, 
and dynamic auction algorithms from scratch. These things take time—and in 
our case took a lot of time. While our social networking business continued to 
grow, from a development perspective it was put on hold so we could follow 
the opportunity for a much bigger success with the new real-time auction-ad-
vertising model. A whole year of heads-down development work was even-
tually put into this project. But it never saw the light of day. The social net-
working business hit an iceberg, and the raison d’être for BannerEdge went 
away. The opportunity cost of that lost time was staggering; it turned into a full 
year of effort for our company to be flushed down the proverbial … ahem … 
washbasin. Also mentally devastating was the fact that all of the thought, work, 
and dreams associated with the brave new world of marketing that we envi-
sioned disappeared into the dustbin of history without so much as one user 
seeing it, and without it ever making us a single, solitary dollar. 
The lesson for me here was that this project took a lot of time. It was ambi-
tious. But it was also not going to make any incremental revenue for us until it 
was completed, released into the wild, and connected with customers.  
What could we have done differently, you might wonder? Perhaps we could 
have postponed the targeting algorithms and real-time auction and just made 
an interface where buyers could create ads and sell them to our population of 
users. With this base, we could have theoretically begun a revenue stream and 

Startup 
31
learned about how media buyers behave. From that we could have added on 
our additional game-changing features one at a time. Hindsight is one hell of a 
painful thing sometimes, isn’t it? 
I recently had the opportunity to meet some development team leaders from 
Google, and when they described their product strategy, it was similarly struc-
tured: Define the smallest piece of functionality that would be even potentially 
useful for customers, build it, and then ship it. Use that experience and user 
feedback to develop the feature set as you decide what is next from a feature 
standpoint. 
Takeaway: Structure your projects to provide incremental value as you go. 
_________________ 
 
Diversify 
Diversification can keep you alive. Diversification is a buzzword in financial mar-
kets for a reason. It makes a critical difference when things don’t go as planned 
… because things frequently don’t go as planned.  
Common Single Points of Failure 
When you fly in an airliner, you can just sit back, relax, and enjoy the ride. You 
don’t need to worry very much about crashes, mechanical failures, or other 
problems because a lot of careful attention is paid by the engineers to make 
sure that when you set off from one city to another, you will get there intact 
and happy. They accomplish this task firstly by engineering the hell out of the 
components, and they install redundant mechanisms for all vital systems on 
every aircraft. Your business is very much like that airliner: you build it to get 
you somewhere. It is designed to carry you and your team to that destination 
in one piece, preferably without crashing, having mechanical failures, or en-
countering critical problems. 
Just like the aircraft engineers at Boeing, you should identify your key systems, 
and then add redundancies to them. The purpose being that when failures do 
occur (and they will), you will reduce the severity and consequence of that 
event from “Passengers and crew, brace for impact!” to a less dramatic 
“Stewardess, that bump spilled my coffee!” 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
32 
Here are some single points of failure that have been significant in my busi-
nesses. 
A Single Distribution Channel 
When the media sales company that I was part owner of was faced with a 
change in policy with its PayPal transaction capability, our primary sales channel 
(eBay.com) suddenly fell off the radar screen. This meant closing our doors. 
The company had known for over two years that it needed to diversify, but 
the development and marketing resources to do so were not sufficient to keep 
pace with surging real-time business demands and open up other sales channels 
at the same time. In an unrelated point, I was a passive shareholder and could 
not force the executive team to heed the advice: diversify! Such single points 
of failure had come near to killing the business on at least three different occa-
sions. To continue the aircraft analogy, it was a known design flaw of the air-
craft, and eventually the pilots, crew, and passengers paid a high price for it. 
A Single Key Employee 
This person has unique knowledge required to do your business. What will 
you do if he moves on, or (in business parlance) gets hit by a bus? Don’t wait 
to find out—hire more talent and train them to know what your key guy 
knows. 
In my current role, I am constantly on the task of making sure my team mem-
bers are redundant from one to the other. When an imbalance comes into 
being where one guy holds too much information that others don’t have, I ei-
ther cross-train them or request budget to hire another team member to pro-
vide coverage. 
A Single Channel 
Depending on one source for your leads and business can be a big risk too. If 
you depend on being on the first page of Google for most of your business, 
you are going to have problems if/when you are no longer at the top of the 
search results. Build diversification into your plan. These days, Google is the 
primary source of traffic and sales for many online businesses. What would 
you do if that part of your customer acquisition strategy was cut in half, or 
disappeared entirely? That is a tough question to answer, but in finding an 
answer (even in part) you will be making large steps toward disaster-proofing 

Startup 
33
your operation, while adding more business in the process. Diversification will 
mean more business in good times and survivability in bad times. 
An Outsized Large Client 
If your company depends disproportionately on one client such as Wal-Mart, 
then you are clearly at risk. A simple change in that company’s mindset or 
strategy could leave you in a dire situation without notice and without re-
course. Diversify your channels to include other clients if possible.  
Sometimes it makes sense to focus on one large client, though. A good friend 
of mine has a banking services business with one major client that provides 
over 90 percent of his transaction volume. We discussed diversification many 
times, and his conclusion was that it is extremely difficult, if not impossible to 
diversify in his case. After a couple of years of worry, his response to that sin-
gle point of failure was to double down and increase his volume with the client. 
He decided that his best path was to make sure that the client is as dependent 
on him as he is on them. This way of addressing the single point of failure has 
worked well for him so far: profits and volume are up. Now that he has 
stopped worrying about finding other customers, he is able to focus more of 
his attention on that one customer and lock in that relationship. Meanwhile, 
since he is consciously aware of the risk, he is banking as much profit as possi-
ble as a hedge against a future fluctuation in the fortunes or requirements of 
that single large customer. 
Takeaway: Identify single points of failure. Find a way to manage them before 
they bite you in a way that you can’t recover from. I have seen entire compa-
nies and years of work lost to this. Don’t let it happen to you. 
_________________ 
 
Specific Intention 
In business, it is really important to have a specific intention behind everything 
you do. If you are going to spend money on marketing, what specifically are 
you trying to accomplish with the investment? If you’re going to hire a new 
employee, in what specific ways do you plan to benefit from having another 
person on staff? If you’re going to invest money and buy new software, in what 
ways do you think your business will be more efficient or in what ways will 
value be created? 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
34 
An analogy that I like to use is playing pool. Most of us have played the game at 
one time or another. The first time I ever really played was in college. I occa-
sionally found it frustrating trying to figure out how to make the balls do pre-
cisely what I wanted, and I could succumb to the temptation to just hit the cue 
ball as hard as possible, thinking that at least something would end up in a 
pocket. The fact of the matter is that just hitting the ball hard in the absence of 
a specific intention is one of the worst options available. As a beginner, in the 
process of evaluating the best ways to win, the just-hit-it-hard strategy is al-
ways there, waiting, as a fallback option when you don’t know what else to do. 
In my case, however, it did not take long to realize that if I wanted any reliable 
chance of getting what I wanted, I really needed to have a specific intention: 
eight ball in the corner pocket. 
In business there are lots of similar situations. For example, experience has 
shown me that you can throw money at anything. You can buy an expensive 
phone system. You can purchase new furniture. You can hire extra sales-
people. There’s no end to the ways that you can invest money in your busi-
ness. I want to reiterate that point: 
There is no end to the ways in which you can invest money in your 
business. 
A corollary to this is that most of the ways in which you can invest money in 
your business are not going to have a clear positive outcome. You have to be 
very selective of where every dollar goes in your operation. That selectivity 
comes from specifically defining your intentions before you move forward with 
any investment. 
Often, when you get into an honest evaluation of an investment decision, you 
will find you don’t need what you thought you did, or that you can function at 
100 percent with much less than you thought at first blush. 
A Waste of Cash, Time, and Energy 
At a dot-com startup where I was an executive, the investors behind the oper-
ation had a history of getting personally involved with decision-making and day-
to-day operations. On one occasion, they decided to purchase a $100,000 
phone system. That thing was complicated. It probably seemed cool to imagine 
what such a system could do, but it was completely impractical and way too 
expensive to be justified for the still-money-losing operation. This is an exam-

Startup 
35
ple of just hitting the cue ball as hard as possible and hoping something good 
happens.  
The business need was simple: to have a phone with a voice mailbox for each 
employee. Period. What was chosen was a corporate-level, multi-city, com-
puter-controlled, integrated phone system with dedicated T1 Internet connec-
tivity. It was also a system that was prone to breaking and that nobody on staff 
understood how to operate. The funny thing about investments like this is that 
the costs aren’t just in the sticker price. The operational cost was several 
thousand dollars a month for just the dedicated Internet connecting the offices. 
It cost us money every time we needed to change the system because we had 
to hire a specialized consultant to come onsite. These guys were hard to find, 
difficult to get to answer our phone calls, and outrageously expensive when 
they did show up. Another hidden expense was lost productivity, when em-
ployees and engineering staff were trying to get this thing to work, instead of 
designing products. Lost calls and unanswered voice mails were yet more cost 
points for us. 
Instead of pursuing an inexpensive yet adequate solution, the investor who 
made the purchase decision felt a need for a “phone system.” What followed 
next was an emotional response to some telco marketing materials that 
painted a picture of business success and the required infrastructure behind it, 
which went along the lines of, “Imagine multiple cities combined on one private 
security network, with intelligent phone message routing, and with productive, 
smiling, employees happily routing customer after customer to one another on 
the BizNet 20001 phone system.” 
This is a much sexier vision than what we probably actually needed. If it had 
been planned out in advance (in the absence of the sales propaganda), we 
could have functioned well enough with a central toll-free number connecting 
to a receptionist desk with an answering system. Sales people and other staff 
could have a POTS (plain-old telephone system) line or a cell phone. Is this 
perfect? No. Would it work? Yes. The actual best-case scenario is probably 
somewhere between the POTS solution and the BizNet 2000, but the guidance 
of specific intentions could have led to a saner solution:  
                                                 
1 Fictional name. 
 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
36 
• 
Customers should be able to reach the company by 
phone, and the company should be able to respond 
professionally. 
• 
Each staff member should have a phone with voice mail. 
Specific intentions, defined before an investment is made, guide how the in-
vestment is made, when it is made, how it is executed, and how it is evaluated 
along the way. This set of specific intentions, if laid out and pursued, could 
have saved the company a lot of money. 
Backing Up the Truck 
Recently, we had a meeting where the team was discussing what we were 
going to do to implement Facebook more centrally on our site. The discussion 
was on where and how Facebook would be added to our user experience. I 
had joined the meeting late, and was interested in finding out what the point 
was. I asked that we “back up the truck a bit,” and figure out the answer to 
“Why?” This is closely related to having a specific intention. 
“Why are we adding Facebook to the site? What specific intention do we have, 
and how will that be reached by the options we are discussing?” 
The question seemed to take everyone by surprise. In fact, nobody was able to 
articulate why we were going to integrate Facebook more centrally into our 
user experience. Would we get more users? No. Would we get more money, 
as a business? No. I took a stab at it by saying, “While we don’t have any spe-
cific intention to get more customers or more money, we believe that it is 
useful to experiment with Facebook integration as a means to gain more expe-
rience in social media, and to gather data on whether or not users will engage 
with our brand in more meaningful ways through this tool set.” 
This specific intention, shared between team members, was useful in that it 
framed the exercise as a reconnaissance mission as opposed to a fundamental 
reimagining of our brand experience. The engineers and creatives were then 
able to understand how much gravity (or lack thereof) was at play with the 
project. As it was, users did not really want to opt into that tool set when we 
deployed it, and it was removed from the site entirely within a few weeks. 
Takeaway: When starting any project, always ask yourself and the people in-
volved to describe the specific intention of the effort. Beyond saying “do this,” 
clearly describing the desired outcome will help you to ensure that value is 

Startup 
37
being created, and that everyone has clear insight into the thought process be-
hind the actions they are taking. 
_________________ 
 
How to Determine the Demand of the 
Market 
This is basic. Anybody who reads this will say, “I already know this.” Be that as 
it may, even seasoned executives can forget this from time to time. 
The exercise: Identify the total set of all potential customers, and the expected 
transaction value for each one per unit of time. Then calculate the percentage 
of them you think you can reach with your marketing message. Follow up by 
estimating how many will actually pull the trigger and pay you their hard-
earned cash (Figure 2-2). 
 
Figure 2-2. The law of profit potential 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
38 
 
A useful way to apply this rule when analyzing a business opportunity is to ask 
yourself how much money is in the entire market for the product or service. 
In other words, how much would you make if you were able to take 100 per-
cent of the transaction volume that is available? This first analytical step con-
cerns the market opportunity. 
The next step is to ask honestly how much you can expect to capture in the 
next year, and then in the next two years, and so on. Basic. I will often “chunk 
down” and ask this same question about incremental changes to an existing 
product. “If we modify our product by adding A and B, how much more sales 
can we really expect to capture?” 
This idea is important as heck because it can help you to identify the good 
ideas and prevent you from chasing the silly ones. Going ahead and doing this 
exercise every time you want to consider a new product or a product change is 
a must do. It will add clarity to what might seem at the gut level to make sense, 
but on closer observation isn’t worth pursuing. 
_________________ 
 
Make Yourself Obsolete  
When you start out, as the founder of a business you are going to be wearing 
multiple hats. That means you are going to be responsible for many areas of 
your business, and be The Decider on everything from the important stuff to 
the necessary but time-consuming little things. In the beginning, you will likely 
become a hands-one expert in multiple areas of your business. If you don’t 
know how to manage something, you are going to have to either learn it your-
self, or hire someone to do it for you. Hiring out for certain tasks is a natural 
phase of evolution for every business. At some point in the future you may 
have the option of posing as the big CEO, chauffeured to the office every day, 
known to ominously occupy a big leather chair and to steeple your fingertips 
under your chin while you consider your further plans for world domination. 
Until you get to that point, you may find yourself needing to handle some cus-
tomer support calls, vacuum floors, and even fix your computer network when 
it goes down. 

Startup 
39
Advertising agent, marketing and product planner, security expert, customer 
support representative, business trend prognosticator, contract negotiator, 
legal document writer, intellectual property monitor, window cleaner, paper 
clip buyer, furniture assembler, utility bill payer—these are some of the many 
hats you may wear. 
Figure 2-3 illustrates a trend. The trend is going from 100 percent you to a 
small percent you. This trend line represents a process that you have heard of 
before: the process of delegation.  
CEO of your 
startup.
Your job: On day 1, 
it’s EVERYTHING!
CEO of a big 
company.
Your job: Enjoy 
your big leather 
chair and look 
important.
Self-regulating threshold
Self-determining threshold
Company Size
Percentage of the Business That Is You
How Much of It Is YOU?
100%
= Ownership-level talent is hired.
 
Figure 2-3. Trend line representing delegation 
Delegation means 
• 
Hiring the right people 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
40 
• 
Training them to understand the business (start with why 
and then work your way up to what and how) 
• 
Gradually giving up control, providing feedback along the 
way 
• 
Empowering your employees to make decisions and to 
make mistakes 
For key team members, it means connecting performance with compensation: 
equity or profit sharing. This is key to progressing up to and beyond the self-
determining threshold. 
Be prepared to delegate as your business gets bigger. You are going to need to 
delegate. Look forward to this and regard it as a sign of success. If you have 
run your business month after month, and year after year, and you are not 
trending strongly toward delegating more and more important tasks to others, 
then you may need to take a hard look at what it is you are doing.  
Knowing that you are going to need to delegate, you should be looking for 
quality people from the first day you even think about starting a business. 
As an employee, it may seem that employers have all of the power. They can 
hire and fire at will, and they can direct what the employees do. The other side 
of the coin is very interesting, though: employers need good employees and 
will do what they must to keep them and grow them.  
To attract and keep the kind of talent that can actually take over the corner 
office and make the strategic decisions that will be needed to keep the com-
pany in business without your guidance, you will need to break out of the mold 
of pure salary-based compensation. This kind of employee will eventually de-
mand a bonus or equity-based compensation that will properly incentivize 
them to do for you what they could do for themselves (go out and become 
your competitor). Otherwise, that key person or persons will likely leave the 
company and work for somebody else, or just start their own businesses. It is 
the way of the world that you will have to empower them through training, 
exposing them to your knowledge, and provide operational experience and the 
ability to make, and learn from, mistakes. All of these things create confidence 
and competence. The qualities of confidence and competence in executive 
functions require you to recategorize these types of employees into an execu-
tive class that shares directly in organizational success. Not doing this will 
mean that you’ll lose their talent and knowledge. That puts the future of the 
company at risk, because it takes years to groom such employees for the roles 

Startup 
41
that you have in mind. This being said, even if you compensate them at an ex-
ecutive level, there is no guarantee that they won’t leave anyway. Building a 
personal rapport and a culture that supports emotional buy-in, and providing a 
vision of what the business means, and where it is going, are key to increasing 
your chances of success. 
A cornerstone of your plan should be, in most cases, to make yourself obso-
lete. Why should this be? Part of the appeal of being an entrepreneur (for most 
people) is being able to call the shots and to be master of your domain. This is 
truly part of being a business owner/operator. However, this becomes some-
what less rosy if you fall into the trap where instead of owning a business, the 
business ends up owning you. This inevitably happens at the outset of your 
business. The goal is to grow the business, its team, and its processes to the 
point where it can become self-regulating at the least and self-directing at best. 
The Self-Regulating Business 
A self-regulating business is one where the principal (you) can unplug for hours 
or days or weeks at a time without the business falling apart. On the long road 
to making yourself obsolete, this is the first big and impressive milestone. I de-
fine self-regulating to be the stage at which you, the founder of your business, 
can lie dormant in a hammock on Fiji (with mai tai in hand) for two weeks—
without e-mail or phone—and be confident that your business will still be hap-
pily humming when you return. Self-regulating businesses have competent and 
empowered employees who know the day-to-day operations and do not need 
your explicit direction to perform them. 
The staff knows how to respond to most situations, and it is empowered to 
make the day-to-day decisions required to keep all of the wheels turning and 
the customers happy. It will probably take years of work to develop a self-
regulating team (see Figure 2-3 again), and it should be one of the primary in-
termediate goals you set for yourself. You should begin thinking about it as 
soon as you get out of business infancy and prove that your business model is 
workable, and begin to carve out an economic niche in which you can prosper. 
The Self-Determining Business 
Getting your business to the self-determining level is the ultimate delegation 
accomplishment, because it means you have found, hired, and trained a staff 
that knows the daily operations, and you have also installed managers who 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
42 
know the big picture—and are prepared to make the long-term strategic deci-
sions that you have been making all this time. In terms of what this means to 
you, it means you can come into the office and work, or go to Fiji (again), or, 
most importantly, sell the company if you want to. If you plan to sell your busi-
ness at some future point (having an exit strategy), you being obsolete will make 
the business more attractive to potential buyers. Why would anybody buy a 
business that will end up having a required component (the previous owner) 
missing after the purchase? 
_________________ 
 
You Will Need More Money Than You 
Think  
How much capital you have when you start out is a critical piece of your survi-
vability. Make sure you have enough to get started, and to survive a few mis-
takes after your business is open. Know ahead of time the following things. 
Problems will arise that you did not anticipate—problems that will cost money 
to solve. Things will generally take longer than you thought to get going. Ex-
penses will likely be higher than you estimated. If you plan with this bias, you 
will have more survivability built into your plan. So don’t embark on your ven-
ture until you have some reserve cash available to help in a disaster. Identify 
sources of credit that you can tap if needed as a last-ditch, break-glass-in-case-
of-emergency backup plan. Here are some examples: 
• 
Series B (or C or D) financing (more rounds of financing 
means less value left for you)2 
• 
Line of credit at the bank (potentially dangerous) 
• 
A rich uncle (also potentially dangerous!) 
• 
Credit cards (even more dangerous) 
                                                 
2 Series B indicates the second round of formal investor funding in a company. The 
sequential naming traditionally follows the alphabet: Series A, Series B, Series C, and so on. 
4

Startup 
43
Use suppliers as a source of credit whenever possible. In an online retail busi-
ness where I was a partner, this was a boon; wholesale companies would ex-
tend credit to cover cost of goods on 30- or 60-day terms. That meant being 
able sell and generate revenue and pay later. Magic. 
Design your business to start making money quickly if possible, and don’t start 
spending money like you are a big business until you are a big business. Get 
something out the door and generating cash as fast as possible so that revenue 
can cover many of your expenses early on. 
_________________ 
 
Active Iteration 
In a meeting of the engineers and creative folk, I was recently reviewing the 
fantastic success we had in growing our product portfolio and reaching nearly 
5 million users per month. I dangerously mixed metaphors and summed up our 
accomplishment by saying “our secret sauce is that we know how to dance.” 
What I meant was that we execute idea after idea for communicating our value 
and getting more customers. In so doing, we rapidly iterate over each concept 
with minimal up-front effort, while tweaking for performance. Some of these 
ideas are winners, which we invest more time in. Some are not clear winners, 
but don’t take a lot of time, so we let them be. Some other mechanisms that 
we try just perform badly, so we withdraw them. This is a dance. As we do it 
we find that over the passage of time, the center of gravity of our operation 
changes, step by step in the (otherwise hidden) evolving direction of the mar-
ket. The fact that we gather data on many different strategies simultaneously 
gives us the information we need to act smart and choose the best options. In 
the absence of multiple simultaneous outreaches into the market, we would be 
less likely to perform well. It would be a matter of chance when what we were 
doing worked (or didn’t). We increase the odds of success proportionate to 
the number of things we try. Key is that each of these efforts is relatively small 
in terms of resources employed.  
A core strategy for finding and capitalizing on a business model that works is 
to actively iterate through variations of ideas and strategies to connect with cus-
tomers and fulfill their needs. It is important to always keep feelers out in the 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
44 
market for changes. Adapt as the market changes to avoid drastic and painful 
adjustments later. This means building in feedback mechanisms to keep you 
connected to the pulse of the market, as well as a set of measures that will 
help you to detect change as it happens and before it becomes any kind of 
threat to your survival.  
Here are some examples of feedback mechanisms: 
• 
Talking to your customers 
• 
Tracking classic performance metrics such as sales, visi-
tors, cost per lead, cost per sale, and inventory levels. 
• 
Tracking the performance of each marketing source (e.g., 
separate phone numbers for different campaigns) 
Your data collection is only useful if it alters or has the potential to alter your 
decision-making. Clearly, the most relevant and meaningful data in the world is 
useless to you if you do not have a willingness to allow it to change how you 
do things. If you are going to go to the effort to gather data, couple that with a 
commitment to listen to it and to act on what it tells you. 
Let’s boil this down by looking at Figure 2-4. There are three iterative phases 
of operation for a business strategy: exploration, refinement, and repetition. 
 
Figure 2-4. The phases of forming a business strategy 

Startup 
45
 
Exploration is when you are not sure what will work. You are putting out fee-
lers to find what the market will respond to. Refinement is when you have 
found a way of touching your customers that has promise, and you are tweak-
ing it to make it sharper and better. Repetition is when you have explored and 
refined, and hit the point of diminishing returns on tweaking a particular activ-
ity. Once you have something that works, you repeat it for as long as the mar-
ket will bear it. Successful businesses are based around this cycle, sometimes 
running dozens of such cycles in parallel. 
■ Note Your business is like a living organism. If you understand it as such, and treat it as such, 
you will play Charles Darwin and search for opportunities to evolve by pushing the boundaries of what 
you understand, and what you are capable of doing. You will treat this evolutionary research and 
adaptation as a core component of your operations. 
A feedback loop is a system in which data is collected at regular intervals, and 
that data is used to correct or alter the conduct of your business at regular 
intervals. This is the same type of system that governs all living creatures, both 
great and small. If it is good enough for nature, it is good enough for your busi-
ness. Beyond that, I would say that multiple feedback loops are required for 
you to be successful in any business venture that has even a medium level of 
complexity. 
The result of active feedback loops, and general feedback from all sources, will 
likely be a series of stages of evolution over time. This is adaptation, just as a 
living organism will adapt to its environment as the environment changes. Pay 
attention to two rules here: 
• 
Avoid doing something today just because it was what you 
did yesterday. Be open to changing any process or aspect 
of your operation if needed.  

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
46 
• 
Experiment with low-risk feelers into new and untried 
activities. Set aside some of your capital to dedicate to 
novel gestures that can connect you to your existing mar-
ket or altogether new markets in ways that you have not 
tried before. This is very important. Constant experimen-
tation is the cornerstone strategy for moving beyond sur-
vival and becoming a standout success among your peers 
in any kind of business. You will find business ideas that 
fail, some that break even, and a few that will really work. 
The best ones will eventually become core to your 
operation, while some things that you do today will 
eventually become obsolete and you will stop doing them 
altogether. This is fundamental.  
Takeaway: Search for low-cost opportunities to try to connect with your 
customers. Gather data to improve your business, but do not make the effort 
to gather data on a process or facet of your business if you know it will not 
affect your decision-making. 
_________________ 
 
Always Get a Contract 
When I look back to when I started my first real company in my early twen-
ties, I was much the same as I am now. I am certainly older now and some 
would say wiser. Part of that wisdom is that at least some of my boyish naiveté 
has been replaced by an understanding of how people can be downright un-
friendly to one another. I hate to bring this up, but I can’t paint things over 
when it comes to this topic. It’s something we must discuss. 
From my perspective, it comes down to psychology. Whether or not people 
are willing to treat each other with respect, honesty, and dignity is dependent 
to a large extent on whether they feel any personal identification with the 
other person and whether they have established and maintained a proper psy-
chological contract. Getting along means maintaining an “us” mentality. 
The problem is that even good people can fall out of this “us” paradigm very 
easily. Things happen, and communication is a very difficult thing to maintain. 

Startup 
47
Especially when money is on the line, relationships and understandings can be 
stretched or torn apart.  
Take the following scenario as an example. You start a business with a business 
partner. Later, the business has problems. You think they are his fault and thus 
feel comfortable telling anybody who will listen that he is not the person he 
used to be. Your partner meanwhile thinks the problems arose because you 
are always out of town, traveling with your wife to Rolling Stones concerts. 
What we have here are people who, through a natural course of events, have 
come to a place where they no longer see eye to eye. Who is right? It depends 
on where you are standing, as both appear ‘right’ from their own vantage 
points. This imaginary scenario is a simple illustration of how one-time friends 
can come to a cold place where they want to sue the living daylights out of one 
another. 
In another instance, a good friend of mine earned a share in a company over 
several years, to be fully vested upon its sale. A great deal of work went into 
building the business into something worthy of acquisition, which eventually 
came. When the sale was completed, no mention of the equity vesting was 
ever offered. When he brought it up, he was told that due to the fact that it 
was an asset sale and not a sale of the actual company, there would be no 
payout. The fine print here is that the company was never ‘sold’ per se, but all 
the assets were—leaving the company only a name on a piece of paper with no 
residual value. That’s great, isn’t it? No two ways about it, the people who had 
worked and struggled for the company felt … how should I say this in a polite 
manner? Well, that they had not been treated fairly. In this case, he did have a 
contract, which was plain and to the point, but not written in a way that fully 
protected him in the situation at hand. He had thought that a big contract was 
unnecessary because the owners were “good folks” that looked him straight in 
the eye at meeting after meeting for years—and had agreed to equity sharing. 
I can only imagine what the owners of the company who got millions of dollars 
in the transaction were thinking. Mind reading is a dangerous thing, but they 
likely felt that they always treat people fairly and that the employees in ques-
tion had actually failed to deliver in some way.  
Everybody considers themselves to be justified in their actions. All of this is a 
matter of perspective.  

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
48 
Over Time, Many Business Relationships Follow This Pattern
Doesn’t feel like anybody needs a contract.
Glad we have a contract, because this is a mess!
 
Figure 2-5. Time and lack of effective communication can lead to problems that nobody wants 
Another recent instance comes to mind. I met a gentleman in Albany, New 
York who is a lobbyist working with the state government. He, in his suit and 
tie and with his youthful enthusiasm, is the only employee of a small firm, and 
he works under the owner. This young man works for $200 per week. His 
story is that he is willing to work for less than the minimum wage because the 
company is going to grow, and his boss “takes care of him,” as he put it. The 
boss buys him lunch most days and gives him an extra Hamilton or two when 
he needs it. In listening to this, I started to get a bit agitated. I asked the ques-
tion, “Does your boss need you in order to continue his business? Are you 
critical?” The answer was a decided yes. Furthermore, since the boss “takes 
care of him,” my friend believes that he is going to be taken care of when the 
business grows into something bigger. My advice to him was, “Get a contract.” 
Directly communicate that the only way to move forward is to trade “fair 
value for fair value.”  
I told him this, “You should expect an equity share to compensate for the lack 
of a living wage, and the fact that you are critical to the business.” I also told 
him that he should directly ask for it in a fair, level-headed, transaction-minded 
way. The likely outcome otherwise will be that the young man diligently puts in 
his time, grows the business, and then gets handed his walking papers when he 
asks for any special consideration later on. Never count on your boss agreeing 
with you that your effort was critical to the success that created the business, 
after all is said and done—it is not going to be visible to him in the same way it 
is to you. 
Peter, a good friend of mine put it succinctly when he said, “Emotion has no 
place in business.” Clearly, people, as emotional beings bring emotion to 

Startup 
49
everything they do, but he means that you should lock down your under-
standings and agreements in a contract or written form so that the ambiguity 
of emotional decision making can be held in check. 
So, I say this to anyone who will listen:  
1. Never rely on abstract ideas like “good feelings” or beliefs like “they 
are great people” or “I feel like I can trust him” in business. These are 
important things, but they are not sufficient by themselves for forming 
the basis of real and reliable business relationships. Assume that the 
worst will happen. 
2. Get a contract to define roles, responsibilities, ownership, and financial 
details for any aspect of the business that has value. 
3. Have your contracts reviewed by an attorney that represents you as 
an individual–distinct from the company.  
4. Remember that nothing changes things like money. If your business be-
comes valuable, you will be thankful for having worked out everything 
between the people involved well in advance. 
Create value together with your partners and build something that benefits 
everyone in powerful ways, but put a mechanism together that protects you.  
_________________ 
Watch Intellectual Property 
Intellectual property is important. It is easy to get in trouble when you don’t 
remember this. With the quick availability of information, images, video, opi-
nions, software, and any other kind of human output that you can imagine on 
the Internet, it is easy to forget that much of this content is owned by people 
or companies that are serious about protecting it. 
By 1999, we were running a whole network of online sites similar to 
Match.com. On one of the home pages, one of our guys did a rework of the 
layout, with large images of happy people that would randomly change out 
each time you visited the page. The layout looked great and people liked it. 
Our conversion of traffic from visitor to member went up a small percentage 
with the new design. 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
50 
A few weeks after this new interface went live, we got a phone call, followed 
by a letter from a legal firm: “You are using our unlicensed images—remove 
them or be taken to court.” They sent a detailed list of the “borrowed” images 
that were being used on our site. The guy who had redone the site had de-
cided not to properly license the images he was using and instead just down-
loaded them and put them in the layout. We were looking at potentially thou-
sands of dollars in attorney fees and civil penalties in court, so what looked like 
a time- and money-saving shortcut ended up taking executive time to respond 
in emergency mode, as well as a potential capital-draining sortie into an unne-
cessary and unproductive legal quagmire. Not good at all. I would have fired 
the guy who did it, but he was my business partner. Bad boy! As it was, we 
were able to diffuse the situation. We immediately removed the images and 
were lucky that they were not interested in pursuing the matter. 
 In an exploratory venture, we started a business producing products in China 
and selling them nationwide in the United States. Our first trans-Pacific freight 
container of products ended up being unsellable because of a claim of trade-
mark infringement from a competitor. I will never forget what our contact at 
the Chinese manufacturer said: “We just make the product. It’s not our re-
sponsibility to check and make sure it’s legal to sell it in your country.” 
Touché. Just imagine a warehouse full of product, and not being able to sell it. 
A word printed on the stuff was registered as a trademark by somebody else. 
It hurt. A lot. We ended up letting the competitor send over a truck and load 
up every last crate and take it from us. At least they paid for the shipping. We 
felt grateful to be done with it.  
The lesson is this: intellectual property is important. Avoid any easy or obvious 
landmines, but remember that if you are visible enough, people will come after 
you whether you have done anything wrong or not. Just have a good lawyer 
and be ready to invest money in your defense.  
_________________ 
 
Control the Money 
Don’t depend on any one connection point to your customers (or their 
money) too heavily. Don’t depend on any one mechanism (like a single credit 
card merchant account) to funnel your money. 

Startup 
51
If you have money flowing into a merchant account, or another payment ac-
count that third-party agencies have access to, never leave any amount of 
money there. Always put it in another account as soon as each deposit is 
made. 
Back in the days when we were running the social networking firm, we 
charged around $30 per month for people to join. (This business was very 
similar to Match.com.) After a year or so, we had nearly a million registered 
users—not all of them paying—but only after a long process of gathering 
members a few at a time at first, then by the hundreds, and then by the thou-
sands per day.  
This business model was based on the concept of rebilling. We would charge a 
new member for an initial membership, and then in subsequent months the 
same amount would automatically be rebilled on their credits cards until they 
cancelled. This meant that our income would tend to increase every month, 
since most members would stay with us for at least six months. 
I was in Japan over the Christmas break when I got a call from my business 
partner, Sterling, who was manning the fort back in the United States. He was 
not in a good mood. He had checked the company mailbox on Christmas Eve 
and found that we had been sent a cancellation letter from our merchant ac-
count underwriter. We were losing our ability to process credit cards—along 
with all of the thousands of other Internet-based customers of this bank. They 
decided to cancel all of the Internet customers in one fell swoop, and to do it 
over the Christmas holiday. They were giving us 30-days notice of cancellation, 
thoughtfully sent out in the Christmas mail rush on the 14th of December. 
The consequence was that we had to sit on our hands and wait until January 
before we could even attempt to remedy our situation. Around January 4, the 
banks started to open again and we tried to apply for a new merchant account 
with another provider. Since the bank that cancelled our account also dropped 
thousands of other Internet-based businesses, there was a mad dash in the 
new year for merchant accounts, and banks were suddenly charging $1,000 or 
more for an application fee because of the sheer volume of applicants surging 
through the system. We made the decision not to pay this kind of extortion 
money on principle. 
January 14th came and went. Our merchant account was suspended. No new 
merchant account was forthcoming. It was February before banks started to 
talk to small businesses again. When we finally got in the door with a bank and 
were working through the paperwork, we provided the paperwork for our 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
52 
previous merchant account. This is the point in the narrative when a good 
storyteller would pause dramatically and say something like, “And you aren’t 
going to believe what happened next.” The new bank declined our application 
because of our chargeback rate. This is the ratio of dollars claimed as errors by 
customers to the total amount of charges billed. If this ratio went over 1 per-
cent, you were considered to be in the “red zone.” We were informed that 
we had an “infinitely high chargeback rate” of $120 (one or two customers 
who did not recognize the Meridian IS charge name on their statement) di-
vided by $0 of transactions in the last month. We explained what had hap-
pened, but we were not able to secure a new account in time to keep our 
earned base of rebillable clients intact. The bank officers didn’t care. The en-
forcement of this policy (without exception and without discussion) was sur-
prisingly rigid. The business would live on, and we got payment mechanisms in 
place again, but the fluid transition of our accumulated rebillings portfolio was 
made very difficult. This cost us quite a bit of money.  
Luckily, we had two revenue streams at this time, and we were able to focus 
our efforts on other areas (namely our data business) during this transition 
period. 
_________________ 
 
Hope for the Best but Plan for the Worst 
This is a logical strategy. Plan out what the full range of possibilities are for 
your business, for your project, and for your new product offering. Under-
stand the possible outcomes, from the best possible outcome to the expected 
average outcome to the complete-failure outcome (e.g., not selling any product 
and getting sued). This exercise should be part of any project plan. 
But beware: you need to make sure that in mapping out the various scenarios, 
your subconscious mind does not grab a hold of the worst-case scenario and 
nudge it toward actually happening! The trick is to be aware of some of the 
most likely of the worst cases, but to move past them and push forward to the 
best-case outcomes.  
Do not get derailed by thinking about every possible bad thing that can happen. 
If you find yourself going there, just stop. Train yourself to examine only the 
most likely of failure points, and do not go on any fantasy excursions to the 

Startup 
53
land of low-likelihood disaster scenarios. There is no point, and it will hurt 
more than it helps. 
A great deal of our success or failure comes about because of the subtle ex-
pectations that lie just below our conscious thought. If you obsess over worst 
cases, you increase the likelihood of bad things happening. Do not doubt this 
for a second.  
As for the detailed failure analysis work, have one of your subordinates do it (if 
you have any) and only ask for a summary of the most likely failure points.  
Changing Plans Is Easier When You Change 
Early 
Always keep in mind Seth Godin’s wisdom in The Bootstrapper’s Bible (Upstart, 
1998):  
Opportunities will try to cloud my focus, but I will not waver from 
my stated goal and plan—until I change it. And I know that plans 
were made to be changed. 
Don’t resist starting over or drastically changing your approach if it is needed. 
If you are going to do so, however, make sure of the following: 
• 
You carried out the best analysis you could before you got 
started.  
• 
The prestart analysis used the best information available at 
the time, and you continued to get further information 
that materialized as the project (or business) moved 
forward.  
• 
The further information that you gleaned from carrying 
out the project (or business) informed you that change (or 
a stop) was needed. 
Avoid indecision and vacillation. If you cannot see a clear path that will take 
you at least a few steps forward in your business, then find someone who can 
help you to do so. Don’t fall into the trap where you tiptoe a few steps into 
something and then quit, and then tiptoe into something else and quit. This fail-
early rule is not an excuse for weak decision-making. It is an exhortation to 
decide on the best available information, keep your antennae up and receiving 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
54 
all available input, and be open to modification of your plans as you move for-
ward. It is better to adjust early than to continue on a path that will not take 
you where you want to go. 
Some businesspeople and educators are fond of the phrase, “Fail early, and of-
ten.” I cannot quite grasp this. I don’t like the “often” part. It indicates a pessi-
mistic outlook by the entrepreneur on identifying real opportunities in the 
market, visualizing a viable path from idea to profit, and executing the plan. 
“Failing often” indicates a lighter commitment to the research and planning 
before investment of capital than I am comfortable with.  
_________________ 
 
Value and Preserve Your Agility 
The tension between being quick on your feet and using military-style planning 
(deliberate and predictable, but slow) was clearly evident after we were ac-
quired by a larger player in the same market. My small team was able to per-
form miracles in productivity, demonstrating that we could execute technical 
changes in hours while our larger parent company would often take months. It 
was a matter of some pride for my tribe of bandit programmers and creatives. 
The truth of the matter was that we were able to do this because we were 
good and we were motivated to be agile, but also because we were smaller. 
Here comes another metaphor: 
Running a business is like hiking with a backpack. 
When the backpack has nothing but a canteen and an extra pair of socks in it, 
you can freely run up and down the mountain without breaking a sweat. When 
you add the cumulative effects of years of business rules, customer relation-
ships, and technical dependencies to your project, it is like loading bricks and 
rocks into that backpack until it is overflowing. When it comes to hiking, you 
will find yourself struggling to simply get out of camp—let alone show off by 
running up the mountainside. So what to do? 
For one thing, you can evaluate whether the extra weight is worth adding on 
each time an opportunity to put something extra in your backpack presents 
itself. This means that you evaluate with a critical eye every transaction that is 

Startup 
55
going to cause you a support demand. Everything that has to be tracked and 
accounted for as a business process is going to contribute to the weight. Every 
new business rule or routine added on to what your business already does 
needs scrutiny before you agree to it. Contracts, special arrangements for indi-
vidual customers, pet projects, marketing processes, and many other things 
that your business will want to do fall into this category. 
I suggest that you share the analogy of rocks in a backpack with your team. 
When you discuss new projects and responsibilities in this context, the conse-
quences of new projects become more intuitive and context-rich. For engi-
neers, saying, “Do we really need to add this rock to our backpack, guys?” 
helps them to view the project from more of a long-term perspective, where 
they may tend to be execution-biased (using short-term thinking) otherwise. 
Keep in mind the tension between being able to change course on a dime and 
having to plan your moves like an aircraft carrier battle group—about 20 miles 
in advance. Weigh the benefit against the true long-term costs on each deci-
sion that you make, because they add up over time. 
_________________ 
 
Mistakes Are Inevitable 
Most entrepreneurs are seriously afraid of making mistakes. They often think 
that making a business mistake will blemish not only their businesses, but also 
their personal identities. This is unnecessary, and time will show that every-
body makes mistakes. You make mistakes, and so do I (and everybody knows 
it). It is tremendously taxing to try to build up and maintain the illusion that, as 
the leader, you have perfect judgment and knowledge—so don’t even try to do 
it.  
Even good, robust decision-making is bound to result in mistakes. Great lead-
ers know that making decisions quickly, getting on with it, and making mistakes 
from time to time is OK. The upside of this is that you get out there and re-
spond to your environment quickly with the knowledge that there are few 
things that cannot be fixed. The alternative to this is slower, more paced deci-
sion-making or, worse yet, delegating all the decision-making to others—with 
no guarantee whatsoever that taking the additional time will make the deci-
sions any better. 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
56 
In fact, making a mistake and then owning it afterward is a great way to share 
your humanity with your team and build loyalty from them. Do your best at all 
times to get everything right, but don’t paralyze yourself in the effort to nail 
everything on the first try every time. 
_________________ 
 
Customer Complaints: Treat Them Like 
Gold 
You can assume that for every complaint you get there are many, many more 
customers out there that thought the same thing, but didn’t care enough to tell 
you about it. Consider every complaint to be the literal tip of the iceberg. 
It is unfortunate if you screw up and someone is unhappy about it. But, you can 
(and should) strive to turn it around and make it a win for your customer and 
your business. If you have the chance to interact with a customer that feels 
wronged, find a way to fix the problem. Even if it costs you some money to do 
it. Don’t mess around—fix the problem. Apologize for the inconvenience.  
On our social networking site we would give customers free extensions of 
their account time—a free month, six months, even a year sometimes. It was 
not an out-of-pocket expense, and people loved it. 
I have this exact discussion several times a year with my employees, and it is 
worth repeating here. A team I am managing right now is an online web brand. 
We touch about 5 million individual customers every month. Recently the 
marketing team lead was agitated and upset because a customer went to our 
Facebook wall and commented negatively about how hard our site is to use: 
“This site is completely counterintuitive! I couldn’t find anything on the 
overview page! What are these guys thinking!” My team was upset because the 
user was venting, and incidentally had simply not noticed features that were 
right in front of him on the page. 
I talked to the marketing folks as a group and reframed their understanding in 
the following way: “How many visitors does our site have in a month? A lot, 
right? If we lined them up shoulder to shoulder, how many miles would they 
reach?” (The marketing manager calculated at that time that they would reach 
70 or 80 miles, shoulder to shoulder.) I asked them to imagine driving past 

Startup 
57
them at 50 miles an hour, trying to look at each and every face swishing by one 
at a time. After 30 or 40 minutes you would be absolutely numb trying to see 
that many faces. Imagine how big that group is! Out of all of those people, how 
many are going to reach out to us and give us feedback on our site? Looking at 
the sheer size of that group, how many would contact us to complain if some-
thing was wrong? You might say 1 percent, or 1/2 percent … and be way 
wrong; 1/2 percent would be thousands of people giving us feedback—(which 
clearly does not happen). Of all those faces, all those customers, it is less than 
one in a million who take the time to contact us to say anything personal about 
what we are doing. The fact that they take the time to say anything (positive or 
negative) makes them extremely special—and worth taking the time to re-
spond to positively. It’s a miracle, don’t you see? Of all the things they could 
have been doing in that moment, they chose to interact with you. I get a warm 
feeling even now, thinking about all of our disgruntled web site complainers. 
The team responded to the customer, and the customer apologized for com-
plaining—and put a positive comment on our Facebook wall. And incidentally, 
the customer had a valid point on improving the site, so we also learned some-
thing about how we could make our site experience better. 
Takeaway: Customer feedback is often rare almost always valuable, and 
something that entrepreneurs often underestimate. 
■ Note Pause to consider before ever explicitly admitting a mistake to your customers—the noble 
gesture of admitting to a mistake could (in certain circumstances) find you in court with no ground to 
stand on if loss or damage were involved and the customer chose to use it against you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 2 | Core Lessons 
58 
Case Study: Adaptec 
My company invested some serious cash in top-of-the-line computer gear 
when we were putting our data center together for Meridian. Unfortunately, 
the critical storage controller card for the primary database went bad right 
after we installed it. We were really upset, because it was supposed to be 
bullet proof (nothing really is bullet proof in IT, but we paid a lot to get close 
to perfect). We called up Adaptec, and they immediately, without questioning 
us, sent an overnight package with a new controller card. Not just a new card, 
but a more expensive card that was a big upgrade from the one that had failed. 
Wow. We went from pissed off and disappointed to fans of Adaptec. I am still 
happy with them, even though their product brought down part of my 
operations for what ended up being a little less than a couple of days. 
 
When it comes down to it, I think that most disgruntled customers just want 
to be recognized as human beings and to feel that they are respected. It is not 
so much that they want to cause problems (although sometimes it is the case); 
they most often just want to be treated with respect. The inverse is also true. 
Always strive in every direct communication with your customers to show 
them your humanity. When I get on the phone with a customer, I do every-
thing possible to establish rapport with them; this means giving them a warm 
greeting and self-introduction, listening more than talking, and speaking clearly 
and professionally. This short list is just common sense, but I have seen how 
bad situations can get when common sense is not used.  
_________________ 
 
The Dollar Exercise 
One thing that I am known for in my circles is the dollar exercise. I always have 
whiteboards in all of my work environments—one of the first things I do in my 
offices is cover all available wall space with whiteboards because of the impor-
tance of multimodal dialog with the team when discussing complex things. (Pic-
tures plus notes plus words plus hand-waving equals better communication.)  
In any case, when new projects, or investments of any kind of labor or capital 
are considered, I like to take the time to draw a dollar sign high up on the 

Startup 
59
whiteboard, above any notes or diagrams. The point is then made that 
whatever details we draw or discuss must ultimately pass the test of 
connecting back to the dollar sign. If we cannot demonstrate by logic or 
function that the project will result (in one way or another) in value (dollars) 
being created for the company, then the project does not make sense, and we 
table it. 
A number of interesting but ultimately pointless projects have been uncere-
moniously filed away in the “won’t do” drawer because of this practice (and 
that’s a good thing). 
_________________ 
This chapter has given a quick look at some core business ideas that are 
important to me, and end up being very frequent subjects of discussion with 
the businesses that I mentor. The subject will now change to one that is very 
near and dear to me: marketing. A recurrent theme of this book is the effort 
required to communicate your value proposition and story to customers; I will 
cover a number of topics from that world in the next chapter.  

C H A P T E R 
3 
Marketing 
 
At the beginning of this book I made the following assertion: 
Most folks think that building a product or packaging a great 
service is the hardest part of becoming a successful business owner. 
The thought is something along the lines of, “If we can just build the 
web site, or open the restaurant, or create the widget—then we are 
going to be rich!”  
Building it, opening it, or inventing it is usually the easy part. The 
hard part is what comes next—connecting with customers, communi-
cating your value, and convincing them to pull out their wallets to 
give you money. 
Figuring out exactly how you will connect the product with 
enough customers in a short enough time span so that you survive, 
and grow to thrive—that’s where the real work awaits.  
From my perspective, building technology or providing goods or services is 
more about marketing than anything else. In this highly competitive world, 
quality products have to be a given—there are simply too many other options 
for customers to choose from.  
Marketing is not advertising. Advertising is just a part of a marketing plan. Mar-
keting is your approach to interacting with the market—deciding what to build, 
for whom, when, and in what way, and how you will connect it with customers 
to make money.  
Marketing is as much art as it is science. If building a piece of software is like 
folding an origami crane—complex and time-consuming, but following a prede-
termined pattern—then marketing is more like a dance where the music is 
constantly changing and new people are constantly appearing on the dance 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
62 
floor. These are two radically different processes, and require radically differ-
ent competencies. The marketing dance will take many forms, and will con-
sume a significant amount of resources if it is to fulfill its goal of connecting 
your product with customers. This section of the book is about that dance. 
Choose Your Product Well 
What comes first? The realization that you have a great idea and that you can 
sell it? Or the realization that you want to run a business? 
It can happen either way, but in either case you have to have a proposition 
that will stand up to the truth of the market. A weak idea can be supported to 
success by excellent execution. A strong product can be a complete failure 
with poor execution. The best scenario is to run a company around a strong 
product, and then back it up with excellent execution. That combination is the 
stuff legends are made of.  
So what does it mean to have a product that will stand up to the truth of the 
market? 
For one thing, it means the product is compelling—it solves a problem for 
people to the extent that enough of them will reach for their wallet and give 
you money for it. Simple enough, huh? 
It also means you can control it—this is called the barrier to entry for your com-
petitors. Once you unleash your idea on the world, how can you protect the 
new niche or market that you have created? Patents and copyrights are de-
signed to help with this. Operational excellence is another way to protect your 
idea. If you hit the ball out of the park, it will be harder for others to follow 
you.  
So before you can have a business, you should have a strong product concept. 
Again, this can be a physical product, a service, or a combination of both. What 
are some of the factors that we should consider when choosing what we are 
going to sell, or evaluating an existing offering? Here are some starting points. 
What You Have to Work With 
What are your strengths and advantages? What makes you a natural fit for 
your industry? Every entrepreneur and every team has its unique attributes. 
Can you identify some unique characteristic or attribute that is available for 

Startup 
63
you to leverage? You should have some of the following characteristics available 
to you: 
• 
Skills: This is where most people start: their area of exper-
tise. This should be connected with other strengths or 
strategy points to make the business great. 
• 
Experience: Similar to skills, this is your (or your team’s) 
history of applying skills to a task. This is the category of 
lessons learned, scar tissue, and wisdom.  
• 
Resources: Do you have access to a unique resource that 
would give your business a natural advantage over your 
competitors? The company that acquired us is a great 
example of this, as they are a consortium of newspaper 
companies, with a tremendous set of resources within the 
organization (including sales staff, offices in cities across 
the country, business relationships, and control of 
television and print resources coast-to-coast). In the late 
1990s, all of these resources were a great launching pad 
for a portfolio of online advertising brands (Cars.com, 
Apartments.com, HomeFinder.com, etc.). 
• 
Knowledge: Distinct from skills and experience, knowledge 
in this sense is something that you know or have realized 
about your market that other companies don’t seem to 
grasp yet (or at least they are not visibly moving on). 
Knowledge of a single key fact can make all the difference 
for a business starting up. Google realized that text-based 
advertising and market-driven pricing were a good idea at 
just the right time. That realization combined with the re-
sources of their growing online search platform helped 
them create a multi-billion-dollar enterprise. 
What Are You Shooting For? 
The combination of attributes just mentioned can help you to identify what 
you should be creating as a product or service. The next step in that 
evaluation process is to look at how the product or service can be leveraged 
over time to make an amount of money for you that is worth the time and 
effort required. If you execute the idea well, and market forces work as you 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
64 
expect them to, what is the potential financial upside for your business concept 
in the very best case? What are you shooting for? Be very specific in what you 
think you can accomplish, and justify your plan to yourself by working out the 
numbers. In working out the numbers, you end up defining the scale at which 
you believe you can operate—that is to say the number and size of transac-
tions you plan to create. 
The question of scale has a couple of components: demand of the market and 
your capacity to obtain or produce product for sale. The market must need 
your product in quantity, and you must be able to produce enough of that 
quantity to meet demand.  
What Is the Opening in the Market? 
After identifying what resources you have to work with, look for a natural 
point of entry in the market itself. Consider that the marketplace is like a cas-
tle; a castle with walls and moats preventing the casual bystander, or even a 
fairly determined assailant, from getting inside. As with all good castle stories, 
your objective is to get in there, to take over a part of it. As you stand on the 
grassy field just below that imposing structure, you begin to study what your 
challenge looks like. You naturally start considering what your approach should 
be. Do you storm the main gate? Do you try to climb the 80-foot-high walls on 
the south side? What if you noticed a gap at the corner of one of the walls—
wouldn’t it be better to hit the gap, the opening, the weak spot where your 
effort for entry would be least?  
Of course it would be. And marketing is no different. Look for a niche that has 
been overlooked or underserviced by other players in the market. Choose 
that as your entry point.  
Once you get started, make it your objective to burrow in so deeply that you 
come to “own” it. Once other players notice you are gaining ground and prof-
iting from your strategy, you are already months ahead. In many markets, this 
is enough protection to survive if you are committed to constant evolution—
always looking for new angles. If people follow your lead and move on your 
niche so long as you have been adapting, morphing, and improving all along, it 
will hopefully be difficult for them to catch up. This strategy often forces larger 
players to just buy you outright instead of trying to follow you. This sequence 
of events worked very well with our apartment real estate site: we found a 
niche, burrowed into it, and then were bought by a larger competitor. 

Startup 
65
While the niche strategy is a common one, not all markets are going to have a 
clearly defined niche approach. Sometimes the best plan is to march up to the 
main gate of that castle and start battering the door down. It should go with-
out saying that this type of approach is often best suited to well-funded and 
highly resourced operations. 
_________________ 
 
What Separates a Hobby from a 
Business? 
Your customers are your reason for being. If I wanted to sound snooty I 
would say that customers are your raison d’être—your reason for being. (Give 
me a moment to fetch my smoking jacket and brandy snifter.) Customers are 
important. If you think about it, customers and their willingness to pay you are 
the only things that separate your business from being a hobby. A hobby is 
nothing more than an activity you do that nobody pays you for. If you love fly 
fishing, you can promote that outdoorsy pastime from a hobby to a business 
just by getting people to pay you to show them how to fly fish, guide them to 
great trout streams, and so on.  
It all comes down to the customer—to his or her willingness to listen to your 
message, process what it means, and then decide to fork over hard-earned 
cash. You have to love it when people choose to spend time with your prod-
uct, and willingly pay you money for it. And in case you are wondering, no, cus-
tomers are not always right. They should, however, almost always get what 
they want—and they should be permanently installed as the rotating, shining 
center of your business’s solar system. 
_________________ 
 
Will You Be a Whale or an Eskimo? 
Eskimos traditionally depended on killing one or two whales to survive for a 
whole year. They risked everything on being successful in this task. Whales, on 
the other hand, survive by eating millions of tiny shrimp. A failure to capture 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
66 
any one, any thousand, or even any ten thousand of those shrimp will not mat-
ter to the whale’s survival.  
Businesses can operate in either mode. You can position your product so that 
you need only a few large clients, or so that you need to acquire many small-
value clients. This is a fundamental point of analysis when deciding what busi-
ness to pursue, or how to position an existing operation or product offering 
for future growth and stability. Neither of these options is right or wrong; 
each carries its good and bad points. 
Early on, you are faced with a choice of which approach to take. In most cases, 
your expertise, product, or value proposition will dictate to you which of 
these choices is most appropriate. It is most common for businesses these 
days (especially online) to default to the mode of going for lots of relatively 
small transactions. It is very useful to recognize that both of these distinctions 
exist, and simply make a note of your choices as you set out to establish 
yourself in the market. The whale/Eskimo dichotomy can also present itself as 
your business grows, as I will describe.  
For example, consider the following scenario. The fictional OJC company 
makes bread. They bake and ship whole-wheat loaves to several small grocery 
chains and have experienced 2 to 3 percent growth yearly for the last ten 
years. OJC gets picked up in an article on healthy eating by the Los Angeles 
Times, which is quickly followed up by a proposal from MegaMart to provide 
heart-healthy wheat bread for 250 warehouse stores coast-to-coast. Great 
deal! That is a fantastic way to grow! It is a terrific opportunity. The know-
ledgeable CEO knows that saying yes entails a major risk, however.  
In order to meet the demand of the additional stores, OJC will have to triple 
its production capacity and hire extra shift workers. This entails an outsized 
capital outlay, which makes the CEO nervous. What would happen if they go 
for it and then eight months into the arrangement, MegaMart decides to pull 
the contract? It could put the future of OJC in question because it may not be 
able to cover the loan it took out to build up its factory. Left with overcapacity 
and a huge debt to pay, OJC could be forced to shut the operation. 
The conundrum here is this: should OJC follow fast, lopsided growth? Or 
maybe choose slower, diversified growth? Following the diversified route, 
there is less risk from any one customer picking up and leaving, but lower 
profit potential over the short term. Our aggressive CEO may choose to take 
the deal, but prioritize the quick acquisition of more sales outlets to create a 

Startup 
67
diversification structure that would support the company if it were to lose the 
large contract.  
_________________ 
 
The Precious Slice 
You advertise. If you work hard to market your product, if you spend the re-
quired time and money to put your brand and your message in front of your 
target audience, then something miraculous will happen: you will earn a pre-
cious slice of your customer’s attention. It will probably be a small slice.  
Reads part of 
your message.
Does not even 
notice your 
message. (By 
far the biggest 
group.)
Reads the 
message but 
does not 
respond.
Reads the 
message, and 
responds to 
your call to 
action.
                                              Level of Consumer Engagement
Population
Typical Bell Curve Distribution for Ad Campaign
Well-constructed 
messages  will skew this 
graph more to the right.
 
Figure 3-1. Most recipients of your message are not going to respond in any way. By creating 
well-formed and appropriate messages, you can increase the rightward skew of the distribution 
This little moment of attention, this precious slice of thought, when combined 
with the right message, is what pulls people out of the zone where they don’t 
know and don’t care and eases them into the first steps of becoming your cus-
tomer. (This is the hook that transitions people from left to right in Figure 3-
1.) This is an opportunity. This is the opportunity that your business depends 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
68 
on. So what compact, well-formed, and compelling message will you put into 
that small, fleeting opening into your customer’s consciousness?  
The precious slice demands that your message: 
• 
Be compact. 
• 
Be simple. 
• 
Be resonant to their experience.  
• 
Have a specific intention. What do you want them to do?  
• 
Perform an action, such as calling you?  
• 
Feel an emotion?  
• 
Remember your name or logo? 
• 
Learn your name?  
• 
Buy your product?  
• 
Get interested and follow up for more information? 
• 
Come into your store? 
In previous years, we carried out large-scale testing of our messaging when 
buying online pay-per-click advertising. By using a simple performance analysis, 
we determined that there were significant numerical advantages to including or 
excluding specific words in our ad copy. Adding an individual word could in-
crease the performance of a 20-word ad by 5 percent. This means that a one-
word difference between two similar-looking ads could mean over $100,000 
difference in value in just a few months. Such is the power of finding the best 
message. The same evaluation applies to every place where you put words or 
images in front of your customers. The following examples are vital:  
• 
What text and images you place in your advertising 
• 
What calls to action you use and where you place them 
• 
What your sales team is trained to tell customers 
• 
What your employees in a retail store are trained to say 
• 
How signs are constructed inside and outside of your re-
tail location 

Startup 
69
Every possible variation of every message you put in front of a customer will 
have an effect. It is incumbent upon you to reach out and try to get a handle 
on what that effect is, and to find the most effective, informative, and value-
creating message to use when you get that precious slice of your customer’s 
attention. 
More than anything, avoid saying too much or assuming your marketing targets 
know anything about you. The tendency I have seen is to try to impart all of 
the great stuff you have built into your product in one avalanche of details: 
“We do this and we do that and you save money and it slices, and dices, and 
wow—can you believe version 2.0 has the new doodlydad with print capability 
and … and … and …”  
Pick the most compelling part of your story and share a simplified, distilled ver-
sion of it when you get that precious slice of customer attention. Use it as a 
hook to get to the next step of the conversation. Then provide more details as 
the customer comes in for a closer look. Your critical messaging will often be 
at least in part, and answer to the question asked in the next section. 
_________________ 
 
Why You? 
This is a question that you will need to answer. It is a question that every po-
tential customer has in store for you, and something that you should be pre-
pared to answer early on. A good friend of mine has been working on a mi-
cropayment platform for online commerce for the past couple of years. Early 
on he asked me for some input on his project, and one of the first things I 
asked him was rather blunt but meant to provoke thought: “Why you? Why 
not Google? Why not Amazon? If you want to be a platform for companies 
and individuals to use across the Web, how will you explain why it needs to be 
you, why it must be you? Why not the other really large (and well-known) 
players in the market?” It may be worthwhile to note that he could not 
convincingly answer that question, and has made a pivot or two since that 
time. 
The “why you?” question is intimately related to the fact that most products 
and services can begin to fall into the parity product category if you let them. 
With most business models, there are multiple other options in the market 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
70 
that you will need to compete against to earn a customer. Take a look at pizza. 
How many different pizza options do you have within 10 minutes of where you 
are right now? Pizza is available via home delivery, Internet delivery, local res-
taurants, and chains such as Domino’s, Pizza Hut, and Papa John’s. A customer 
could even decide to head to the kitchen and make one from scratch. How 
many pizza brands can you find in your local store? Your grocery store proba-
bly has 30 different options for frozen pizza. Any which way you turn—pizza is 
everywhere. 
Take a moment to think about all of the messaging you get for this one prod-
uct on TV and the radio, in the newspaper and junk mail coupons, and from 
signs at the grocery store. All of this messaging is aimed at differentiating prod-
ucts from one another on some facet of the pizza experience:  
• 
Taste 
• 
Price 
• 
Convenience 
• 
Emotions (e.g., fun) 
• 
Quality 
• 
Local exclusivity  
Just as with the pizza industry, you will have to differentiate yourself in some 
way to stand out, to get customers, and to grow a defensible position from 
which to operate. 
_________________ 
The Internet Is Not Magic 
Don’t believe that the Internet is a magic solution to any business problem. It 
is much like any normal marketplace, but with a lower barrier to entry and 
potential global reach. If you look at your laptop computer, plugged into the 
World Wide Web, and feel electrified by the possibilities represented by that 
connection with so many other people, then we both have something in com-
mon. I feel it too. 

Startup 
71
Even though the Internet is a miracle of technology that has revolutionized 
communication and commerce, know that it is still governed by the same laws 
of economics that have controlled business since the earliest days of man. Re-
member the dot-com bubble and what were called new economy companies? 
This time saw the emergence of a large number of companies that thought that 
they could ignore many of the traditional laws of economics, get aboard the 
Internet, and ride it to wealth on the power of pure enthusiasm and limitless 
financing. The dream didn’t last. People woke up as soon as their financing 
started to run dry and they realized that investors would want to see real in-
come in order to be convinced to invest more. “No income” meant “no busi-
ness,” and Icarus fell to Earth with a big thump. 
Traditional business (pre-Internet) was bound by distance. Limiting? Yes. But it 
was also empowering. Let me paint a picture of circumstance for you to visual-
ize about the Internet. For our example, let’s consider something traditional 
and cast our minds back to about the year 1750. How about looking at the 
business model of a cooper? (A cooper was a person who made barrels for 
storing materials such as gunpowder, liquids, and foods.) To survive in his local 
marketplace in 1750, our cooper must:  
• 
Offer a service or product that people value. People need 
barrels.  
• 
Have enough potential transactions in his local market to 
survive. This means a population of people within trading 
distance, who produce food or store liquids in such quan-
tity that they regularly need barrels. A barrel might last 
anywhere between one and five years, so our cooper has 
to take that into account when looking for repeat 
customers.  
• 
Build and maintain a good reputation. If you were known 
to be a cooper that once used outhouse planks to make 
barrels, folks might not want to buy from you. 
• 
Find the right balance between demand and supply. For ex-
ample, 40 coopers in a 40-barrel-per-year market won’t 
work. 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
72 
• 
Be able to source materials for making barrels. That means 
iron for the metal rings, wood for the barrel planks, and 
wood for making fires to dry the planks and heat the metal 
if necessary. If any of these materials are completely un-
available (e.g., in Antarctica), the cooper would be in the 
barrel-importing business, not the barrel-making business. 
Because it’s 1750 in this thought experiment, the cooper doesn’t have access 
to global markets. He cannot (easily) sell his product to Paris, London, and 
New York at the same time. He is pre-Internet, pre-airplane, and pre–steam 
power. This is local in the most profound sense of that word. 
I said that a local market is empowering a moment ago, did I not? I say that be-
cause of these two factors: 
• 
Information is simple and available. 
• 
Consumer options are limited.  
Table 3-1 describes some of the chief differences between doing business on a 
local scale and a global one. 
Table 3-1. Core Differences Between Local and Global Markets 
Local 
Global  
Information is simple. In a primi-
tive local market, you can know a 
significant proportion of what 
there is to know about the market 
forces at work.  
Information is complex. In a global market, infor-
mation about competition and market forces is 
very complex, and often hidden. Competitors and 
market pressures can arise from anywhere at any-
time without warning. 
Options are limited. If you are the 
only barrel maker or a member of a 
small population of coopers, then 
people need to come to you for 
their barrel needs. 
Options are unlimited. For the customer that is 
willing to use FedEx or UPS to obtain goods, dis-
tance is not an issue. Providers from Croatia to 
Cleveland are going head-to-head with one 
another. 
Relationships are strong. You meet 
every single customer face to face. 
You are not a brand—you are a 
person. 
Relationships are weak. You almost never meet a 
customer face to face. Until you build powerful 
brand recognition (like Apple or Amazon), you are 
merely a product description and a price point. 

Startup 
73
Local 
Global  
Marketing is unnecessary. In a pri-
mitive local market, marketing as 
we know it is unnecessary. You 
offer a service in a town. People 
who need the service in the town 
come to you. 
Marketing is mandatory. In a market with global 
reach, you can reach everybody but are known by 
nobody at all (at least in the beginning). It’s a di-
abolical trade-off. 
Sales volume is not volatile. You sell 
as much as the local community 
demands—no more, no less. There 
is relatively predictable demand 
over time. 
Sales volume is highly volatile. Your sales volume 
is directly tied to the effectiveness of your brand 
positioning and marketing. 
The lure of the Internet is seductive indeed: “If I 
can reach the whole planet and everybody wants 
my product, then I can make a lot of money!”  
For the sake of making my point, I will repeat the 
first sentence: Your sales volume is directly tied to 
the effectiveness of your brand positioning and 
marketing. 
Profit is more certain. The price 
that customers are willing to pay 
for your goods or services is likely 
to be at a fair equilibrium with the 
cost to produce your goods or 
services. 
Profit is much less certain. The price that custom-
ers are willing to pay for your goods or services 
can vary widely from profitable to impossibly 
cheap. You often compete against the cheapest 
provider anywhere in the world.  
Maximum profit is limited. The 
best-case scenario for revenue and 
profit in a local market is limited. 
Maximum profit is very high. The best-case sce-
nario for revenue and profit in a global market is 
many times higher than in a local market. 
 
Looking at this comparison, we begin to see that marketing is a response of busi-
ness to weak relationships, distance, and customers having multiple options for a 
product or service. 
Takeaway: Limited distance restricts your reach, but it also means that you 
only have to compete with the locals. The Internet gives you access to a global 
audience, but also competitive exposure to any Joe with the same idea you 
have—worldwide.  

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
74 
_________________ 
 
Parity Products and the Bozo Factor 
Abandon all hope ye who enter here. 
—Dante 
A parity product is something non-unique, such as books, DVDs, and software. 
Indiana Jones on DVD is a parity product—it is the same at Wal-Mart as it is at 
Best Buy. Parity products cannot compare to one another in terms of features 
(as they are identical), so the market has to search for other differentiating fac-
tors. Convenience is one. Customer service is another. In most cases the mar-
ket will push and prod, and the most important differentiating factor will turn 
out to be price. When the differentiating factor is price, this overwhelming 
downward pressure continually pushes profit margins down—often to near (or 
below) zero profit. The game then quickly becomes which supplier can provide 
the parity product with the lowest-cost overhead. This is a terrible game to 
play, as everyone seems to lose (except the customers, who are happy that 
they got what they wanted—and cheap). 
A complicating factor for selling online is what I have come to call the bozo 
factor. In a large enough marketplace (such as the Internet in general, and 
eBay.com, Amazon.com, and similar marketplaces in particular), if you have a 
parity product, there is never a shortage of bozos who will knowingly or un-
knowingly operate at a loss and push the prevailing lowest market price on their 
products below the realistic lowest profitable price. These market participants 
are often short-duration participants because they will put themselves out of 
business in short order, due to lack of profit. An example of this, and what I 
am thinking of in particular, are the numerous and largely anonymous partici-
pants selling products on razor-thin (or negative) profit margins on massive 
trading platforms like Amazon and eBay. A Darwinian die-off never really takes 
hold because other similar participants are always entering even as older ones 
go out of business and disappear from the scene. A natural selection scenario 
with emerging winners is only valid in localized contexts where the entry of 
new participants is constrained by the finite nature of the supporting popula-
tion. The Internet is not a constrained or finite population, and new partici-

Startup 
75
pants are emerging and disappearing with staggering speed and limitless re-
placements on their way.  
In short, there is never a shortage of bozos, and the markets where they pro-
liferate are made unprofitable for legitimate players because of the bozos’ 
limitless loss-taking.  
With parity products in large enough markets, somebody somewhere can always 
sell cheaper than you. If you are the cheapest today, then somebody else will 
be cheaper tomorrow. Your competitors may have advantages that make it 
very difficult if not impossible for you to compete against them. This is a 
natural (and to economists, beautiful) feature of the marketplace, and it’s yet 
another reason to avoid parity product markets.  
The only exception to the rule of avoiding the parity product market alto-
gether is the highly desirable case where you can shatter the parity paradigm in 
some way. 
An illustration of this would be if you could acquire the products significantly 
cheaper than anybody else. An example of this is buying closeout merchandise 
from retailers, or having an asymmetrical deal with the manufacturer that 
prices you differently than everyone else in the market. (This is also where 
counterfeiters appear on the scene. Interested in a $35 Gucci handbag any-
one?) 
Another way to succeed with parity products is if you can market the products 
to a group that has no other options. An example of this is the concession stand 
at a movie theater. You have a closed audience with no other options for pur-
chasing a Coke or a candy bar, so you can literally charge five times the normal 
cost. These parity products are at their most profitable when customers have 
no other options. 
_________________ 
 
The Two Approaches to Differentiation 
No matter what your business is, your primary job in communication with 
your customers is to be noticed and to differentiate yourself from their other 
options. Moreover, you want to sufficiently separate your brand from other 
options so that you are their choice when they go looking for your category of 
goods or services. Another way of framing this challenge is this: you need to 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
76 
differentiate yourself with regard to your competitors, and to arrange your 
communication and strategy around these particular points.  
There are two main approaches for differentiating that I have come across so 
far in my businesses: I call them positional differentiation and structural 
differentiation. 
Positional Differentiation 
This is the classic marketer’s definition of differentiation, where you “build a 
better mousetrap.” If you are providing a product or service, what is your 
story? Why is your product or service better, more convenient, better tasting, 
sexier, or more desirable? Every business should try to build this kind of narra-
tive, and it must be the following: 
• 
Simple to explain: Can you explain it in five words or less? 
• 
Believable: Does it strike the average consumer as true? 
• 
Relevant: Are the points that you make actually valuable to 
your target audience? 
Here are some examples of businesses that use positional differentiation:1 
• 
College Painters: This company does what many other paint-
ing companies do: painting houses. The owners know it is 
hard to message effectively for abstract differences like 
materials quality, brush technique, and so on. These guys 
position themselves as “exceptional college students 
managing their own business as interns for the summer.” 
That is a wholesome messaging point that people respond 
to when choosing who to hire. “Why hire some contractor 
when you can get a great paint job for your house and also 
help put smart, motivated kids through college?” This is 
positional differentiation on the emotional resonance of a 
service. 
                                                 
1 These are actual business models at work in Austin, Texas. 
 

Startup 
77
• 
Nature Burger: This is an un-fast-food joint that provides 
burgers and fries like the other guys, but does so with lo-
cally produced beef and organic potatoes. The owners 
make a better product, and they make sure that all of their 
customers know it. They actually have pictures of the 
ranchers that they buy from on the walls in the restaurant. 
When customers are making a decision about what they 
want to eat (and feed to their kids), they choose Nature 
Burger because of the environmental and health differ-
ences in the product offered. This is positional differentia-
tion on the health attributes and emotional content of 
product. 
• 
The Joint Chiropractic: This clinic does not accept insurance, 
and differentiates itself by a flat $20 fee for all services. It 
avoids the complications of insurance filing and copays by 
just charging one set fee. Most visits are walk-in and can be 
completed in 10 minutes or less. It appeals to busy 
customers because it is not too expensive, and customers 
can make a spur-of-the-moment decision to stop by. Less 
money, less hassle, less time. This is positional differentia-
tion on cost and convenience. 
Structural Differentiation  
Structural differentiation is useful when your product or service is very much 
like the other options in the market, and/or the difficulty of communicating the 
unique selling points of your product (if there are any) is high. An alternative to 
pinning down customers one by one and explaining why you are better is to 
study your market and its consumer behavior to find a way to make it inevita-
ble that you will get customers by the structure of your activity: where you 
place yourself and your messaging. Compared to positional differentiation, this 
is a very practical option when the market is so crowded that any complex or  

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
78 
nuanced messaging will be impractical and ineffective. Here are some hypo-
thetical examples of businesses using structural differentiation: 
• 
Joe’s Pizza: Joe makes good pizza, but he doesn’t make the 
best pizza in the world, and he doesn’t even advertise, be-
cause he bought the rights to locate his stores at several 
airports in his area. His business is asymmetrical compared 
to the competition in that he is the only choice for his tar-
get audience at a particular point in time. Customers are 
locked into whatever eating choices are available once 
they are through the airport security line and waiting for 
their flights. If they are at the airport and want pizza, then 
they are a Joe’s customer. Quality, price, and other differ-
entiators mean less in this scenario than they would in an 
open market (although they do help). Being the only 
option is a good example of structural differentiation. 
• 
Online Real Estate Search: In building an online business that 
competes in this crowded marketplace, we implemented a 
visually distinct brand, but realized over time that this 
would not be what would make or break our success. The 
quality of the brand experience did not impact our reach 
to users (although it certainly impacted the conversion 
rates of users once they came to the site). Our differentia-
tor in customer acquisition was to “always be there” when 
shoppers needed to find a place to live. What that meant 
for us was that, more often than not, when they would go 
to Google and type in a search, we would be an option on 
the results page.  

Startup 
79
We built high-quality content and executed a complex 
search engine–optimization and search engine–marketing 
strategy to satisfy that objective of “always being there.” 
We did well because we were very frequently there on 
the screen when any of the 80 million apartment shoppers 
in the United States decided they needed to find a new 
place to live. Of those searchers, it came to pass that mil-
lions of them per month came to our site. This was not 
because of our brand position, but because of how we 
structured the placement and type of messages guiding 
them to us. Finding a way to be omnipresent as an option 
for the customer is a powerful example of structural 
differentiation. 
• 
MegaMart: The MegaMart chain of warehouse stores de-
cides to make a house brand of soda. It just puts “Mega-
Mart Cola” on the label and doesn’t particularly worry 
about trumpeting the product quality or taste. The prod-
uct is then displayed prominently on the end caps of 
MegaMart’s soda aisles. While MegaMart may choose to 
put some messaging behind the quality of the product, it 
doesn’t need to differentiate product characteristics; it can 
use the status of house brand to get customers by default 
(so long as the product is somewhere near the quality of 
the alternatives). This is a case structural differentiation 
combined with positional differentiation: the product is 
simply always there, and it can be priced cheaper than the 
alternatives due to the higher margin. 
Takeaway: You will benefit by looking for both structural and positional dif-
ferentiation in your business. Take advantage of both if you can, and expect 
that one or the other will be dominant in what actually brings in business for 
you. 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
80 
_________________ 
Know Your Customer 
Knowing the market is critical. It also means knowing your competition and 
knowing your customer.  
At one startup where I was the chief strategist, and in charge of the marketing 
team, I put together a tangible model of our target customer. We gathered 
statistics about our web site users that provided us demographics on age, eth-
nicity, gender, education, and so on. From this data, we determined that the 
single largest demographic group was Hispanic and African-American women 
between the ages of 24 and 32. I asked my creative team to make a life-size 
full-color cutout of “our customer.” This female figure was then placed on a 
glass room divider near our break room. Several engineers reported feeling a 
bit jumpy while they were getting their coffee because it felt like they were 
being watched! We named her Valerie and surrounded her with squares of 
paper taped to the wall that each had an important bit of market research 
written on it. 
So, what was the point of this? I wanted my team members to “Remember 
who our customer is.” Each member of the team makes decisions every day 
that can be meaningfully informed by “Remembering who our customer is.” 
When designing an interface for our web site: “Remember who the customer 
is.” When deciding what kind of content we want to research and put on our 
web site, it’s the same: “Remember who the customer is.” When deciding 
whether to buy advertising in a baseball stadium or a women’s magazine: “Re-
member who the customer is.”  
By creating an impactful visual aid, planting it in the middle of our work envi-
ronment, and driving home a mantra-like repetition on the subject of knowing 
the customer, we created an effective tool for informing decisions made by 
our employees at every level of the company. 
When You Have Multiple Customers 
Related to this question of knowing your customer, it is common to have 
more than one customer to consider. When looking for an acquisition for our 
web real estate business, I would often refer to our task as “satisfying the 
three customers.” We had multiple customers which could have conflicting 

Startup 
81
needs in terms of how we messaged our site, spent money on advertising, and 
managed our business. Here are the three customers, a tangled web: 
• 
Shoppers: These were folks looking for a place to live. They 
need information, and efficient 1-2-3 shopping. 
• 
Advertisers: These were property management customers 
who were our advertisers. They needed to feel they were 
getting value for their advertising dollar. We would often 
find ourselves forced to make changes to the site which 
actually diminished the performance of the ads, but made 
the paying customers feel like they were getting their 
money’s worth. This included things like writing “premium 
ad” above their search result listings. Shoppers click on 
these less, but it is easier for management customers to 
verify that they are getting what they paid for. 
• 
Acquisition partners: These were our competitors in the 
market that could possibly be enticed to acquire us. This 
audience would be looking for a complementary brand to 
add to their portfolio, so we would differentiate our look, 
feel, and messaging aggressively even if we felt that shop-
pers and management customers would not respond as 
well. At certain periods of time, when our top priority was 
getting acquired, this customer’s needs would win in any 
design or messaging debates within the team. 
We needed all three of these groups, and each would rise to primary impor-
tance at different times during different periods of our growth. Recognition of 
these distinct customers and their individual needs was critical for us. 
_________________ 
 
Image Counts 
Know who your customers are and build an image that meets their needs. 
Who are the customers? Do you know who they are? What do they want? 
Why are they looking for you? Customers looking for a residential plumber 
are most likely going to want what everyone wants: a good service that they 
can rely on that does not cost too much. In this case, if your web site looks 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
82 
too slick, people might be scared off, thinking that your service would be too 
expensive. By targeting your image to the audience, you would build a site that 
is clean and functional and shows any industry affiliations you have. 
This goes for you personally as well: always remember that image counts. That 
means that you may need to leave cutoff shorts and flip-flops on the floor at 
home waiting for your return, instead of wearing them to work. Even if you 
are not planning on meeting powerful contacts today, dress nicely. Get used to 
it. You can always tell when someone changes the way they dress for an im-
portant meeting. Their clothes don’t quite fit right and they will look uncom-
fortable. My advice: Dress for the position you want in your industry but may 
not have yet. 
Also, any of your staff that comes in contact with your customer is the face of 
the business. When they are interacting with the customer, they are you by 
proxy and they represent the company. So hold them to the same standards 
that you hold yourself to. 
Your place of business is also up for this scrutiny. As is your business vehicles, 
your business cards, and the on-hold music on your phone system. Is your 
business e-mail at Hotmail instead of your own business domain name? All of 
these things should match the brand image that you have built (or are building) 
for your business. 
Takeaway: Do an inventory of all of the things that actually touch your 
clients. Go through each and ask yourself if it is appropriate image-wise for the 
company you want to be today. Are they appropriate for the company you 
want to become in one year? In five years? 
_________________ 
 
If You Build It, They Will Come  
In the movie Field of Dreams, actor Kevin Costner is informed by a spiritual 
messenger, “If you build it, [they] will come.”2 In the story that follows, against 
any common sense, he proceeds to build a baseball field in the middle of no-
where—and is rewarded by throngs of visitors that congregate to take in and 
                                                 
2 The actual quote is “If you build it, he will come,” but using the word they better fits my 
story.  

Startup 
83
enjoy his creation. In Hollywood, this is great storytelling. In business, this is a 
dangerous hallucination. Unfortunately this concept carries many entrepre-
neurs forward and draws them into a disappointing reality when they realize 
that building a web site or a product is not enough. It would be awful if you put 
all of yourself into throwing a party, and then nobody showed up. It happens in 
business all the time, but it doesn’t have to.  
A part of any business plan should be the answer to the following question: 
How are you going to connect with your target audience, convey 
the sales pitch, and convert enough of them to paying customers in a 
short enough time period to not only survive, but to thrive?  
_________________ 
 
Radicalize 
You know your business better than anyone. You care about whether it does 
well. The uninformed public on the other hand does not know about your 
business. They don’t care about it at all. 
Understand that the customer coming into contact with your marketing mes-
sage is unmotivated. They are very likely to be in a passive state. A passive 
state means that they are not moved emotionally or physically from inaction or 
noncaring. As I will remind you throughout this book, much of what you do as 
a businessperson is to fight against this passivity, against this noncaring (see 
Figure 3-2).  

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
84 
Hates it
Loves It
Dislike
Negative Passive
Positive Passive
   Like
Most people (the 
masses) will be 
passive and won’t 
respond.
A few people 
will love it, and 
respond to your 
call to action.
A few people may 
really hate your 
message. Some-
times people in this 
category will 
respond because 
they are negatively 
radicalized.
Use emotion and well-structured 
messaging to push this curve
 to the right.
Response Distribution of People Who Notice Your Messaging
N o   R e s p o n s e
Responds
Responds
 
Figure 3-2. Bell curve distribution of consumer passivity to your messaging. Your job as a mar-
keter is to push this curve to the right. 
Ask yourself how you can push more people into the Love! category. Experi-
ment with different kinds of messaging to accomplish this. At one business, we 
were trying to get people to talk about our brand on Twitter. My suggestion 
(which we did not use) was to have a contest where we put a banner at the 
top of our home page that said, “Twitter about us and win a water buffalo.” 
My team laughed at the idea—nobody had ever heard of a contest like that 
before. The unexpected can radicalize. Our audience (Twitter users) is mainly 
twenty- and thirtysomethings. This generation thrives on novelty, and the 
online set loves to have something to share with their friends on Facebook, 
their blogs, and Twitter. (The fine print of this contest would have been that 
the winner would have a water buffalo purchased on their behalf at 
www.heifer.org, a charity supporting rural families in Third World. This would 
have cost us about $250.)  
Radicalize! Emotion is the best radicalizer. Anger. Love. Fear. Hate. Use these 
emotions to your advantage. We found on our real estate web site that our 
audience (females) responded better to our calls to action if we had a picture 
of a baby on the page. What does a baby have to do with a real estate site? 
Nothing, other than that our customers clicked more and stayed longer with 
our brand when we had babies on the site. Emotion sells, so use it.  
 
_________________ 
 
_________________ 

Startup 
85
 
Never Ask Water to Climb a Ladder 
Marketing staff at every company needs to compose messages that get cus-
tomers to do what the company needs done. This will logically see the staff 
members starting a campaign or message or brochure by thinking about what 
they want the customer to do. The need is there behind what the marketer does: 
“We need people to buy swimming pools,” “we need people to ‘like’ us on 
Facebook,” “we need people to come to our web site and buy widgets.” What 
starts as a business need then manifests itself as a piece of marketing colla-
teral—a message in a bottle sent out into the sea of commerce, hoping for a 
response back. 
A Marketer’s Tale 
The airport parking company that I use in Austin has a shuttle bus that runs 
from the lot to the airport terminal. I got a good chuckle out of a poster that 
the company had plastered on the bus windows, which said the following: 
“Like us on Facebook. Plus us on Google. Follow us on Twitter.” 
This makes sense doesn’t it? Let’s break it down:  
• 
Somebody at the parking company has been tasked with 
the job of handling social media.  
• 
That person’s boss has probably established some sense of 
the metrics in the space: likes, plusses, and follows.  
• 
Since this is what the social media person is being meas-
ured on, she creates the sign as described and posts it in 
the bus.  
• 
The irony is that she has herself missed the metaphorical 
bus with the marketing collateral that she just made. 
So what’s wrong in this case? Simple: She is telling customers what her com-
pany wants them to do. 
Why would any customer ever care what her company or her boss wants? Why, 
why, why? I would not be surprised if out of 50,000 customers per month in 
those busses nationwide, not a single one ever responds to this poster as it is 
written.  

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
86 
The Problem 
Simply asking customers to do what you want is like asking water to climb a 
ladder. (Which just doesn’t work.) 
Customers are like water: Water passively courses along the path of least re-
sistance, following its natural bias—which is to flow downhill.  
A customer’s natural bias is to be unaffected by most messages, only noticing 
and following a few of the ones that satisfy their needs in some way. The key 
to getting some of your customers to do what you want is to bind your call to 
action (like me, buy me, visit me) to a benefit that they want a part of. 
What She Should Have Done 
Here’s what our marketer might have done differently:  
1. Start with “why.” Under what circumstances would cus-
tomers ever want to interact with messaging from her 
brand? What do they need? What are they interested in?  
2. After identifying candidate whys, then you evaluate your 
resources and see how you can provide a solution to one 
or more of them. This is the process of building a value 
proposition around that why. The mantra here is, “Pro-
vide value. Provide value.” 
3. Finally, follow up by attaching the desired actions (in this 
case, like, plus, and follow) to that value proposition.  
How about these: 
• 
“Get one free day of parking! Just ‘like’ us on Facebook to 
receive your coupon.” (Value plus desired action) 
• 
“Love Hawaii? So do we! We are sending two lucky fami-
lies to Oahu—just follow us on Twitter and we will enter 
you to win!” (Value plus desired action) 
• 
“A lizard in a suitcase? The funniest travel stories ever told 
—only on our Facebook page.” (Value plus desired action) 
By providing value, and arranging the message in such a way that customers 
who are interested in the value do what you are asking them to do, you greatly 
increase your chances of getting customer buy-in. 
3

Startup 
87
_________________ 
 
 
Climbing the Mountain  
How do you get enough customers to survive? To thrive? The answer is that 
you get them one at a time. As you acquire customer after customer, you will 
see a pattern emerging. This pattern is universal and consists of several stages. 
When looking back at the life cycle of a customer who has bought your prod-
uct, you can identify the stages they went through to get from “knows nothing 
about you” to “spending money with you” to “repeat customer, spending 
money with you again and again.” 
All of your customers are at some point completely ignorant about you. They 
don’t even know your name. As you can see in Figure 3-3, every potential cus-
tomer for your business starts here. When you open your doors as a new 
startup, you will begin to reach out, advertise, and communicate to your po-
tential customers. You will advertise, and push, push, push your message out 
to this group, and eventually, some of your potential customers will come to 
know who you are—recognizing your name when they see it or hear it (a mi-
racle!).  
This is a good start, but by itself will not make you money. Your customers 
have to understand your value proposition before they can possibly buy any-
thing from you. Beyond that, they have to actually believe your pitch. Pushing, 
enticing, dragging, and pulling your potential customers through these stages 
eventually yields some people that will do the unthinkable. They will actually 
reach deep into their pocket, pull out their wallet, and buy. Once you have 
people buying your product or service, it is your highest duty to make sure 
that they are so thrilled, happy, and satisfied with the experience that they will 
come back to you again and again. This group, the repeat customer, is the 
most valuable group of people in your business world.  

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
88 
Don’t Let this 
happen. Every 
customer 
should be a 
repeat 
customer.
Market  Population 
Climbing a Mountain for Each Customer Acquisition
 Ignorant
 of Product
Knows the 
product 
name
Willing to 
listen to the 
pitch
Understands 
the value 
proposition
Believes 
the value 
proposition
Buys the 
product!
Repeat 
customer
Finally Making Money!
Push, Push, Push
Customer Engagement
Investing Time and Money to Get Customers
 
Figure 3-3. This graph represents the underlying flow of customers responding to messaging 
and their understanding of a business.  
For some businesses, this cycle is very fast. Going back to the pizza restaurant 
at the airport is an example. People are hungry and don’t know who you are at 
all until they see your sign. They know your name, see your menu, and see the 
pizza slices behind the counter. They know the details and feel the benefit 
(hungry, must eat, yum, looks good). So they buy. 
Imagine how similar the same life cycle is for a car purchase. How about a 
home purchase? Now, how about your product or service? Run through the 
scenario of how your customers move through this pathway from ignorance to 
repeat customer. Look for the details; understand the gaps that might be there 
in the way you are trying to sell.  
You must know the contours and details of this cycle inside and out. Know it, 
observe it, tweak it, own it. Why not put this book down right now and figure 
out how your different customers move through this pattern in your business? 
This is one of the most important exercises you will ever do to ensure the 
success of your business. 

Startup 
89
_________________ 
 
Learn to Love Statistics 
I love statistics. They make me happy. Why? Because they give me confidence. 
For instance, statistics gave me confidence when I was running my first online 
business. Confidence was a very big deal for us because we had started where 
everyone starts: from zilch. When we first launched the product, we had a 
membership base of my partner Sterling, myself, and an account that I had 
made for my cat. That is a grand total of three users, one of whom was not 
likely to ever log in. We obviously needed to build up our list of users if we 
were ever going to have a real business. At that time, the big search engine 
was AltaVista. Banner advertisements were still “pretty neat,” and had user 
click-through rates of over 20 percent in some cases. 
OK, so I started by saying how I love stats. Here’s why: we were using a serv-
ice called goto.com, which was one of the pioneers in selling keyword-based 
click-through traffic. It was a pay-per-click model, where we would bid on a 
keyword phrase and pay 10 cents for every person that clicked through to our 
site. This is not big news now, since Google AdWords is a cornerstone of 
many business ventures online these days. For us, it was very important to get 
these bids right. 10 cents per click sounds tiny, but it adds up. We quickly got 
to where we were spending tens of thousands of dollars a month for traffic, 
and we had to get it right—if we were not capturing value, we could have gone 
broke in a few weeks The stats that came through this experience were beau-
tiful to see. The aggregate behavior of thousands of visitors to our site ended 
up being very predictable. We could not say if any one visitor would spend 
money to become a member, but in aggregate, we would see that if we spent 
$1,000 in traffic from goto.com we would get $2,000 in sales. If we spent 
$10,000 dollars, we would get $20,000 in sales. This then got us into page 
testing to tweak up our stats.  
Look for opportunities in your own business to measure return on investment 
(ROI) or business performance, tweak what you are doing, measure, and 
repeat.  
Here are a couple of examples:  
• 
For web sites, use Google Analytics, Omniture, and testing plat-
forms like Google’s Website Optimizer to create experiments 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
90 
where you both change aspects of your site and measure for per-
formance. Test both major and minor tweaks—you would be sur-
prised at how even minor and seemingly irrelevant changes can 
positively (or negatively) affect performance. The presence of a 
web radio player on one site at the top of the screen increased 
performance by 6 percent even though customers did not click on 
it. 
• 
For service businesses, provision separate phone numbers for cer-
tain ad campaigns to measure dollars spent vs. business earned. 
Never stop this process. A quote that I am famous for in my circles is 
A day without testing is value forever lost. 
_________________ 
The Marketing Mix 
Every viable business has a magic formula for efficiently connecting with the 
right group of customers, in the right way, at a cost per customer that is sus-
tainable. The basket of various marketing tools and methods that you use is 
called your marketing mix. More often than not, the difference between the 
companies that fail, the companies that barely make ends meet, and those that 
flourish, rests on finding this magic formula and executing it effectively. 
Identify the best ways of reaching your audience very early on in your business. 
Make a list and continually adjust the ways in which you use these tools. Al-
ways be on the lookout for new ways to reach out and get your message into 
the right places. I remember back in the 1990s when Amazon.com was putting 
stickers on bananas at the grocery store. That was really out there, but here I 
am mentioning it to you over a decade later, so it must have been memorable. 
Repeating the point: Always keep your eyes and ears open for new opportuni-
ties to reach your audience. The key to marketing is being able to discern 
openings in the market. This means finding and exploiting new products and 
services that fit in places where there are no competitors, and it means being 
the first to devise and press strategies for connecting your product with the 
people who are not yet your customers. 

Startup 
91
Pay particular attention to those mechanisms that you can track the perfor-
mance of. Be careful not to spend too much money on mechanisms with which 
you cannot actually track sales. Early on, Sterling and I spent a substantial 
amount of money to market one of our brands with CitySearch.com. The 
company had an impressive office and a nice-looking sales pitch. We ended up 
signing a contract. We came to regret it, as there was not one sale or sales 
lead attributable to that investment. It hurt, because on our limited budget we 
did not have much money to spend on marketing, and here a big chunk went 
out for a year-long contract on something that was of no measurable value to 
the bottom line. The reason that we spent this money was that we were new 
to the market and we did not yet have a playbook to reach our customer. I 
remember feeling like it was a Hail Mary move, but we did not believe we had 
other options. That was neither smart nor accurate. We learned, moved on, 
built a playbook, and were able to grow from no customers to counting many 
of the Fortune 500 as our customers within 18 months. 
There have been times in my businesses when the marketing mix was more of 
a single channel from which every drop of water dripped. Our relationship 
with goto.com was an insidious process to experience: we had a new product 
and needed to reach people. We were not yet getting organic traffic to our 
site, so we paid for traffic. There were a number of options for spending 
advertising dollars on the Web, but the one that was most effective was the 
goto.com product. What happened was a natural course of events—we pulled 
money from ineffective campaigns like banner ads and trade magazines and put 
it where we were getting good results. In the short term this was great, 
because we leveraged our marketing budget to get the biggest possible return. 
This ended up feeling like a deal with the devil because we became dependent 
on the traffic from that source—too dependent to be comfortable. What 
would happen if goto.com increased its rates? What would happen if it went 
out of business altogether? What would happen if it dropped us for some 
policy violation we weren’t aware of? What if? What if? The fact is that we 
would have been in a tough place if something had happened to that customer 
stream. It did not become a terminal problem for us because we diversified 
our marketing and gained solid ground on the search engines, which provided a 
great deal of customers at a cost of $0.00. (Read zero dollars and zero cents. 
Free.) With multiple sources of traffic and customers, we were well diversified 
and had found a way to minimize at least one area of risk in our business. 
In subsequent years, I have seen the same process occur again and again. The 
most popular mechanisms for reaching customers—eBay, Amazon.com, 
Google, Google AdWords, the local newspaper, trade magazines, television, 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
92 
Craigslist—all of these marketing mechanisms will try to work well enough so 
that you drop all your other options and become dependent on them. This can 
feel easy, inevitable, and even natural: but it is inadvisable to succumb to the 
temptation to allow any one marketing source to overwhelmingly drive your 
value chain.  
Following only optimal returns on your marketing spend can lead you to the 
situation you see in Figure 3-4. When you allow your business to be dependent 
on one marketing channel, you put yourself in a hostage situation (which is 
bad). What to do? 
Marketing Dependency Is A Darwinian Process
All
Marketing 
Channels
Performing 
Channels
Top-Performing 
Channel
 
Figure 3-4. Progression from a variety of marketing sources to one winner, because it per-
formed better than the others. 
• 
Allow yourself to spend money on the best of the other 
marketing options that you are aware of that have a posi-
tive or near-break-even ROI. The options near break-even 
may be tweaked and made to be profitable. 

Startup 
93
• 
Any healthy Darwinian system has a weeding-out process, 
and a process of replenishment. Seek to replace the options 
that die off as quickly as possible, and initiate new market-
ing tests. There are always alternatives, and you must find 
them. 
_________________ 
 
Product Pricing  
Think people will buy more if you charge less? Maybe, but not always. 
Case Study: Meridian World Data and Pricing 
When we were building our social networking business, we needed to be able 
to figure out how far apart our members were from each other. When some-
one signed up in Singapore, they probably would be less interested in people 
who lived in Greenland or Australia (although you can never tell). We abso-
lutely needed to be able to determine how far apart people lived, and what city 
and country they were in. The end result was that we built our own database 
of city and country names with latitude and longitude for each. This database 
had over 2.5 million entries in it before we were done and was a critical part 
of our business. Because we were not able to find this kind of product for sale 
anywhere for any price, it made a lot of sense to spin it off as a standalone 
business. This is an example of a choice—where you focus on one thing or 
chase supplemental opportunities. The decision for us was “chase on!” in this 
case, and we started another business in parallel by posting a simple web site 
called GeoData that offered a World Cities Database on CD, priced at $425. 
No sales at all.  
I was sure that people needed our product, but it was not selling. As a test, we 
bumped the price up to $1,200, and sales started coming in. Amazing! Embol-
dened, we created even more versions of the product at $1,200, $2,000, 
$3,000, and higher. The result? More and more sales. As the business grew we 
would eventually come to sell the product for up to $50,000. This is the same 
product that we could not get anybody to buy for $425. 
There are four lessons that I take away from this: 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
94 
• 
It turned out that people could not trust a product that 
was too cheap. They had a psychological need to spend 
more if they were going to trust it.  
• 
Businesspeople spend money, and they don’t want to put 
their reputation on the line with their bosses in order to 
save a few dollars of company money.  
• 
It is good to offer graded versions in your pricing struc-
ture. People don’t want the cheapest, and they want to 
feel that they did not pay for the highest either—the one 
with all the bells and whistles. They can settle in and feel 
comfortable with the one-notch-down-from-the-most-ex-
pensive product. There is substantial research to back this 
point up.  
• 
The price we set was completely arbitrary. We charged 
what we thought we could get at first, but found by raising 
prices we got more sales (the first lesson mentioned pre-
viously). The fact is that by setting the anchor point our-
selves, we were able to build a price structure that was 
very appealing to our customers. In a vacuum of expe-
rience (have you ever bought a data disk of cities with lati-
tude and longitude before?), we could charge whatever we 
wanted within reason, so long as we were consistent. Hu-
man beings have difficulty evaluating a product or service 
and putting a hard-and-fast price on it, especially without 
points of reference such as competitors or prior expe-
rience with similar purchases. 
Even parity products can vary widely in their pricing if you can convince the 
customer that they are not buying a parity product, but something special. 
Look at Louis Vuitton and Tiffany. A Vuitton handbag is a bag. It is made of 
stuff and holds stuff inside. There are many, many, many products on the mar-
ket that do exactly the same thing. You can drive down to JCPenny and buy a 
bag that probably does a better job of holding stuff than any Vuitton bag and 
costs 1 percent of the price. But, my wife, for instance, would much prefer the 
Vuitton bag because Louis Vuitton has communicated a product message that 
she wants to be a part of, and the brand has name recognition.  

Startup 
95
_________________ 
 
Oprah Is Not Your Marketing Plan  
Ever see a company become a big hit because it got very lucky and found itself 
on TV, with a tremendous amount of attention and free advertising? It is a sin 
of many young tech entrepreneurs that think they are going to have such a 
good product that people will automatically start talking about it and buzz will 
materialize automatically. Or worse yet, they hypothesize: “Maybe Oprah will 
like it!” Appearing on Oprah is an example of what I call the lightning-strike mar-
keting model. You can get a lot of energy from a bolt of lightning, but you 
never know where or when it is going to strike. I don’t want to be a downer, 
but I am here to tell you that the odds of lightning striking, and you getting a 
huge infusion of free marketing attention that will carry you to the promised 
land, are not good. 
Let’s look at technology: I know many programmers, as well as a lot of tech-
nology people, who are extremely good at what they do. These guys know 
how to build stuff. Oftentimes, they are also extremely naive regarding the 
question of how to actually connect the stuff they build with enough customers 
in a short enough period of time that they can survive and grow to thrive.  
This reminds me of taking biology classes in college. In biology, a funny and re-
current pattern was that when the science of biology just didn’t know how 
something works, experts would make a declaration like the one in Figure 3-5. 
 
Figure 3-5. An example of an uninformative analysis of a complex process 
Does this make you smarter? If you take the time to read this, you realize you 
don’t actually know very much more about how fireflies’ bioluminesce than 
you did before, except that oxygen and some magic is involved. Technical en-
trepreneurs are often similarly inclined to believe that their technology plus 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
96 
some kind of instant marketing miracle will make their invention into the next 
big thing based simply on how great their idea is (Figure 3-6).  
 
Figure 3-6. A common, oversimplistic, and false model for describing how a business will con-
nect product to customers 
The better alternative is to plan for developing an idea and connecting it with 
the target population of users—one at a time if necessary. This requires 
money and expertise. In short, you need people that know how to market and 
how to sell. That is usually a different group of people than the ones that know 
how to actually make a piece of technology (or any product) work. This real-
ity-based approach should serve as a base for promoting your product and 
should be reflected in all of your financial and timeline projections. On top of 
this base, you will then work on getting Oprah to fall in love with you or oth-
erwise cause lightning to strike and bring you all of the fame and glory that you 
deserve. Chase the lightning by all means, but don’t count on it. 

Startup 
97
_________________ 
 
If You Can’t Measure It, You Can’t 
Control It  
The customer support group for Dell in Austin, Texas, had a huge banner 
hanging from the high ceiling above the heads of several hundred customer 
support reps. It read as the heading of this section reads: “If you can’t measure 
it, you can’t control it.” Amen. What do I recommend you do with this advice? 
Test everything that you can for performance. Measure everything that has the po-
tential to feed back into your decision-making and help you to be more efficient. 
That goes double for marketing expenditures. Test performance of every dol-
lar that you can when you advertise. For example: 
• 
Web pages: Use page-tracking tools like Google Analytics 
to understand the performance of your web site. Use 
Google Webmaster Tools to set up tests to determine 
how to make your web site make you more money. 
• 
Customer surveys: Engage customers carefully. I have found 
that surveys are usually answered by your fans, and ig-
nored by the rest. You can skew your perception with 
surveys, but they can give you valuable feedback nonethe-
less. 
• 
Direct observation: Hire a third party to send anonymous 
shoppers to your store and prepare reports on their ex-
periences. 
• 
Behavior tracking: Some grocery store chains use cameras 
and sophisticated tracking to observe consumer behavior 
in their stores—the product selection and arrangement in 
each store location is customized to the local demographic 
by using testing and feedback. 
Make sure that you are aware of performance trends! Even small changes hap-
pening over time should not go unnoticed. They are the feedback you need to 
be able to adjust and respond to the market. You will learn the nuances of 
your market, such as changes in sales due to seasonality and external forces 

Chapter 3 | Marketing 
98 
that will cause more or less sales. Knowing the cause, rhyme, and reason be-
hind your company performance is part of your job, captain. 
One thing to note with this is that I never want to spend the time to collect 
statistics, carry out research, or analysis on something that I know ahead of 
time does not have at least the potential to affect my decision-making. I only 
want to know more raw data about my business if that knowing has a likeli-
hood of informing how I act.  
 

C H A P T E R 
4 
Building a 
Team 
 
Starting a business is a very personal thing. For me, it begins with some kind of 
realization or sense of need: a need to make a specific idea become real. This 
kernel then manifests as thoughts that bubble up again and again without con-
scious cause or reason. After a while, these ideas begin to gel into a plan of 
action, and as a series of steps that could be taken. If at some point the 
thoughts and planning grow to be more intense, and if the ideas pass numerous 
sanity and feasibility checks, then I might start thinking of concrete steps to 
make the idea happen. You will notice that at this point the nascent business is 
just a private internal dialog, and nothing more. Once you start acting, the first 
few steps are things that you can do by yourself. 
But before long you will probably need to enlist the help of other people to 
really get it going. Beyond getting started, your business is going to need other 
people to understand the idea and the vision behind it. Beyond that, your busi-
ness will need other people to agree to take it on as their cause or purpose as 
well. If at some point you don’t have other people standing in for you as sup-
porters of the business, then your chances of getting anywhere are very slim. 
In my work in startups, I have found a number of best practices and frames of 
reference with regard to building a team, managing it, and keeping work pro-
ductive and fun. I will share some of them with you here. 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
100 
Your Network Will Determine Your 
Success 
Having a phenomenal business idea and a plan to match will not mean much 
without assembling a diverse network of people to help you. When I first 
started out in business, I did not yet understand this lesson. I had confidence in 
my plans, confidence in my own intelligence, confidence that I could overcome 
any technical hurdle that presented itself. What I did not have was the support 
of an experienced and diverse group of people—I was practically on my own. 
Looking back, I realize now that I had let fate determine my network. Specifi-
cally, my small group of friends and confidants was virtually the same a year 
into my first business as it was on the first day. I did have conversations with 
businesspeople when the opportunity arose, but I did not seek to transform 
that contact into any kind of relationship. Furthermore, I did not actively seek 
out connections that would make a difference for me. When happenstance did 
present a knowledgeable person to me, I did not try to establish any kind of 
continuing communication with them. These were mistakes of the first or-
der—big ones. 
What I did: 
• 
Toughed it out on my own (but I learned a lot—the hard 
way) 
• 
Did not join professional groups (I thought I was too busy) 
• 
Let chance dictate whether or not I would get an opportu-
nity to talk to helpful people again once I met them (plain 
stupid) 
• 
Believed that there were not any resources available to 
me, even if I were to seek them out (false) 
• 
Believed that people would not really be interested in 
helping me, even if I were to ask them (false) 

Startup 
101
What I should have done: 
• 
Sought out qualified people as friends and associates that 
could advise me 
• 
Joined professional groups 
• 
Kept in touch with incidental contacts that were good 
sources of advice 
At that time there was no Internet—so social networking was not even a known 
term. It was offline, analog, and old school. With technology being what it is 
today, there is no excuse for that kind of isolationist approach to anything. 
Don’t work in a vacuum. You need to mix and network with people. You must 
• 
Know customers. 
• 
Know competitors. 
• 
Know industry folks. 
• 
Know unrelated folks—look for synergies. 
• 
Use LinkedIn, Twitter, Quora, Facebook, and other online 
networking mechanisms. 
• 
Attend industry events. 
• 
Speak at events. 
• 
Build your personal brand and establish yourself as a hub in 
your business or subject matter community. 
_________________ 
The Best Employees Would Do the Work 
Even Without the Job 
My current venture has been particularly good with regard to employees. In 
some sense, we have grown a dream team of individuals who work well to-
gether and whose output is imbued with tremendous quality. The way I put it 
is that most of my team members are doing for the company what they would 
be doing on their own, even if they weren’t being paid for it. We have a great 
arrangement where they do what they love (for the company) and get a salary. 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
102 
They are motivated to do well, and they enjoy themselves. They even get paid 
for it. Everybody wins, and I fiercely protect the psychological environment 
that allows this to take place. 
I encourage you to look for this kind of employee. The signs are clear. Look 
for people that are already doing their skill as a career, and, in their job 
interview, find out what they do in their spare time. I am always very 
interested in finding employees that live what they do in and out of the office. 
For example, the best programmers are the ones that are at home on the 
weekends doing what they do as their office job. For instance, tweaking server 
configurations in their living rooms, or performance-testing data structures. 
When I hear things like, “I was benchmarking a queue system on my Linux 
cluster at home this weekend,” I know that this is the right kind of person to 
be doing queue systems for the business during the week. No doubt. In cases 
like this, what you have is an employee who is something, not a just a person 
who does a something. It is a subtle difference, but very profound.  
_________________ 
 
The Psychological Contract 
Motivation and enthusiasm from each individual in a company is important. 
Your employees need to feel the importance of success for the company from 
within themselves, not simply be held in check with company policy and per-
formance guidelines. This can only happen if you have nurtured the psychologi-
cal contract between you (your company) and them. This is a long process that 
permeates every single interaction that occurs between employee and com-
pany. 
The psychological contract is the basis from which an employee will decide 
• 
How much quality to put into the job 
• 
How much loyalty to put into the company 
• 
How much energy to contribute to the team 
• 
How much off-hours time to devote to thinking about 
your company’s success 
• 
How much care with which to handle your customers 

Startup 
103
Does this sound important yet? It should. 
So, how do you build a robust and healthy psychological contract with your 
team? You have heard this since you were a kid: follow the Golden Rule. Treat 
your employees as you would like to be treated if you were in their shoes. Re-
spect, honesty, and appreciation for effort will get you started.  
The subject of the psychological contract in itself could fill up a very long book. 
Short of making a book out of it, I have compiled it into a list, or more specifi-
cally a kind of informal contract. This contract is something that each of my 
employees gets a copy of when we do performance reviews. This agreement 
sets a contrast to the usual tone of a review, which is, “What have you done?” 
and “What will you do for the company?” This is all about how the manager 
works to fulfill the needs of the employee, which is the cornerstone of any 
manager relationship in my opinion. This is particularly applicable to knowledge 
workers and creative workers. In the form presented here, it is less applicable 
to hourly workers who do things such as man a cash register or work in a call 
center. This contract is custom-tailored to knowledge workers in many of its 
details, as most of the people who work for me are engineers or creative 
professionals. 
A Contract for Your Team Members 
So much of the discussion between employees and employers is about what 
the employee needs to do for the company. This is a necessary and valuable 
topic, but I have found it useful to turn the discussion around by giving the 
people that work for me a commitment on how I will help them to be suc-
cessful. Here is the contract I offer team members: 
My Commitment 
1. To provide you with clear instructions and 
clearly define what is expected of you. 
2. To make sure you have the resources you need 
to be successful. 
This includes 
• 
Time 
• 
Information 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
104 
• 
Equipment 
• 
Budget 
• 
Cooperation from other team members 
3. To protect your interests. 
This means 
• 
To always try to protect your time. I don’t want you 
to spin your wheels on projects that won’t make a 
difference to you and to the company. 
• 
To always try to protect your career. While this does 
not mean that things will always work out, if I am part 
of the conversation, you are being watched after to 
the best of my power and ability. 
4. To help you to grow and reach your goals. 
This means: 
• 
To strive to get you the training you need to enhance 
your skill set. 
• 
To give you the opportunity to make mistakes and to 
learn by doing. 
• 
To actively seek to help you grow your responsibility 
to include new areas as your knowledge and skill im-
proves. 
• 
To give you advice and encouragement designed to 
nudge you toward your best potential, even if that 
means you eventually grow beyond the company. 
5. To make sure your contribution is visible to 
others. 
This means 
• 
Employees should get credit for everything they do. 
As your manager, I will make sure this happens. I 
know that nothing demotivates quite so powerfully as 
a manager smiling his way through the process of 
taking credit for what his subordinates created. 

Startup 
105
6. To not micromanage. You own what you do. 
This means 
• 
I recognize that the best employees own what they do. 
Their work should be an expression of themselves. If 
a manager gives too much direction or restriction, 
then it strips employees of the opportunity to express 
themselves and invest the full power of their creative 
energies. 
A fellow entrepreneur recently shared a story about Sam Walton from early in 
his career. He was a founding member of the Procter & Gamble/Wal-Mart cus-
tomer team in northwest Arkansas. This assignment gave him the opportunity 
to observe Sam Walton in person. He was deeply impressed with how Sam 
would start his meetings by asking what his senior managers had done for the 
employees in the last week. He would say that if they were not making support 
of employees “job number-one,” then they could go work somewhere else. I 
think I would have liked Sam. 
_________________ 
 
Manage Different People In Different 
Ways 
Of all the employees I have had the opportunity to work with, every single one 
of them was a unique expression of personality, talents, weaknesses, needs, 
attitude, and enthusiasm. In other words, we are all human beings. Big news, 
right? Ask yourself if you take this into account when you manage your em-
ployees. If indeed every employee is unique, then the way that you deal with 
each employee should ideally be unique as well (I am contemplating the rela-
tionship between you and the employees that report directly to you). A one-
size-fits-all mentality fails to capture the nuance needed for a real and dynamic 
team. Some people need more instruction, some less. Some prefer written 
communication, some verbal. Some people are visual and benefit from working 
on a whiteboard, some not. If you treat all employees the same, then I would 
suggest to you that you are missing something. 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
106 
Learn how the individuals on your team think and how they prefer to work. 
(Note that this doesn’t mean that company policies apply differently to differ-
ent individuals.) For instance, on my team now there are employees that need 
top-level objectives only, and know so much about our business that they can 
be left to fill in the blanks on the details. There are some employees that need 
close management of details. And some employees have less experience and 
need a mentoring role to support them.  
Accommodate them with a management style that fits them and they will per-
form significantly better. I have found that this accommodation on the behalf of 
the manager can mean the difference between disgruntled and unmotivated 
employees on one hand, and motivated, engaged, and productive employees on 
the other. 
Employees are the backbone of your business, and believe it or not, less 
squeezing and more helping from management will increase performance. 
_________________ 
 
Friends as Employees 
At age 23, I started my first company. As any business owner does, I always 
needed reliable people to help me on projects. I did not yet have a deep net-
work of business relationships and subcontracting companies, so I would do 
what seemed natural—I would recruit people that I knew. In one memorable 
case, I hired a high-school friend to work for me. I remember that he was 
really excited about it. The problem was that he would show up at the job site 
when he wanted to—he was treating our work relationship as a friend relation-
ship. Fact is, he impacted my schedule and cost me money because he was un-
reliable. On finishing our first job together he remarked to me, “That was fun. 
We gonna do it again?” I replied honestly, immediately, and directly: “You 
were consistently late and didn’t even show up on the second day of the 
project because you were hung over. What was all that about?” 
Sadly, that was the last time he and I ever spoke. Really, I should not have 
hired this friend to work in a professional capacity with me. Looking back, his 
personality was not well suited to it. 
Other personal relationships have yielded similar problems, all stemming from 
this point: when friendship—which means that people have equal status with 

Startup 
107
one another—blurs into a boss/employee relationship (where what you say is 
what they have to do), it can cause conflict. In almost all cases, the interper-
sonal boss/employee position of “my way or the highway” and the buddy posi-
tion of “we are friends of equal status” have great difficulty reconciling with 
one another. If an employee makes a mistake, you have to point it out. If they 
perform poorly or have a bad attitude, you have to hold them accountable. 
With friends, these situations are problematic and often lead to an end or 
permanent change (for the worse) in the relationship. 
I think I should share something with you. This next story should likely remain 
buried, but this is nothing if not an archaeological expedition. Way back, I of-
fered to make a teacher of mine an employee/partner in my Horizon Services 
business. That is, I would treat him as a revenue partner but he would just help 
on executing jobs and would play no part in all of the background effort of 
running the company. It was a very generous offer on my part, if I do say so 
myself. It quickly became a completely regrettable situation. As it was, he was a 
good friend of mine who needed some money. I looked up to him, so I thought 
it would be a great benefit to have his drive and intelligence helping me out. It 
wasn’t. It was awful. He would not want to work on certain days. He would 
expect half the money cleared from each job, even though I had a lot of ex-
penses I had to cover that he would never see, such as equipment payments 
and advertising. He actually made more money than I did! What would really 
make me annoyed was when I would drop by his place to pick him up at an 
appointed time, and he was not ready to go. He would invariably be casually 
eating cereal in his kitchen, not even dressed yet. Every time I think about this 
situation, even years later, my blood pressure starts to go up. 
Now you are no doubt thinking, “Fire him already!” and you are right. The 
problem was that I had an important relationship with him outside of work, 
which I would damage or throw away if I were to lay it on the line and tell him 
to get stuffed. I was sorely tempted on several occasions to do just that. 
It came to that anyway, and for good reason. But for the few months that I 
tried desperately to make both the work reality and the personal reality play 
nicely with each other, it was pure hell. What a mistake! 
For the sake of completeness, I have to throw this in. On the start day of what 
was the biggest contract I had ever landed, he arbitrarily decided, as the not-
on-the-hook-for-anything partner, that he was not going to work. To this day, I 
don’t know what he was thinking, but he refused to get moving and insisted 
that I do the same. Like an idiot (remember, I was very young), I caved in and 
we delayed start on the project. 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
108 
The customer fired us (well, me, actually) and demanded that his huge deposit 
be returned immediately. That was such a painful lesson. Looking back on it I 
am ashamed, embarrassed, and regretful. I don’t have many such memories, 
but this one was an unmitigated disaster. Everything about sharing my pros-
perity with this (once) respected friend was a complete and utter failure. I am 
feeling sick as I write this. I fired him as a partner, and soon thereafter as a 
teacher and friend. The upside of all this is that I learned the following lesson 
that I can share with you. 
Takeaways: Keep your personal and business relationships separate unless 
you can follow these guidelines: 
• 
Lay all expectations out beforehand: start time, finish time, 
the responsibilities, who makes decisions, and who is pay-
ing for what. Discuss everything in a frank and direct way. 
Don’t pull punches—say what you need to say before you 
get started. For example: 
• 
I need you here at 8:00 a.m. sharp every day. 
• 
If you’re working with me, I will treat you like any 
other employee—and you will treat me as a boss. I’m 
serious about this, and if that makes you uncomforta-
ble, this arrangement won’t work, and the job offer is 
off the table. 
• 
Hold them accountable. 
_________________ 
Friends as Partners 
As you know, it is very common for friends to come together as partners to 
do business. This is especially good when you are starting from scratch and 
everybody contributes in defined ways to build something together. Some of 
the most productive work relationships I have had are of this type. It has al-
ways been so much more powerful to move from friendship to partners 
building together than from friendship to employee. 
The advantages of friends as partners are 
• 
They know you. 
• 
You know them. 
 
_________________ 

Startup 
109
• 
You have a framework of trust. This framework exists be-
tween the two of you, but also extends to your shared 
network of friends and family. This web of relationships 
adds substantial strength to a business partnership that 
supports you and provides arbiters and perspective-givers 
when the going gets tough. 
The disadvantages are 
• 
Network diversity can be impacted. When I partnered 
with Sterling to found Meridian Internet Services, we were 
a great fit. One thing we recognized at the time, however, 
was that we both knew the same group of people. We 
found that since our networks overlapped so much, we did 
not have the benefit of networking that would have come 
from relationships with diverse and separate groups of 
friends. 
• 
Friends tend to be similar to one another. The dynamism 
that can come from having a business partner that has a 
different background, a different temperament, and a dif-
ferent attitude from you is often lost in friend-based 
partnerships. 
• 
Legal formalism is reduced. You may feel comfortable 
doing things without contracts—since you are friends. This 
can come back to bite you. It has worked out OK for me, 
but it would have been preferable to have known exactly 
where my partnership stood with regard to a number of 
issues over the years. The informal status was easy, but 
uncomfortably ambiguous much of the time. 
On balance, having friends as partners is a desirable situation. The basis for my 
personal evaluation of what would make a good business is anchored in the 
question, “Who around me can share my enthusiasm in such a way that they 
can contribute instead of just being along for the ride?” If the answer is there 
in the form of someone you already know and respect, then run with it. 
If you are forming a partnership, sign a contract up front. I know that this can 
seem overdone and formal for friends or family, but it is for the best. The con-
tract lays it all out there. If you don’t have a lawyer, as a last resort, you can 
find a boilerplate contract document online and modify it to fit your needs. Be 
forewarned that this kind of contract can be very difficult to get right, but the 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
110 
benefits for having the understanding down on paper cannot be 
underestimated. 
_________________ 
Hire Well or Not at All 
Back in about 2002, my company Meridian World Data enjoyed a surge in in-
terest in its product, and my partner Sterling and I felt we had an opportunity 
to greatly expand our business. We got a new office, new furniture, a phone 
system, and servers, and we were ready to take on the world. The concept of 
Meridian World Data was solid. We had customers and a growing list of 
people who were lining up to buy our products. We “owned” a significant 
number of important keywords for our industry on the search engines and we 
were the only player of our type in our market. As a small operation, we were 
very excited to have nearly $1 million of new sales leads written in a list on a 
big whiteboard in the middle of our office. 
It was with this sense of optimism that we set about hiring a group of sales-
people to expand our capacity to make profit and reach new heights. The fact 
is that Sterling and I were both pretty tired of having to do everything for our-
selves.  
As background, Sterling and I had great success with making phone calls to po-
tential clients and getting sales. With our knowledge and sense of ownership of 
the product, we had a very good closing rate from phone call to purchase of 
product. Our commercial licenses averaged about $2,000, but they went as 
high as $50,000, so there was a good incentive to close as many leads as possi-
ble. But it was time-consuming and we wanted to hand the process over to a 
dedicated sales staff. With the recent office expansion, we did not have a lot of 
extra cash to commit to high salaries for our new sales team. It was decided to 
heavily weight salaries toward commission. We brought two people in and 
gave them around a $35,000-per-year base, plus commissions. We also handed 
them tasks relating to product enhancement, general office work, and sales. 
To cut a short story even shorter, the result was that we had two salespeople 
sitting in an office only half trying to hide the fact that they were looking at 
porn sites instead of working, who made zero dollars in sales over several de-

Startup 
111
pressing months and successfully burned up our whole list of potential clients 
by making repeated inept and ineffective contacts with them.  
Ouch. 
So then, what did I learn with this exercise? Well, for one thing, if you are 
going to delegate something as important as contacting potential clients, you 
had better make sure that the people you’re delegating to have the training 
and experience required, along with the right attitude to treat your customers 
(the most important of all resources) with the respect and careful handling that 
they deserve. In point of fact, we probably should not have handed sales to 
people who weren’t owners at this early stage. 
The old adage is usually true: you get what you pay for. We tried to hire 
people on a budget. What we thought we could afford was $15 to $20 an 
hour, plus a generous commission structure. We would have actually made a 
lot more money if we had paid a single highly qualified salesperson $40 an hour 
with a smaller commission structure. The problem for us was that we needed 
to make sure that we could pay the bills as they came in, and we only knew we 
could do that if we had sales to go along with the new employees—thus com-
mission-heavy compensation. In the end, it may have been the case that we 
were not yet ready to hire multiple additional employees. Clearly, hiring just 
one individual with a better attitude and some good sales experience would 
have been the better thing to do. 
Hiring the wrong person can really hurt, as we found out, especially when you 
are just starting your business. Consider hiring new folks as contractors for 90 
days before committing to them as full-time employees. 
_________________ 
 
Lead by Example 
As the leader, a policy of “do as I say, not as I do” just won’t cut it. Always, 
always lead by example. If you want attention to detail from your team, then 
you need to pay attention to detail. If you want creative thought, then think 
creatively. The difference between what a regular employee brings to the busi-
ness and what you bring is called ownership mentality. Ownership mentality is 
the driving force behind fixing and avoiding problems, gaining new business, and 
promoting excellence in a business. It is the force of caring about the result, 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
112 
not just caring about getting to Friday at 5:00 p.m. It is the state of mind that 
takes it personally when you lose an account or have a bug in your software. 
Ownership mentality cannot be taught directly—that would be like telling 
somebody how to feel (kids, you are required to love broccoli!). This does not 
work. It can be caught, however, when it is demonstrated over time, and when 
employees are allowed to express themselves adequately and own what they 
do.  
As a young entrepreneur in the construction industry, one of the things I rea-
lized early on was that when my team of workers would start to drag their 
butts near the end of a long day that was my cue to jump in and double my 
own efforts. I remember fondly the looks on my employees’ faces when my 
160-pound self would take over the work of one of the 250-pound heavy-
weights that had run out of steam. The look of surprise was precious. The re-
sult was that they would all pick up the pace, not wanting to be outdone. No 
one likes to be outdone—and enthusiasm is contagious. 
_________________ 
 
Motivated Employees Are the Key 
The best employees are those that care about your business. One employee 
that really cares about whether your business survives, thrives, or dies is 
worth more to you than a room full of unmotivated ones that are just showing 
up for a paycheck. Motivated employees are exactly what you need to 
progress from a company that is just you to a self-regulating company that can 
stand on its own, and eventually into a self-determining company that will fully 
function without your input. This progression, as discussed elsewhere in this 
book, is of critical importance to you if you are eventually going to want to 
release your company by sale or delegation into other people’s hands. If you 
can confidently tell me that you want to spend the rest of your life managing 
the same company, then please ignore this chapter and skip ahead to the next 
one. Motivated employees are the key. 
If this is so, then how do you get motivated employees? First off, this kind of 
employee is not simply found; he or she is often grown. You will probably 
never get somebody off of the street that suddenly and inexplicably decides 
that they love your company and identifies with you and your mission from the 

Startup 
113
start, unless you are a brand like Google. Getting a team that cares about your 
business is a process, which takes time. 
Employees will not viscerally care about your business unless they can see 
their contribution to it as a matter of identity. If an employee cannot do her 
job and then point at the result and say, “That was me,” then it will be very 
hard to grow her to a point where she cares deeply about your joint success. 
The exception to this is when you are a well-known brand such as Disney, 
Coke, or Google. You can hire employees to repaint the broom closet who 
may end up taking pride and ownership in their contribution just on the merits 
of your famous name. As a small startup company, you will have to earn 
employee buy-in the hard way. 
Find a way to engage your employees. Revenue share is one way. Having an 
articulate, understandable, and concrete story that describes the purpose and 
meaning of your business is another way. Giving employees responsibility to 
make decisions and shape outcomes is another way. 
The best answer to this question of growing great employees will be subtly 
different for every business. Look at your particular business model and see 
what fits for you. The key takeaway is that acquiring engaged employees should 
be one of your primary goals. Look, learn, and challenge your team—don’t set-
tle for people that are just showing up for a paycheck. 
_________________ 
 
Your Extended Team  
Beyond the employees that you hire, there is a cadre of additional team mem-
bers that every business will need to find, and establish relationships with. This 
group includes lawyers and financial folks for sure, and will likely include exter-
nal vendors, suppliers, and contractors as well. 
It is tempting to treat these relationships in a purely transactional way—that is, 
to think, “We pay ’em, and they work.” That is true, but for the most impor-
tant of these relationships it is not good enough. The smart entrepreneur will 
make it a point to humanize these relationships and create personal bonds 
with these critical outside players. These vendors and professionals will be 
critically important from time to time, but you are sharing them with many 
other people. Having a first name–basis relationship with them, sending them 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
114 
an occasional gift when they do a good job for you, interacting with them on 
Facebook, and otherwise treating them as friends can go a long way toward 
making sure that they treat you right, and will be there for you when you need 
them. 
Have a Good Lawyer and Put Him on 
Speed Dial 
In case you haven’t noticed, the world we live in is governed by neither good-
will nor common sense. Both of these admirable traits are abundant around us 
(most of the time) when we are dealing with individuals, but are often missing 
entirely when individuals give way to companies, corporations, and the laws of 
the land. Because of this, make sure you have a good attorney, and consult 
with him or her frequently. 
The first lawyer I had for an early company of mine was, well, how can I best 
describe him? Well, the best thing I can say is that he was a nasty piece of 
work. After getting to know him, he was soon sharing schemes with us where 
he would not pay his credit card bills, but would buy the debt for pennies 
through some kind of back door. He took a kind of sinister pride in warping 
the law for his own benefit. Our relationship ended before it really got started 
because it quickly became clear that he embodied one of the ugliest sides of 
the legal profession—the application of rules without morality. We moved on 
and met a competent and upstanding attorney who I continue to work with 
even years later. 
The benefits of having the close association of legal counsel are many: 
• 
Common sense is no substitute for knowing the law. 
There are legal precedents and reasons beyond your un-
derstanding for every detail and nuance in a contract. 
Don’t even begin to think that you can deal with this kind 
of thing on your own. The consequences of specific word 
choices and the presence or absence of certain clauses in 
any contract will often only be revealed in court if it 
comes to that in the worst-case scenario—and that is not 
the time to find out that you were not adequately 
protected. 

Startup 
115
• 
Without an attorney, you are more likely to simply accept 
any contract you are presented with. With an attorney re-
viewing every contract, you are more likely to negotiate, 
and to effectively shape your agreements in a way that sup-
ports your long-term best interests. 
• 
You will be more effective in responding to threats made 
to you. If you become successful and get noticed in busi-
ness, people will come after you and try to sue you. It is an 
unfortunate fact of life. Competent legal staff is a must and 
will often be able to help you stop such actions as they 
start, instead of allowing them to fester and become full-
blown problems that could threaten your business. 
Here is one anecdote that I like from early in my Meridian Internet Services 
days. We were a very small company and unable to get out of a bad service 
contract that we had signed with an Internet facilities company in Austin. After 
a year or so we found that we were locked into a package of expensive serv-
ices that was billed at far over the market rate. The company refused to nego-
tiate with us on bringing the price down to a reasonable level. There had been 
some service outages during our relationship with the company, so we used 
this to our advantage. We just had our lawyer put a short letter on his letter-
head describing the impact of the service outages. We were out of that rela-
tionship within the week. That is a simple example of how even a faint whiff of 
legal intervention can help you to bring reasonable behavior back to a business 
relationship. 
Lawyers: One Size Fits All? 
As a new entrepreneur, I did not realize that having a general attorney is not 
enough to solve many of the specific scenarios I would face. You too will even-
tually need specialists. Would you go to a family doctor for laser eye surgery? 
No, you would find an ophthalmologist who specializes in laser surgery to fix 
your baby blues. The same applies to attorneys. When the chips are down, it is 
critical that your attorney be a specialist in solving the kind of problem at hand. 
One unfortunate tendency is that there is a financial incentive for your general 
attorney to offer to help you with things that are outside of his or her speciali-
zation. And if you don’t know any better, what could be easier than to ask 
them to do whatever you need? This happened to some of my entrepreneur 
friends some years back, as they were represented in court by a friendly and 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
116 
willing contract attorney who had absolutely no courtroom experience. After 
a painful 18-month court case, they lost. 
There are many types of attorneys: contracts, real estate, civil or litigation, 
mergers and acquisitions, environmental, and so forth. Don’t ask your attorney 
to represent you in anything that is outside of his or her experience and com-
fort zone. As an attorney friend of mine recently noted, there is an every-
changing body of knowledge in each area of legal specialization, with court pre-
cedents being set and changing laws at the local, state, and federal levels. He 
sharply noted that there is way too much to know in any one area for an at-
torney to effectively cover more than one base for you. You need a general 
counsel to be there for the day-to-day transactions and questions, but make 
sure that you and he understand when it is time to call in specific help. Don’t 
let him even try to cover everything all the time. 
Getting the Most from Your CPA 
Until you are big enough to have full-time financial folks managing your ac-
counts, you are likely to end up hiring outside companies or individuals by con-
tract to help you to keep everything in order. Especially when it comes to han-
dling your taxes, a CPA or accounting firm is really important.  
My experience is that these professionals are not going to understand the 
nuance of what you are doing with your business financially, and will not come 
near to fully grasping your story—even if you document everything and spell it 
out for them. These individuals are not close enough to the decisions that you 
make every day, and have made in past years, to really get everything, unless 
you press the point and follow up on every detail. A CPA falling off the turnip 
truck and missing a few details can have tremendous consequences for you—
and none of them good. 
A CPA that I know provided the following insight into the mindset that comes 
with a client relationship when handling the books: CPAs will take the path of 
least resistance, which means erring on the side of safety (and thus higher tax) 
if they do not explicitly understand any particular detail of your financial story. 
This means they are primarily interested in avoiding regulatory mistakes, and 
much less interested in making sure that you get every penny that you could 
reasonably claim. 
This has happened in my businesses repeatedly and has been a drain on fi-
nances and time. So what to do? 

Startup 
117
• 
Because you are going to have to push your financial folks 
on certain details, this means that you have to know some-
thing about tax law and financial law. You cannot farm out 
everything to your CPA. Find out about recent changes to 
tax law and the best strategies to navigate it. 
• 
Prepare your documents carefully. 
• 
Make a checklist of your assumptions and ask for an initial 
by each point from your CPA. 
• 
Ask questions frequently—I have always ended up saving a 
lot of money in taxes when I stopped to question my 
CPA’s assumptions. 
• 
After you have asked, if you have any lingering concerns, 
ask again. If they don’t like your attention to detail (many 
won’t), then find another firm to represent you. 
Vendors 
Another important group of team members comes in the form of the various 
vendors and service providers that you will develop relationships with over 
time. I have found that vendor relationships tend to evolve to into highly valu-
able (even critical) symbiotic relationships over time. Such types of relation-
ships include those with wholesale distributors, advertising partners, and soft-
ware and equipment providers.  
My advice for this type of relationship is to treat your vendor partners (the 
people) in a very considerate manner. Treat them with respect, share informa-
tion with them, and stay on good terms with them even when times are tough. 
Appropriately, as I write this section of text, I am sitting on the patio of the 
Sand Hill Resort in Silicon Valley, having just participated in a Google-
sponsored networking event. I am here because of the relationship with a ven-
dor (my Google sales rep), and the fact that we just worked through a tough 
licensing discussion a couple of months ago. 
Some years ago, during a period when I was involved in online retail, we devel-
oped relationships with our wholesale vendor reps that were critical to our 
operations. Through strong relationships with the vendors (the people, if not 
the companies in question), we were able to get increased discounts, extended 
credit, and even information on the buying patterns of competitors. This was a 

Chapter 4 | Building a Team 
118 
feature of our personal relationships with our reps. We would even send 
baskets of chocolate and baked goods to them during the holidays. I remember 
us discussing how that was always the best $80 we could spend.  
Other businesses I have been involved with have gotten early access to new 
products, marketing exposure, special assistance, advice, and even intercession 
with unrelated issues where our vendor reps had connections. Vendors are 
potentially very valuable allies—and they should be because they need your 
business. Don’t let the fact that you send them money or have options with 
other competitors find you complacent or dismissive of these folks. Keep your 
options open, honestly communicate if you have issues or problems, and nego-
tiate hard on price, but keep the human relationship well maintained. It is good 
karma, it’s the right thing to do, and it has the potential to benefit you and 
your company in ways you may not expect. 
  

C H A P T E R 
5 
Communication 
Matters 
 
What is the purpose of communication? In business, the desired outcome of 
communication is to get work done (internal) or to generate revenue 
(external).  
I have a great interest in communication as it pertains to business. A few years 
ago I conducted a research project on communication in international projects 
that included nearly 100 engineers and managers from over a dozen compa-
nies. The underlying thesis of this study was my belief that communication is the 
most critical component for effective management of teams. 
If you are an experienced manager, or simply have a good imagination, this 
should not come to you as a surprise. Of course, communication is vital—it is 
the glue that brings individuals together into a team. Whether it is communi-
cating a value proposition with customers, a strategy to management, or de-
tails of a plan to a team, communication is one linchpin that you must get right. 
No two ways about it.  
Repetition 
When communicating an important message to your team or to your custom-
ers, it often pays to first decide what the important core of your message is, 
and then plan ahead of time for ways to repeat that core message again and 
again to your audience.  

Chapter 5 | Communication Matters 
120 
When communicating with your customers, plan to tell them the message and 
repeat it. Repeat. Repeat. Pick the most valuable message and focus on it. Have 
salespeople tell the customer, have your web site tell your customer, and have 
printed materials tell your customer the same message. Phone touches should 
repeat the message. Pick your most important message and repeat it until the 
customers get it. It may take ten messages before they get it. Keep at it. 
Training and management are the same way. Managing thought and 
understanding in teams will find you needing to repeat and reaffirm those 
things that are important in your organization again and again. 
Here are some examples: 
• 
In an engineering project, I verbally repeat the objectives 
every time we meet. The team has heard the objectives 25 
times by now, and we are just getting started. 
• 
For marketing, there are mantra-like objectives that the 
team has heard from me repeatedly, such as “provide 
value” and “don’t bury the lead.” 
• 
For management, the repeated patterns include “What is 
the specific intention?” and “How will we make money 
with this?” 
It is not enough to simply tell somebody something. If it is important, repeat it 
until they get it. (Even once they have gotten it, it is still advisable to repeat it 
as long as it continues to be important, just to make sure.) 
_________________ 
Multiple Layers 
In doing research on how effective international engineering teams work to-
gether to produce highly complicated products, one of the most important 
lessons I learned was the idea of using multiple layers for communicating. That 
is to say that if you’re going to focus on important details in a meeting, you 
should follow up afterward with another layer of communication that rein-
forces the same message. Usually this would be in an e-mail or a printed hand-
out that lists and summarizes the most important takeaways from the meeting. 
For the most complicated subjects, the meeting should also be preceded with 

Startup 
121
the distribution of materials outlining what is scheduled to be discussed in the 
meeting, so people can prepare a mental context and do research if required 
beforehand. 
The concept of providing multiple layers and chances for an interested (or 
even disinterested) audience to get the message you are trying to communi-
cate applies both in and out of the office. Let me explain: when putting to-
gether a marketing campaign, it is very common to provide multiple layers of 
the same message. For instance, a sales e-mail might be followed up with a 
phone call and a request for a potential customer to see a web site that has 
PDF documents and video on it. By providing multiple types of information, 
you increase your chance of communicating successfully with interested par-
ties—those people that really want to know what you are talking about. You 
also increase the chance of getting at least some of your message through to 
people that originally did not want to know what it is that you are trying to 
communicate. If you provide multiple types of messaging, you will find that 
some customers are predisposed to prefer one type of message over another, 
and your chances of getting through increase when you provide multiple layers 
of communication. An example of this multimodal communication is as follows: 
start by sending an e-mail (text) that includes a link to a video (visual plus 
sound), followed by a phone call (verbal) and then printed materials (text plus 
graphics). 
_________________ 
 
Never Assume 
In business you should never assume anything.  
If you are not sure, then find out how to become sure. Get in the habit of 
double-checking your facts. If I hear anyone on my team say “I assume . . .” I 
ask them politely but firmly to delve into the matter with a purpose and find 
out the definitive answer to the assumption, and promote it to a known and ve-
rified fact.  
I have repeated this sentiment to my team so many times that, mercifully, I 
don’t have to say it any more. If someone utters an assumption, I can just give 
them the look—you know, where the eyebrows go up a bit and the eyes seem 

Chapter 5 | Communication Matters 
122 
to say “really?” They immediately recognize that what they have to do—go and 
make sure. 
_________________ 
 
“I Don’t Know” Is a Powerful Statement 
If you don’t know, just say so. It is not a sign of weakness. On the contrary, for 
a competent team member to say “I don’t know,” it is a sign of confidence 
from my perspective. 
Don’t waste time by lying to yourself or others if you don’t have an answer. If 
you don’t know, say so and then go find somebody that does—and learn.  
_________________ 
 
Communications Case Study: Valerie 
Way back in the 1990s, we were operating a social networking business, and in 
time we had nearly 1 million users and a staff of less than 10 people. We 
learned the hard way that customer support is a serious responsibility. What 
started out as a few letters sent by e-mail to our inboxes became a torrent of 
requests and required more than a full-time job to handle it all. And in less 
than a year from opening for business. As we built up our user base, we natu-
rally needed to help people with technical problems, refunds, photo uploads 
not working, forgotten passwords, and the like. There was a problem though: 
people would get pissed off. Frequently. The accompanying screenshot gives an 
example of the type of communication we would receive from customers. 
  

Startup 
123
 
Ouch. It was an interesting window into human psychology, and a real wake-up 
call for my staff to have to deal with this kind of problem. And it was happen-
ing all the time. What to do? 
We used a fancy strategic nugget that fixed the problem immediately. It was 
simple, cost nothing to implement, made us smile to ourselves, and made the 
customers respond in a more constructive manner. All of which saved us un-
told thousands of dollars. Drum roll please … 
 
 
Do you see the difference here in the text? This may seem like a joke, but 
honest to Pete, people (both men and women) always responded nicely when 
our e-mail persona was “Valerie.” It was still the same customer support 
folks—usually single, geeky men trying to get through a mountain of re-
quests—but when we metamorphosed them all into our perky customer sup-
port princess, the sailing got a lot smoother. “She” saved us tens of thousands 
of dollars. Thanks Val! 

Chapter 5 | Communication Matters 
124 
My take on the psychology behind this transformation is that women trust 
women more than men in an anonymous relationship through e-mail. And men 
tend to be polite to women in this kind of online situation because they are 
thinking, “She might be cute.” (That’s just tacky, isn’t it?) 
_________________ 
 
The Pen Is … 
I don’t like e-mail for communicating with my team. Don’t get me wrong—I 
use e-mail every day. But when I have to communicate something complex, 
important, or of sufficient value that it really matters to me, e-mail usually 
won’t do. Let me list the reasons why: 
• 
It is impersonal.  
• 
It is easy to miss, when it comes in with a hundred other 
messages in a day.  
• 
It is hard to provide nuance in e-mail. 
• 
Complex relationships or processes are hard to describe 
in e-mail. 
• 
E-mail is easy to ignore. 
• 
E-mail is discarded easily. 
So what is the alternative these days? I use … wait for it … a pen and paper! 
Can you believe it? It is absolutely fantastic. This new discovery was so good in 
fact that I might have to go out and buy some stock in a portfolio of pen com-
panies. I think this might catch on. 
So what exactly is so great about pen and paper?  
It is personal. When I put together ideas on paper, such as in a to-do list, a 
drawing, or a process diagram, it is clearly a personal communication from me 
(a human being) to the intended audience (another human being). This is often 
lost with digital communications, since they are abstracted away in the handoff 
between a device and another device. 

Startup 
125
It is hard to miss because it is a physical object. I have to walk over to my ad-
dressee and hand it to him or her. This usually is accompanied by eye contact, 
and maybe even an exchange of words. Oh my, how quaint! 
It is relatively easy to convey nuance in a handwritten missive. The handoff of 
the paper from my hand to theirs allows me to couple the written record with 
some finger-pointing and explanation: “The process starts here and wiggles 
over here and then results in this …” snapping my fingers for emphasis. 
Nuance abounds. 
Complex processes and relationships are the perfect applications for a drawing 
with annotations, plus a verbal explanation. It does not get any better unless 
you are ready to produce a documentary for television. I am thinking of Front-
line or Nova. I don’t have that kind of time or budget, so my pen plus paper 
plus voice are going to be my choice. 
A handwritten note and walk-by are hard to ignore. I am standing there. Go 
ahead then—try to ignore me. It won’t work. 
A handwritten diagram is apparently harder to discard than an e-mail. I have 
been writing these diagrams and handing them to my team for quite a while 
now, and the pattern is that people keep them. These diagrams get taped to 
walls, left out on desks where they can be referenced, and carried to meetings. 
They are real artifacts with a human intention behind them (almost gift-like, I 
suppose). That makes them hard to throw away. This is a good thing. Fantastic 
in fact. 
• 
I can digitize these and keep them as permanent documentation on 
our company wiki. 
• 
Save an archive version on your computer. 
• 
Send them by e-mail anywhere in the world. The iPhone (or any other 
modern phone) has a good enough camera to digitize the thoughts.  
• 
Also, our company printer does a quick scan to PDF format, if we 
need to.  
In summary, if you want to communicate effectively, convey greater complex-
ity, and have your information understood better and retained and referenced 
for a longer time, put the keyboard aside and pull out some white paper and a 
good-old pen. 

Chapter 5 | Communication Matters 
126 
_________________ 
 
Communication Frequency and Duration 
Many companies and organizations have meeting-centric cultures and devote 
an inordinate amount of time to scheduled and structured meeting events. This 
can result in employee distraction, demotivation, and overcommunication. As a 
manager, one of the most important tasks on my to-do list is to match the 
level of communication to every person and to our task load. As in the tale of 
the Three Bears, there is too little, too much, and just right. I do my best to hit 
just the right mix of information sharing to keep my team optimally engaged 
and informed.  
There are a number of variables at your disposal in managing the communi-
cation in your team. Among the most important of them is a decision about 
how you structure the regular and day-to-day communication with your em-
ployees. I focus on the following variables: duration and frequency. 
• 
Duration: How long do you spend with employees when 
you communicate with them? How in-depth do you get 
when you meet? 
• 
Frequency: How frequently do you communicate with each 
team member? (Once a minute? Once an hour? Once a 
day? Once a year?) 
I will tailor these variables to each different employee. Employee experience, 
personality, and respective task complexity are all different, so my communica-
tion style is different for each. My personal style is to touch base daily with 
each employee for 30 seconds to 5 minutes, and then facilitate meetings be-
tween employees or the whole team as needed. I end up being a communica-
tions facilitator for each member of the team.  
This is great for me as a manager, in that I get a daily personal update on all of 
the following: 
• 
Employee well-being: Are they happy, engaged, and 
productive? 
• 
Task status: Are we on track? 

Startup 
127
• 
Facilitator tasks: What do I need to do to move each 
project element along? Schedule specific meetings between 
individuals or the whole team? Remove obstacles? Get re-
sources? Change the task specs? 
This also allows me to be a boundary spanner, with intimate knowledge on 
business processes from product design, marketing, engineering, and sales.  
_________________ 
 
The Curse of the Expert 
Since you are dealing with your business and your particular specialty every 
day (and have probably done so for years), you are very, very close to it. You 
have a context that is rich and nuanced from which to understand it. This is 
great for doing well in your specialty and communicating about it with other 
experts.  
However, this expertise and close-up perspective can be a serious problem if 
you are trying to communicate with customers or non-experts about what you 
do. Invariably, you will have to communicate with people that don’t know as 
much about your specialty as you do—that is probably why they are hiring you 
or buying your product. When you do communicate with non-experts, make 
sure that you recognize the need to recontextualize your approach to make 
sense for them. 
Establish Context 
I often see experts give a loving and heartfelt explanation of their technology, 
and start off by launching right into the details: “What we’ve been doing is fo-
cusing on the chemical structure of the bonding agents is such that light and 
heat degradation is minimized, and maximum rigidity is exhibited within a mere 
three hours of curing time.” 
OK, so what are we talking about here? We have failed to establish a context 
to help your audience to get onto the same page with you before you get into 
the details. Set the context first. Then get specific. You cannot assume that 
people will be able to follow. Start shallow and work your way into deeper 
water once you have made sure that your audience is following you. 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 5 | Communication Matters 
128 
Here’s an example of establishing context: “My partner James spent four years 
at MIT working on polymers, and we have started a company to commercialize 
them. We are working on aviation-quality glues for use in aircraft manufactur-
ing.” Then get into the details. 
I cannot tell you how often failures to establish context come up at my com-
pany, even after months and years of correcting it. When we write marketing 
materials, the first drafts often assume context has already been established 
with the reader on one point or other. One of the most frequent problems 
that needs to be ironed out is the establishing of context before diving into 
details.  
_________________ 
 
Put a Handle on It 
I spend a fair amount of time listening to pitches from startups—software, In-
ternet, science, and engineering companies mostly. Here is a common theme: 
“With ywidget.com you can combine multiple social media paradigms in one 
context, with platform-agnostic messaging when you’re on the go, and a cen-
tralized interface that allows you to organize your lifestyle like never before.” 
Wow, I have no idea what this means.  
I hear this type of pitch several times a month from startups that are really ex-
cited about how they are going to change people’s lives through their new, in-
novative product. The problem with this is that I don’t understand it. I know 
that there is some “messaging” going on, and something “social,” but not much 
more. I cannot explain their business to myself, let alone explain it to others—
which is what I would have to be able to do if I were to consider their impas-
sioned communication to have been successful. 
Lets imagine a scenario together: you are going on vacation to Europe for six 
weeks. In preparation for your trip, you have arranged all of your travel items 
on the floor of your bedroom. Take a moment to visualize what you would lay 
out the night before your flight as you get ready. Stuff arranged for your trip 
might include jeans, shirts, underwear, a toothbrush, toothpaste, socks, trav-
eler’s checks, a laptop computer, a charger cable, a cell phone, a charger for 
your phone, two books to read on the plane, a camera, a belt, dress shoes, 
running shoes, sandals, and more.  

Startup 
129
Imagining all of these items, what are you going to do in order take them with 
you? You are going to put them all into something that has a handle on it. A suit-
case will work just fine, won’t it? It has a handle on it for a reason: it is easy for 
you to pick up and to hand to the guy at the check-in counter at the airport. It 
is also easy for that guy to hand it to someone else, and so on and so forth. 
Your stuff can only go with you if you make it easy for you, your family, and 
various members of the travel industry to pick up, hold, and carry. 
Your business messaging is like that assortment of valuable and important 
items the night before your trip. If you want your potential customers to be 
able to carry your idea and hand it off to others, it needs to have a handle on 
it. 
Put a handle on it, even if that means that you leave out important parts of 
your story when you communicate to others. That is called brand sacrifice. It is 
better to convey the critical essence of your business and have it remembered 
by your audience than to throw the kitchen sink at them and have them duck 
and run for cover. 
The preceding pitch could be rephrased as, “ywidget.com is all your social 
messaging, organized in one place.” That is something that I could recall after a 
day or a week, and something that I could pass on to others with fidelity. 
These are the hallmarks of good communication. 
_________________ 
 
Speech Markers 
When talking on a detailed subject, I suggest adopting a habit wherein you pro-
vide your listeners frequent context markers as your discourse progresses. This 
helps them to accurately follow and interpret what you are saying—and that is, 
after all, the objective of communication. Here are some examples of markers: 
• 
I am going to change the subject. Is that OK? 
• 
I am making an assertion now; this is just a preliminary 
idea, so please feel free to challenge it. 
• 
This is a question, not a request. I am not asking for you to 
do this, but am just asking if it would be reasonable. 

Chapter 5 | Communication Matters 
130 
• 
I want to make sure we are on the same page, so tell me if 
this is right. You said … 
Using communication management mechanisms like these is in effect providing 
a parallel layer of information alongside the content of the conversation. By 
marking transitions in topic, confirming your understanding, and explicitly label-
ing the status of topic points, you reduce the chances of miscommunication. 
Context markers are an effective strategy for enhancing the flow and compre-
hension of information in any complex or technical conversation.  

C H A P T E R 
6 
Strategic 
Thinking 
 
Strategy is a charismatic word for thinking ahead and acting in such a way as to 
optimize your outcomes over a long period of time. I like optimizing outcomes and 
so do you. I spent over a decade as a martial arts instructor, and I can guaran-
tee you that in that kind of environment, everybody wants to optimize out-
comes. On the Judo mat, strategy means getting out of a bad situation in one 
piece. To support this desirable outcome, think about the following:1 
• 
Know your options.  
• 
Know your opponent’s (your competition’s) options.  
• 
Know how the market and business environment can 
change.  
• 
Have a sense of priority. 
This makes a great deal of sense in martial arts. It also makes sense in business. 
In this chapter of the book I will talk about strategy—ways of thinking that can 
inform your decision-making and make your business life easier and more suc-
cessful. These will help you to know your options and those of your competi-
tion, and achieve a sense of priority to determine which things should come 
first, which second, and which are not worth doing at all. 
                                                 
1 This strategy was a core lesson at the Integrated Arts martial arts academy in Austin, 
Texas, at which I was the assistant instructor for many years. 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
132 
A Human Flaw: Failure to Appreciate the 
True Complexity of the World 
The world is a complex place. The human brain is highly adept at processing 
information, but depends heavily on abstraction and generalization to deal with 
the true complexity of the environment around us. Even seasoned veterans of 
any given specialty will find that unforeseen details will pop up and affect their 
plans. Account for what you don’t know in your planning by adding in extra 
time and resources. 
Even in a familiar environment, with a cohesive team, doing a project similar to 
projects that have been done before, there will be aspects that were unknown 
during the planning phase (Figure 6-1), and unanticipated in terms of allocating 
reserve resources for them. 
 
Figure 6-1. The three categories of events that exist in all projects and endeavors 
In project management, you will see managers budget both time and money in 
anticipation of unforeseen problems. This is called padding. It never ceases to 
amaze me how much can be unknown in a project. I assert to you that the 
true complexity of the world in which we operate is way beyond our grasp. 
When we make plans and predictions for our projects and for our businesses, 
we make a mental abstraction of how the chaos and complexity of the world 
have bearing on what we are doing. This abstraction is a smoothing out of the 
wrinkles, a removal of the messiness, a simplification of the unknown mass of 

Startup 
133
connections and relationships that actually exist into a clean mental represen-
tation of only the most significant facts. It is in guessing what is most significant 
that we can make our mistakes, as it is the nature of chaos that what is signifi-
cant and not significant can change drastically and suddenly in a short period of 
time. 
Takeaway: Realize that you will not be able to anticipate everything that will 
happen, and be prepared to allocate extra time and resources commensurate 
with the complexity. More complexity means that more will be unknown.  
____________ 
 
The 80/20 Rule 
You very often get 80 percent of the result for about 20 percent of the work. 
For example, in the software world, a project that takes two weeks will often 
look done after just two days: the visible stuff will be there, and manager types 
will start getting excited about the deployment date being close (read: tomor-
row). There is often a feeling that the developers are slacking off or even in-
competent when it takes the rest of the week, and then all of the following 
week, to actually get the project code completed, tested, tweaked, retested, 
and deployed. As Figure 6-2 shows, the same phenomenon occurs in all walks 
of life, whether painting your house, landscaping your yard, or writing a book. 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
134 
Time
Appearance of “Done-ness”
Completion
Inflection Point
Start
80/20 Rule in Action in Project 
Management 
 
Figure 6-2. The illusion of being “close to done” can be a powerful one 
Knowing to distinguish appearances from actual reality is a key skill in running a 
business. Learn to recognize the 80/20 rule when it is at work in your business 
and you will appear to be wise beyond your years. It is now time to grow a 
long, gray beard and stroke it pensively as you sagely predict to your em-
ployees that your project will take another two weeks. 
____________ 
 
Always Ask 
Dr. Gaylen Paulsen, who taught an excellent class on negotiation at the Uni-
versity of Texas School of Engineering, gives one of the simplest and most
 
_________________ 

Startup 
135
effective pieces of advice I have ever heard: 
Always ask for something you want, even if you don’t think you can 
get it. 
He would challenge his classes to see who could get the most benefit in 30 
days by using this technique. I ended up with about $22,000 of value in that 
month that I would not otherwise have gotten—just because I was willing to 
ask. Gaylen was impressed. (I am not sure, but even years later I may still hold 
the record for the challenge.) I got a corporate sponsorship to pay a large 
chunk of my engineering graduate-school expenses, a new car for $4,000 less 
than anybody would have believed, and several other small benefits in the 
weeks after being challenged with this simple idea. What did I do differently?  
1. I decided to expect success.  
2. I asked for what I wanted.  
It works. Just adopting this mindset will be worth the time spent on this book 
100 times over. I promise. 
■ Exercise 
Always ask. Try this yourself. For the next month, look for opportunities to ask for 
things that you want, but would not normally think you could get. Ask for an upgrade to first class at the 
ticket counter. Ask for a lower price, a better deal, or whatever. The point is to ask. The worst that can 
happen is that you’ll be told no.  
____________ 
 
Ready, Fire, Aim 
This method is aimed at a bootstrapped or small operation producing a less 
complex product with a lighter design cycle (consumer-facing web in partic-
ular). I prefer the ready-fire-aim method of management for most of my 
projects that fit in this category. As the name suggests, you will decide what 
target you are trying to build into using the best guess available at the time you 
start. You immediately start building something, and vigorously collect feed-
back along the way to create a suitable product. The comparison to artillery is 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
136 
informative: old-school battleships would come equipped with big guns on 
their decks. To hit a target, they would turn the turret toward the target, set 
the elevation, and select how many barrels of powder to put behind the pro-
jectile. As far as aiming goes, they would be done at this point. The gun would 
be fired and would either hit the target or miss. This can be problematic if the 
target is moving in unpredictable ways. The first shot will often be nothing 
more than a targeting aid, to be followed by a second or third shot that will be 
required to home in on the target. This wastes time and gunpowder, but it was 
the best that the Navy could do at the time. 
More recently, guided munitions solve this dilemma. A projectile is fired in the 
general direction of the target. Feedback (usually a laser, GPS, or RADAR) al-
lows constant adjustment of the path in flight. Even if the target moves, so long 
as the feedback loop is intact, you will arrive at the intended destination. 
Projects can be like this. 
I like to build something small and quick, gain feedback, and repeat. This cycle 
continues until I have a product that works. I will almost never have a com-
plete spec before getting started. Firing first and aiming later gets you to mar-
ket fast, which is critical for small businesses—especially if your first guidance 
was close to the mark. This speedy approach also helps you to validate the 
market early. You can get out there and start learning, and get engaged in the 
market quickly and adjust (and even get out) quickly if need be.  
Ready-fire-aim is particularly appropriate for consumer-facing web businesses, 
as there are lots of potential users and relatively low costs associated with de-
velopment. The capacity to play this quick strategy decreases as the number of 
potential customers decreases. If you are aiming to sell software to enterprise 
clients (IBM, GE, etc.), then you had better have a very well-targeted product 
and a clear story of how it works and why it is valuable to the customer before 
you deploy or package your offering. Packaged and physical products and con-
sumer goods are the same way—do your market validation and research be-
fore you build!  

Startup 
137
____________ 
 
Tensions 
Tension is the resulting pressure when two or more forces are applied to a 
system in opposition to one another. Business is, in many ways, the manage-
ment of tensions. There are examples of this everywhere around us. In 
government, an example would be the classic American dilemma of small 
government vs. big government. In raising our children, we have the 
conundrum of helping a child to succeed vs. allowing them to use their own 
strength and learn from failure.  
When addressing these problems, we should recognize that there is no right 
answer, but rather a balance of trade-offs. There may be one or more optimal 
answers that are as close to right as we could hope to get. These optimal an-
swers are elusive. In a complex system (such as a business), the optimal 
choices for any particular subset of phenomena change with circumstances and 
depend highly on what your situation is, what your viewpoint is, and in what 
place and time you are at. I call this type of adjustable subset a tension system. 
An example of this elusive optimization can be illustrated by President Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt’s response to the Great Depression. In the long narrative of 
small vs. large government, he famously opened the government’s bank ac-
count and began to direct public funds toward make-work building projects 
across the country. In retrospect, this is appalling to the small government 
camp, but it arguably did provide an answer to the dire economic malaise that 
was threatening the stability of our nation. Moving forward in time, as the 
economy stabilized and private sector jobs were created, it became less and 
less appropriate for that kind of spending and government intervention to con-
tinue. Taking the context of the 1980s or 1990s, the same set of actions would 
clearly have been inappropriate. In the 2009 market collapse, a similar spending 
pattern was seen again with President Barack Obama. 
When addressing tension systems, the right answer can never be ensured. In-
stead of focusing on right or wrong, we position ourselves on the continuum 
of options, watch what happens, take feedback into account, and then either 
update or maintain our choices. 
It is helpful to visualize tension systems as a continuum or line running through 
an imaginary space. You could visualize a temperature scale this way, with cold 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
138 
temperatures on the left, warm temperatures near the middle, and boiling hot 
temperatures on the far right. You can see that for a bath, the right choice 
would be warm, and for a margarita you would need to move left into the 
near-freezing region of the line. 
This chapter will discuss some of the most common tension systems that en-
trepreneurs need to manage. The intended result is that you will: 
• 
Recognize them: Many decision-makers are not explicitly 
aware of these tensions, and often simply ignore them or 
lock themselves into a position. Having an awareness of 
these systems will inform your capacity to recognize when 
data or situations are worthy of your notice. The ability to 
properly categorize data as you receive it is important 
when trying to improve your decision-making.  
• 
Plan for them: Planning will also give you the opportunity to 
explicitly consider how each of these tension systems ap-
plies to your business, and to formulate a set of under-
standings about how to address them individually and in 
relation to each other.  
• 
Optimize them: Your success in whatever you do will be, in 
part, the result of how you manage tension systems. Once 
you have recognized the trade-offs repre-sented by the 
continuum present in each of them, you will have the tools 
to begin explicitly calibrating your performance and 
manipulating your position in each. This active 
experimentation is the cornerstone to maximizing 
performance. 
Notice that I have used the word explicitly several times. This is not a throw-
away modifier to make the sentences seem more official or businesslike. I am 
using it to point out the contrast to non-explicit behavior (e.g., what happens 
by default, what we have seen other people do, what we have always done, 
etc.). By looking for, noticing, and then specifically responding to stimuli, we 
take a measure of control that would otherwise fall to chance. 
Focus vs. Opportunity 
Do you pursue new, unproven opportunities or do you keep a focus on what 
you think are your existing strengths? Don’t let a relentless focus on “the plan” 

Startup 
139
keep you from taking advantage of opportunities to make money. Doug 
Richard, a business mentor on the United Kingdom’s Lion’s Den television 
series, said, “My first business and many of my other businesses grew on the 
back of plan B or plan C or plan X.” His was a business of adaptation and seiz-
ing on the best available chance to bring in revenue. (In Silicon Valley, this is 
called a pivot.) 
This tension system is omnipresent in technology companies. Every project 
that I have ever been involved with has abundant opportunities to run this way 
or that in pursuit of “better” or “next.” It is clear that one of the primary re-
sponsibilities of the entrepreneur or manager is to quickly (but gently) shoot 
down ideas that will distract from your purpose. I call it skeet shooting, and it is 
almost a joke between my team members and me. The tension comes in when 
you realize that some of these ideas are going to be real winners and deserve 
to be vigorously chased down and implemented. Telling the difference is a mat-
ter of experience, imagination, and paying attention. 
Process vs. Agility 
Nothing beats just getting things done when you are small and growing. Small 
companies are forced by circumstance to build product and rapidly make deci-
sions as they grow. The process is often chaotic, but this agility (or ability to 
move, build, and adapt) is critical for them to get off the ground. As companies 
get bigger, however, a focus on just getting things done can cause problems.  
A larger business has many more moving parts than a small one. Imagine if IBM 
allowed all of its employees and engineers to make decisions autonomously as 
to how product should be built, and to do so without consulting their peers. It 
would be bedlam. Chaos. At the same time, if IBM had too strong of a process 
mentality—with forms, documents, approvals, and meetings for every detail of 
its business—then it would not be able to every get anything done at all. IBM, 
as any other business (including yours), will need to find a balance. That bal-
ance will change as the company and the market changes. 
You will find that there is a transition from the informal, non-process-oriented 
decision-making of a startup to more formal processes as your company grows 
in size.  

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
140 
Analysis vs. Quick Decision-Making  
Another tension system you will find in business involves the trade-offs be-
tween analysis and quick decision-making. It is natural for many people to want 
to minimize risk by doing detailed analysis before making decisions. Others 
prefer to take a quick look at a situation, and start a plan in motion based on 
gut feeling. Again, these are both valid options, and either one may find a posi-
tive outcome across the various situations that you will find yourself dealing 
with in your business. The overall likelihood is that your optimal ROI will be 
found somewhere in the middle of this space.  
I have been involved with organizations that I would accuse of analyzing too 
much—so much in fact that their performance suffers. I am sure you have 
heard the term analysis paralysis. It is easy to accuse folks of being in analysis 
paralysis when they pause to think carefully about a decision. The proof is al-
ways in the pudding, as they say, and there can certainly be valid reasons for 
doing a very careful analysis before leaping in and getting to work.  
Certainly, the question of what is at stake will have great bearing on how much 
analysis should precede action in any given case. Sending astronauts to Mars, 
for example, should rightly be preceded by a great deal of analytical thought. 
As the analysis continues, the decision-makers will see that the inherent risks 
in the project will decrease as more knowledge is extracted or synthesized. At 
a certain point, however, it will be necessary to transition out of analysis and 
get into the “doing” phase of the project. The art here is in recognizing when 
additional effort begins to stop netting you additional benefit. This can be diffi-
cult because the effect of research on your outcome will not be known until 
later. You could spend an hour, a month, a year, or a decade putting together 
a stock analysis program for managing the 20-year return on your portfolio. 
You won’t actually know how well it works in the real world until you stop 
testing and plug it into the markets with real cash and then watch what 
happens.  
Knowing how much theorizing to do is an art form, and there is no single cor-
rect answer. We can recognize the extremes on this continuum as being fool-
ish (e.g., ten hours planning a trip to the store or ten minutes planning a trip to 
the moon), but recognizing your real optimization point for your business situ-
ations (somewhere in between these extremes) will be a matter of experience, 
trial, and error (see Figure 6-3). 

Startup 
141
Time
Certainty in Decision
Inflection Point
                        (Point of Diminishing Returns)
Start
80/20 Rule in Decision Making
100% Certainty
 
Figure 6-3. Certainty, too, is subject to the 80/20 rule, where it reaches a point of diminishing 
returns 
One thing to take away from Figure 6-3 is that no amount of planning can 
completely eliminate risk. If you are doing something that is complex enough 
to warrant a thought-out plan, then there will continue to be risk no matter 
how you try to eliminate it. It is interesting to note that in business and in-
vesting, as risk increases, so often does the potential reward. That is one of 
the fundamental truths of an open market. This being the case, if you are plan-
ning for zero risk, you are probably playing for small profits as well. 
Perfection vs. Progress  
When is “good” good enough? Difficult question? When do you decide that 
what you are working on is good enough to call it done? This is a significant 
problem, in that getting it wrong can result in increased costs and delayed 
schedule on one side, and product failure on the other. One phrase that I 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
142 
heard long ago, and I must admit took me a little bit of time to warm up to, is 
this:  
Perfection is the enemy of progress. 
To get to the heart of what this means, we can look at some experiences in 
my recent projects. 
I have software engineers working for me that love their craft. They enjoy the 
art and science of what they do. This is usually fantastic, but it needs to be 
monitored. There have been times when a schedule has slipped and when a 
delivery date has been pushed back—things that I would prefer to avoid. On 
close inspection, one reason for at least a couple instances that I can recall was 
because of the pursuit of perfection among the engineers. When you are writ-
ing computer code, or building something with your hands, or producing any-
thing that you care about, it is natural to dig deep into the art of it and strive 
to express yourself by making it as perfect as possible. There is a balance be-
tween this and just getting the work done.  
The conversation that I often have with my team usually ends with the follow-
ing: “Will rewriting that section of code and making the changes that you pro-
pose make the company more money?” Sometimes the answer is that it will 
keep us from having problems down the road. This can be quantified as the 
avoidance of future costs. On the other hand, the more frequent answer is a 
simple no. In those cases, I will ask for the code to be made good enough and 
to move on. 
In almost all cases, doing a job as well as it can possibly be done will not make 
you more money. Again, the 80/20 rule comes into play (see Figure 6-4). 

Startup 
143
Time
Product Quality
80/20 Rule in Product Quality
“Perfect” Quality
Inflection 
 Points
                        
High-complexity 
project
Medium-complexity 
project
Low-complexity project
                                               Asymptotic  Approach 
Even higher-complexity 
project
(Inflection point not reached yet)
Higher-complexity projects
have less well-defined inflection points.
*
(Projects of any complexity will never reach  “perfection”)
 
Figure 6-4. Quality will increase quickly up to about 80 percent, then reach a point of 
diminishing returns 
The art here is again to recognize where the point of diminishing returns is, as 
it will not always be clear. A delicate consideration that comes with this cutoff 
of effort is that the more artistic or professional of your employees will be de-
nied an element of satisfaction if they are not allowed to proceed further up 
the perfection path. It is a matter of incentives. As a business owner, you need 
to make money. A significant part of the benefit that a good employee will get 
from their work is a sense of accomplishment and self-expression. Needing to 
enforce this balance will hit directly at these two points, and the ramifications 
to employee morale need to be thought out in advance. 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
144 
____________ 
 
The Triple Constraint  
When you are developing a product or executing a project, always keep in 
mind the triple constraint (Figure 6-5), which is explained simply by the following 
description:  
Quality, features, and speed to market: You can pick any two.  
 
Figure 6-5. The triple constraint allows you to pick only two of the three primary product 
characteristics: features, speed to market, and quality 
The classic triple constraint consists of cost, scope, and schedule. I personally 
prefer to look at speed, features, and quality. 
 
_________________ 

Startup 
145
Speed Plus Features 
Our iWidget must be delivered to market by November 1 so that we 
can hit the Christmas shopping season. In order to compete in this 
tough market, we are going to pack the iWidget with ten new features. 
The tight delivery date means less time to consider what the market wants and 
needs. There’s little time to put concepts in front of the potential consumer. 
The planning portion of the project gets cut short in a race to get to the build 
stage. The development team races to get it all done, but it will take as long as 
it takes to deliver the features. Another fact associated with the timeline is that 
we will have to sacrifice some desired features, and we will ship the product 
with known bugs. It is unavoidable because the engineering team has a drop-
dead date to meet. The test phase is likely to get cut short as well, because of 
the time constraints. The resulting product will be delivered quickly and have 
lots of features with lower quality in terms of targeting the consumer, and in 
terms of robustness, it is likely to break often. 
Speed Plus Quality 
We need the iWidget by Christmas. This means we deliver no later 
than November 1. I know that is a short timeline, and we need to de-
liver a solid product so that we don’t get chewed up with support is-
sues, so I want to focus on one or two core features. 
The delivery date means less planning time before getting started on develop-
ment. The limited scope of features, however, allows the team to focus on 
what really needs to be done, so quality can remain high. The same holds true 
for development and testing. There are few variables to deal with, so a high-
quality product can be delivered in a relatively short period of time. We are 
also likely going to have a cheaper cost of production on the product itself be-
cause the complexity of the design will be lower. The downside is that when 
the product reaches the market, it will be very reliable but may not resonate 
with a demanding public who is hungry for the latest-and-greatest features. 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
146 
Quality Plus Features 
We are going to build the best iWidget the world has ever seen. I want 
to have ten new features in the product and I want it to be rock-solid. I 
don’t want to get any bad press about either system bugs or missing 
features. This is a lot to ask for, so we are going to plan carefully, build 
carefully, test carefully, and deliver when we are done. Not a minute 
before. 
We are focusing on building a great-quality product here. We are going to get 
out there in front of our customers and research what they want in a product. 
This means we are going to have a higher chance of getting the feature set 
right. We are also going to test the heck out of this thing to make sure that 
when a customer buys one, she is going to be satisfied with how it performs. 
We are running a risk, however, that we will spend a lot of money developing 
this because our team will be engaged with iWidget for a long time. This 
means the end product will likely have to be priced high, or we will have to sell 
a massive number of them at a smaller margin to make our profit. 
The opportunity cost is such that we might have been able to build two or 
three iterations of simpler products in the same period of time that it will take 
to execute this plan. Also, the gap between our research and our product de-
livery will be long. This means we face to the possibility of being out of touch 
with the market on our delivery date. There could well be massive changes in 
the market while we are heads-down developing. Particularly important here is 
that our rivals could introduce new products that change user expectations, or 
there could be macroeconomic changes such as a downturn in the economy 
that could jeopardize our product positioning. 
Quality Plus Speed Plus Features 
The iWidget is the cornerstone of this company’s survival. We are 
going to deliver ten new features by November 1, and we will have 
absolute quality control on this. Our company reputation is on the 
line with every product, and we are going to hit a home run with this 
one. 
This is actually the most common type of project initiation statement. “We 
need everything—and on a tight timeline.” Especially in the United States, the 
business leader or CEO is supposed to be aggressive. “Always deliver more,” 
s

Startup 
147
he/she says. One result of this approach is that team morale can take a hit. 
When expectations are put forward that are not realistic, it saps the com-
pany’s mental resources, making your company not such a great place to work. 
In addition, you nearly guarantee failure in some aspect of your project. The 
odds of delivering on all three variables are very slim. The leader that pushes 
for too many features and quality with an absolute drop-dead delivery date 
runs a good chance of a complete project failure. In case you need me to re-
mind you, this is the worst of all outcomes in a project! 
The takeaway here is that as a leader, you should modulate your expectations 
and declared objectives in such a way as to maximize the odds of success. In 
my opinion, “asking for everything” is actually nothing more than a lack of 
planning or vision on behalf of the decision-maker. Don’t be that person. In-
stead, hone your talent for seeing into the process involved in delivering a 
project. Ask for more than your team will be comfortable with—that is to say, 
push your staff to perform—but understand the trade-offs that come with 
pushing too hard. 
You may consider setting two separate goals: an unpublished realistic goal that 
is your best guess for your team’s capacity, and a motivational “stretch” goal 
that will serve to rally your team toward higher performance. 
____________ 
 
The Positive Frame 
Sometimes problems arise. It is a fact of life. It is a fact of business. Get used to 
it. And now I am going to tell you yet another thing that you already know: 
The actual impact of problems is largely determined by how we 
choose to respond to them. 
When something happens that feels like it is going to derail your business or 
cause you difficulty, I recommend taking a moment and reframing it into what I 
call the positive frame. As an entrepreneur, you should carry this with you in 
your back pocket. There are two things to do to see things in the positive 
frame: 
• 
Expect that things will actually be better with the change. 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
148 
• 
Look at everything as an opportunity.  
Some people suffer greatly when they choose a problem-based worldview. It 
seems natural and correct to them that everything that happens should be 
looked at from the perspective that it is problematic in some way. This is a 
very accurate-feeling model, because everywhere you look you will find prob-
lems if you expect to see them. (I suggest to you that we are such active par-
ticipants in the creation of our worlds that if you expect opportunity, discrimi-
nation, or even Communist conspiracies as you go through your life, you will 
find evidence to support those biases as well.) The problem-based worldview 
is a common one in which the observer will often end up end up physically 
manifesting the actively created problematic reality with symptoms such as 
knotted muscles, indigestion, headaches, and a pinched expression on the face. 
Ouch. (Fair disclosure: I used to be that person.) The irony is that if you take 
the same situations and choose to view them as opportunities, you are also 
right!  
For instance, some years ago I was advising an Internet software-as-a-service 
startup that was in the process of acquiring funding. The founders were upset 
as they complained about how a competitor had appeared in their space, 
where there had been none before. They were really feeling bad about their 
prospects and the loss of their hoped-for first-mover advantage. My advice to 
them was to view it as a positive development: 
• 
Look guys, if there were no competitors, your investors 
would likely ask you what is wrong with the market. If it is 
a good idea, there will be other people going after it in 
most cases. 
• 
Another benefit for you is that this competitor will help 
educate your future customers about the fact that soft-
ware as a service even exists for this business. They are 
doing you a big favor in opening up people’s minds in this 
way. 
• 
They will also make mistakes that you can benefit from. It 
is much better to be a smart second-mover than an unin-
formed first-mover. 
Choosing an opportunity-based worldview feels oh-so-much more fun, engag-
ing, and productive than choosing a problem-based one. It allows you to stay 
creative, engaged, and effective when those around you need it the most; par-
ticularly when the brown stuff hits the fan—and it will. 

Startup 
149
____________ 
 
Potential 
As you read this, you are sitting somewhere, looking at this text (and enjoying 
it immensely, no doubt). As you lift your eyes from this paragraph, you can no-
tice some of the details of the space around you. How much of that space 
could you see if you covered your eyes with your fingers? None of it, I would 
imagine. How about if you crack your fingers open a little bit so that you can 
see through slightly? How much could you see then? A big improvement over 
seeing nothing, but still very limited—probably a field of blackness with a single 
half-in-focus spot of light in the middle. There is a lot to see around you, but 
we can recognize that much of the space around you is invisible with your eyes 
covered in this way. 
This is the kind of limited vision we often fall into without thinking about it. 
Beyond actual vision (photons hitting our retinas), other fields of information 
that are available to us get a similar treatment whereby they rest largely hidden 
from our understanding. When thinking about what possibilities the future 
could hold for you, and how you might take hold of some of those possibilities 
to change your life for the better, this kind of blindness can be very costly 
indeed.  
Everyone in the world has this kind of blindness to some extent. Think about 
your own senses for a moment. Take a quick tally of all of the available stimuli 
that are coming at you, all the time. It would be unmanageable if we actually 
processed all of the information available to us at any given moment: sounds, 
kinesthetic sensations, light, smells, tastes. We only notice a narrow slice of 
these things at any given time. So we cope with this overload by having a nar-
row window of focus—like looking through a cardboard tube when viewing 
the Grand Canyon. We see only a slice of the rich and often overpowering 
streams of information that make up our environment.  
In the midst of this real-time processing of stimuli, we will frequently pull back 
from the moment and reflect on the abstract field of future possibility. It is what 
could come; something not here now, but that could be arrived at with the 
proper actions. A problem with this exercise in imagination is that, as hard as it 
is to capture the true nuance of actual concrete occurrences around us, 
planning possible future outcomes is even less tangible and much less 
constrained. Recognizing this, it is fascinating to note that because it is less 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
150 
concrete, it is inherently much more rich and variable. Unlimited is a good 
word to describe it.  
There is literally an unlimited potential for us as human beings to make bold, 
unexpected choices and experience fantastic outcomes—should we want to 
do so. But we are blind to it most of the time because that field of possibility is 
hidden behind things like tending to our jobs, brushing our teeth, and watching 
reruns of Seinfeld. It is an eternal truism that you see what you see—and don’t 
see what you don’t see. 
I am going to make up a new phrase here: potential field. This is like the mag-
netic field reaching into space around a magnet, but it is a field of possibility as 
it extends forward in time and space from where you are right now. This ab-
straction of a potential field extends out from each of us. The many variations 
of this potential field represent all that could be. All that you could do. This po-
tential field can be shaped and explored, but only in a very shallow and limited 
way, unless you are willing to break the repetitious patterns that hold you in 
the place where you are right now. 
What would happen if you decided that you could question anything? What 
would happen if you could entertain any dream regardless of how outlandish it 
seems?  
There is a potential of freedom moving in any direction from the here and 
now, out into the direction of your passion—a place where your fire is lit up, 
and you light up the people around you. Think about it.  
This optimistic, anything-is-possible mindset is where the entrepreneur finds 
the power to do what the entrepreneur does. It is a big part of what makes an 
entrepreneur an entrepreneur. It is also, incidentally, often a learned skill. It is 
something that you can learn to do just by … doing it.  
•
If there were no constraints on you, what would you want 
to do today?  
•
If there were no limitations in terms of money or time, 
what would you do in the next year? 
•
If there were no limitations in terms of opportunity, scale, 
reach, and impact, what would you want to accomplish in 
the next 20 years? 

Startup 
151
____________ 
 
Think Big 
You may be limiting yourself without realizing it. Do you believe you can be 
the biggest player in your market? If not, then why not? Your answer to this 
question probably has more psychological bias than actual provable fact behind 
it. There is, in fact, a way available to you to accomplish almost anything. Don’t 
doubt it for a second.  
As big as you are thinking now, look two orders of magnitude larger. Seem 
unreasonable? Do not artificially limit yourself and your success because of 
preconceptions about what is not possible. Look out there, think big, and allow 
yourself to see it all working out. See your success reaching up to the highest 
levels and it just might.  
With this one mental change you immediately and instantly increase the depth, 
reach, and variations of the potential field that is reaching out into your future. 
This potential field is the mechanism that in its essence becomes your story. 
Here is an exercise that illustrates just how far the upper bounds of this con-
cept can reach: if I told you that you could do something completely arbitrary 
and audacious, such as write the name of your favorite pet on the surface of 
the moon, what would your reaction be?  
I am telling you that it is so.  
 
If you were inclined to do so, you, dear reader, could start in the next moment 
to formulate and execute a plan (that has a palpable chance of success) to put 
your mark on the moon as described. The plan? Take your finances, such as 
they are. What would happen if over the next 40 years you were as successful 
as Warren Buffet has been? There are certainly investment strategies that 
would earn you in excess of $1 billion over the next 40 years. For the pur-
poses of this exercise, you need not believe that you can do it, just recognize 
that it is possible. Continuing the story, we also know that technology is 
rapidly developing. Commercial space flight is almost commonplace now, with 
governments and private companies both providing pathways for rich 
individuals to do things in space. It is not much further beyond the confluence 
of wealth (which we understand is completely possible) and technology (which 
we know is lowering barriers to space every year) that you find your purpose-
laden trip to our celestial neighbor.  
 
_________________ 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
152 
The purpose of this drill is to help you to exorcise your self-imposed limita-
tions by sheer brute force. What I am looking for as you visualize this realistic 
scenario is the ah-hah epiphany when you feel, if just for a moment, a connec-
tion with this distant and challenging objective. The sensation is like water 
flowing out of a constrained and tight enclosure and reforming itself into a new 
and wider shape—reaching forward in time and space. I am willing to bet that 
prior to this moment you would have never considered that the range of 
possible futures included anything this distant and far-flung. Here is to flexing 
and exploring your potential field. Flex away! 
____________ 
 
The Flail 
When people get into a high-pressure situation when the stakes are high, they 
often get flustered and think that they don’t have any options. They will often 
get bombastic and try Hail Mary stunts that will almost certainly make any bad 
situation worse. I call this the flail, similar to when a child who gets frustrated 
enough will often just start crying and flailing their arms around. I also saw this 
frequently with adults when teaching Brazilian jiujitsu, which I did for 12 years. 
New and even intermediate students would get frustrated, and then go ape 
and forget everything they knew about strategy, what to do, and what not to 
do. This would result, as I said a moment ago, in a bad situation getting worse. 
Eventually, as they became more advanced, they would learn to keep their 
head on straight and focus on the basics when they got frustrated. That lesson 
was often hard-learned and only came about as the result of trusting their 
training. 
At a recent industry conference, SXSW Interactive, I saw an example of the 
flail that was both embarrassing and unproductive. The frustrated CEO of a 
company was having a hard time connecting with his desired audience at the 
conference, so he hijacked part of a panel discussion by taking the microphone 
during Q&A and addressing the audience with a pitch for his business. I ad-
mired the guts it would have taken to do that, but the attendees thought this 
guy was disrespectful and out of line because he broke social rules. Not a good 
move. 
Afterward, I had the opportunity to meet with the gentleman and give him 
very direct feedback on his stunt. The backstory for him was that he believed 
 
_________________ 

Startup 
153
he had a fantastic idea and a real value-add for the world but could not get any 
attention. He was getting desperate and needed to try something. 
The flail arises from the desire to get big results from little input, and a loss in 
faith in our ability to positively affect our environment through planning and 
execution. The problem is that the flail can undo significant amounts of work 
(as in damaging your reputation or exhausting limited funds). When the urge to 
flail arises, I recommend buttoning down and focusing on basics. Get back to 
the little things that each incrementally make your business go. Pick the most 
important thing that is not yet done and do it. Then progress to the next thing 
and the next. Keep it simple and focus on the basics. 
____________ 
 
The Bell Curve 
It is true that nature behaves in both predictable ways and in chaotic ways. 
Among the chaos, there are both visible and invisible patterns. Patterns are 
sequences of events that express themselves in ways that can be predicted.  
People and business are part of nature. Recognize that in business, as in nature, 
when you are looking at large sets of data (your target customers, your com-
petitors, the individual transactions that contribute to your bottom line, etc.), 
they will have characteristics and behaviors that tend to fall into bell curve dis-
tribution patterns (see Figure 6-6). By this point in the book you have seen this 
pattern repeatedly—and for a reason. Nature expresses itself in this pattern 
across a wide array of circumstances. It is a metapattern of grand and wide 
scale, so by understanding this you gain insight into the behavior of systems as 
far-flung as consumer decision-making, project management, and water mole-
cules evaporating out of a coffee cup. This is important stuff. 
You can use this to your advantage if you have this image in mind when you 
project how your decisions will play out in the marketplace. 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
154 
Classic Bell Curve Distribution
 
Figure 6-6. The bell curve is a global metapattern that manifests itself throughout business and 
nature. 
To explain this, let’s construct a very simple example. The archetypical make-
something-and-sell-it business model of a pizza restaurant will help illustrate 
this. In designing a menu for our pizza restaurant, would you want to be au-
thentic and write everything in Italian? It might be argued that people would 
probably understand enough. (Let’s say the restaurant is in a historically Italian 
neighborhood.) It could more reasonably be argued that among the whole 
population of customers, a few would understand perfectly, most people 
would understand some of it, and some people would be completely lost. This 
is where a bell curve can be used to help you out (Figure 6-7). 
 

Startup 
155
Bell Curve Distribution for Understanding Italian
No 
Understanding
Native 
Understanding
Little 
Understanding
Some 
Understanding
Good
Understanding
This small 
group gets it.
This big 
group just 
doesn’t get 
it. 
 
Figure 6-7. Customer bell curve for understanding Italian 
Knowing that this likely distribution exists, you would reasonably predict that 
the “No Understanding” group is going to be totally lost, and at least half of 
the “Some Understanding” group will be lost. This would result in a quick deci-
sion against the avant-garde styling of a foreign language approach to your 
menus, and a decision to go with English as the predominant choice. 
I find myself doing this kind of mental analysis for nearly everything that has to 
do with large groups of my customers. Deciding how to design a web inter-
face? This leads to questions like these: what populations of people will be 
seeing the web site and what will their purpose be? Bell curve. Choosing 
words for marketing and advertising? Bell curve. Where will I be advertising 
and what mode of thought will people be in when they see my message? Bell 
curve.  
For the restaurant, you might ask yourself whether you should buy the more 
expensive chrome barstools or go with the cheaper ones. To make this deci-
sion, you have to answer some questions. How many people will notice? Of 
that group, how many will actually be influenced enough by that small but ex-
pensive detail to be pushed them over the edge from one-time customer to 
repeat customer? Bell curves can help you tease out that answer.  
 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
156 
____________ 
 
A Change in Perspective 
As an entrepreneur, you make it a point to look at and study your business 
and the market every day. Every day you feel you are the same you, and the 
business is the same business. Both of these statements are false—both you 
and your business are different from day to day and moment to moment. 
When you spend time thinking about what you are doing and what you should 
be doing, don’t get stuck in a mental rut. Make it a habit to change your pers-
pective on a regular basis. Here are a couple of my favorite ways for getting a 
new perspective on anything that I am thinking about.  
Chunking Up  
Expand your perspective. Look at your business from the 50,000-foot view and 
see how it looks. If you are absorbed in the day-to-day issues of running the 
business, you may not be in the habit of doing this.  
If we were talking about chunking up with regard to a sailing ship, it would be 
taking your perspective up and away from sea level and looking at it from air-
plane level. How is it different from up here? For one thing, you see less of 
your ship and more of the environment that it is in. What if you moved up to a 
satellite-eye view from space? Even more so, you switch from object (the boat) 
to context (the environment and its patterns). Chunking up even more, you 
look at the effect of the moon on tides and how much light at night you have 
to sail by. Chunking up even more, you’re looking at solar flares affecting your 
communications. Chunking up further, what can we imagine?  
Mental exercises like this can yield new and interesting perspectives that you 
will never have if you confine yourself to your usual ground-level perspective. 
Chunking Down  
The geometric counterpoint to chunking up—chunking down—provides yet 
another set of real, relevant, and potentially useful insights.  
To continue the sailboat analogy, chunking down would be looking at how 
barnacles clinging to your hull increase friction and drag, causing you to travel 
 
_________________ 

Startup 
157
with slightly less velocity. Chunking down might have you analyzing the speed 
at which the crew can execute a tack to starboard or how positioning of the 
cargo in the hold affects your ability to handle high waves. The chunking-down 
methodology is critical for achieving operational excellence. From a business 
perspective, it is the process of deconstructing all of the details of how you 
touch your customers and optimizing all of the little pieces that matter—and 
judiciously leaving the pieces that don’t matter undisturbed. 
____________ 
 
Systems Thinking 
Let’s take a moment to think about thinking. The Greeks taught us about linear 
thinking, in which logic and sequential analysis are used to come to conclusions 
about the world around us.  
Here’s an example of linear thinking: “Customers like coupons. If I put a cou-
pon in the newspaper, I will get more business.” 
This is a valid logical structure—the kind of structure that we use hundreds (if 
not thousands) of times a day to make decisions. Having applied a label to this 
method of thinking, I would like to introduce you to an alternative way of using 
your brain, called systems thinking. Systems thinking is a way to think of many 
things at once (a system of interconnected processes) instead of one thing at a 
time (linear). Systems thinking will allow you to visualize your business in mul-
tiple dimensions, to feel the ebb and flow of the inputs and outputs, to feel the 
sense of timing and balance within it, and to effortlessly access the rich field of 
information and potentials that exist outside of the standard linear-thinking 
mindset. 
Here’s an example of systems thinking: “Customers like coupons. If we run a 
coupon in the paper … I can feel a number of aspects of our business that 
change at once … the ad spend … branding effect of the reach of the ad (de-
pending on the approach) … distraction of marketing team from core business 
… customer expectation of getting discounts may hurt us since we don’t 
usually do coupons” (and 100 other things, all felt and wordless). 
As an illustration of the process of visualizing your business from the inside—a 
systems-thinking approach—let us take a brief trip down the road together 
and think about driving. The next time you drive your car, notice how you are 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
158 
processing the experience. It will likely feel like the following common-sense 
statement: “I am sitting in my car and driving down the road.” But there is 
more for you here … 
Try this the next time that you are driving: feel the steering wheel in your 
hands. There is vibration from the road coming up through the frame of the 
car to your seat. Can you feel it? Feel the texture of the road beneath the 
tires. It is interesting how the smoothness of the road is punctuated by minor 
variations in the concrete.  
Allow your awareness to expand beyond your body and take in the whole 
length and width of the car. As you change lanes, accelerate, and decelerate, 
allow yourself to sense the car as you would your body. You can feel the 
whole car moving. As you drive, relax into the experience of the car as your 
body. This is very comfortable, and you are more in control and more aware 
of the driving environment than you were before. 
As you travel, you are seeing that the road ahead begins to turn gently. You 
are allowing your awareness to expand forward ahead of the car and feel the 
curve in the road. When you finally get to the curve you are already pulling in 
unison with the change in direction.  
There are cars and trucks on the road as well. You can feel them, too. With-
out words, you change lanes to avoid a slower truck ahead of you. Your 
awareness takes it in, and you automatically feel how its change in position and 
speed affect you. 
Can you see where I am going with this? With this creative riff on a quick drive 
down the road, we are playing with something altogether different from a li-
near visualization of a body sitting in a car holding a steering wheel and pushing 
on the accelerator pedal. This is a transition from a separate, isolated, New-
tonian model of a person plus a machine to a systems-thinking approach.  
Systems thinking takes into account multiple simultaneous variables and inputs. 
The potential result of this is the synthesis of information and understandings 
that would be unavailable to you if you were thinking in a linear fashion. 
As another illustration, I was recently on a walk in Zilker Park near my office in 
downtown Austin. Just 5 minutes from the office is a patch of woods that has 
within it a kid’s summer camp facility. This facility has installed a 15-foot log, 
suspended by steel cables just inches off the ground, which is like a moveable, 
rounded balance beam. The first time I tried to get up and balance on it, I im-
mediately fell off. Same for the second and third tries. I gave up that first day, 

Startup 
159
and came back the next day. That time I got on the log again and fell off again. 
On reflecting on why it was so hard to balance, I realized that I was thinking 
about it all wrong! I decided to allow my systems-thinking mind to kick in, and 
let my thinking expand beyond my own body to encompass the log, the cables, 
and the ground. Suddenly (and without effort) I had access to feedback me-
chanisms and a way to feel my way into the problem of balance. I was imme-
diately able to walk all the way down the log and back without falling off. The 
difference? Nothing except the way I was looking at it. 
Thinking about this phenomenon, I took my kids to visit the park and did an 
experiment with them. My two sons (Mitchel, age 5, and Connor, age 10) were 
excited about this balance log and immediately tried to traverse it—and fell off. 
I let each of them try two or three times, and they teetered and repeatedly 
stepped back to the ground, frustrated. I wanted to try to get them into a sys-
tems mindset to see if they could increase their ability to perform this task.  
I told them, “Let your feeling reach into the log beneath your feet. Feel into it 
and relax. Feel into the log and it will stop moving—you will be able to balance 
with no problem.” I kept repeating this as Connor immediately stabilized his 
balance and walked the length without any problem. Mitchel then tried, and I 
repeated the same thought: “Let your feeling reach into the log beneath your 
feet. Feel into it and relax. Feel into the log and it will stop moving—you will 
be able to balance with no problem.” The five-year-old was also able to walk 
the length of the log without falling. Both of them succeeded on their first sys-
tems thinking–assisted attempt. This is the power of a changed perspective.  
I believe we are all wired naturally to do this. In fact, I think it is more basic and 
intuitive than language-based linear thinking. The trick is to recognize this fact 
and allow yourself to relax into the alternative whole system–thinking model. 
In business, this kind of visualization is of critical importance to me. I make it a 
point to build a multifaceted model for each business that I am involved in, 
which takes into account a long list of variables. Examples are 
• 
The product 
• 
The customers 
• 
The marketing plan 
• 
The team of employees 
• 
The geometry of relationships between marketing, 
customers, and products 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
160 
•
Financial models for marketing, products, and staffing 
•
Frequency of events such as updates, product releases, and 
so on 
This list will be long enough to include every bit of information that you know 
about the company, the market, and the world at large. The end result of each 
of these elements coming together is a laboratory environment—a representa-
tion and model that can be used to test any potential change to business strat-
egy, tactics, or operations. 
The feeling of having the model in action is that of a morphable, multi-
dimensional structure that can be rotated in space, twisted, analyzed, rolled 
forward and backward in time, split apart, and otherwise manipulated in any 
way that the imagination can create. For me, this structure is experienced from 
inside and throughout it. Key to this structure are the geometric relationships 
inherent in the business. How many customers are coming in? Are they online 
or are they real customers in stores? With what frequency? What percentage 
of the time do they actually make a purchase? What structures outside of the 
business are bringing them in? What is the timing and dependency model for 
the marketing plan? These questions are not asked in words, but by applying 
them physically to the model and observing how the feeling changes. The ex-
perience of it is effortless, and the field of available information is incomparably 
rich. 
What does all this thinking do for you?  
Having built the understanding of the business, and having assembled the 
model, the model is just waiting to be asked questions. But questions without 
words. What repeatedly has happened in my experience is that someone says, 
“OK, we are going to do this and this in the marketing plan.” After plugging it 
into the model, there will be an immediate conclusion, for instance, that “the 
plan doesn’t make sense, and here’s why.” What may follow from this is a 20-
minute discussion of why it doesn’t make sense. That discussion (with white-
board diagrams to support it, of course) may take quite a while to work 
through because the logic needs to be translated out of a systems-thinking 
perspective (which is wordless and nonlinear) and put into a language-based 
linear model for sharing with other people. This takes time. 
As I said, I believe that we are all naturally wired to do this. It is simply a mat-
ter or recognizing the potential of it, and turning off the language center of 
your thinking long enough to get inside and feel the relationships in your busi-
ness instead of asking yourself in words. Take the time to play with this. I 

Startup 
161
started doing this about 20 years ago, and I am still learning how powerful it is. 
I use it daily. It is where the “wow” factor comes from when bringing strategic 
guidance to my businesses. Let it be the wow factor for you too.  
____________ 
 
Know That You Don’t Know 
We know all kinds of things about our environment, our market, and our busi-
ness. Realize up-front that there is a great volume of information that is hidden 
from your sight.  
You don’t know everything, even if it feels sometimes like you might be getting 
close. Wise businesspeople should be humbled by the complexity of the world 
and always stay in touch with the fact that much more is not known than is 
known. They also realize that there is no end or limit to how much they can 
learn—which means that what they know at any moment is always incomplete. 
____________ 
 
Domain Knowledge 
You can analyze a situation or market and produce remarkably elegant under-
standings and mental structures to deal with it, it is true. But before making 
any important decisions, or even feeling confidence in your conclusions, make 
sure that you have adequately coupled this type of exercise with sufficient ex-
perience in the market itself. While mental analysis is a valuable and necessary 
tool, it is important to note that a single missed fact about any marketplace can 
invalidate substantial amounts of strategic planning. 
Confidence is often misplaced by smart people who have had a great track 
record of decision-making in one domain when they jump the boundaries of 
that specialty and begin to ideate in another domain. The process feels the 
same, but lies on different ground with different assumptions and background 
facts. A fantastically smart energy industry executive, for example, has no busi-
ness expressing confident, detailed opinions on the publishing industry (unless 
and until he jumps into that industry and earns his confidence by the process 
 
_________________ 
 
_________________ 

Chapter 6 | Strategic Thinking 
162 
of getting to know the publishing business firsthand). Having success in one 
area using a rich palette of thought-tools such as those discussed in this book 
will absolutely make it easier to enter other areas of action, but your capacity 
to analyze is no substitute for firsthand experience and domain knowledge. 
____________ 
 
Enjoy the Drama 
Just as I created the mailroom-to-the-boardroom scenario for myself, identify 
what kind of drama you want for yourself. For me, this meant that as a young 
man, I wanted to work my way up from basic entrepreneur labor, to being a 
business leader and to see first hand all of the steps in between. From a stra-
tegic-thinking standpoint, this becomes your overarching story frame from 
which you contextualize and understand how each chapter of your life fits to-
gether. This can be a powerful tool when it informs you what cadence and 
tone best suit your personal needs. This frame has within it many classical for-
mulas, such as the comeback, the underdog, the tycoon, the philanthropist, and 
many others. It is how we use archetype to describe to ourselves and others 
what flavor of experience we represent.  
Identify your ideal story, and then go out build it and enjoy the heck out of it. 
It may well be what you are here for at this time and place. Go out today and 
make it happen. There are no excuses for simply waiting day by day to arrive 
at the finish line. If you feel some kind of spark or a voice that tells you to get 
up and do something great, making it happen is less “a doing” or some great 
effort, and more a matter of getting out of the way and watching what hap-
pens. Don’t delay. There is no time like the present. Enjoy every step, every 
failure, every success.  
 
_________________ 

C H A P T E R 
7 
Exiting Your 
Business 
 
This book is primarily about starting and running your business. A critical part 
of that subject is a discussion of what to expect when you make the decision 
to sell what you have built, and move on. It is important for entrepreneurs 
starting out to understand the big picture of what likely options and events lay 
ahead for them in this regard. In recent years (since the 1990s), the idea of 
selling out to investors or issuing an initial public offering (IPO) has become the 
focus of incredible amounts of media attention and the stuff of modern 
folklore. It seems that in tech circles, everybody knows someone somewhere 
who sold their business for millions of dollars, so it is natural to want to 
replicate their success in your own business. While it is my personal 
preference to focus attention on the process of operating the business, it is 
important to realize that for those businesses that survive and thrive, it is likely 
that at some point the idea of an exit will become important. 
Selling a business is the culmination of a lot of work—usually years of it. In 
order to be acquired, you ultimately need to have something that others feel 
that they have to have. This means knowing the right people, being visible in 
the market, and being on the right side of an intense valuation done by 
investors.  

Chapter 7 | Exiting Your Business 
164 
I have had three exits in my career so far: 
• 
Private equity sale: In the late 1990s my Meridian World 
Data business was acquired by private equity investors. 
The investors were not in the mapping-data business (until 
it bought Meridian), but thought that there was good po-
tential in running Meridian as a portfolio investment.  
• 
Strategic merger: That capital from selling Meridian World 
Data, and a few years of work, helped us develop a grow-
ing online retail business—but this operation felt under-
developed in many ways. We approached and negotiated a 
merger with a larger competitor in Chicago. It had a weak 
technology profile, but it had great facilities and operation-
al capacity. With our strong technology back end, and 
their much weaker operational capacity, the fit was too 
good for us to pass up. We merged and the gravitational 
center of the two companies moved to Chicago.  
• 
Acquisition by competitor: Some time later, I joined a com-
pany with the explicit purpose of positioning the company 
for acquisition. From day one, the primary objective for 
me was to get the company sold. My mandate from the 
CEO to was change the engineering, marketing, product, 
and culture of the company to get the investors a return 
on the substantial investment they had already made in the 
company. It was an intense fast-forward rebuild of just 
about every part of the company in preparation for at-
tracting the best possible buyout offer. With the successful 
industry networking of our CEO and a well-received re-
boot of the business, we had an acquisition deal 13 months 
after I came on board.  
These acquisitions were not accidents; they were planned for, and they were 
the result of a great deal of deliberate work, positioning, and communication. 
As you start or run your business, here are some things to think about that 
will help you to position and prepare for an exit on the best possible terms. 

Startup 
165
_________________ 
 
Preparing from Day One 
If you are running a business, you have numerous and daily opportunities to 
take shortcuts or allow problems to fester. These shortcuts can span a wide 
spectrum, including how you deal with taxes, legal issues, intellectual property, 
HR issues, bookkeeping and financials, problems with product quality, and so 
on. These types of problems will appear as issues for most companies at one 
time or another, and the way that you deal with them will have many 
consequences. Those consequences manifest themselves in both the short 
term and the long term. The short-term consequences of not dealing 
completely and properly with this category of issues are clear enough, and vary 
from problem to problem. The long-term consequences are such that they can 
easily endanger your ability to successfully reach a graceful and profitable exit 
from your business. I advise you to plan on positioning yourself for your exit 
from the very beginning—by keeping in mind that to exit and transfer your 
operation to somebody else, the complete details of any hidden problems will 
come out of the closet and be subject to the scrutiny of your potential 
acquiring company. This means avoiding shortcuts, and making a point to clear 
up the messy issues that sometimes seem like they can just be ignored. The 
hope that they will go away on their own accord is a false one—the messy 
issues just seem to linger, demanding your attention for their proper 
resolution. 
In addition to dealing with tough issues in the proper way, your preparation for 
an acquisition maps very closely to the good execution of the operational 
principles discussed throughout this book. Primary among these are 
• 
Having identified a clear niche in the market and subse-
quently taking ownership of it through effective positioning 
and communications. 
• 
Having built your organization to be self-directing, or self-
managing (staffed with employees that are trained and em-
powered to run the business without the principal owers).  

Chapter 7 | Exiting Your Business 
166 
_________________ 
 
Common Reasons for a Sale 
Even if you want to operate, build your company to sell. Keep your options 
open. You never know what can happen to change your needs or outlook. 
Here are some events that can trigger an exit (planned or otherwise): 
• 
A plan to build and sell from the very beginning 
• 
A belief that the future of the niche or market is not good, 
and you need to get out while you can 
• 
Health issues 
• 
Relationship issues between founders 
• 
Financial weakness (perhaps leading to a bargain-basement 
acquisition) 
• 
An unsolicited offer that’s too attractive to pass up 
• 
Investor fatigue (you are not yet wildly successful, and 
your investors or principals decide they want to move on) 
_________________ 
 
What Makes a Business Attractive for a 
Sale? 
Simply wanting to sell is not nearly enough to get you bought. In my case, 
when challenged with the task of getting a business acquired, the thought 
process for positioning and building to accomplish that end iterates repeatedly 
over the question of what our strengths are, and what the market has and 
does not have.  
What would make us attractive (or irresistible) in the market? 

Startup 
167
Here are some common answers to that question: 
• 
A developed product that would be too much effort to 
duplicate 
• 
Intellectual property that an acquirer could not obtain any 
other way 
• 
Strong brand recognition 
• 
Physical assets 
• 
A significant customer base 
• 
Industry-leading talent on your team 
• 
A larger rival in your space looking for greater market 
share 
• 
Weakness (an acquirer may believe that they can buy your 
company cheap for resale, or that they can fix and operate 
your company) 
_________________ 
 
Relationships Count 
Relationships with the right people at the right time account for a great deal of 
the opportunity that you will need to be successful in your business. The same 
goes for your exit. Your chances of finding a good exit are enhanced 
significantly if you have a robust network. So long as you have a good 
reputation and a good story to tell, the more people you know, and the more 
people who know you, the better.  
An individual’s personal network is usually a very slowly evolving structure—so 
get ahead of the curve and shore up your network before you need it. Make it 
a point to be involved in trade groups, investor forums, CEO meetings, and the 
like from early on in your business. Two of my transactions came about 
because of attending an industry event and rubbing elbows with fellow 
executives over a cold beer. 
w

Chapter 7 | Exiting Your Business 
168 
_________________ 
 
Choose the Front Man Well 
Once you decide to sell, or once you are approached, consider carefully who 
the front man (or front woman) should be for your business. It may not be the 
smartest person on the team, the most experienced, or even one of the 
founders, but a good front man is a person that can open doors for you. Pick 
someone with the right look, the right words, the right swagger. 
For the sale of our real estate dot-com project, we had this in our CEO. He 
was invaluable in that he looked the part and could play the role expected by 
the acquiring company. We would not have had a deal if it were not for the 
CEO’s ability to win over the investors early on with “old-boy network” 
charm. It also didn’t hurt that he was smart and had a lot of experience in 
transactions from his previous work. Our company was a good purchase for 
the acquirer, but this connection and networking was what made the sale  
possible.  
A sale has to be a mix of the right numbers and the right emotions. The 
numbers have to add up to a good value for the acquirer. But numbers alone 
are not enough—you also have to set the right feeling and emotional tone with 
your potential suitors. Some say that emotion does not have a part in business, 
but I assert that it is frequently at the heart of transactions when businesses 
are sold. Part of that emotion on behalf of the acquirer is their feeling about 
the organizational risks involved in buying your company. This category of risk 
includes whether or not the people, processes, and hidden aspects of the 
business are really as good as you portray them. The organizational risks are 
framed and communicated by your front man—and this is a critical process. A 
good front man can open doors and help you to close deals that you would 
otherwise never have had. 
_________________ 
 
Getting the Right People on Your Side 
If you are looking to sell your business, you need to get your organization’s 
financial IQ developed and working toward the right ends quickly. If your 

Startup 
169
principal founders are not experienced with negotiating and structuring 
financial deals, you need to find somebody that is, and start working with them 
months ahead of any negotiations to sell or take on serious capital investment.  
A lot of irrevocable decisions can happen very quickly in this kind of transition, 
and a lot of value can be won or lost in the small details. The investors that 
you will likely be dealing with in these scenarios are (probably) going to be 
savvy, sophisticated, and more experienced than you in terms of the business 
of buying equity and structuring deals. In the process of selling a business, it is 
typical for the entrepreneur to have significantly less experience. In my case, I 
have been in three major transactions over 18 years or so. That means I have 
had some very specific experiences and a reasonably diverse track record as an 
entrepreneur, but compared to a venture capitalist (VC) or private equity 
group that might do five or six transactions per year, three is not a very 
impressive number in terms of negotiations. I think about it this way: if I had 
played baseball three times in my life, I would have a lot to say compared to 
somebody who had never played the game before, but would be at a 
disadvantage against an professional competitor in the sport. Professional 
negotiators and VCs are (usually) good at what they do, and they benefit from 
the fact that a significant gap between their knowledge and yours can cost you 
a lot. Make sure your team has an experienced deal-maker engaged on your 
behalf. Jeff Olson, a publishing pro who helped me extensively in the 
production of this book, experienced this in his career when he sold part of his 
business to a larger competitor several years ago. The situation was typical in 
that he felt utterly and completely outgunned when dealing with the guys on 
the other side of the table during the negotiation. He wishes that he had had 
more support and experience representing his interests during that process, 
and will always have some lingering doubts about whether or not he got the 
best deal possible.  
Knowing this, you should make sure that you have your own gunslingers at the 
table with you during any acquisition.  
• 
Hire an attorney that specializes in venture capital and ac-
quisitions.  
• 
Bring in an experienced businessperson to help you nego-
tiate. Look for people like this well before you need them, 
and build their context in your business over months and 
years—you will benefit in many ways from doing this, in 
addition to having them there to advise you in a buyout. 

Chapter 7 | Exiting Your Business 
170 
•
Setting up a formal (or informal) board of directors for 
your business early on can be another way to have expe-
rienced businesspeople on your side to help guide you. Be-
ing a board member is a minor status symbol for business-
people, and it need not cost you anything to get them to 
agree to serve as one. 
________________ 
Due Diligence 
Any sale will include a period of investigation called due diligence, in which an 
acquirer will attempt to get inside your closet and look for any skeletons. 
Make sure you don’t have any. Or, if you do, consider framing them 
constructively and proactively sharing them with your potential acquirer.  
To get through due diligence 
•
Be free of lawsuits and legal entanglements. The uncertain-
ty of pending lawsuits will scare away most potential ac-
quirers. 
•
Ensure that you have maintained full and proper book-
keeping and financials. 
•
Provide all contracts and current legal obligations. 
•
Show that you have used intellectual property properly. In 
a recent acquisition, we went through two months of in-
tense due diligence. Neither the principals on our side nor 
our attorneys had ever seen anything like it before—we 
were presented with a long list of disclosure requirements 
that dove deep into core software, servers, every agree-
ment with every vendor, and even to the level of providing 
lists of every software program on every computer and 
laptop in the organization. It must have been good karma 
paying off for us, because we had meticulously licensed 
every relevant piece of software across our infrastructure. 

Startup 
171
• 
List reasonably well-documented operational assets (soft-
ware, product production, and processes). Any acquiring 
company will send in its crew of experts and managers to 
interview your team with the purpose of making sure that 
they will be able to successfully utilize your assets accord-
ing to their plan. This is where having documentation and 
well-designed systems can really pay off. If you are holding 
together your operation with layers of duct tape and bail-
ing wire, you might not get the nod to go ahead during due 
diligence. 
One fond memory of mine from when we were selling the Meridian company 
involved a comment from the investors. They said they “had never seen such a 
well-prepared due diligence package.” Sterling had printed and bound all of the 
contracts and financials into a phone book–sized package that served as the 
centerpiece of due diligence. The full and well-documented disclosure set the 
tone for what was to become a relatively quick and easy sale. 
_________________ 
 
Earn-Out Agreements 
Investors like to hedge their bets. Many recent deals that I have seen, especially 
with smaller companies, have involved earn-out clauses in the acquisition 
contract. In this scenario, the buyer pays a percentage of the purchase price up 
front, but withholds the remaining money contingent upon you staying in the 
business for a couple of years post-deal and driving a prescribed level of 
performance. In essence, they are telling you this: 
If you believe your own sales pitch about where your business is going, 
prove it by doing it. 
They will pay you a percentage of your asking price to acquire your company, 
and hold out the remainder as “safety money.” The remaining money will 
never be paid unless you can prove that your sales pitch was not simply hot 
air: You hit your multi-year business metrics and grow the company value to 
where you said it could go. This is usually 2 years in term. It is good to know 

Chapter 7 | Exiting Your Business 
172 
ahead of time that your options on exit may involve this kind of time-intensive 
scenario.  
_________________ 
 
Giving Up Your Baby 
Every aspect of running a business can be imbued with emotional content for 
an entrepreneur. There had to be a serious case of fire in the belly for you to 
commit to building a business in the first place. It is a sure thing that there will 
be a significant emotional component in selling your company. In the case of 
Meridian World Data, our decision to sell was definitely an emotional one. My 
business partner told me, “If I have to do this one more day, I am going to 
shoot myself.” If that is not an emotional decision, I don’t know what is. So we 
sold it. Luckily, I was on the same page as my partner, and I agreed to do it. 
This is a significant point where controlling interest and management control 
can come into importance.  
One very likely result of your emotional investment in a company (and your 
close-up perspective) is that you may tend to overvalue your business due to 
your proximity to it. Your potential acquirers will likely see things differently. 
They are going to lowball you—just try not to take it personally! In one case, 
we actually lost an early acquisition deal because we had momentary second 
thoughts about the sale price. We were near to a deal, and we were feeling 
the pain of impending separation from our baby (company). We mishandled 
the situation by pushing too hard for too much. That potential deal fell through 
at least in part because we had not worked out for ourselves what our pricing 
requirements were—and we let it get the better of us. We sold the company 
to another party within a few months, but at a lower price than had been 
offered in the deal we lost. Tough lesson. One useful way to keep this type of 
problem at bay is to decide early on how to answer this question, “How much 
is enough?” 
Think about what an exit needs to look like for you to be satisfied. Set a 
minimum price that you would accept, and then anchor your negotiations well 
above that level. Also think in advance about other characteristics of the deal 
that will be important: 
• 
Do you want to stay on and earn a salary as an employee? 

Startup 
173
• 
Do you want to get out and move on to other things? 
(Watch out for earn-out conditions in this case.) 
• 
How will your employees be taken care of?  
• 
Do you want your brand to survive, or is it OK for it to 
be subsumed by another company or taken apart?  
_________________ 
 
Getting and Evaluating an Offer 
The most primal of human emotions come into play when you finally get an 
offer to sell your business: fear, excitement, anger, uncertainty, greed, relief. It 
will trigger a significant emotional response. As Darwin would tell you if he 
were part of this conversation, emotions evolved in humans in support of our 
survival, which, when it comes to behavior, is often concerned with the 
acquisition and defense of resources. From a biological standpoint, selling your 
business is a major event. Short of being attacked by a bear or otherwise 
having your life threatened, few situations will be more personal or 
emotionally intense.  
Here are some thoughts on evaluating an offer: 
• 
Make an effort to distinguish between emotion and reason.  
• 
Use tools outside of your own thought to help you to es-
tablish a depersonalized perspective—market data, advisor 
input, analysis spreadsheets.  
• 
I always anchor my considerations on the big-picture scale, 
and then work my way down to the details. My process 
starts with finding an answer to the simple yet profound 
question, “How much is enough?”  
Also, notice the explicit difference between “How much is enough?” and “How 
much can I get?” Economists will tell you that maximizing outcomes is the 
purpose of negotiation in the marketplace, but this is not just a money 
question. I suggest that you evaluate this question in a multidimensional 
fashion: 
• 
Finance: How much money is enough? 

Chapter 7 | Exiting Your Business 
174 
• 
Time: Will this deal position me with enough time to do 
what I want in the next stage of my life? 
• 
Future opportunity: Will this deal position me well for my 
next career step? 
• 
Stability: Does this deal create aggregately more or less 
stability? Is stability even important to me? 
• 
Emotional satisfaction: Does this feel like a fitting move in 
terms of how I want to write my own story? 
_________________ 
 
Handling Employees During a Transition 
If you are negotiating a buyout or merger, your employees will likely know 
something is going on, even if you are trying to keep it low profile. Transitions 
are scary, and what will happen is that in the absence of specific and consistent 
messaging from management, your employees will be forced to imagine some 
of the worst scenarios and begin preparing for them (getting fired or laid off is 
primary among these). While severance of employment for team members 
often goes along with acquisitions, it is the solemn responsibility of 
management to communicate truthfully and as openly as possible with the 
team as the process unfolds.  
My objectives in this regard are as follows: 
• 
Be as open as possible with information. Speak frequently 
and personally with individuals who want to know what is 
happening. 
• 
Take care of employees in a fair and generous way.  
• 
Allocate extra compensation for key team members if you 
need to ensure their stable participation through the tran-
sition. 
v

Startup 
175
_________________ 
 
Exit or Operate?  
The idealized version of the fairytale startup sounds something like this: A 
couple of guys have an idea and build it in their mom’s garage over four 
grueling months. They roll the product out, it catches the market’s attention, 
and 18 months later, they have multi-million-dollar buyout offers rolling in. 
They take an offer, and live happily rich ever after. 
An alternative, less media-worthy version follows. A couple of guys have an 
idea and build the first version of it in their mom’s garage over four grueling 
months. They roll the product out, starting small, and they build up a loyal 
following of customers. They enjoy the business so much that it never even 
occurs to them that they would want to sell. They do take investments (in 
exchange for a minority stake in the business), which they use to 
professionalize their operation:  
1. They move into new offices. 
2. They carefully hire staff, including managers (that they 
know are smarter than they are), and begin sharing the 
burden of running the company with a team. 
3. They position key staff members in roles that quickly 
get their business to self-managing status—freeing up 
the founders to focus on as much or as little of the op-
eration as they desire. 
4. They produce a steady income from the business that 
allows them to do whatever they want, inside or out-
side of their successful startup. 
I think that the social commentary on the “big deal” may overemphasize selling 
out. Until the last several decades, the main purpose of building a business was 
to simply have a business, which meant building profitable relationships with 
customers, and building a team to do good, fulfilling work. As many find, the 
greatest joy is in the journey, not the destination.  

Chapter 7 | Exiting Your Business 
176 
_________________ 
 
Exit, and You Are Just Going to Want to 
Be In Again—Soon 
Retirement, leisure, and the proverbial hammock on the beach are overrated, 
but they are great as a contrast to a period of accomplishment. They’re the yin 
to the startup’s yang. But all the time? No way (not for me anyway). For me, 
leisure only has meaning as an occasional contrast to building and working. 
Notice all of the ex-startup folks that are now VCs and angel investors, 
interviewing and working with startups. One of the primary reasons for this is 
the thrill of the chase. The game is complex, primal, and exciting—carrying just 
the right mix of thinking, execution, luck, and potential financial upside to 
provide a powerful cocktail of emotional rewards for the participants. The lure 
of this game doesn’t simply go away once you have made a some money by 
selling a startup. My read on this is that the ex-startup guys out there looking 
for ways to play are somehow less happy than the guys who are all-in and 
playing for everything. 
There are few things that can make you feel quite as alive as being involved in a 
startup, feeling the high stakes and having a lot riding on how well you and 
your team match the current of the changing market. Live it. Enjoy it.1 
                                                 
1 Find more resources on startups and business at the companion website for this book: 
http://startup-insider.net. 

        
I 
Index 
Symbols and 
Numbers 
80/20 rule, 133–134 
A 
actions, specific intention for, 36–37 
active iteration, 43–46 
agility 
  preserving, 54–55 
  vs. process, tension system, 139 
always asking, 134–135 
analysis, vs. quick decision-making, 
140–141 
attractive business, for selling, 166–
167 
 
B 
basics win ball games, 27–28 
bell curve, 153–155 
big boss, 12–13 
bootstrap mentality, of entrepreneurs, 
19–21 
bozo factor, 74–79 
  positional differentiation, 76–77 
  structural differentiation, 77–79 
brand sacrifice, 128–129 
business 
  defined, 7 
  entrepreneurs 
    bootstrap mentality of, 19–
21 
    concentrated effort, 15–16 
    connecting ideas with 
customers, 5–6 
    defining business, 7 
    vs. employees, 8–9 
    guiding vision for, 17–19 
    impact on personal life, 21–
26 
    intrinsic motivation needed, 
16 
    kinds of work, 11–14 
    launch strategies, 9–11 
    making people care, 6–7 
    and resonance, 1–4 
  exiting, 163–176 
    and due diligence, 170–171 
    earn-out agreements, 171–
172 
    emotional aspect, 172–173 
    and front man, 168 
    handling employees during 
transition, 174 
    vs. operating, 175 
    preparing from start, 165 
    and relationships, 167 

Index 
 
178 
    retirement is overrated, 
176 
    selling, 166–170, 173–174 
  vs. hobby, 65 
  selling 
    evaluating offers, 173–174 
    getting people on your 
side, 168–170 
    making business attractive, 
166–167 
    reasons for, 166 
 
C 
changing perspective, 156–157 
chunking 
  down, 156–157 
  up, 156 
clients, diversifying, 33 
climbing mountains, 87–88 
communication, 119–130 
  brand sacrifice, 128–129 
  context markers, 129–130 
  and experts, establishing 
context, 127–128 
  frequency and duration of, 126–
127 
  "I don't know" is powerful 
statement, 122 
  multiple layers of, 120–121 
  never assume, 121–122 
  with pen and paper, 124–125 
  repetition, 119–120 
  Valerie example, 122–124 
complaints, from customers, 56–58 
complexity of world, 132–133 
constraints, triple, 144–147 
  quality plus features, 146 
  quality plus speed plus features, 
146–147 
  speed plus features, 145 
  speed plus quality, 145 
context markers, 129–130 
contracts, using, 46–49 
core lessons, 27–59 
  active iteration, 43–46 
  basics win ball games, 27–28 
  controlling money, 50–52 
  customer complaints are like 
gold, 56–58 
  delegating, 38–42 
    self-determining level, 41–
42 
    self-regulating level, 41 
  determining market demand, 
37–38 
  diversify, 31–33 
    distribution channels, 32 
    key employees, 32 
    large clients, 33 
    multiple lead sources, 32–
33 
    redundancy, 31–32 
  dollar exercise, 58–59 
  hope for best, plan for worst, 
52–54 
  intellectual property is 
important, 49–50 
  mistakes are inevitable, 55–56 
  more money will be needed, 42–
43 
  no partial credit, 28–31 
  preserve agility, 54–55 
  specific intention, 33–37 
    for actions, 36–37 
    for investment decisions, 
34–36 
  using contracts, 46–49 
CPA, extended team, 116–117 
customers 
  complaints from, 56–58 
  connecting ideas with, 5–6 
  getting to know, 80–81 
 
D 
delegating, 38–42 
  self-determining level, 41–42 
  self-regulating level, 41 
distribution channels, diversifying, 32 

Index 
 
179 
diversifying, 31–33 
  distribution channels, 32 
  key employees, 32 
  large clients, 33 
  multiple lead sources, 32–33 
  redundancy, 31–32 
dollar exercise, 58–59 
domain knowledge, 161–162 
drama, enjoying, 162 
due diligence, when exiting business, 
170–171 
duration, of communication, 126–127 
 
E 
earn-out agreements, 171–172 
emotional aspect, of exiting business, 
172–173 
employees 
  diversifying, 32 
  vs. entrepreneurs, 8–9 
  friends as, 106–108 
  handling during transition, 174 
  managing differently, 105–106 
  for team, 101–102, 110–111 
  that are motivated, 112–113 
entrepreneurs 
  bootstrap mentality of, 19–21 
  concentrated effort, 15–16 
  connecting ideas with 
customers, 5–6 
  defining business, 7 
  vs. employees, 8–9 
  guiding vision for, 17–19 
  impact on personal life, 21–26 
    financial, 21–22 
    health, 25 
    life on hold, 22 
    resources, 25–26 
    time involved, 23–25 
  intrinsic motivation needed, 16 
  kinds of work, 11–14 
    big boss, 12–13 
    impresario grande, 13–14 
    laborer, 11 
    like a boss, 12 
  launch strategies, 9–11 
    joining party, 10–11 
    jumping in, 10 
    soft launch, 9–10 
  making people care, 6–7 
  and resonance, 1–4 
    compelling, 3 
    controlable, 3–4 
    creating something new, 2 
    scalable, 3 
examples 
  leading by, 111–112 
  pizza example, 18–19 
  Valerie example, 122–124 
  World Cities Database example, 
93–94 
exchanging information, 119–130 
  brand sacrifice, 128–129 
  context markers, 129–130 
  and experts, establishing 
context, 127–128 
  frequency and duration of, 126–
127 
  "I don't know" is powerful 
statement, 122 
  multiple layers of, 120–121 
  never assume, 121–122 
  with pen and paper, 124–125 
  repetition, 119–120 
  Valerie example, 122–124 
exiting business, 163–176 
  and due diligence, 170–171 
  earn-out agreements, 171–172 
  emotional aspect, 172–173 
  and front man, 168 
  handling employees during 
transition, 174 
  vs. operating, 175 
  preparing from start, 165 
  and relationships, 167 
  retirement is overrated, 176 
  selling 
    evaluating offers, 173–174 
    getting people on your 
side, 168–170 

Index 
180 
    making business attractive, 
166–167 
    reasons for, 166 
experts, communicating with, 127–
128 
extended team, 113–118 
  CPA, 116–117 
  lawyers, 114–116 
  vendors, 117–118 
F, G 
features 
  plus quality, 146 
  plus speed, 145 
financial, impact on personal life, 21–
22 
flail, 152–153 
focus, vs. opportunity, 138–139 
frequency, of communication, 126–
127 
friends 
  as employees, 106–108 
  as partners, 108–110 
front man, when exiting business, 168 
H 
health, impact on personal life, 25 
hobby, vs. business, 65 
hope for best, plan for worst, 52–54 
I 
"I don't know", is powerful statement, 
122 
ideas, connecting with customers, 5–6 
if you build it, they will come, 82–83 
image counts, 81–82 
impresario grande, 13–14 
information, exchanging, 119–130 
  brand sacrifice, 128–129 
  context markers, 129–130 
  and experts, establishing 
context, 127–128 
  frequency and duration of, 126–
127 
  "I don't know" is powerful 
statement, 122 
  multiple layers of, 120–121 
  never assume, 121–122 
  with pen and paper, 124–125 
  repetition, 119–120 
  Valerie example, 122–124 
intellectual property, importance of, 
49–50 
internet, is not magic, 70–73 
intrinsic motivation, 16 
investment decisions, specific 
intention for, 34–36 
J 
joining party, launch strategies, 10–11 
jumping, in launch strategies, 10 
K 
know that you don't know, 161 
L 
laborer, 11 
launch strategies, 9–11 
  joining party, 10–11 
  jumping in, 10 
  soft launch, 9–10 
lawyers, 114–116 
lead sources, diversifying, 32–33 
leading, by example, 111–112 
lessons, 27–59 

Index 
 
181 
  active iteration, 43–46 
  basics win ball games, 27–28 
  controlling money, 50–52 
  customer complaints are like 
gold, 56–58 
  delegating, 38–42 
    self-determining level, 41–
42 
    self-regulating level, 41 
  determining market demand, 
37–38 
  diversify, 31–33 
    distribution channels, 32 
    key employees, 32 
    large clients, 33 
    multiple lead sources, 32–
33 
    redundancy, 31–32 
  dollar exercise, 58–59 
  hope for best, plan for worst, 
52–54 
  intellectual property is 
important, 49–50 
  mistakes are inevitable, 55–56 
  more money will be needed, 42–
43 
  no partial credit, 28–31 
  preserve agility, 54–55 
  specific intention, 33–37 
    for actions, 36–37 
    for investment decisions, 
34–36 
  using contracts, 46–49 
life on hold, impact on personal life, 
22 
lightning-strike marketing model, 95–
96 
like a boss, 12 
 
M 
market demand, determining, 37–38 
marketing, 61–98 
  business vs. hobby, 65 
  choosing product, 62–65 
    advantages of, 62–63 
    goals of, 63–64 
    point of entry for, 64–65 
  climbing mountain, 87–88 
  if you build it, they will come, 
82–83 
  image counts, 81–82 
  internet is not magic, 70–73 
  knowing customer, 80–81 
  lightning-strike marketing model, 
95–96 
  marketing mix, 90–93 
  measuring performance, 97–98 
  never ask water to climb ladder, 
85–86 
  parity products, and bozo factor, 
74–79 
  precious slice, 67–69 
  and pricing, 93–94 
  radicalize, 83–84 
  standing out, 69–70 
  using statistics, 89–90 
  whale vs. eskimo analogy, 65–67 
mistakes, 55–56 
money 
  controlling, 50–52 
  more will be needed, 42–43 
motivation, intrinsic, 16 
multiple layers, of communication, 
120–121 
 
N 
never ask water to climb ladder, 85–
86 
never assume, 121–122 
no partial credit, 28–31 
 
O 
offers, evaluating when selling, 173–
174 
on hold, life, 22 

Index 
 
182 
operating business, vs. selling, 175 
opportunity, vs. focus, tension system, 
138–139 
 
P 
parity products, and bozo factor, 74–
79 
  positional differentiation, 76–77 
  structural differentiation, 77–79 
partners, friends as, 108–110 
pen and paper, communicating with, 
124–125 
perfection, vs. progress, tension 
system, 141–143 
performance, measuring, 97–98 
personal life, impact on, 21–26 
  financial, 21–22 
  health, 25 
  life on hold, 22 
  resources, 25–26 
  time involved, 23–25 
perspective, changing, 156–157 
  chunking down, 156–157 
  chunking up, 156 
pizza example, 18–19 
plans, changing early, 53–54 
point of entry, for products, 64–65 
positional differentiation, 76–77 
positive frame, 147–148 
potential, 149–150 
precious slice, 67–69 
pricing, World Cities Database 
example, 93–94 
process, vs. agility, 139 
products, marketing 
  advantages of, 62–63 
  goals of, 63–64 
  point of entry for, 64–65 
progress, vs. perfection, 141–143 
psychological contract, 102–105 
 
Q 
quality 
  plus features, 146 
  plus speed, 146–147 
quick decision-making, vs. analysis, 
140–141 
 
R 
radicalize, 83–84 
ready-fire-aim method, 135–136 
reasons, for selling business, 166 
redundancy, 31–32 
relationships, when exiting business, 
167 
repetition, 119–120 
resonance, and entrepreneurs, 1–4 
  compelling, 3 
  controlable, 3–4 
  creating something new, 2 
  scalable, 3 
resources, impact on personal life, 
25–26 
retirement, 176 
 
S 
self-determining level, 41–42 
self-regulating level, 41 
selling business 
  evaluating offers, 173–174 
  getting people on your side, 
168–170 
  making business attractive, 166–
167 
  reasons for, 166 
soft launch, launch strategies, 9–10 
specific intention, 33–37 
  for actions, 36–37 

Index 
 
183 
  for investment decisions, 34–36 
speed 
  plus features, 145 
  plus quality, 146–147 
standing out, 69–70 
statistics, and marketing, 89–90 
strategies, 131–162 
  80/20 rule, 133–134 
  always asking, 134–135 
  bell curve, 153–155 
  changing perspective, 156–157 
    chunking down, 156–157 
    chunking up, 156 
  complexity of world, 132–133 
  domain knowledge, 161–162 
  enjoy the drama, 162 
  flail, 152–153 
  know that you don't know, 161 
  launch, 9–11 
    joining party, 10–11 
    jumping in, 10 
    soft launch, 9–10 
  marketing, 61–98 
    business vs. hobby, 65 
    choosing product, 62–65 
    climbing mountain, 87–88 
    if you build it, they will 
come, 82–83 
    image counts, 81–82 
    internet is not magic, 70–
73 
    knowing customer, 80–81 
    lightning-strike marketing 
model, 95–96 
    marketing mix, 90–93 
    measuring performance, 
97–98 
    never ask water to climb 
ladder, 85–86 
    parity products, and bozo 
factor, 74–79 
    precious slice, 67–69 
    and pricing, 93–94 
    radicalize, 83–84 
    standing out, 69–70 
    using statistics, 89–90 
    whale vs. eskimo analogy, 
65–67 
  positive frame, 147–148 
  potential, 149–150 
  ready-fire-aim method, 135–136 
  systems thinking, 157–161 
  tension system, 137–143 
    analysis vs. quick decision-
making, 140–141 
    focus vs. opportunity, 138–
139 
    perfection vs. progress, 
141–143 
    process vs. agility, 139 
  think big, 151–152 
  triple constraint, 144–147 
    quality plus features, 146 
    quality plus speed plus 
features, 146–147 
    speed plus features, 145 
    speed plus quality, 145 
structural differentiation, 77–79 
success, determined by team, 100–
101 
systems thinking, 157–161 
 
T, U 
teams, 99–118 
  best employees for, 101–102, 
110–111 
  extended team, 113–118 
    CPA, 116–117 
    lawyers, 114–116 
    vendors, 117–118 
  friends 
    as employees, 106–108 
    as partners, 108–110 
  leading by example, 111–112 
  managing employees differently, 
105–106 
  motivated employees for, 112–
113 
  psychological contract, 102–105 
  success determined by, 100–101 

Index 
 
184 
tension system, 137–143 
  analysis vs. quick decision-
making, 140–141 
  focus vs. opportunity, 138–139 
  perfection vs. progress, 141–143 
  process vs. agility, 139 
thinking big, 151–152 
time, impact on personal life, 23–25 
triple constraint, 144–147 
  quality plus features, 146 
  quality plus speed plus features, 
146–147 
  speed plus features, 145 
  speed plus quality, 145 
V 
Valerie example, 122–124 
vendors, extended team, 117–118 
vision, for entrepreneurs, 17–19 
 
W, X, Y, Z 
whale vs. eskimo analogy, 65–67 
World Cities Database example, 
93–94 
 

 
STARTUP 
AN INSIDER’S GUIDE TO LAUNCHING AND 
RUNNING A BUSINESS 
 
 
 
KEVIN READY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Startup: An Insider’s Guide to Launching and Running a Business 
Copyright © 2011 by Kevin Ready 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the 
whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, 
reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms 
or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief 
excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied 
specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for 
exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or parts 
thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher's 
location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from 
Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright 
Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright 
Law. 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-4218-5 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-4220-8 
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a 
trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we 
use the names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the 
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar 
terms, even if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of 
opinion as to whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights. 
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at 
the date of publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can 
accept any legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The 
publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material 
contained herein. 
President and Publisher: Paul Manning 
Lead Editor: Jeff Olson 
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, 
Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, 
Michelle Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey 
Pepper,  Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan 
Spearing, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh 
Editorial Assistant: Rita Fernando 
Copy Editor: Damon Larson 
Compositor: Apress Production 
Indexer: BIM Indexing & Proofreading Services 
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko 
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New 
York, 233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax 
(201) 348-4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com.  
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit 
www.apress.com.  
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or 
promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For 
more information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at 
www.apress.com/bulk-sales.

 
 
 
 
 
TO KAZUKO, CONNOR, MITCHEL, MAE, AND 
RAYMOND 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
v
About the Author 
Kevin Ready loves building things and helping people to build things. Over 
the last 20 years, he has built, run, consulted for, and advised numerous 
startups and businesses. For him, there is nothing more interesting than 
understanding business models and the problems that entrepreneurs come 
up against in their markets. As he says often, “It is my work and my play. I 
never get tired of it.” 
Born into a engineering family, Ready started his first company right out of 
college. While the venture was a success, he saw the limitations to scaling 
the business. As the Internet era took shape, he joined the “tech wave” 
through the late 1990s, starting several online businesses. Years before 
Facebook, he was a founder of a social networking site with nearly one 
million users. Later, he and a partner spun off and sold a digital mapping 
business, then moved on to become an online software and media retail 
business that merged with a larger rival in 2008. That same year, he became 
a partner at an online real estate business that was in crisis mode. By 
applying the lessons presented in this book, he helped turn the business 
around. Just 13 months later, it was acquired by a company in the 
newspaper industry. That business—where he still works as technical 
director and strategist—now brings in millions of dollars of profit per year 
and touches over 4 million consumers monthly. 
In addition to his entrepreneurial ventures, he has worked in engineering 
positions at Dell Computer and Toshiba, and as an executive at Classified 
Ventures, LLC. 
 

 
vi
Acknowledgments 
Many thanks to those people that have inspired my work as an entrepre-
neur, and to those who freely gave of their time and knowledge to assist me 
in putting this book together. 
I especially appreciate the time I spent with my friend Joseph Wright, his 
father Wayne Wright, Sr., and their family during my teenage years. Observ-
ing this wonderfully entrepreneurial family, I decided that business building 
was a lifestyle choice worth emulating. 
Special thanks to Dr. Fernando Macias, Dr. Ken Price, George Mora, and 
Daniel Castro, for their substantial investments of time to assist me with 
this manuscript. 
Also great thanks to Jeff Olson, my editor from Apress. Your persistence 
and patience are the difference that made the difference. 
 
 
 
 

P R E F A C E 
1 
Preface 
What we do is a function of what we know, and what we have experienced 
and come to understand. As entrepreneurs, we encounter myriad difficult, 
novel, and challenging situations that normal people will never be faced with, 
and we build up a library of such experiences over time. In the entrepreneurial 
world, this is sometimes aptly described as scar tissue, and it is with some level 
of respect and admiration that we say that somebody has a lot of it. Some of 
these experiences and lessons stand out above the others and grow to serve 
as a basis for the entrepreneur’s decision-making ever after. This book is about 
scar tissue, about lessons learned, and about how we can use those lessons to 
make business less painful, less difficult, and more profitable. 
A great interest of mine is helping motivated people to start their own busi-
nesses. I especially enjoy working with people who are absolutely excellent at 
something. These are folks that have an area of excellence that they have de-
veloped over many years. They have realized that they could provide greater 
value for themselves and their families if they focus all of their time and energy 
on exercising that area of excellence as a business, in the form of a startup. 
This is a great leap, and it is one of the most exciting moves you can make. 
What most people find, however, is that their area of excellence alone is not 
enough to carry them through the challenge of wrapping a business around it. 
Their core skill set (programming, DNA analysis, etc.) needs to be mated with 
new business skills to make it all work.  
As an example, my friend John (who is a highly skilled PhD microbiologist) re-
cently started his own genetics company. He knows DNA sequencing up and 
down; he has been doing it for years. It was easy for him to imagine leaving the 
university research environment and applying his skills for his own customers. 
It was so easy to imagine, in fact, that John actually quit his university research 

Preface 
viii 
job, took out a business loan, bought a lab full of equipment, and is now on his 
own—and is realizing at a visceral level that he must quickly become excellent 
at a long list of entrepreneurial skills that he has never thought about before. 
As of the writing of this preface, he has all of the trappings of a business, ex-
cept he has no customers yet! This book is for John, and any other people with 
a robust competency and excellence in their specialties who want to make a 
business out of it.  
I have spent a lot of time helping people like John. In consulting with them, my 
primary objective is to help them reframe their understanding in some very 
particular ways. A reframe is a change in the aggregate understanding we have 
of a situation or process—a change in the perspective we have on it. An 
expert and a novice can look at the same situation and come to very different 
conclusions about what it means. This is true for everything that we do in life. 
In business, there are a few fundamental, overarching, and important reframes 
that, once understood, empower you to perform at a higher level—with more 
efficiency and a greater capability for your business to survive. This book is, at 
its core, a compendium of critical reframes for the entrepreneur.  
So How Did I Become an Entrepreneur? 
After years of education, every college graduate is faced with the same ques-
tion: “What do I want to do?” When I was a nearing the end of college, I knew 
that I wanted to be an entrepreneur. I had grown up in an engineering family. I 
studied engineering in school and I wanted to build a tech business, but I did 
not want to go to business school to learn how. My decision was to do a “real-
world” MBA program of my own construction—a starter business. I would 
find a business that had a low barrier to entry (since I did not have any money) 
and would leverage whatever skills I had. I wanted to construct a real-life 
laboratory that would expose me to the ins and outs of the full-time, man-in-
charge entrepreneurial experience. I called this plan that I was setting up for 
myself “Mailroom to the Board Room.” I wanted to start at the lowest and 
most basic form of work possible, and build for myself a set of experiences in 
which I could learn the lessons needed to grow from the simplest kind of 
business to running multi-million-dollar corporations.  
I started with a $5,000 loan and a simple desire to start my own business. Two 
decades later, I have been through three successful corporate transactions—
the latest of which is now reaching nearly 5 million customers per month.  

Startup 
ix
Along the way I did the following: 
• 
Opened  a construction business, learning how to run a 
startup the hard way: by doing it. 
• 
Moved on to building an Internet services company, and 
building our own data center from scratch. 
• 
Launched a social networking business with nearly 1 mil-
lion users, years before Facebook. 
• 
Created a digital mapping data company, earned a portfolio 
of Fortune 500 customers, and sold the business to private 
equity investors. 
• 
Was a partner in an online retail business, eventually merg-
ing with a larger competitor. 
• 
Joined a 50-person startup company—with the challenging 
objective to turn it around and get it acquired. In just one 
year we had rebuilt the brand and earned an acquisition by 
a larger competitor. We had phenomenal growth, and 
soon became the fourth-largest apartment real estate web 
site in the United States. 
• 
Consulted for and helped entrepreneurs with startups in 
countries all over the world. 
This book shares some of what I have learned along the way. 
How to Read This Book 
This book is organized into chapters that cover the most important building 
blocks of any startup: Setting the Stage, Core Lessons, Marketing, Building a 
Team, Communication Matters, Strategic Thinking, and Exiting Your Business. 
The chapters themselves are composed of individual, discrete lessons that 
stand alone and can be read independent of the other parts of the chapter. 
Several of my favorite books follow this standalone format, and I have followed 
that paradigm here. The compact size of each section is deliberate in that each 
is a distillation of one or two standalone concepts from my entrepreneurial 
experience. I believe that your ability to understand and remember these ideas 

Preface 
x 
is best supported by getting to the point quickly, and keeping the volume of 
text to a minimum. 
Each subsection has a title that is intended to support your recall of the 
subject—a mnemonic key to assist your memory. In my businesses and my 
consulting with entrepreneurs, these are phrases or keywords that I frequently 
teach and use as labels for the important ideas within.  
If you’re a new or aspiring entrepreneur, I recommend reading the book from 
the beginning, and working your way through the chapters in order. If you’re 
an experienced entrepreneur, this book can be read straight through or by 
sections in random order without loss of congruence.  
Come Fly with Me 
I was recently fortunate enough to be slicing a brilliant blue summer sky over 
Napa Valley at the controls of a sleek two-person glider. The flight instructor 
in the back seat gave me a great piece of advice when I asked how to gain alti-
tude. She said, “Look for the biggest birds, and follow them.” You see, large 
birds gain altitude by riding thermals (not flapping). For them, the air up there 
is their natural environment, and they know how to make the most of it. As a 
(mostly) land-bound mammal, I didn’t have much idea of how to get what I 
wanted in that aerial environment. Thermals are completely invisible—and 
startling when you come upon them, because they whack you like a tornado 
looking for a double-wide. Spotting an upwardly spiraling hawk and following 
its lead with a similar flight pattern was a great strategy to begin to understand 
the mostly invisible, rapidly changing, and complex environment I was in.  
This is a great strategy for aspiring entrepreneurs as well: find people riding the 
currents in the way you’d like to and then do what they do. Better yet, sit 
down with that bird and share a bottle of bourbon—get him to open up and fill 
you in on some of his flying secrets. That in a way describes this book: it is an 
intimate conversation, where anything goes, with the end goal of helping you 
to understand the invisible inside experience of being an entrepreneur. If you 
want to learn how to identify opportunities, fluently interact with markets, and 
grow a business of your own, then this book can help.  
Let’s do some flying together. 
Kevin Ready  
http://kevinready.com 
December 2011  

