Startup 
Essentials 
A Curated Collection of Chapters from 
the O'Reilly Business Library
FREE 
DOWNLOAD

Startup Essentials 
A Curated Collection of Chapters 
from the O’Reilly Business Library 
 
If you’re considering a software or hardware startup venture, this 
collection provides valuable excerpts from four existing and 
forthcoming O’Reilly books on the subject. Sample chapters from Hello, 
Startup, Hot Seat, The Hardware Startup, and Managing Startups feature 
stories, case studies, and salient advice from companies and experts 
that have blazed trails from successful launch to market acceptance.  
 
These four books also take you through the many dilemmas and points 
of failure possible with product development, funding, and startup 
management along the way. You’ll dive into sample chapters from: 
 
 Hello, Startup—the tutorial for building products, technologies, and 
teams, based on interviews with programmers from successful 
startups. Featured chapter: “Why Startups.” 
 Hot Seat: The Startup CEO Guidebook—four-time founder/CEO Dan 
Shapiro tells stories of startups that have survived and thrived by the 
advice in this book. Featured chapter: “The Cofounder Dilemma.” 
 The Hardware Startup—two-dozen case studies of real-world 
startups illustrate successes and failures at every stage of the 
process. Featured chapters: “Knowing Your Market” and “Branding.” 
  Managing Startups—the best posts from many blogs on technology 
startup management, compiled by Harvard Business School 
Professor Tom Eisenmann. Featured chapter: “Why I Left Consulting 
and Joined a Startup.” 
 

 
Hello, Startup 
A Programmer’s Guide to Building Products,  
Technologies, and Teams 
Available in Early Release 
Chapter 1. Why Startups 
 
Hot Seat  
The Startup CEO Guidebook 
Available Now  
Chapter 2. The Cofounder Dilemma 
 
The Hardware Startup 
Building Your Product, Business, and Brand 
Available Now 
Chapter 3. Knowing Your Market 
Chapter 4. Branding 
 
Managing Startups 
Best Blog Posts 
Available Now 
Chapter 75. Why I Left Consulting and Joined a Startup 
 
 
 


Why Startups
The age of the tech startup
About 540M years ago something amazing happened on planet Earth: life
forms began to multiply, leading to what is known as the “Cambrian explo-
sion”. Until then sponges and other simple creatures had the planet largely
to themselves, but within a few million years the animal kingdom became
much more varied. […] Something similar is now happening in the virtual
realm: an entrepreneurial explosion. Digital startups are bubbling up in an
astonishing variety of services and products, penetrating every nook and
cranny of the economy. They are reshaping entire industries and even
changing the very notion of the firm.
— THE ECONOMIST [A CAMBRIAN MOMENT 2014]
At this very moment, somewhere in the world, two programmers are sitting in a
garage and creating our future, one line of code at a time. We are in the era of the
high tech startup. Silicon Valley is leading the way, but every major city, from
Boulder to London to Tel Aviv to Singapore, is trying to build its own startup
hub. More than two thirds of young adults around the world are thinking of
becoming entrepreneurs [Telefónica Global Millenial Survey 2014] and if they do,
they will have access to hundreds of accelerators, incubators, and more than $50
billion of angel and venture capital funding per year [Hollas 2011].
The startup revolution is here and in this chapter, I’ll explain why that’s
something you’ll want to pay attention to (reading this book is a good start!). I’ll
talk about some of the things that make startups great and why you should con-
sider joining one, or even starting your own. To keep the discussion honest, I’ll
also confess to the things that make startups terrible and why they are not for
25
| 1

everyone. But first, I’ll define what I mean by “tech startup” in this book, as the
phrase can mean different things to different people.
What is a tech startup?
This book is primarily focused on tech startups. The “tech” part is easy to explain.
If your company’s business primarily depends on building technology—whether
that technology is the actual product you sell or if the technology is used to sell
some other product—you’re a tech company; if you primarily use technologies
that already exist, then you’re not. For example, GitHub is a tech company since
they build and sell technology that makes it easier for programmers to collabo-
rate. Likewise, TripAdvisor is a tech company: they sell travel products (e.g. hotel
rooms, vacation packages, flights), but to make that possible, most of the work is
building technology such as hotel pages, user accounts, review storage, photo
storage, and search features. A local restaurant is not a tech company, even if that
restaurant has a fancy website and even if that website is written in Flash and
auto-plays music. That’s because the restaurant’s primary activity as a business is
to create food and a great atmosphere for diners, and not technology.
So that takes care of the word “tech”, but what about the word “startup”? The
prototypical startup is a week old company with two developers in a garage. But
the word “startup” is sometimes also used to describe much bigger and older
companies. For example, the Wall Street Journal [Phillips 2014b] uses “startup”
to refer to:
• SnapChat: $10 billion valuation, 2 years old, 20+ employees.
• Uber: $42 billion valuation, 5 years old, 550+ employees.
• SpaceX: $4.8 billion valuation, 12 years old, 3,000+ employees.
So it doesn’t seem like a startup is defined by how much it’s worth (from $0
to $42 billion), how old it is (from 1 week old to 12 years old), or how many
employees it has (from 3 to 3,000). So what is a startup? To answer this question,
let’s look at a few definitions from well known entrepreneurs and investors. We’ll
start with Eric Ries:
A startup is a human institution designed to create a new product or ser-
vice under conditions of extreme uncertainty.
— ERIC RIES, THE LEAN STARTUP [RIES 2011A, 27]
26 | HELLO, STARTUP

Creating products and services makes sense, and startups definitely face lots
of uncertainty, but so do most local restaurants, which face failure rates similar
to most startups [Miller 2007]). You generally wouldn’t call the local pizzeria a
startup, so we need more. Let’s see what Paul Graham has to say:
A startup is a company designed to grow fast. Being newly founded does
not in itself make a company a startup. Nor is it necessary for a startup to
work on technology, or take venture funding, or have some sort of “exit.”
The only essential thing is growth. Everything else we associate with start-
ups follows from growth.
— PAUL GRAHAM, CO-FOUNDER OF Y COMBINATOR [GRAHAM 2012B]
In addition to uncertainty, you now have another essential ingredient for a
startup: massive growth. The goal of a local pizzeria usually isn’t massive growth,
but to get enough customers every night for the owner to make a reasonable
income, so it’s not a startup. On the other hand, even though the food delivery
company SpoonRocket has been profitable since 2013 [Sciacca 2013], it was
designed for growth and continues to raise more money, spread to new cities,
and get new customers. So SpoonRocket is a startup, but will it be a startup for-
ever, or does it become a “real company” at some point? To answer that question,
let’s turn to Steve Blank and Bob Dorf:
A startup is a temporary organization designed to search for a repeatable
and scalable business model. Within this definition, a startup can be a new
venture or it can be a new division or business unit in an existing company.
— STEVE BLANK AND BOB DORF, THE STARTUP OWNER’S MANUAL
[BLANK DORF 2014]
An established business has a product that has been proven to work in the
market, so the focus is on scaling, optimizing, and efficient execution. A startup
has no idea what product will work in the market, so the company is primarily
focused on experimentation and trial and error—on searching for a repeatable
and scalable business model. In other words, the final ingredient of startups is
that they run in a search mode. Now that we have all the ingredients, let’s put
them together. A “tech startup” is an organization with the following characteris-
tics:
WHY STARTUPS | 27

1. Product: technology.
2. Environment: extremely uncertain.
3. Goal: massive growth.
4. Mode of operation: search.
For the purposes of this book, I’m not concerned with the age of the organi-
zation, how many employees it has, what industry it’s in, or how much money it
makes. The material in this book will apply to a brand new 3 person company or
a new venture within an established 3,000 person company, as long as you’re
building technology, your environment is constantly changing, your primary goal
is growth, and you’re running in a search mode. This might not be the way most
people think of the word “startup”, but I’m not aware of any other word or phrase
that captures these ideas better. I briefly considered calling the book Hello, Orga-
nization Designed for Massive Growth that is Searching for a Repeatable Business
Model and Building Technology in an Extremely Uncertain Environment—but Hello,
Startup sounded a bit sexier, so I’ll stick with “startup”.
Why you should work at a startup
So now that you know what a tech startup is, why all the fuss? What makes them
so great? There are three main reasons you should consider working at, or even
starting, a tech startup: more opportunity, more ownership, and more fun.
MORE OPPORTUNITY
Here’s a fun fact: you are a cyborg. Over time, your mind and body have been
enhanced with artificial components and technology. It happened so gradually
that you probably didn’t even notice, but if you—and all of your augmentations—
were sent a few thousand years back in time, compared to the purely organic
beings back then, you would have superpowers. There are the obvious physical
enhancements that are possible due to modern medicine, such as glasses, con-
tacts, hearing aids, fillings, braces, dentures, cardiac pacemakers, heart valve
replacements, hip replacements, artificial hearts, 3d printed ears, hair implants,
breast implants, skin grafts, titanium bones, and prosthetic limbs. But all of that
barely scratches the surface of how intertwined you are with technology.
For example, this book, and more generally, writing, are technologies that
augment the abilities of your mind. You can extend your memory by “storing”
28 | HELLO, STARTUP

words on paper. You can extend your computational abilities by working through
math problems, step by step, on a whiteboard. You can extend your ability to
communicate by sending someone a letter, email, or text message. And every
time you draw a diagram, chart, table, timeline, or blueprint, you are, quite liter-
ally, using writing to enhance your ability to think [Victor 2014].
These days, you do much of your thinking in a digital medium. You might
be reading a digital version of this book on a tablet or an e-reader and you proba-
bly purchased it in an online bookstore (e.g. O’Reilly, Amazon, iTunes). You
might get your news from Twitter and Reddit, put your resume on LinkedIn, file
your taxes using Turbotax, get your entertainment from Youtube and Netflix, and
stay in touch with your friends and family via GMail and Facebook. Nearby, in
your pocket, purse, or on a desk, you probably have a smartphone. You use it to
augment your communication (e.g. phone calls, text messages), your memory
(e.g. calendar reminders, alarm, photos), your sense of direction (e.g. GPS, Goo-
gle Maps, TripAdvisor), your entertainment (e.g. music, videos), and your knowl-
edge (e.g. Google, Siri, Yelp, Stocks, Weather). The phone is a part of you. You
carry it with you wherever you go, you sleep next to it, you check it dozens of
times per day, and you rely on it constantly. In fact, you probably feel lost and
nervous without it.
Now head outside. Did you walk past a car, bus, or train? These marvels of
technology, which are designed on computers and built in factories full of robots,
enhance your ability to travel vast distances in a short amount of time. Now, look
up. Somewhere above you, an airplane may pass by, powering its way across the
sky using jet engines, radio, and auto-pilot. Somewhere above that, satellites and
space stations are orbiting the earth, taking pictures, measuring the weather, and
routing phone calls.
But this is only the beginning. Soon, you’ll be wearing technology (e.g. Apple
Watch, Google Glass, Jawbone Up), locking your doors with your phone (e.g.
August Smart Lock, Lockitron, Goji), using your phone to monitor and diagnose
diseases (e.g. spot heart attacks early by tracking blood pressure and performing
an electrocardiogram straight from your phone [Topol 2015]), relying on robots
instead of people for a wide variety of tasks (e.g. replacing cleaning staff with the
Roomba Vacuum Robot, replacing FedEx with Amazon’s Drone Delivery), using
“replicators” to create physical objects (e.g. printing DNA [Lee 2014] at home or
emailing a wrench to outer space[LeTrent 2014]), traveling in robot-controlled
vehicles (e.g. a self-driving car from Google or Tesla), and traveling to outer space
(e.g. via Virgin Galactic or SpaceX).
WHY STARTUPS | 29

What do all of these technologies have in common? They all rely on software.
In other words, as Marc Andreessen predicted in 2011, “software is eating the
world” [Andreessen 2011]. As technology becomes more and more ubiquitous,
software companies will take over more and more industries. For example, Ama-
zon dominates the book industry, controlling 41% of all new book purchases and
65% of all online book purchases [Milliot 2014]. In the US entertainment indus-
try, 50% of households now use Netflix, Hulu, or Amazon Prime [Leichtman
Research Group 2014] and YouTube reaches more 18-34 year olds than any cable
network [YouTube Statistics 2014]. In the travel space, Airbnb has more than 1
million homes listed and is adding 20,000 more per week. Compare that to the
InterContinental Hotels Group, which is one of the largest hotel companies in
the world (they own the Holiday Inn and InterContinental chains) and has just
700,000 rooms [Griswold 2014]. In the communications industry, WhatsApp
users send 7.2 trillion messages per year, compared to 7.5 trillion text messages
per year across the entire global telecommunications industry [Evans 2014], and
Skype users make over 200 billion minutes of international calls per year, which
is already 40% the size of, and growing 50% faster than, the global telecommuni-
cations industry [Gara 2014]. Software companies are becoming dominant in
many other industries too, such as LinkedIn in the recruiting industry, Paypal,
Square, and Stripe in payments, Uber and Lyft in transportation, Spotify and
Pandora in music, and so on.
The biggest change of all is coming from mobile. The smartphone takes all
the software that changes how you live and puts it into a package that includes a
fast CPU, lots of memory and storage, unparalleled connectivity (3G, LTE, Wifi,
Bluetooth, NFC, GPS), a plethora of sensors (microphone, camera, accelerome-
ter, fingerprint, gyroscope, barometer, proximity), a touch screen, and speakers.
And this package is so small and useful that you have it with you at all times and
in all places. As a result, mobile has become one of the fastest growing technolo-
gies in human history (see Figure 1-1).
30 | HELLO, STARTUP

Figure 1-1. Number of years to reach 80% coverage for select technology. Chart courtesy of [Jack
and Suri 2010], based on data from the World Bank.
Figure 1-2. Putting Global Mobile In Context. Chart courtesy of [Sharma 2012].
The numbers around mobile are staggering. As shown in Figure 1-2, far
more people on earth have access to mobile phones than TVs, bank accounts,
and even safe drinking water and toothbrushes [Hall 2011]. By 2020, 80% of the
WHY STARTUPS | 31

1 For example, Google[x] is a semi-secret branch of Google that is in permanent “search mode”, exploring
projects such as wearable technology, self-driving cars, high-altitude Wi-Fi balloons, and glucose-
monitoring contact lenses [Gertner 2014].
adults on earth will have access to a smartphone. In other words, mobile is eating
the world [Evans 2014].
Tech startups are at the head of a great deal of the software and mobile revo-
lution. This is because a revolution means an enormous amount of change, and
change is something startups are much better equipped to handle (and initiate)
than big companies. Some tech giants are responding by trying to run parts of
their organization like a startup1, but many will be unable to keep up, and start-
ups will displace them. In fact, every generation of startups is growing faster than
than the one before it, as shown in Figure 1-3. Companies like Facebook, Google,
Groupon, and Zynga grew faster in a decade than most corporations grew in the
entire 20th century [Blank Dorf 2014]. In 1958, the average tenure for a firm on
the S&P 500 index was 61 years. Today, that number is down to just 18 years
[Innosight 2012].
Figure 1-3. Months to 1 million users, based on data from [Fralic 2012].
Startups are reaching billion dollar valuations twice as fast as they did back
in 2000, [Van Grove 2014], not because of a bubble, but because it is easier to
build and grow a company than ever before. Here are some of the things that
have lowered the barrier to entry for startups:
32 | HELLO, STARTUP

2 See http://www.hello-startup.net/resources/ for a comprehensive list of service-providers, tools, and
products for startups.
Open source
Instead of having to write everything from scratch, a modern startup can
leverage the code in over 10 million open source repositories [Doll 2013].
Many of these repositories are developed, tested, and documented by a
large community of developers, which means you not only save time by
using open source, but you also get access to projects that are much larger
and higher quality than anything you would be able to build in-house. See
Chapter 5 for more info on open source and picking a tech stack.
Services
Startups can also leverage hundreds of services that make it dramatically
easier and faster to get up and running. For example, instead of building
your own data center, you can use AWS, DigitalOcean, or Rackspace.
Instead of building your own monitoring software, you can use New Relic,
KISSMetrics, or MixPanel. Instead of building your own email service, you
can use Amazon SES, MailChimp, or SendGrid. And if you need a logo,
you can use DesignCrowd; if you need legal services, you can use Rocket-
Lawyer; if you need to accept payments, you can use Stripe; if you have to
manage customer data, you can use Salesforce; and if you need to provide
customer support, you can use Zendesk.2
Distribution
Distribution is easier than ever before, both in terms of marketing your
product and in terms of being able to run a distributed company with
employees all over the world. For marketing, due to the ubiquity of technol-
ogy, the Internet, and mobile phones, you have instant access to more peo-
ple than ever before through SEO, SEM, mobile app stores, advertising,
email, and social media channels like Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Reddit,
Hacker News, YouTube, Instagram, and Pinterest (see “Distribution” on
page  for more info). For building a distributed company, you have access
to a plethora of collaboration tools, such as GitHub, Skype, Google Hang-
outs, JIRA, Slack, HipChat, Basecamp, Asana, Trello, and many others.
WHY STARTUPS | 33

Information
These days, there is a lot more information available on how to build a suc-
cessful startup. This includes books (such as this one!), courses (the free
online Stanford course [How to Start a Startup 2014] makes an excellent
complement to this book), blogs (especially [Paul Graham’s Essays]),
meetup groups, conferences, accelerators, and incubators.
Money
Thanks to open source, services, easier distribution, and more information,
startups need far less money than ever before. And when you do need
money, you have plenty of options, including not only traditional venture
capital firms, but also angel investors (e.g. AngelList), crowdfunding (e.g.
KickStart, Indiegogo, Lending Club, Kabbage), and government funding
and incentives for startups (e.g. [Startup-Up NY] and [Singapore Startups
Government Funding and Assistance Schemes]).
All of this means that we are at a remarkable time in history. Software is tak-
ing over every industry, smartphones are changing how we live our lives, and
startups are able to reach more people in less time than ever before. In other
words, software is eating the world, mobile is eating the world, and as a result,
startups are eating the world. As a programmer, you have the unprecedented
opportunity to join this feast and touch millions of lives by joining a startup and
writing some code.
MORE OWNERSHIP
So why not write code at a big, established company? What advantages does
working at a startup offer over tech giants such as Microsoft, Cisco, or IBM? Isn’t
it better to work for a more “stable” company that has thousands of employees,
has been around for years, and provides job security?
Well, let’s talk about job security. Perhaps your parents or grandparents
worked at the same company for 50 years, climbed the career ladder, and retired
with a golden watch. You won’t have that luxury, because those types of jobs are
gone, and have been for a long time. In the US, the average person born in the
early 60’s held 11.3 jobs between the ages of 18 and 46 [BLS 2012] and this num-
ber might be on the way up, as the average person born in the early 80’s has had
an average of 6.2 jobs by age 26 [BLS 2014]. That means that the average job ten-
ure is under 3 years. And big companies don’t seem any safer than little ones.
For example, in the last few 4 years alone, Cisco laid off 6,000 employees, IBM
34 | HELLO, STARTUP

laid off 13,000 employees, Microsoft laid off 18,000 employees, and HP laid off
27,000 employees [Tolentino 2014]. Job security is dead.
One piece of advice I got when I was deciding where to go after university
was that you should think of Silicon Valley as one big company, with a
Facebook department, a Google department, and a bunch of small
startup departments. Sometimes, departments get re-orged and don’t
exist independently anymore, but all the people just join other groups. I
think this is a pretty good analogy. People move around quite frequently
between different companies here.
If you’re even a semi-competent software engineer, you don’t really
have to worry about the risk of joining a startup. You’re probably getting
paid a reasonable salary, perhaps not as much as at the biggest compa-
nies, but it’s going to be enough for you to pay your bills and loans, and to
get by. If that startup flops, you just go find another job, so it’s not really
risky.
— TRACY CHOU, SOFTWARE ENGINEER AT QUORA AND PINTEREST
[CHOU 2014]
The real risk is not losing your job because you joined a tiny startup—after
all, there is no guarantee you won’t lose your job at a big company—but the risk
of losing an opportunity. When you choose to work at one company, you’re
implicitly choosing not to work at many others. In that respect, the death of job
security might not be such a bad thing. If you stay at the same job for a long
time, you are probably missing out on better opportunities elsewhere.
At big companies, stagnation is a common problem. You end up doing the
same tasks over and over again, so you no longer feel challenged, you stop learn-
ing, and you get bored. Moreover, you have little say in what you work on and
your contributions usually feel small and unimportant. Working for a large com-
pany is bit like being one of the thousands of oarsmen on a large galley ship.
You’re doing repetitive, back-breaking work, but your contribution is completely
lost in the wake of everyone else’s rowing. If anyone gets any credit, it’s the per-
son at the helm, even though they seem to do little more than wear an impressive
hat. And though you’ve got little say in where the ship goes, when you do make
WHY STARTUPS | 35

3 Apparently, if you’re on a fully loaded supertanker traveling at normal speed and you can see an iceberg
in your path, it’s already too late [Vella 2013].
an effort to make a difference, you find that it’s incredibly hard to turn a big ship.
3
In my experience, at larger companies, your success or failure is often
based around what group you end up in, if upper management feels that
the work being done in that group is strategic, aligns with the business,
will matter when earnings come around, that sort of thing. While that’s
important, I prefer environments where you have more of a say in your
fate and your success or failure is based around your ability to execute
and build something that the market wants.
— JULIA GRACE, CO-FOUNDER OF WEDDINGLOVELY, CTO AT TINDIE
[GRACE 2014]
At a small company, you usually have much more autonomy. You have much
more say in what you work on, when you’ll work on it, and how you will do it.
You also have much less red tape, bureaucracy, and politics. Most importantly, as
a founder or early employee of a startup, you get to define the company culture
(see Chapter 9). For example, what is the company’s mission and what are your
values? Will you be transparent or secretive with your communication? Will you
have an open floor plan or private offices? Will you be able to work from home?
Will you organize the company using a management hierarchy or keep the com-
pany flat? Will you track hours and vacation time or just focus on results? At a
large company, most of these decisions have already been made, and you have to
live with them. At a startup, many of these decisions will be up to you.
Each decision you make at a small startup has a big impact on the company.
Moreover, you’ll see your impact sooner because small and agile companies usu-
ally have a faster feedback loop than large companies. Every line of code you
write and every feature you build will make a visible difference. You’re no longer
just a small cog in a big machine, but a significant influence on the entire organi-
zation. The result is that you will feel more connected to the company’s mission
and feel more of a sense of purpose. It’s hard to care about increasing the profit
margin of a huge company, but at a small startup where you are responsible for
its very survival, it’s easy to feel inspired and connected.
36 | HELLO, STARTUP

Most people are drawn to the technology or the mission more than the
money. I think our mission at Coursera stands out above many other com-
panies. We get a lot of candidates that were previously working on adver-
tising systems, high frequency trading systems, and they are like, “This is
not what I want to be doing with my life. I’m not helping people.” So, I think
people get excited about Coursera and the challenges in the education
space.
We’re solving real world problems, like the lack of access to quality
education and the lack of physical infrastructure to teach students. We’re
doing these learning hubs where we set up Coursera in public spaces,
even in remote areas with limited Internet access. We have a segment
every week at all-hands where we feature stories about Coursera learners
from around the world.
— NICK DELLAMAGGIORE, SOFTWARE ENGINEER AT LINKEDIN AND
COURSERA [DELLAMAGGIORE 2014]
Startups also give you more opportunities for mastery. You’ll be faced with a
huge variety of tasks and you’ll constantly have to learn new things as you go.
You might be writing database queries one day, designing a UI the next day,
answering customer service emails the day after that, and putting together an
investor pitch deck in between. You’ll develop skills that will be useful for the rest
of your career and you’ll learn to deal with pressure, stress, and risk. You’ll be
pushed beyond your comfort zone, which is where learning really happens. This
is why many people learn more in 3 months at a startup than 3 years at a big
company.
[At previous companies,] I felt like there was all of this architectural cruft
that had carried on over the years that would take a massive amount of
effort to change, and I was in no position to even start arguing with people
what to do about it. So I felt very beholden to decisions of people that
came before and what they thought was the right way to do things.
At Foursquare, there was only a handful of engineers, most of the
decisions had not been made yet, and I would get to make the decisions
and it would be much better. And that panned out. I did get to make a lot
of decisions. They weren’t necessarily good ones. 3.5 years later, I was
like, I’m so sorry, I’m so sorry, don’t quit because of this terrible choice I
WHY STARTUPS | 37

made 3 years ago. But it was a great learning experience. I definitely
learned a lot.
— JORGE ORTIZ, SOFTWARE ENGINEER AT LINKEDIN, FOURSQUARE, AND
STRIPE [ORTIZ 2014]
Together, autonomy, mastery, and purpose are three of the most powerful
human motivators (see “Motivation” on page ). If you’ve found a job that offers
all three, then you’ve found a job that you will love and a place where you can do
work you’re proud of.
MORE FUN
Startups can be more fun. In a big company, you have a product that already
works in the market, so your primary task is to optimize it. In a startup, all you
have is a bunch of guesses about what might work in the market, and the focus is
on search. It turns out that searching is a lot more fun.
A search can feel like a battle of you against the world. Fighting to stay alive
creates much stronger bonds than trying to increase profit margins by 2%; strug-
gling to bring something new into the world is more exciting than optimizing
something already there; celebrating your first public launch, becoming profita-
ble, or an IPO is far more memorable than the annual Christmas party or the lat-
est performance review cycle.
The coolest day in my life, to be very honest—I mean, Silicon Valley pays
well and all that—but the greatest joy I ever got was this call in the middle
of the night from one of my co-founders, who said, “someone is paying us
50 bucks!” That was how much we were charging for our software through
PayPal and the money had just landed in our account. All I could think was
that we made this software, this thing we put online, and now someone is
giving us real money for it. I was afraid to withdraw the money because,
well, I was worried our software was going to crash and the customer
would come back and ask for the 50 bucks back, and I don’t even know if I
have 50 bucks, so let’s not touch it.
— VIKRAM RANGNEKAR, CO-FOUNDER OF VOICEROUTE AND SOCIALWOK
[RANGNEKAR 2014]
Even the “crappy” days at a startup can be fun. The ghetto office, the need to
scrape by on a budget, the constant sense that you have no idea what you’re
38 | HELLO, STARTUP

doing can all be terrifying, but also exciting. They teach you to appreciate the
small victories in life rather than becoming obsessed with promotions or politics.
Some of my favorite memories at LinkedIn are from when I first joined, for
the first 2 years at the East Embarcadero office. There were pretty much
no benefits and we still loved working there. Lunch was typically frozen
burritos or perhaps a random food truck that may or may not show up
that day. It was quite a contrast to the lavish treatment of engineers at val-
ley startups these days. That said, we were still treated really well. One of
my favorite memories was when Reid Hoffman personally paid for an ice
cream truck to stop by the office one summer day to treat the company.
It was a crazy office. It was situated between the dump, an airport, a
golf course and East Palo Alto. The bathrooms were flooding all the time.
We had multiple break-ins. But it was super-fun. We had scooter races
around the office, guitar hero competitions and epic Nerf wars. Ian
McNish had this giant bazooka and he would tag you in the back of the
head with it. It was almost concussion-inducing.
One thing I really liked was our weekly product all-hands meeting,
where all the product managers and engineers would get in the room and
just go over the numbers. We launched the recruiter product in around
Fall, ’05, and we were like, wait, we are making money? People actually
want to pay for this? Then we started making a million dollars, and we
were like, oh my god, we’re making a lot of money!
I just loved that time. The engineering team was maybe 12 people. I
felt like I was having the most impact then: learning a ton, producing a lot
of code, and just having fun.
— NICK DELLAMAGGIORE, SOFTWARE ENGINEER AT LINKEDIN AND
COURSERA [DELLAMAGGIORE 2014]
Startups are inherently about change, so they are more open to doing things
differently, which is why the most fun company cultures are usually found at
startups and not huge corporations. You’ve probably heard of the basics available
at most tech companies, such as a casual dress code and free snacks, drinks, and
meals, but it goes far beyond that. For example, HubSpot regularly hosts talks
from thought leaders, reimburses an unlimited number of books for employees,
does a semi-random “seat shuffle” every three months, and has an unlimited
WHY STARTUPS | 39

4 Another alternative title I considered for the book was How to Never Pay for a T-shirt Again. See [Nash
2010] and [Brikman 2014a] for more info.
vacation policy [Hubspot 2013]. Evernote also has an unlimited vacation policy,
but they go a step further by offering employees a $1,000 bonus for actually tak-
ing a vacation [Bryant 2012]. At Asana, employees get $10,000 to customize their
office setup, as well as access to in-house yoga, massage, and a full-time on-site
chef who cooks customized meals for the employees [Drell 2011] (check out
Chapter 9 for many more startup culture hacks).
Some of these may sound like silly perks, but they have a way of changing
what you do from being “just another job” to something more. If you’re lucky
enough to catch a ride on a “rocketship”—that is, a highly successful, hyper-
growth startup—it can be life changing. For me, LinkedIn was a blur of incredi-
ble moments: scaling the site to handle hundreds of millions of members;
hackday competitions in Mountain View, New York, Berlin, Amsterdam, and
Toronto; the InDay Speaker Series, with talks from Sheryl Sandberg, Marc
Andreessen, Ariana Huffington, Thomas Friedman, Mayor Cory Booker, Bryan
Stevenson, and even President Barack Obama; the IPO in New York; holiday par-
ties in the Ferry Building, Club Auto Sport, and Giants Stadium; t-shirts to com-
memorate every product launch and celebration4; and much more. At times, it
was hard to believe that someone was paying me for all of this.
The fact that startups have the courage to stray from the safe path in an
attempt to do something new is what makes them an amazing place to work.
And, as shown in Figure 1-4, having the courage to stray from the safe path is
also the key to living a remarkable life [Newport 2012].
40 | HELLO, STARTUP

Figure 1-4. Comfort zone
Why you shouldn’t work at a startup
So far, this chapter has made it sound like startups are better than established
companies in every way. They aren’t. Startups have many problems of their own,
some of them far worse than big companies. In fact, startups are all about
extremes: the highs are much higher and the lows are much lower.
Joining a startup is not for everyone. Founding a startup is for even fewer
people. In this section, I’ll present some of the drawbacks to the startup world,
including the fact that it’s not glamorous, that you’ll have to sacrifice a lot, and
that you probably won’t get rich. I’ll also discuss some of the trade-offs between
joining someone else’s startup and founding your own.
IT’S NOT GLAMOROUS
Steve Jobs is on the cover of Time, Elon Musk is on the cover of Fortune, Twitter
is constantly on TV, and there is a movie about Facebook. Tech entrepreneurs
have become the new rock stars—some programmers even have agents [Widdi-
combe 2014]. For the most part, that’s great. Anything that gets kids excited
about technology is a good thing, and an entrepreneur or programmer is argua-
bly a better role model than a rock star or an athlete. But, as is often the case with
the media, it creates a very distorted image of what the startup world is really like.
Seeing entrepreneurs on the cover of every magazine creates the myth of an
entrepreneur-hero who single-handedly comes up with a brilliant strategy, sur-
mounts all obstacles, defeats all competitors, changes the world, and becomes
rich in the process. Movies like The Social Network portray startup life as an end-
WHY STARTUPS | 41

less series of parties and successes. In reality, no entrepreneur and no startup is
actually like that. For one thing, the vast majority of startups fail. And of the few
startups that do succeed, it’s not because they had a single hero with a “eureka”
moment, but because there was a team of people grinding it out day after day
after day, constantly iterating and evolving the product and the company. The
true story behind every startup includes a huge number of missteps, failures, piv-
ots, arguments, and fights. Occasionally, there is betrayal, backstabbing, and
massive fallouts. Always, there is fear, stress, and pain. And in the end, the win-
ner is usually not a brilliant strategist who came up with the perfect plan ahead
of time, but a scrappy team that survived even when things did not go according
to plan.
In other words, a startup is 99.9% hard, unglamorous work. At 11PM on a
Thursday, while your loved ones are at home, relaxing in front of the TV, you’ll
be deploying new code. And at 2AM on a Friday night, while your friends are all
out partying, you’ll be furiously coding away to fix a critical bug in the release
from the night before. And all day Saturday and Sunday, while people with nor-
mal jobs take the time to get away from their work by going on hikes and road
trips, you’ll be afraid to be more than 5 feet from your computer, because a web-
site needs to run 24x7, and you’re on call this week.
Large companies have the luxury of hiring specialists dedicated to some of
these tasks, but in a tiny startup, just about everyone has to be a generalist, and
you’ll have to do a little bit of everything. And I mean everything, not just coding.
You may have to set up cubicles, estimate how much toilet paper to get for the
bathroom, learn how to hire a VP of sales, set up payroll, fill out all sorts of legal
and tax forms, create pitch decks for investors, design a logo, and a whole lot
more. Some programmers love this, as they get to learn lots of new skills, but
other programmers would much rather be coding.
In my next life, I don’t know if I’d start a company, because I now know all
too well what CEOs (and CTOs) of startups do and it’s not solving interest-
ing engineering challenges. It’s worrying about hard things like business
deals, marketing and user acquisition strategies, and negotiating con-
tracts. Even in the CTO role you’re rarely the person who is actually build-
ing features.
There’s a big difference between building a business and solving
interesting engineering problems. There are interesting engineering prob-
lems in startups, but very frequently, your business will not succeed or fail
42 | HELLO, STARTUP

based on how well you solve those engineering problems. The exception
to this is startups focused on hard scientific problems. For example, I have
a friend who has a battery company and his business will succeed or fail
based on the scientific breakthroughs they make, as well as how well they
run the business. This hard science component is not applicable to 99%
of web startups; most web startups succeed or fail based almost entirely
on execution, meaning marketing, sales, product, and engineering. We
think as engineers that if we can write great code and build something
that can scale to a million people that we will be successful and lauded in
the community and people will say, “oh, you’re so amazing”, and they’ll
want to acqui-hire us for millions of dollars. That’s what we read in Tech-
Crunch and that’s what we hear about at meetups, but it is very very far
from reality.
— JULIA GRACE, CO-FOUNDER OF WEDDINGLOVELY, CTO AT TINDIE
[GRACE 2014]
For developers who have spent their careers at big companies, it often comes
as a surprise that much of the work you do at a startup has nothing to do with
engineering. Big companies have their own distractions to take you away from
coding, such as useless meetings, and heavy processes and methodologies (see
“Process” on page ), but at a startup, the non-engineering tasks often aren’t
overhead, but an essential part of the job. This work is worth doing to build a
company, but it can be mundane. Despite the reputation startups have for being
“sexy” places to work, a lot of the time is actually filled with drudge work and
tasks that are decidedly not sexy. And the higher up you go in the organization,
the less time you’ll spend on the engineering tasks you love.
I love woodworking. I love to build things. When I was young I could stand
and stare for 10 minutes at something I had just built and feel proud. That
art of creation and the satisfaction of creation, you get a lot of that in soft-
ware engineering. And I love that. I love getting in the zone, banging out
code, realizing it’s midnight, and holy crap, you have this cool thing you’ve
just built. As you scale up a business, as the leader of it, you realize you
can’t do that as much anymore.
It happens gradually. You don’t really notice it. When it’s just 5 people,
you’re spending very little of your time talking to people about career
development, thinking about their promotion cycles, the pay rates. As you
WHY STARTUPS | 43

get to where you have 50 people, all of a sudden, you find you’re doing it
10% of your time. You get to 100 people and now you have 4 or 5 people
that are reporting to you that each have 20 people, and now it takes up
50-75% of your time. And then you get bigger, and all of a sudden, you’re
starting to be the public face of the business. And that crushes the last lit-
tle bit of coding time you have. If you have to be on the road, talking to
investors, doing presentations, and going to talks, the rest of your time
gets sucked up. Your schedule becomes so variable that it’s hard to get
blocks of solid time where you can do honest engineering work. The evolu-
tion happens slowly enough over time that, one day you wake up, and you
realize, “Oh wow, I haven’t coded in 4 months.”
— STEVEN CONINE, FOUNDER OF WAYFAIR [CONINE 2014]
Many developers have trouble transitioning from a coding role to a leader-
ship role, such as CEO, CTO, or VP. If you’ve never had such a role, you might
expect that being part of the executive team will make you feel important, respec-
ted, and powerful. You imagine yourself spending all your time drawing up
strategies, giving orders, and moving chess pieces around a board, like a five star
general. In reality, you’ll be more of a salesman crossed with a psychiatrist. You’ll
spend a lot of time trying to get someone, anyone, anywhere, to care about your
company. You’ll also spend lots of time listening to your employees, trying to
figure out their needs, dealing with their complaints, and figuring out how to
motivate them. You will get to make decisions, but many of them will be painful,
risky, and unpopular. And no matter how much you try, you’ll get some of these
decisions wrong. Some people thrive in this sort of environment, but if you’re
not one of them, a leadership role might not be for you.
People have this vision of being the CEO of a company they started and
being on top of the pyramid. Some people are motivated by that, but
that’s not at all what it’s like. What it’s really like: everyone else is your
boss—all of your employees, customers, partners, users, media are your
boss. I’ve never had more bosses and needed to account for more people
today. The life of most CEOs is reporting to everyone else, at least that’s
what it feels like to me and most CEOs I know. If you want to exercise
power and authority over people, join the military or go into politics. Don’t
be an entrepreneur.
— PHIL LIBIN, CEO OF EVERNOTE [LIBIN 2012]
44 | HELLO, STARTUP

IT’S A SACRIFICE
Building a successful startup is incredibly hard. It’s hard to hire great people
when competing against big companies. It’s hard when great people you’ve man-
aged to hire decide to leave. It’s hard to fire people who turned out to not be
great. It’s hard to motivate people. It’s hard to motivate yourself when nothing is
working and you’re running out of money. It’s hard to raise money. It’s hard to
keep investors from derailing your business once they’ve given you money. It’s
hard to focus on the long term direction of the company when you have to worry
about short term survival. It’s hard to bring a new product into a constantly
changing market. It’s hard to spend so much time working on something—
building it, selling it, marketing it—and still no one seems to take notice. It’s
hard to fend off the competition when they suddenly do take notice. It’s hard to
make dozens of decisions every single day, with not nearly enough information,
and with each one putting a lot of time, money, and many careers at risk. And it’s
hard when you make mistakes—and you will make many mistakes—because you
have no one to blame but yourself.
All of this means that working at a startup involves a lot of sacrifice. Some
people manage it better than others, but working at a young startup often means
you won’t get to see your friends and family as much as you might like and your
health may suffer. Startups have ruined marriages, caused mental and physical
health problems, and worst of all, even driven some founders to suicide [Feld
2014]. It rarely get that bad, but long hours and too much stress are common
problems.
I was 26 and ended up in the doctor’s office. I was experiencing short-
term memory issues. He did some blood tests and he said, “you have the
numbers of a 60 year old, so we have a problem.” I realized I didn’t want to
be on that path, so later I told my boss, “Look, I’m leaving. I’m not enjoy-
ing myself, I’m working 90 hours a week, and I’ve been doing it 8 or 9
months.” And he said, “Yea, I’m at the doctor with heart troubles myself,
so I’m going to probably leave too.” I learned that you have to pace your-
self at a startup. You have to work hard, but you also have to find a way to
do this on a sustainable basis.
— PHILIP JACOB, FOUNDER OF STYLEFEEDER, SOFTWARE ENGINEER AT
STACKDRIVER AND GOOGLE [JACOB 2014]
WHY STARTUPS | 45

Startups are an emotional roller-coaster. There are extreme highs and
extreme lows. For some people, this is part of the charm. For others, it’s more
stress than they can handle. It’s particularly stressful for founders. If you’re an
employee of a startup that has failed, it’s disappointing, but you shake it off and
move on to your next job. But if you’re the founder of a startup that has failed, it
will feel like you’ve let everyone down. Your employees gave you years of their
lives, your customers gave you their money and trust, your investors funded you,
your family supported you, and in the end, you did not deliver. Your dream is
dead, and that can be devastating.
Fear is the engine of a startup. There is the constant fear that your best
developer will walk out the door and join the competition. […] There is the
constant fear that some of the best people in your team will quit and start
your biggest competitor, across the street. […] There is the constant fear
of running out of money. […] There is the constant fear about your cus-
tomers. […] And even when you’ve gotten your serious round of funding,
with a couple of millions of dollars on the bank to finance the growth of
your company, and some ace VCs on your board, you’re terrified that you
won’t be able to live up to expectations. […]
So if you can’t live with fear, don’t ever go into the startup business.
— PETER HINSSEN, FOUNDER OF ECOM, ACROSS, AND NEXXWORKS
[HINSSEN 2013]
YOU PROBABLY WON’T GET RICH
Most startups fail. The numbers vary depending on what you define as a
“startup” and as “failure”, but the typical failure rate is somewhere around 75%
[Gage 2012]. Three out of four times, despite all the pain and sacrifice, the
startup goes nowhere. And if you’re one of the lucky few that does succeed,
you’re still unlikely to get rich. That’s because in the startup world, the vast
majority of the money is funneled into a very small number of winners. In other
words, startup returns don’t follow a normal distribution, but a power law distri-
bution, as shown in Figure 1-5.
46 | HELLO, STARTUP

Figure 1-5. Power law
In an analysis of more than 600,000 startups since 2000, just 34 companies
—well known giants such as Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Uber—accounted
for 76% of the total market cap [Van Grove 2014]. If you’re at one of these giants,
you may get rich, but your odds of ending up at such a company are fairly low. If,
instead, you ended up at one of the other startups, even if it was successful, the
returns will be small, and will mostly go to the investors (see “Equity” on page 
for more info).
You also shouldn’t expect to get rich from your salary. Most early startups
pay a lower salary than the market, so if anything, you actually run the risk of
making less money by joining a startup. If the company is successful and grows,
your salary usually will too, but rarely enough to make up for several years of
being paid less. And just because you’re an early engineer at a startup, there is no
guarantee that you will be promoted to senior positions as the company grows.
Most of the VP and CTO level positions go either to the founding team or to
“experienced” hires brought in at a later stage of the company to “clean up” the
mess and help the company scale.
Startups often involve, for engineers, very long hours, rapidly changing
requirements, and tight deadlines, which means the quality of the code
they write is generally very poor in comparison to what they’d be able to
produce in saner conditions. It’s not that they’re bad at their jobs, but that
it’s almost impossible to produce quality software under those kinds of
deadlines. So code rots quickly in a typical startup environment, espe-
cially if requirements and deadlines are being set by a non-technical man-
WHY STARTUPS | 47

ager. Three years and 50 employees later, what they’ve built is now a
horrific, ad-hoc, legacy system hacked by at least ten people and built
under intense deadline pressure, and even the original architects don’t
understand it. It may have been a heroic effort to build such a powerful
system in so little time, but from an outside perspective, it becomes an
embarrassment. It doesn’t make the case for a high-level position.
— MICHAEL O. CHURCH [CHURCH 2012]
In short, joining a startup to get rich is a bad idea. It’s not only unlikely to
happen, but also a bad motivation. The desire for money will not be enough to
get you through the brutally hard work of building a company. If anything, it can
actually reduce motivation, as we discuss in “Motivation” on page .
I want to remind you that financial success is not the only goal or the only
measure of success. It’s easy to get caught up in the heady buzz of mak-
ing money. You should regard money as fuel for what you really want to
do, not as a goal in and of itself. Money is like gas in the car—you need to
pay attention or you’ll end up on the side of the road—but a well-lived life
is not a tour of gas stations!
— TIM O’REILLY, FOUNDER OF O’REILLY MEDIA [O’REILLY 2009]
JOINING VS FOUNDING A STARTUP
As I’ve mentioned a few times in this chapter, your startup experience will be
vastly different as a founder than as an early employee of a startup. Here’s the
basic trade-off: as a founder, you will have to make 10x the sacrifice in exchange
for a chance of 10x the reward. By sacrifice, I mean you will be faced with an
order of magnitude more of stress, risk, and long hours, and by reward, I mean
that in exchange for this pain, you could earn an order of magnitude more
money and reputation if you succeed. Founding a company is a very high risk,
high reward game, and as most people are not equipped to handle that much risk
—or, more accurately, the amount of stress that goes with it—most people
should not be entrepreneurs, no matter what great ideas they have.
Even if you can handle the stress, there is another factor to consider. While
writing this book, I came across a startling fact that completely changed the way I
thought about founding a company. As a founder, if you get lucky enough to
build a successful startup (remember, the odds are roughly 1 in 4), it will take
you, on average, 7-8 years to reach a successful exit (i.e. an acquisition or an IPO)
48 | HELLO, STARTUP

5 For example, consider the age of some of the most successful startups of the last decade at the time of
their IPO’s or acquisitions: Facebook was 8 [Facebook 2014], Google was 6 [Google 2014], Twitter was 7
[Twitter 2014], LinkedIn was 8 [LinkedIn 2014], WhatsApp was 5 [Hoff 2014], and Zappos was 10 [Zappos
2014].
6 In fact, if a founder tries to leave immediately after an IPO, it will hurt the founder’s reputation, the com-
pany, and the stock price, so most founders stick around for at least a few more years. As for acquisitions,
most of the contracts involve a “cliff” or “vesting period” of 1-2 years to help transition the company over.
The founders only get the financial rewards of the acquisition after this period, so this sort of contract is
usually referred to as the “golden handcuffs”.
[Lennon 2013].5 Of course, it’s really only an “exit” for the investors—the found-
ers will usually stay on at least a couple years more.6 So here’s the rule of thumb
to take away from this:
Only start a company if you’re willing to spend the next decade of your life
working on it.
If you’re 20 years old, you’ll be working on the company until you’re 30. If
you’re 30, you’ll do little else until you’re in your 40’s. Once I heard this statistic,
I went back to my list of startup ideas and threw half of them away. I realized that
many of them were just “get rich quick” schemes at their core, and there was no
way I’d be able to spend the next decade toiling away at them.
A successful exit isn’t the only reason to found a company—as I’ve men-
tioned before, it’s one of the worst reasons to do anything related to startups—
but so many people see startups as a get-rich-quick scheme that, if you take away
nothing else from this chapter, remember this: building a startup probably won’t
make you rich, and if it does, it won’t be quick. Success is rare, and when it hap-
pens, it takes on the order of a decade.
During that decade, you’re going to have to work very hard. Harder than
you’ve worked at anything else in your life. It may be easier than ever to start a
company, but making it successful is just as hard as ever. Any founder will tell
you that bringing a new product into the market, changing user habits, and hir-
ing the right people, all while making ends meet, is one of the hardest things you
will do in your life.
I think the hardest thing is that the success function is very discontinuous.
For example, you’re trying for months to figure out how to accelerate user
growth. You try to introduce some features which you think will help make
the metrics go “up and to the right”, but nothing really works. For ages,
nothing happens. And then, suddenly, some massively successful thing
happens totally unexpectedly.
WHY STARTUPS | 49

Since you have no idea in advance where these discontinuities are
going to be, it seems then that the only reasonable behavior is to work
really hard. You have a finite length of runway, so if you can maximize the
amount of stuff you can get done, that maximizes the chance that you’re
going to hit that next discontinuity before you die. And if you die before
you get to that next discontinuity, you know that you worked so hard that
you couldn’t have possibly done anything else to get there faster.
— MARTIN KLEPPMANN, CO-FOUNDER OF GO TEST IT AND RAPPORTIVE
[KLEPPMANN 2014]
Because the success function is very discontinuous, working at a startup,
especially as a founder, is a bit like running a marathon with a blindfold on. You
know it’s a long race, but you can’t see the mile markers or a clock, so you have
no sense of how far you’ve gone, and you’re not even sure if you’re running in
the right direction—but you can’t slow down and take a break, or someone will
surely pass you. So you keep chugging along as fast as you can, chasing after that
next discontinuity.
For most programmers, joining someone else’s startup gets you enough of
the benefit with far fewer drawbacks. In fact, rolling the dice on several startups is
one of the best ways to have a fun and successful career as a programmer. If you
start a company, the odds that it’s the next Google or Facebook are very low, but
as a founder, you’re committed, and you’ll have to stick with it for 5-10 years to
find out. During that same time period, as an employee, you could join 3 or 4
different startups for a few years each, and significantly increase your chances of
finding a successful one.
The 100th engineer at Facebook made far more money than 99% of Sili-
con Valley entrepreneurs. Small slices of gigantic pies are still themselves
gigantic.
— DUSTIN MOSKOVITZ, CO-FOUNDER OF FACEBOOK AND ASANA [MOS-
KOVITZ 2013]
Just as there are lawyers who chase ambulances, there are engineers in Sili-
con Valley who chase IPOs and acquisitions. This isn’t a bad thing. These engi-
neers hop from pre-IPO company to pre-IPO company and they contribute
serious value to each one by building products and helping to scale the organiza-
tion. In return, they get to develop a wide variety of skills, enjoy the unique cul-
50 | HELLO, STARTUP

7 A few companies to watch in 2015 and 2016, at least based on their fundraising, growth, and recent devel-
oper migration patterns, are Uber, Airbnb, Square, Stripe, DropBox, Pinterest, PagerDuty, Slack, Zenefits,
and GitHub.
ture at each company, accumulate some stock options, and, after a few years,
they walk away with a ton of fun experiences under their belt and, in many cases,
a fair bit of money in their pocket.
If you knew which engineers to pay attention to, you could probably get
pretty good at predicting which companies will soon have a massive IPO or
acquisition. For example, in the last few years, I watched a few friends of mine
rotate through LinkedIn, Facebook, and Twitter, joining each company a few
years before it had an IPO. How did they know? There are three primary signs.
First, look for products you and most people you know are already using. Most
developers are “early adopters”, so if a lot of them are flocking to a particular
technology, there’s a good chance the rest of the world will soon follow. Second,
look for companies that have raised a lot of money through multiple rounds of
financing. The more money invested, the more the investors will want to see big
returns, and the most common way to make that happen is for the company to
go public or get acquired. Third, look for companies that are growing at an
incredible pace and will need more money to sustain that growth until they
become profitable.7
If you’re more likely to get rich and have fun by joining someone else’s
startup, is it ever a good idea to start your own? Yes: when you simply can’t not
do it [Moskovtiz 2014]. That is, the best reason to start a startup is because you
are so passionate about an idea that you must bring it into the world. You’re
doing it not for the fame or the fortune, but because it’s something important
enough to you that you are willing to go through all of the pain, risk, and sacrifice
to make it happen. In the words of Tony Gaskins Jr., if you don’t build your
dream, someone will hire you to help build theirs [Gaskins Jr. 2012].
Just make sure not to confuse the dream of accomplishing a specific mission
(see “Mission” on page ) with the dream of building a startup. Sometimes a
startup is the best way to accomplish your dream, but in many cases, you’d be far
better off starting a lifestyle business (e.g. a work-from-home consultant), or join-
ing someone else’s company, or doing research at a university. A startup is just a
means to an end [Payne 2013b].
WHY STARTUPS | 51

Recap
Do you know the best thing about startups? […] You only ever experience
two emotions: euphoria and terror. And I find that lack of sleep enhances
them both.
— MARC ANDREESSEN, CO-FOUNDER OF NETSCAPE, LOUDCLOUD, OPS-
WARE, AND NING [HOROWITZ 2014]
You’ve now seen both the light and dark sides of startup life. Startups can be
more fun, but they can also be more stressful. You get more autonomy, but you
also get more grudge work. You could make a huge impact on your career and
the world, but you are also very likely to fail. The question is, is a startup right for
you?
There is only one way to answer this question: try it. That doesn’t mean
everyone should go out and start a company, but at least once in your life, just
about everyone should work at a startup. And for that matter, everyone should
also work at one big, established company. Startups aren’t for everyone and big
companies aren’t for everyone, so it’s a good idea to try both to see which one fits
you.
I’ve worked in large companies and I’ve worked in small companies. I think
it’s valuable to go between the two because there are different skills that
you have to rely on. In startups, there’s this sense of energy, you’re doing
new things that are resonating with people, changing how they communi-
cate, or travel, or whatever it happens to be. When you’re working at larger
companies, you need the ability to communicate and think about the per-
spectives that other people have. But I think sometimes, when you just
want to get something done, it’s nice to have a bank account with 3 million
dollars and nobody in your way.
— PHILIP JACOB, FOUNDER OF STYLEFEEDER, SOFTWARE ENGINEER AT
STACKDRIVER AND GOOGLE [JACOB 2014]
Perhaps after trying it out, you’ll find that startup life is for you. Maybe you’ll
even be inspired to become an entrepreneur. In some sense, everyone is already
an entrepreneur. Adam Smith wrote that every person “becomes in some meas-
ure a merchant” [Smith 2003]. You sell your time, knowledge, and resources to
others, either to someone else’s company or to customers of your own company.
52 | HELLO, STARTUP

The days of working at the same job and climbing a career ladder for many years
are over. Self employment is at record levels [Monaghan 2014] and the peer-to-
peer economy is on the rise, powered by startups such as Uber, Sidecar, Lyft,
Airbnb, TaskRabbit, Homejoy, and Etsy.
Of course, renting a room out in your house or doing consulting work is not
the same as creating a startup, but as entrepreneurship becomes more ubiqui-
tous, it will hopefully make people more accepting of startups and less attached
to the false sense of “job security” of larger companies. You may even realize that
the modern notion of a “job” as some entity that floats around and that you’re
entitled to after college, makes no sense. There are no jobs. There are just things
you can do that someone else finds valuable, so they’ll pay you for it. The fact that
the payment comes from a big company, a startup, or self employment is just an
implementation detail.
When you grow up you tend to get told the world is the way it is […] Try not
to bash into the walls too much. Try to have a nice family, have fun, save a
little money.
That’s a very limited life. Life can be much broader once you discover
one simple fact: Everything around you that you call life was made up by
people that were no smarter than you and you can change it, you can
influence it, you can build your own things that other people can use.
Once you learn that, you’ll never be the same again.
— STEVE JOBS [JOBS 2011]
WHY STARTUPS | 53


The Cofounder
Dilemma
It’s almost a foregone conclusion now: startups need cofounders. Paul Graham,
founder of the elite startup accelerator Y Combinator, observed, “Have you ever
noticed how few successful startups were founded by just one person? Even com-
panies you think of as having one founder, like Oracle, usually turn out to have
more. It seems unlikely this is a coincidence.”
It’s true; there are a lot of multifounder successes and just a few solo acts,
like Jeff Bezos at Amazon. Personally, I’ve tried it both ways. At Ontela, I was
joined by two terrific cofounders, Brian and Charles. At Sparkbuy, I incorporated
the company and raised money as a one-man show, then brought on a top-notch
CTO, Scott Haug, the day that the investment round closed. Robot Turtles, my
Kickstarter experiment turned board game company, was a solo endeavor from
start to finish. And my latest endeavor, Glowforge, has me paired up with two
epic cofounders, Mark Gosselin and Tony Wright, each with multiple successful
startups under their belt.
The cofounder decision isn’t an easy one. There are a lot of good reasons to
have cofounders—and one big bad reason not to. Starting with the positive,
then...
Cofounders Are Top Talent
You can usually get better talent, sooner, by playing the cofounder card.
In the case of my current company, Glowforge, I could have hired a CTO to
help me build the first 3D laser printer. But someone like Mark Gosselin just
isn’t available as an employee. His last company, Cequint, sold for $112 M. He’d
designed and manufactured tens of millions of dollars’ worth of hardware. He’d
actually built a combination CNC mill, 3D printer, plasma torch, and laser cutter
11
| 2

in his own garage, for fun, after selling his company. He wasn’t going to join
someone else’s business. If I wanted him, he would need to be a founder from
the start.
Similarly, Tony Wright is a well-known product genius, founder of compa-
nies like RescueTime (part of the earliest Y Combinator batch) and Cubeduel (a
viral hit in the recruiting space, of all things, that was snapped up by an acquirer
within months). A four-time CEO himself, I wasn’t going to convince him to run
product and design for Glowforge with an employee badge.
In short, serial entrepreneurs with a history of success may not be interested
—at least not until later, after the company’s shown some success—unless
they’re cofounders.
Top talent engaged at big companies really have no idea what they’re getting
into, but it’s easier to sell them the dream of cofounding a company than to per-
suade them to come aboard as an employee.
Big-gun senior operatives who can demand salaries of a quarter million and
up on the open market are probably priced out of the range of an early hire. But a
cofounder position can shake them loose.
Even your closest friends may find it much easier to make the jump to a
startup if they’re a part of the founding team with you, and not bolted on post-
founding as an early hire.
Startups have very little ammo when it comes to recruiting, and awarding
cofounder titles is the single most effective tactic available to entice amazing tal-
ent. Even if you’re putting together a team of brilliant college grads straight out
of school, you’re going to have a much easier time pulling things together if
you’re recruiting for founders, not for employees.
Cofounders Save Cash
I have good news and bad news.
The good news is that adding cofounders is going to cost you meaningfully
fewer dollars than hiring someone as a full employee. When a company is first
beginning, founders often work for next to nothing. In many cases, they actually
work for nothing, although this is technically illegal under minimum wage laws.
One of the great things about adding cofounders is that you get to bring a whole
lot more horsepower to the table without taking a huge hit on your balance sheet.
Of course, this applies at the start, when you’re working on the cheap. But
the bargains keep rolling in as the cofounder stays on over the years. Well after
the company has been firmly established, it will, on average, pay about $25K per
12 | HOT SEAT: THE STARTUP CEO GUIDEBOOK

year less for a founder than a nonfounder, according to Noam Wasserman’s The
Founder’s Dilemmas (Princeton University Press, 2013).
Some people feel it’s unfair that founders take such a hit in terms of cash
compensation after the company is large and profitable. Wasserman postulates
that this is a state of affairs forced on mature startups by investors, who know
that the founders are so emotionally committed that even if they are underpaid
they will still not walk away.
On the one hand, founders get a comparatively huge slug of equity to offset
their lower salary. On the other hand, they earn that equity by taking early-stage
risk, so it’s not clear that they should suffer twice. On the third hand, that’s the
market, so it’s hard to argue with.
Now here’s the bad news: as you probably guessed, the founder discount
applies to the CEO too.
Investors Love Cofounders
There are some in the entrepreneurial world who like to debate the relative mer-
its of various startup accelerator programs, but all agree that Techstars is one of
the best. Presumably they’ve learned a thing or two about what makes a startup
sing.
I started reading applications for Techstars in 2011, considering applicants
for the Seattle summer class. It’s a finicky process, as much art as science. How
accomplished are the founders? Does their application show ingenuity? It’s OK if
the company concept is less than exciting—ideas can change—but does it reflect
thoughtful potential?
The one thing that’s almost nonnegotiable is that Techstars does not gener-
ally accept companies without cofounders. It’s not a hard-and-fast rule and it’s
not written down anywhere, but it’s there nonetheless. In 2012, for example, the
Techstars companies all had two or more founders, with one exception: Linksy,
whose lonely founder was Adam Loving. He was admitted after a flurry of intro-
ductions by Techstars to a number of eligible cofounders, with a relationship
consummated and shares exchanged before the beginning of the Techstars
session.
You see, ultimately Techstars is an investor, and to investors, cofounders are
a no-brainer.
First, bringing in a cofounder is a crucial test. If the CEO can convince an all-
star cofounder or two with deep domain expertise to quit their jobs and work at
THE COFOUNDER DILEMMA | 13

her company for a pittance, that bodes well for her future sales and hiring
activities.
Second, as noted previously, it allows the startup to hire better people,
cheaper, than it would be likely to get otherwise.
But the third point is the most impactful. A first-round investor typically gets
about 20%–35% (let’s call it 30%) of the company’s equity. Another 15% or so
goes to the employee stock pool, to be used for hiring later employees.
That means the investor will see 55% of the company go to the founding
team. The only question is—how many founders do they get in exchange for that
equity?
Think about it—founders’ primary compensation is equity, and if there are
two, or three, or even four cofounders, that equity is just divided up. The investor
is getting a screaming deal—they don’t give anything more up; they just get
more cofounders, working for cheap, splitting the same equity.
While I’ve never heard any investors say this with their “out-loud” voices
(and to be fair, Paul Graham and a number of other investors have stated that
more than three cofounders is suboptimal), I know that this is a consideration
that weighs heavily on their minds. Equity is money, and investors get more for
their money when cofounders split it.
The Split Is the Downside
Joe Heitzeberg was the founder of Snapvine, which sold to Whitepages for
$20M. When he began work on his second company, MediaPiston, he started
looking for a cofounder.
It was his wife, Natalie, who steered him to the solo founder path. Joe related
the story to me over bourbon one night, sitting at his dining room table. Natalie,
a vice president at Citigroup, smirked in the background as he recounted the tale.
“Joe, if you bring on a cofounder, how much of the company would they
take?” he recalled her asking.
“Well, I’ve done a lot of the early work already—built a prototype, made
some sales, proven the market... let’s say 30%.”
“And if you sold that 30% to investors instead of giving it to a cofounder,
how much do you think they would pay for it?” she continued.
“I think I could get a good valuation this time around, but let’s say $1.5
million,” Joe replied.
“OK. So what you’re telling me is that you think it’s better for your company
to have a cofounder than $1.5 million dollars, right?”
14 | HOT SEAT: THE STARTUP CEO GUIDEBOOK

Joe founded the company solo. He never raised any money. And when
oDesk acquired MediaPiston, Joe kept every dime.
That’s the downside of cofounders. They’re really, really expensive.
It’s not easy to make the decision about whether to seek out a cofounder, but
here are the three questions that will get you to an answer.
First Question: Are You an Army of One?
The founding team is going to have to climb quite a few hills. Design the prod-
uct. Create it. Get traction. Raise investment. Are you going to be able to manage
all of that yourself?
For some people, the answer is yes. You may be able to build and market the
product successfully enough that you can attract investment (or get to profitabil-
ity) on your own. This is a factor of both the person and the product.
Instapaper founder Marco Arment created the app himself and watched it
grow to astronomical success without a single additional employee, let alone
cofounder. Gabriel Weinberg, the founder of search engine DuckDuckGo, kept it
as a single-person show for three years until he took outside investment and
made his first hire. Both of those projects could have supported multiple
cofounders, but had one person strong enough to carry the weight solo.
I asked myself this question when I started working on the Robot Turtles
game. I was tempted to add someone to the “founding team.” It would mean less
work for me to do, a broader skill base to draw from, and so on—but I wasn’t
sure the project was big enough to support another person.
To make the decision, I listed what I’d need to do successfully to make the
Kickstarter campaign work:
• Design and playtest the game
• Produce artwork for both the game and the campaign
• Write/direct/produce a video for the Kickstarter page
• Manage publicity, PR, outreach, social media, and other marketing
• Find and manage a manufacturer and shipping partner
• Handle product support
Then I asked myself if I was confident that I could handle all of these tasks
myself. The answer, of course, was “hell no.” But I decided to act as a single
THE COFOUNDER DILEMMA | 15

1 No secret that this is easier said than done—I’m frustrated with myself that despite trying hard to find
diverse teammates, of the four cofounders I’ve worked with in my career, only one belongs to an underre-
presented minority group. At Glowforge, I’m zero for two.
founder anyway, because I was excited about learning all of these things, and
Robot Turtles was all about creating something for my family while learning
something new. So, for the purposes of this project, I decided I would be a
founding army of one, bringing on short-term contractors to help with areas
where I was inept, like artwork and videography. More importantly, I was com-
fortable with failing, and learning in the process, so it was OK for me to take the
risk of not having a cofounder’s help.
I faced the decision again for Glowforge, but the calculation was totally dif-
ferent. This time, the company needed:
• Injection molded plastics
• High- and low-voltage power supplies
• Onboard microprocessor architecture
• Pneumatic and hydraulic subsystems
• Coordination with factory schedules
• Laser physics
And that was just the hardware. Further, I did not found Glowforge for a
learning experience: I founded it to create a multibillion-dollar company that will
fundamentally change the way products are made and empower a new genera-
tion of creators. It was no contest: I needed A+ cofounders.
Second Question: Do You Have Access to a Solid-Gold Cofounder?
First, consider diversity. It’s easy to find people with the same skills and back-
ground that you have, but a pair of MBAs will have a devil of a time outperform-
ing an MBA/engineer team. If your experience is with one company, it can be
helpful to get a different set of experiences on hand by working with someone
from a different company. If you’re a white dude, not only will you expand your
perspectives by working with someone other than another white dude, but you
will find yourself with a bigger network and pool of talent to draw from when
hiring.1
16 | HOT SEAT: THE STARTUP CEO GUIDEBOOK

2 After a six-digit Kickstarter campaign success, the gadget is now available at http://poppy3d.com.
3 Former Urbanspoon founder Ethan Lowry.
Second, consider compatibility. If one of you is a serial entrepreneur with a
multimillion-dollar exit and the other is a lifetime big-company worker without a
big savings cushion, it’s going to be hard to agree on things like when to take sal-
ary or when to sell the company. If one of you is a nine-to-fiver and the other
never sleeps, it may be hard for you to respect each other’s contributions. Com-
pany culture is born of the founders (as we’ll see in Part III), and incompatible
values can build deep stresses into the company infrastructure.
Finally, consider raw capability. To win, you’re going to need to build a team
of the best and brightest. If you make compromises early on, at the founding
stage, you’re toast. You simply can’t settle here; you should always try to recruit
better than you deserve, but there is simply no room for error when it comes to
cofounders.
Third Question: Will You Trade Cash for Camaraderie?
This is the hardest question to answer. If you don’t need a cofounder to round
out your skill set or to ensure funding, it’s hard to argue that it makes financial
sense to bring one on, versus hiring people as employees.
The one thing you can’t buy is someone else who knows what you’re going
through. The hot seat is lonely and painful at times, and a cofounder is the best
person to ease the burden.
Is that camaraderie worth trading away half of the ownership of your com-
pany?
That’s the final question.
And a concluding note on that: MediaPiston, Joe’s solo startup, wasn’t Joe’s
last company. He’s since launched Poppy,2 a 3D camera and viewer accessory for
iPhones—with a cofounder.3
A Finicky Note on the Linguistics of Cofounders
The “co-” is clunky. Aren’t founders just founders? Should they have some spe-
cial label because they weren’t the only ones?
THE COFOUNDER DILEMMA | 17

Personally, I only use the “cofounder” term when it’s a helpful label in talk-
ing about more than one at the same time, as in “My cofounders at Glowforge.”
If I’m describing them individually, I’ll describe them each as founders. That is
the convention I’ll use throughout this book.
18 | HOT SEAT: THE STARTUP CEO GUIDEBOOK


Knowing Your
Market
Your mentors, True Believers, early adopters, and the broader
hardware-founder community will all provide invaluable feedback in the
early stages of idea validation for your product. However, since your goal
is to build a profitable company, one group of people is clearly the most
important: the customers. They’re the people who will give you dollars.
You can’t have an individual relationship with all of them, unlike the
groups discussed in Chapter 2. However, you must know everything you
can about them—who they are, what they need, what drives them, how
much they’re willing to spend—so it’s extremely important to have con-
versations with them early in the product development process.
The time to identify and talk to potential customers is long before
you’re thinking about moving toward manufacturing. The lessons you
learn from these discussions will shape the product. They’ll also be
extremely important for branding and marketing strategies, setting a
price point, and identifying the distribution channels that are right for
your company.
In the preprototype stage of customer development, the primary
question you’re trying to answer is, “Who is likely to buy my product?”
You can’t be all things to all people, so it’s important to identify the type
of customer who is most likely to spend money on the first version of
your widget. You’ll revise your offering for mass mainstream adoption
somewhere down the line.
35
CHAPTER 3

The Who, What, and Why of Your Product
Building any company—hardware or software—will require you to under-
stand your market, know your customer, and build your community.
Your goal is to find both problem/solution fit and product/market fit. In
his book Running Lean (O’Reilly), Ash Maurya defines problem/solution
fit as “Do I have a problem worth solving?” Product/market fit is “Have I
built something people want?”
Before you build a single prototype, you should consider three impor-
tant questions:
• What is the problem I am trying to solve?
• Who are the people who have that problem?
• Why should they want to buy my product rather than the solutions
that already exist in the market?
The purpose of these questions is to help you identify and segment
your market, as well as to understand the underlying drivers that lead
customers to purchase products in your space. The research you do as
part of the idea-refinement process is extremely important. It will shape
your early thinking on technology and pricing, and it might have an
impact on fundraising strategies in the future. It will also help you begin
to define your brand.
Researching Your Market: Trends and Competition
When it comes to gathering numbers, market research for a product idea
can be broken down into an examination of market size and a forecast of
market trajectory. The size is a function of sales revenue and users over a
given time period (possibly also within a geographically constrained area).
For example, to determine a rough estimate for the market size of a
given medical device, you would multiply the number of potential buyers
in the market (hospitals, clinics, etc.) by the quantity of devices each
would purchase in a year, and then multiply that number by the average
price paid for a single device:
5,723 hospitals in the US × 10 devices purchased per hospital ×
$3,000 cost per device = $171.69 million
This example counts hospitals, but it neglects to consider other buy-
ers, such as clinics. However, it also assumes that every hospital in the
US would buy 10 devices, which is unlikely.
CHAPTER 3
36

MARKET SIZE
One common pitfall for new entrepreneurs is overestimating the number
of potential buyers. If you are selling a device targeting hospitals, your
potential addressable market is not the total number of hospitals in the
world. It’s the number of hospitals that fall into your potential sales chan-
nels (perhaps limited by geography or business structure) and are likely to
actually buy your product. Some might be buying from your competition,
or perhaps they don’t want (or need) your device. In order to be more pre-
cise, marketers therefore use three distinct levels when referring to mar-
ket size (nested as shown in Figure 3-1):
Total addressable market (TAM)
Sometimes called the total available market, TAM is an estimate of the
maximum potential revenue opportunity for a given product or ser-
vice. Assuming no competition and no distribution challenges, this is
everyone you could possibly sell to in an ideal world. It’s important to
clarify the geographic scope of TAM; some people assume it’s global,
while others identify a particular region.
Serviceable available market (SAM)
A subset of the total addressable market, the term serviceable identi-
fies customers whose needs are served by a specific product offering.
SAM market sizing accounts for the fact that a given market has
competition and that companies are limited by distribution channels.
Serviceable obtainable market (SOM)
SOM is the realistically obtainable market, limited by factors such as
competition, cost, outreach required, distribution channels, and so
on. These are the customers you have a realistic chance at closing.
In our hospital example, the TAM might be all of the hospitals in the
world. SAM would impose some limitations: the hospitals must be loca-
ted within the US, must have more than 20 rooms on the cardiac floor, or
must be running a particular operating system. SOM would further limit
the market by imposing likelihood constraints: if 20 percent of hospitals
are in a long-term contract with a competitor, they are likely not
obtainable. When considering how big you can potentially grow a com-
pany, the most relevant estimate is almost always the SOM.
37
KNOWING YOUR MARKET

FIGURE 3-1. TAM/SAM/SOM market levels
MARKET TRAJECTORY
Market-size calculations give you a snapshot of overall market potential at
a given moment in time. The market trajectory refers to whether a given
market is expanding or contracting. It’s about trends. A market can grow
or shrink as a function of many different factors. In the previous example,
perhaps those 5,723 hospitals are facing budget cuts and 5 percent of
them will disappear in the next year (this assumption is totally fictional).
If that year-over-year (YOY) trend continues, perhaps selling to hospitals
isn’t a great long-term play, and it’s time to consider selling to clinics
instead.
For consumer products, demographic changes are an important fac-
tor in predicting market trajectory. One commonly cited example is the
number of senior citizens (age 65 or older) in the US, which is rapidly
increasing. There were 40 million seniors in the US in 2010 (13 percent
CHAPTER 3
38

of the population), but projections indicate that this number will grow to
72 million (20 percent of the US population) by 2030. This bit of infor-
mation doesn’t tell you anything about the purchasing habits of this dem-
ographic, but since the population is growing, it is reasonable to expect
demand for products serving it (including health-related devices, home-
assistance tools, entertainment platforms, etc.) to grow as well.
At other times, the number of potential users may remain constant,
but shifts in industry business practices might lead to market expansion
or contraction by way of changing purchasing habits. For example, one of
the reasons that BlackBerry’s market share declined substantially is that
companies began to allow employees to use their own mobile devices at
work.
Gathering data on numbers and trends can be somewhat challeng-
ing. Google searches surface news articles or blog posts that mention
market size, but those posts are often pulling their data from market
research firms’ white papers. The white papers themselves are rich sour-
ces of information, but they can cost hundreds to thousands of dollars.
Occasionally, you can gain access by signing up for a trial. Quora is
a good place to go to see if others have posted relevant data, or to ask a
question of an industry expert yourself. And Steve Blank, one of the crea-
tors of the Lean Startup, maintains a market research section on his blog
that links to open data sets and helpful market-sizing resources.
It’s less important to have exact numbers than it is to have logical
justifications for believing that a market you’re looking to enter can sup-
port your potential company. Running analyses based on several different
scenarios (called a sensitivity analysis) can help you evaluate the degree to
which a specific assumption weighs on a given outcome. When doing
back-of-the-envelope estimates of market size, run the numbers based on
best case, worst case, and expected outcome.
MARKET ANALYSIS
The overall dollar value of the market, the number of potential customers,
and the trajectory are all important variables, but market research is about
more than just quantitative facts and statistics. We started this book with
a look at the factors that have combined to drive growth in the hardware
startup “industry” (decreasing cost of components, better and faster
prototyping technology, etc.). The goal of such research is to understand
the interplay between forces shaping your market. Studying the trends
39
KNOWING YOUR MARKET

underlying a market will help you understand your customer, develop
effective brand positioning, and, eventually, communicate the potential of
your idea to an investor.
Venture capitalist and Hunch cofounder Chris Dixon calls this type
of market sizing analysis “using narratives, not numbers.” To understand
your market in narrative terms, consider economic, social, political, and
technological factors driving its growth. For example, according to indus-
try analysts, more data will be generated by machines than people next
year. The factors driving this phenomenon include advances in analytics
tools for processing big data, cloud computing (no need to buy machines
to dedicate to analysis), and ubiquitous connectivity. Combined, these
trends indicate that demand for enterprise Internet of Things hardware is
likely to increase.
Once you have a handle on market size and trends shaping your sec-
tor, it’s time to look at the specific companies and brands that operate
within it. One of the most important things to determine is how crowded
your market is. More-established markets typically have more existing
players, including some big brands.
Consider smart watches. The first watches appeared in the market
approximately 10 years ago and were primarily for receiving time-
sensitive information (weather, stock quotes, etc). As the technology
developed, fitness-tracking features were added, which increased the
appeal to athletes. Over time, these devices have added features—GPS,
ability to receive text messages and email, heart rate monitoring, etc.—
and become increasingly useful to a mainstream audience. There are cur-
rently dozens of watches on Best Buy’s Smart Watch page (and there are
undoubtedly more that Best Buy doesn’t carry). Most are from large com-
panies, including Samsung and Sony. But there are also offerings from
startups such as Pebble.
There isn’t a specific number of companies that separates a “crowded
market” from one that’s still developing. What matters is the combination
of how many companies are in the market, how strong their brands are,
and how much money is being spent in the space. If you’re going to com-
pete in a market sector with many incumbents, knowing the players
involved will help you identify and prioritize your differentiators.
CHAPTER 3
40

DIFFERENTIATORS
Differentiators are what distinguish you from your competition. They are
the answer to the question posed earlier: “why would a customer buy my
product over my competitor’s offering?” Particularly in a more mature
market, some of the products you’re competing with belong to companies
with millions of dollars to spend on advertising and physical showrooms
already in place. Startups can compete with incumbent giants, but it’s
critical that you determine in advance if what you’d like to build is differ-
ent enough to claim meaningful market share. If you’re producing an
activity-tracking product to compete with Jawbone Up, for example, will
your product compete on price (by being less expensive)? Will it offer
more features? Perhaps it will be more accurate or have a more stylish
design?
The most basic way to get a handle on your competition is to identify
which products exist and make a feature comparison matrix (see
Figure 3-2); this mimics the process that consumers go through when
they buy devices (particularly if they’re shopping online). A good way to
start is to do extensive online research on as many product-related key-
words or phrases as you can think of. In addition to unearthing competi-
tive products, it will give you a preliminary sense of how the products are
marketed, what sites (and physical stores) are selling them, and what pub-
lications or blogs are reviewing them. Once you have compiled a list of
products, go looking for reviews (Amazon.com can be a particularly use-
ful site to check). Read all of the reviews, and make a note of the features
or usability factors that customers are praising or complaining about.
This is an excellent source of unvarnished feedback.
Try not to let your research happen entirely online. You, and your
competitors, are building physical products. A feature matrix can tell you
only so much. It can’t convey how pleasant the user experience is, or if
the components have a high-quality feel. Get out there and touch the
competition’s offerings, to the greatest extent possible.
41
KNOWING YOUR MARKET

FIGURE 3-2. A feature comparison matrix
Differentiators aren’t limited to cost, design, and features. You can
also appeal to convenience, quality, or specifically targeted use cases. You
can offer better customer service or a more intimate or positive customer
experience. The important thing is to have a solid understanding of what
already exists and why people are buying it. This will help you identify
gaps in the market—unmet needs that you can set out to fulfill. As you
build your brand, this early knowledge of your differentiators will help
you to position yourself effectively.
If you’re not competing in an established market, you have a differ-
ent set of problems to consider. First and foremost: does anyone really
want your widget? If you truly have no competition, is it because no one
really cares about the “problem” you’re trying to solve? Creating technol-
ogy in search of a problem might mean that the timing isn’t right for your
offering. You will not only have to explain your product to an uneducated
audience, but you’ll also have to convince them that they should pay you
money for a solution to a problem they didn’t know they had.
On the flip side, however, you might truly be onto something big and
new. Lots of successful companies were founded to meet the needs of
what initially seemed like a niche market. Jawbone, for example, started
as a company that built noise-canceling headsets for US soldiers. The
CHAPTER 3
42

thought that the technology might appeal more broadly to consumers
came several years after initial product development. The “connected
home” space is another relatively recent transition from niche hobbyist
community into major consumer market. If your product is built upon a
real technological breakthrough, there simply might not be a market out
there yet.
Chapter 10 goes deeper into how to leverage your differentiators to
build a distinct brand, as well as marketing within both crowded and non-
established markets. For now, at the preprototype phase, you should be
looking at the data you uncover with a critical eye and with the goal of
deciding whether the market you’re considering entering is big enough
for the type of company you’re envisioning building.
Segmenting Your Market
Market segmentation is the process that most marketers and brand devel-
opers use to identify groups that are most likely to receive a new product
positively. Segmentation involves dividing a broad potential market into
distinct subsets of people who share common characteristics or needs.
The customers within those subsets will likely share a similar response to
particular media channels or advertising approaches. Once the brand has
identified relevant segment attributes, it can design a distinct marketing
mix most likely to reach them.
The goal of segmentation in the preprototype phase is to help you
discover and understand who you’re building for, so that you can get both
your product features and brand positioning off on the right foot from the
very beginning. You can’t build an MVP without knowing whom you’re
building for.
Segmentation helps you identify and focus your energy on the
customers who are most likely to buy from you. It’s a way to identify
potential early adopters as well as customers to reach out to later in your
company’s lifetime. An ideal target segment is distinct enough to be
measurable and also large. It should be stable (meaning it will be around
and relatively unchanged for a while) or growing, and it should have
enough purchasing power to enable you to turn a profit.
CUSTOMER AQUISITION COST (CAC) AND LIFETIME VALUE (LTV)
As discussed in “Market Size” on page 37, a meaningful target segment
must be accessible, which means that you can reach out and market your
43
KNOWING YOUR MARKET

product to that audience. Software startups, particularly those practicing
the Lean Startup methodology, typically keep track of two metrics related
to customer acquisition from the very start. The first is customer acquisi-
tion cost (CAC). This is the amount of money you spend to get a customer
to buy your product or try your service. It includes money spent on mar-
ket research, advertising, promotions (“$10 off your first order”), and
sales (including the salaries of your sales force).
The second is lifetime value (LTV), which is the amount of money you
will theoretically make from a given customer over the duration of his
relationship with your company. Chapter 10 spends a lot more time dis-
cussing CAC and LTV in the context of distribution channels, but even in
the early, preprototype days, it’s important to develop a sense of what it
might cost to reach your customers. If they don’t pay attention to tradi-
tionally inexpensive marketing channels, or if you can’t reach them
without extensive effort or cost (in terms of time or money), they might
not truly be a viable market segment for your product, particularly when
you’re just starting out.
DEMOGRAPHICS AND PSYCHOGRAPHICS
Markets can be segmented according to many different factors. Two of
the most common are user characteristics and user behaviors. Segmenting a
market on the basis of customer characteristics involves two types of cus-
tomer profiling:
Demographics
Demographics are quantifiable statistics that describe a particular pop-
ulation. A marketer’s basic demographic profile might include age,
race or ethnicity, and gender. Other demographic data includes mari-
tal status; highest education level completed; socioeconomic factors
(household income, social class); occupation; generational cohort
(e.g., Baby Boomer, Generation X); and number of children. Some-
times, demographic profiling incorporates geography; zip codes are
commonly used to segment regionally.
Psychographics
Psychographics classify individuals by interests, activities, and opin-
ions (often referred to by marketers as IAO variables). These factors
can include personality types, attitudes, hobbies, or lifestyle. Think
about stereotypical high school cliques. When you hear “jock,”
“nerd,” or “punk,” you can probably envision a member of that group
CHAPTER 3
44

and have a sense of that person’s likelihood of buying a particular
article of clothing or album.
Marketers often use a combination of psychographics and geographi-
cally bounded demographics to fine-tune their outreach strategies.
PRIZM, a segmentation tool developed by consumer information com-
pany Nielsen, sorts the population of the US into 66 personas (“Money
and Brains,” “Bohemian Mix,” “Middleburg Managers”) related to demo-
graphic and psychographic traits. Searching by zip code reveals the break-
down of various personas in a given area. While tools such as PRIZM are
geared toward big brands focused on highly specific targeting, looking
over the personas can help new entrepreneurs develop a sense of the fac-
tors that experienced marketers consider in their own segmentation
studies.
BEHAVIORAL SEGMENTATION
Behavioral segmentation is another framework for identifying potential
customers. If you’re working within a crowded space (say, fitness track-
ers) and have chosen to compete by making a product with better battery
life or greater ease of use, your most relevant market segment is likely not
identifiable simply by gender or household income, but by technological
sophistication. You might want to target frequent buyers, bulk buyers, or
deal hunters. You might want to approach benefit or behavioral segmen-
tation through exercises such as persona building around a given usage
scenario: envision the most likely use cases for the product you want to
produce, and then construct a persona that has the type of needs the use
case fulfills.
A subset of behavioral segmentation is segmenting by buyer motiva-
tion. This involves understanding the type of benefit the user is seeking
from the product. An individual who is considering buying a sweater, for
example, might prioritize warmth, comfort, durability, price, or style. One
or 
two 
primary 
motivators 
drive 
most 
purchasing 
decisions.
Understanding the ones most common to your sector will help you strate-
gically differentiate.
Within the B2B world, identifying your target customers involves dif-
ferent types of segmentation, but the concept remains the same. When
identifying potential client companies, you might want to think about
grouping customers by industry, standard industrial classification (SIC)
category, size, market cap, or geography. On an individual level, you’ll
45
KNOWING YOUR MARKET

want to consider the needs and motivations of both the person who
makes the purchasing decisions and the likely end user.
Usually, the appeal to the purchaser is based on economics, and the
needs of the end users are technological or functional. It’s possible to
evaluate B2B customers using behavioral analyses as well. For example,
some companies will buy at particular times of the year.
Chapter 4 discusses branding in much more detail, and Chapter 10
returns to marketing issues. For now, the takeaway is to understand the
importance of thinking about your customer before prototyping, so that
you can build smarter. If you’d like to learn more about market research,
segmentation, and other aspects of brand-development marketing, Mar-
ketingProfs is an excellent source of information and tutorials.
Customer Development
So now you have a sense of how to segment your market and identify
potential customer affinity groups. However, when building a company,
you must do more than think theoretical thoughts about who your cus-
tomers are, particularly if you’re working in a crowded space. You need to
get out there and talk to them.
This is one of the core tenets of Lean Startup that’s as applicable to
hardware startups as it is to software. You want to be doing customer
interviews before you have any kind of functional prototype. You might
not be able to give these potential customers access to a series of iterative
alpha releases for them to play with, but you can show them designs or
models and discuss potential features. Ideally, you can map each feature
in your MVP back to a clearly articulated customer need. (See “Lumo
BodyTech: A Case Study” on page 47, for an example of this process in
action)
Hardware product development mistakes are particularly costly, in
terms of both time and money. The goal of customer-driven development
is to incorporate user feedback into the product development cycle in
order to avoid building something that doesn’t meet the needs of poten-
tial buyers. A good place to start the process is to reach out to individuals
in several of the market segments you’re considering and sit down with
them to learn about their pain points. That will help you identify the real
needs of your prospective customers—emotional, cognitive, and
physical—and to discover how they’re currently meeting those needs.
Here are some common questions for customer discovery interviews:
CHAPTER 3
46

• Do you have Problem X?
• How much does Problem X cost you (in terms of time and money)?
• How are you currently solving Problem X?
• What do you like best about this existing solution to Problem X?
What do you like least?
• What is the perfect solution to Problem X?
• Would My New Product solve Problem X?
• Why?
The last question—“Why?”—can turn a conversation from a surface-
level survey into a discussion that unearths deeper needs, issues, and
motivations.
It’s important to phrase the questions you ask as neutrally as possi-
ble. You don’t want to allow biased or leading questions to prompt your
interviewees to respond in a certain way. It can also be difficult for entre-
preneurs to really listen, particularly if the interview turns out to chal-
lenge their assumptions about a particular market or problem. Try to
keep an open mind throughout.
For both B2C and B2B products, it’s often ideal to sit back and
observe as your target customers use whatever their current solution is to
the problem you’re trying to solve. You might learn more by watching
their actual use case (and possibly hearing them narrate their issues as
they go) than by asking them to articulate their needs. Your goal is to gain
insights, even if they disprove your hypothesis.
Lumo BodyTech: A Case Study
Monisha Perkash is the CEO and cofounder of wearables company Lumo Body-
Tech. Its products, the Lumo Lift and Lumo Back, use sensors and software to
help wearers monitor their posture and be more active. Here, Monisha details
Lumo’s approach to gathering early customer feedback as part of an iterative
prototyping process.
“My cofounders and I came together without knowing what company we
wanted to start,” Monisha says. They were motivated by the desire to solve an
important problem and make a positive impact in the world. The team spent
six months exploring ideas, occasionally creating low-resolution prototypes for
designs that were particularly appealing.
47
KNOWING YOUR MARKET

Monisha and her cofounders evaluated ideas based on three criteria: fea-
sibility, viability, and desirability. Feasibility was an investigation into technol-
ogy. Did the technology necessary to build the product exist, or was it almost
there? Viability pertained to the likelihood that a product could become a self-
sustaining business. Desirability focused on the needs of a theoretical cus-
tomer. Would people want the device? Did it solve a pain point that customers
would be willing to spend money or time on?
During this exploratory period, cofounder Andrew Chang started taking
classes to help with his back pain. He found the experience life-changing and
began to think about ways to incorporate technology into improving posture.
The team had noted the increasing prevalence of sensors in their daily lives
and were intrigued by the idea of helping people improve their health via a
wearable sensor device.
The Lumo team began their process for evaluating the feasibility, viability,
and desirability of the posture-device idea. They came up with the idea of a
sensor that, when placed on the wearer’s lower back, would help promote
proper alignment. Using a post to Monisha’s alma mater’s alumni mailing list,
the team recruited test subjects for early feedback. They made sure to select a
diverse mix of genders and ages.
When gathering user feedback, the team avoided yes-or-no questions.
They kept all questions broad and open-ended. “Tell me about how you’re
managing your back pain today.” “What solutions are you currently using?”
“How are they working out for you?” “What would you change about this
current solution?” Above all, Monisha emphasizes the importance of asking
why. She says, “You really want to discover the emotional need that person has
around that issue.”
The team continually refined their idea based on what they were learning
about the customer pain point. Their lowest-resolution prototypes were made
of paper, which they used to solicit feedback from 20 people. Several individu-
als suggested incorporating the sensor into an adhesive, similar to a nicotine
or birth-control patch. The Lumo team incorporated that feedback into their
next prototype, putting the sensor onto a sticker. It was a failure. “People con-
ceptually thought they would want a sticker on their back,” says Monisha. “In
practice, they really didn’t. It got icky.”
The sticker design for the Lumo Back was gooey, collected lint, and was
unpleasant for users with body hair. But most important, the team realized
that it had a clinical feel. Since they wanted a more polished consumer experi-
ence, they recognized the need to rework the design. “We didn’t want a ‘clini-
CHAPTER 3
48

cal’ product,” Monisha says. “We felt that a strong consumer product was the
best way to attract an audience, get feedback, iterate, and eventually put out
new products.”
After determining that the patch wouldn’t work, they switched to a clip-on
device that attached to the waistband of a garment worn by just about every-
one: underwear. The closer the sensor was to the body, the more accurately it
would read the tilt and angle of the wearer’s back. However, feedback from the
test group was clear: it was not a good user experience. Some commented that
it was socially awkward. Others expressed concerns that it would fall into the
toilet.
Eventually, the Lumo team decided to try a design inspired by a heart rate
monitor. They bought heart rate monitors and wore them around their own
waists for a week. After deciding that the monitor bands were comfortable,
they once again reached out to their testers for feedback. Finding it positive,
they decided to launch with the band form factor.
Despite conventional wisdom, Monisha believes that it is possible to do
lean iteration as a hardware startup. “We went through 30 different design iter-
ations and low-resolution prototypes before bringing this one to market,” she
says. She emphasizes the importance of being “scrappy and resourceful.”
In addition to paper and other craft supplies, the team used readily avail-
able, inexpensive items to test designs. At one point, they went to The Con-
tainer Store and bought tiny containers approximately the same size as the
case that would hold their sensor. They attached the containers to elastic
bands and wore them.
Once tester feedback was positive on both design and function, Monisha
and her cofounders went to a prototyping facility and built 50 functional proto-
types. Soon after, they launched a successful Kickstarter campaign for the
LUMOback (now the Lumo Back) v. 1.
The Lumo BodyTech founders worked through dozens of ideas before
finding one that both resonated with their desire to build something meaning-
ful and filled a real need in the market. And after finding the right idea, they
spent an extended amount of time developing the right form factor and feature
set. Lumo has continued to listen to its target market as it has expanded its
product line. The new Lumo Lift incorporates both features (upper-body
posture feedback) and design (a more fashionable, customizable device)
gleaned from Lumo Back customer feedback.
49
KNOWING YOUR MARKET

While it is undoubtedly more difficult to apply Lean Startup principles to a
hardware startup, with the right scrappy, resourceful approach, it can be done.
First-time entrepreneurs often wonder how to reach people in seg-
ments within which they don’t have extensive contacts. An ideal way to do
that is to use your existing network. It’s worth building a LinkedIn pres-
ence to see who your second-degree connections are. A warm introduc-
tion—having a mutual colleague or acquaintance introduce you to the
person you want to approach—is most likely to convince people to sit
down with you. Beyond your friends and family, consider reaching out
through an alumni network. Online, sites like LinkedIn, Facebook, and
Meetup bring groups of like-minded people together. Blogger networks
might also be helpful. Craigslist, Reddit, and Mechanical Turk users are
often willing to take a survey (though typically for some type of compen-
sation). Offline, reach out to local clubs or professional associations.
You can also leverage online marketing tools for product hypothesis
validation on a larger scale: you can test and validate product features and
price elasticity without building a single prototype. Make a few special-
ized landing pages, each offering your product, but highlighting a differ-
ent feature set, design, or price point. That way you can identify the mar-
ket(s) most worth pursuing in the early stage of your company, when you
likely don’t have extensive dedicated resources for marketing or outreach.
Buy Google AdWords to drive traffic to each landing page, targeting
the customer segments you’ve identified as having the potential to be
early beachhead markets. Using Google Analytics (or another analytics
dashboard), track which keywords and sources bring people to your page.
Observe the number of people who land on the page versus the number
who provide you with an email address or other indication of interest in
preordering. Services such as LaunchRock and Beta List, which enable
users to sign up and “share” your company among their networks (in
exchange for early admission to a beta), can also help you gauge interest
and get the word out.
You should consider reaching out to people who have signed up with
a more thorough survey about what interested them in your product. Sur-
veyMonkey is an excellent tool for such a project. At a minimum, you are
beginning to gather a list of interested customers to contact when
announcing a crowdfunding campaign or taking preorders in the future.
CHAPTER 3
50

If you’re building a product with integrated software, consider using
the software to validate your assumptions about the functions your users
care about. Produce mockups, or even a rough alpha version of the soft-
ware, and see what resonates.
To the greatest extent possible, you want to validate your assump-
tions about market size, desired product features, and price points well in
advance of building your hardware MVP. Once you’ve started down the
road to manufacturing, feature changes become increasingly difficult.
Your goal is to be the best at your core use case from day one. You can
incorporate the nice-to-have features in a subsequent release.
For more techniques, consider reading some of the many excellent
resources that focus specifically on customer discovery and product devel-
opment. Steve Blank’s book The Four Steps to the Epiphany (K&S Ranch) is
one of the classics. His blog is also rich with case studies and worksheets
that can help you conduct efficient interviews. Lean Analytics (O’Reilly),
by Alistair Croll and Benjamin Yoskovitz, will help you use data to find
your customers and develop the right product for their needs.
51
KNOWING YOUR MARKET


Branding
As you go through the customer development and market
research processes, you are collecting valuable information that will help
you formulate a brand identity. Your brand is the personification of your
company, and developing a strong brand is absolutely critical to your suc-
cess. It builds a foundation for a long-term relationship with customers.
Branding can feel like a rather elusive concept, as the value-add of a
strong brand is difficult to quantify and measure. Startups often under-
value the importance of building a brand, particularly if the founding
team is strong on tech but has no marketing or sales experience (as is
often the case). In any early-stage company, there is much to do and pre-
cious few resources to do it with. There is never enough time, money, or
people, so most founders put all of their resources toward nailing the
product. Branding, marketing, sales strategy…those are problems to push
off until a later date.
Don’t make this mistake.
The problem with this approach for a hardware company is that your
product will be competing for shelf space (digital or physical) with estab-
lished players. When you are on a physical shelf, there is no website with
help text or comparison charts that can explain the virtues of your prod-
uct. Your package messaging must be appealing enough to convince a
busy shopper to put your widget into her cart. If your product is on the
shelf next to one of similar price manufactured by a competitor who has
better name recognition, your product is at a disadvantage. People have
many choices, but little time. They’re going to grab the product they’ve
heard of, or the brand they are loyal to.
While startups often neglect brand building, Fortune 500 companies
prioritize it. They treat branding as a critical facet of their business strat-
egy. A study by Interbrand and JP Morgan determined that, on average,
53
CHAPTER 4

brand accounts for close to a third of shareholder value. Though valuing
intangibles is notoriously difficult, the study says:
The brand is a special intangible that in many businesses is the most
important asset. This is because of the economic impact that brands have.
They influence the choices of customers, employees, investors and govern-
ment authorities. In a world of abundant choices, such influence is crucial
for commercial success.
In 2013, Apple was the most valuable brand name in the world, worth
an estimated $98.3 billion. Google was second on the list, at $93.3 billion,
and Coca-Cola was third, with $79.2 billion.
Brand equity is the monetary value that comes from having a recog-
nizable brand. Marketing experts have found that positive name associa-
tion enables a company to justify a price premium over similar goods.
Think of the product options on the shelf of your drugstore: is Clorox
bleach better than store-brand bleach? Is Advil better than generic ibupro-
fen? In both cases, the generic is exactly the same product, but it costs
more. And yet, people still buy it. That price premium is Clorox’s and
Advil’s brand equity.
In the world of devices, your product is not exactly the same as your
competitor’s product. At a minimum, you likely have a few different fea-
tures and a different design. But when customers are deciding what to
buy, they are purchasing a product to meet a need or fulfill a want. If
either your device or your competitor’s device will satisfy their objectives
for approximately the same price, brand becomes a powerful
differentiator.
Emotional responses to products matter. According to Alina Wheel-
er’s seminal brand-strategy guide Designing Brand Identity (Wiley), brands
serve three primary functions:
Navigation
A strong brand helps customers make a choice when presented with
a wide array of options.
Reassurance
In a world with so many choices, a brand reassures customers that
the product they’ve chosen is high quality and trustworthy.
CHAPTER 4
54

Engagement
Brand visuals and communications make customers feel that the
brand understands them. The result is that customers identify with
the brand.
A recognizable brand can help a company increase (or defend) its
market share by inspiring trust and enhancing the perception of quality.
Having customers who identify with your brand engenders loyalty.
Brand loyalty is important in an industry in which product turnover
is high. Within a few years, new technology renders many hardware prod-
ucts outdated. People upgrade consumer electronics (phones, music play-
ers, cameras, speakers) every few years. High-quality software products
are developed to engender what’s known as lock-in: over time, customers
become accustomed to the feature set, learn advanced shortcuts, store
their data, or create large libraries of files. They become loyal customers
and will often pay to upgrade the software as new versions are released.
They have invested time and energy in learning how to use it, and this
makes them reluctant to switch to a new product. This phenomenon is
particularly prevalent in enterprise software, where corporations want to
ensure continuous availability of data and internal documents. They don’t
want to risk losing document integrity porting to a new product.
With most hardware products, this kind of lock-in is difficult to
achieve. Unlike with software, where you can push an update that incor-
porates new technology (and suggest that your users buy it), hardware
upgrades eventually require new physical components encased in new
plastic. At the point of purchase, whether on the shelf or online, your cus-
tomers will be confronted by alternatives. Strong branding generates loy-
alty and makes customers more likely to have you top-of-mind when they
intend to purchase; even when they’re not actively intending to purchase,
you want your brand to be top-of-mind.
Besides loyalty, a strong brand gives you leverage when expanding
your offering into a new category. This is a particularly important consid-
eration for connected-device startups or for wearables companies that
aspire to be platforms. According to Sean Murphy of product develop-
ment consultancy Smart Design (see his discussion of branding and
design in “From Conception to Prototype with Smart Design: A Case
Study” on page 56), “There really aren’t ‘connected products’; there are
just connected brands. You don’t just experience the product; you experi-
ence an ecosystem.”
55
BRANDING

From Conception to Prototype with Smart
Design: A Case Study
Sean Murphy was previously the Director of Design Engineering at Smart
Design, a design innovation consultancy with expertise in both digital and
physical products. Its client roster includes powerhouse companies that pro-
duce both designed products (Oxo) and consumer electronics (Flip, Toshiba).
Here, he tells us about the process Smart Design uses to take its clients from
conception to prototype.
The Smart Design team began the process with a qualitative user
research study. “We start with a hypothesis and a design instinct around a
product, and we put that in front of who we think the target audience is,” Sean
says. Participants in the qualitative study often come through recruiters, to
ensure an unbiased and independent set of opinions. There are typically 8 to 12
participants, representing a range of target customer personas. Occasionally, if
a client has a specialty focus (e.g., for a product geared toward the deaf popu-
lation), the client will provide the participants. The team will set up in a poten-
tial user’s home and watch him go through the usage scenarios. The product is
often in very raw form, sometimes just a paper prototype or illustration.
The emphasis in these early conversations is on identifying the important
functional elements that the product should have, and how the product will fit
into the user’s daily life. “This builds a narrative for the design vision,” Sean
says. The team’s goal is to assign a relative value to the different functional ele-
ments according to how important they are for solving the customer’s prob-
lem. The resulting framework is the basis for the design. At this point, it’s still
flexible, but it’s a reference for what users care about and why.
The design research team might present brand elements to the partici-
pants during the qualitative study, addressing how a product makes them feel
or what it means to them. The team wants to understand what is important,
and why. “We try to make it abstract, to allow them to pour their own narrative
onto the product,” Sean says. “You want to hear things like, ‘This is like this
other product that I had 10 years ago and loved for these reasons.’” The team
might also ask the participants to rank competitive brands, or do some associ-
ation exercises. This helps the client gain insights into tone and positioning.
The Smart Design team uses the information gleaned from the qualitative
study to create one or more design directions for the product. If the client’s
schedule and budget allow for it, the Smart Design team will return to the qual-
itative study participants (and bring in some new ones) to show them several
possible prototypes and solicit more feedback. The goal is to observe user
CHAPTER 4
56

reactions. It’s a learning and refinement process, geared toward guiding fur-
ther development.
The team presents multiple versions of a product to ensure that the user
doesn’t think of a prototype as the product. “Perhaps you have a strong prod-
uct ID, but you’re taking refined prototypes to the field that are more about
usability than ID,” Sean says. “From the design perspective, you go to the field
to learn and refine rather than validate.” This second-round conversation can
also help develop a greater understanding of brand perception.
At various points in the design process, the client might express a desire
for a more rigorous quantitative study with a larger sample size. The quantita-
tive analysis is often a web-based survey with questions such as, “On a scale of
1 to 10, how important are these three features?” and “Would you rather have
feature X or feature Y?” According to Sean, “It’s designed to be an A/B test for
a physical product.”
A quantitative study can give the team additional data to help them
anchor design elements and reinforce what was learned from the qualitative
interviews. “One of the big challenges for design is to make decisions not feel
so subjective,” Sean says. “There are always elements of subjectivity in a
design process, but when you’re trying to make a decision as to something
that influences the cost, it’s good to have a more rigorous rationale.”
After the design principles are established, product development contin-
ues along the industrial design process, blending together features and inter-
actions with distinct styling directions. In general, it takes one to three months
to get to a design prototype, depending on the complexity. Wearables and
products that are ergonomic can require multiple iterations and user studies.
Often, a company has not yet engaged a contract manufacturer, so the design
is subject to revision as the internals of the product change.
Many products have technology requirements that act as a limiting factor
on the design, so it’s important to work with a designer who understands the
technological limitations up front. A contract manufacturer will do its best to
work with the design files it’s given, but designers without experience in a par-
ticular market might neglect to incorporate certain elements—say, holes for
venting heat. The manufacturer will add in the necessary holes, possibly at the
expense of aesthetics. The smaller the product, the greater the possibility that
a design will be unable to accommodate the necessary internals. Wearables
are particularly challenging.
Once a product gets to tooling, it’s difficult and costly to make changes.
To mitigate this type of problem, Smart Design has a technical team that
57
BRANDING

understands both frontend and backend needs. Sean says, “One of the advan-
tages to working with someone who stays engaged all the way through the pro-
cess is that the same designer is there when something changes, which almost
certainly will happen.” 
Working with a consultancy for the full design-to-production process can
cost well into the six-figure range, which is often prohibitive for startups. Since
the contract is typically priced by phase (in which each phase is tied to a deliv-
erable), a startup might want to approach a firm with its qualitative and quanti-
tative research already done. One of the value-adds of working with a firm that
has technological, design, and branding experience all under the same roof is
that simultaneous development of all three will help the startup ensure that no
one aspect is treated as an afterthought.
Jawbone started out as company called Aliph; Jawbone was the name
of its first wireless headset. It released several subsequent models of
headsets over the years—Jawbone Prime, Jawbone Icon, Jawbone Era—
before eventually dropping the name Aliph and rebranding as simply
Jawbone. Under the successful Jawbone brand, the company expanded
from headsets into portable speakers (Jawbone Jambox) and then a fitness
device (Jawbone Up). The packaging for each of these devices reads:
“ERA by Jawbone,” “UP by Jawbone,” etc.
Prioritizing brand recognition gives a company a leg up on a new
launch, in terms of both awareness and perception of quality. Regardless
of the distribution channels you pursue, you won’t sell many widgets if
you’re an unknown quantity.
So how do you build a recognizable brand?
Your Mission
First and foremost, a brand must have a mission. Earlier in this chapter,
we touched on the importance of identifying a problem that truly moti-
vates you and resonates with others. Your mission is what your company
is doing, why, and for whom. You should be able to articulate this suc-
cinctly in the form of an elevator pitch or mission statement (sometimes
called a mantra). Your brand mantra is a statement of why you exist. Con-
sider the following examples:
CHAPTER 4
58

Apple
“Committed to bringing the best personal computing experience to
students, educators, creative professionals, and consumers around
the world through its innovative hardware, software, and Internet
offerings.”
Microsoft
“To enable people and businesses throughout the world to realize
their full potential.”
Nike
“To bring inspiration and innovation to every athlete* in the world.
(*if you have a body, you are an athlete)”
Google
“To organize the world’s information and make it universally accessi-
ble and useful.”
These sentences distill each company’s intent and purpose into a sin-
gle statement that represents the core of the brand’s identity. All other
facets of branding—personality, assets, and experience—are outgrowths
of this statement of purpose.
The company’s products also reflect this purpose. Consider Apple’s
and Microsoft’s mission statements in the context of their product lines.
Apple builds beautiful products and prioritizes a seamless user experi-
ence. Microsoft builds exemplary productivity tools used in enterprise
companies all over the world.
Knowing your mission helps your company in both an internal and a
public-facing capacity. Internally, it serves as a guide for employees to
know what they stand for and what they’re working toward. It provides a
company with a framework to evaluate strategies and products: to what
extent does a specific action or product release advance your mission and
align with your core values?
Sean Murphy (see his discussion of branding and design in “From
Conception to Prototype with Smart Design: A Case Study” on page 56)
points out:
There’s a tremendous pressure to cut corners when you’re a startup. Hav-
ing strong brand principles gives you something to refer back to during
development. As the product evolves, you’re going to make decisions with
respect to what you understand your brand to be. The software, the service
59
BRANDING

components…it will all be viewed in the context of answering the question
“Who are we?”
Publicly, your mission statement is a communication tool that
frames your brand in the minds of consumers. You are telling people
what you stand for and why you exist. In his book Grow (Crown Busi-
ness), marketing expert and former Procter & Gamble global marketing
officer Jim Stengel advocates that a company should have a brand ideal, a
“higher-order benefit it brings to the world” that satisfies a fundamental
human value that improves people’s lives. In his own words, people’s
lives can be improved by engaging five fundamental human values:
Eliciting Joy
Activating experiences of happiness, wonder, and limitless
possibility.
Enabling Connection
Enhancing the ability of people to connect with each other and the
world in meaningful ways.
Inspiring Exploration
Helping people explore new horizons and new experiences.
Evoking Pride
Giving people increased confidence, strength, security, and vitality.
Impacting Society
Affecting society broadly, including by challenging the status quo and
redefining categories.
These ideals elicit emotional responses. Emotional connections lead
to deeper relationships with customers. Brand communication skills
expert Carmine Gallo has interviewed numerous CEOs about what their
brands stand for. He recalls Tony Hsieh, founder of Zappos, replying
with one word: “happiness.” Richard Branson, CEO of Virgin Group:
“fun.”
New founders might be skeptical of the real impact of values and
ideals on important metrics, such as sales numbers. While a direct link is
difficult to quantify, Stengel cites a study that examined the connection
between financial performance and customer engagement and loyalty
over a 10-year period. The researchers looked at 50,000 brands and found
that in the minds of consumers, the 50 top high-growth brands were
CHAPTER 4
60

linked with an ideal. These 50 companies (called the “Stengel 50”) grew
three times as fast as their competitors over the 10-year period. One
example of such a company is Pampers:
Pampers’ brand ideal, for example, its true reason for being, is not selling
the most disposable diapers in the world. Pampers exists to help mothers
care for their babies’ and toddlers’ healthy, happy development. In looking
beyond transactions, an ideal opens up endless possibilities, including end-
less possibilities for growth and profit.
You can’t be all things to all people. A well-defined set of values and
authentic messaging will help you attract customers who share your val-
ues and vision, and care about what you are trying to do for the world. As
a startup, it can also help you find investors and potential employees who
are aligned with your mission.
Brand Identity and Personality
Putting in the effort to arrive at a deep understanding of your brand’s val-
ues and mission will help you define and project a coherent brand iden-
tity. As defined in branding expert and author of The Brand Gap (New
Riders) Marty Neumeier’s The Dictionary of Brand (an excellent resource
for brand builders), brand identity is “the outward expression of a brand,
including its trademark, name, communications, and visual appearance.”
Brand identity is the sum of all of the parts. Identity is deliberately
constructed by the company, with the goal of ensuring that customers
both recognize the brand as an entity and can articulate how it differs
from the competition. Brand image is the consumer’s perception of this
identity: how the market views your brand. You want the market view to
align with the impression you are trying to create.
As Neumeier puts it, “[A brand] is not what you say it is, it’s what
they say it is.” To have an impact on your brand image, you must actively
manage your brand identity.
Professional brand strategists use a variety of methods and frame-
works to define and shape identity. In Designing Brand Identity, Alina
Wheeler breaks down the process into five steps:
Conducting Research
Fully investigate the existing perception of the brand, both in the
market and in the minds of stakeholders (constituents who have a ves-
61
BRANDING

ted interest in a company, such as employees, investors, customers,
partners, etc.).
Clarifying Strategy
Define goals, identify key messages, and determine appropriate
strategies for naming, branding, and positioning.
Designing Identity
Define a unifying “big idea” and develop a visual strategy.
Creating Touchpoints
Produce visual elements, refine the look and feel, and protect
trademarks.
Managing Assets
Develop and implement a launch strategy to unveil brand elements,
define brand standards, and establish guidelines to ensure
consistency.
This process might seem like an extensive undertaking, particularly
for a resource-constrained startup, and it can be a long and time-
consuming process. But even in the days before a startup has stakehold-
ers aside from the team, it should be thinking about brand identity. Jinal
Shah of marketing communications firm J. Walter Thompson (JWT) dis-
cusses ways that startups can streamline this process in “Brand Building
for Startups: A Case Study” on page 62.
Brand Building for Startups: A Case Study
Jinal Shah, Global Digital Strategy Director at J. Walter Thompson, has 10
years of experience as a brand and digital planner. Throughout her career she
has worked with both large brands and startups. In this case study, she shares
the highlights of the branding process and how startups can do this most
effectively with limited resources.
Typically a company writes a brief before engaging a branding agency.
The brief captures the objective of the assignment, the desired outcome, any
competitive insights, and mandatories that will help the branding process.
“This is a foundation document. It must also convey key information about
your company. The story of how it was started, etc.”
The agency will then begin a stakeholder audit and interview at length the
founders, the employees, and often also the customers/users (both the cur-
rent customers and those the company aspires to attract). The goal of this
CHAPTER 4
62

audit is to get a sense of the values shared across all groups—because they are
the basis for the underlying values of the brand. This audit will also uncover
any discrepancies in the brief and other weaknesses and consistency issues—
which all contribute toward building a strong brand and hence are necessary to
identify and address early on.
Jinal says, “Consistency is absolutely key when articulating and designing
your brand. It is important that all the stakeholders are aligned.”
One of the things this initial research often produces is a clear
understanding of values: a document that says “who we are; who we are not.” A
company might say something along the lines of “we are global, but we are not
corporate” to indicate its size and outlook but also refer to its informal and
approachable personality.
“You’ll start to see patterns emerging…words and phrases that appear
repeatedly,” Jinal adds. Those attributes are the foundation of any company’s
corporate culture. Once the culture is identified and defined, the brand’s per-
sonality, assets, and messaging can be designed as manifestations of those
ideals.
Once the brand values are defined, the next step is to address the brand
positioning. “Brand positioning is about identifying the space you want your
brand to occupy in your audience’s minds,” Jinal says. “What do you exist in
the world to do? You have to nail your answer to that. Everything cascades
from that.”
At this point, JWT often engages in extensive competitive and landscape
analysis to ensure that the positioning it defines for a client is unique, well dif-
ferentiated, and future-proof.
Positioning is about the brand, not the product that the company offers.
“Focusing positioning on the product commoditizes your brand and is short-
sighted,” Jinal says. It will box you into a category, making it difficult to elevate
and leverage brand recognition if you expand into a new market or pivot for the
future. She continues, “The goal of brand building is to attach emotional value
to the brand. When there is a competitor, a choice in the market, the emotional
connection is what will make your customers pick you over anyone else.”
This stakeholder audit and research takes a few weeks and can cost from
$30,000 to $50,000 with a reputable firm. Most early-stage startups don’t
have the resources to pay for this formal branding process. “Startups have
fewer resources but more agility,” Jinal says. “What takes a large company
months, a startup can often accomplish in a few weeks.”
63
BRANDING

For starters, there are fewer stakeholders to interview. And in general,
startups exist because founders have already identified a need (a “white
space”) in the market that they are working to solve.
A startup with limited funds can work through an effective brand-building
process without using an agency. To derive brand values and personality, the
founding team should start with the kind of people they are. “Start with cul-
tural attributes that are very true to you,” Jinal says.
Authenticity is important. In the early days, the founders (the visionaries)
are the most effective mouthpiece for the brand, especially online. They will
not be effective if they’re trying to be something they’re not.
“The thing to remember about brand building is that everything commu-
nicates—so once you know who you are and what your values are, infuse them
through everything you do and produce,” says Jinal. Your brand values should
dictate how you onboard new employees and handle customer complaints to
the color of the paint on your walls and the brand of coffee in your office
kitchen.
A community manager is a key hire in bringing your brand to life exter-
nally. The founders may define the brand, but the community manager will be
the person who most consistently has the opportunity to convey it to users. If
you don’t have a community manager or head of marketing yet, make sure
someone on the team is an excellent communicator. That person should be
responsible for infusing the brand’s personality into touchpoints until a dedica-
ted hire or agency partnership is in place.
Once your brand is defined, you’ll need to build assets. For example, if you
are a hardware startup, you may need packaging that shows off your product
but also communicates your brand. When you are meeting with the packaging
agency, bring packaging materials and examples of different types of packag-
ing that resonate with you and reflect either your brand or brand values.
According to Jinal, “If you’re engaging a creative person you want to inspire
and challenge them, but also educate them about your brand and your prefer-
ences to get the best work out of them.”
Early brand building takes a lot of time and discipline. It should be a seri-
ous, process-driven endeavor. Startup founders put a lot of energy into prod-
uct development and trying to attract customers. Identifying brand values and
knowing who you are is equally important. Your ultimate goal is to sell your
brand—the values, vision and emotional connection—not your product.
CHAPTER 4
64

A fundamental component of brand identity is brand personality.
Emotions are involved in the purchasing process, as the customer has a
need or desire and is looking to fulfill it. Consumers buy products that fit
the perception they have of themselves, or the way they wish to be per-
ceived by others.
A successful brand has a clearly defined personality that appeals to or
resonates with its target customers. In The Dictionary of Brand, Marty
Neumeier defines brand personality as “the character of a brand as
defined in anthropomorphic terms.” Brands can be kind, funny, mascu-
line, elegant…the possibilities are endless.
Agencies use several common frameworks to help their clients iden-
tify a brand personality, some of which a research-constrained startup can
carry out independently. One is an archetype study. Archetypes are a uni-
versal model for a personality, such as “the Joker” or “the Rebel.” Hard-
ware startup Contour Cameras took this approach, which founder Marc
Barros described in a blog post about the process: “Defining a brand is
like defining a person. No different from how you would describe a
friend, brand attributes are the adjectives you choose to define the person-
ality of your brand.”
Using the 12 archetypes defined in Margaret Mark and Carol Pear-
son’s book The Hero and the Outlaw (McGraw-Hill), the Contour team
identified the persona that fit their desire to facilitate imaginative self-
expression: the Creator. Using the Creator as an anchor, they focused
their brand on creativity. They worked on producing a product that would
be loved by Creator types: artists, innovators, and dreamers.
In psychological research, the five-factor model asserts that there are
five basic dimensions of human personality (called “the Big Five personal-
ity traits”): openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and
neuroticism. In a similar vein, Stanford marketing professor Dr. Jennifer
Aaker believes that brand personality can be broken down into five core
dimensions: sincerity, excitement, competence, sophistication, and rug-
gedness. Within each of these dimensions are facets and traits that
increase the specificity of the description, as shown in Figure 4-1. While
some academics have criticized Aaker’s scale as biased toward American
culture, these lists of traits are a solid jumping-off point for companies
looking to define their brand personality.
65
BRANDING

FIGURE 4-1. Aaker’s brand dimensions
Another approach to the process involves listing adjectives that
describe your target customer. Some branding agencies have their clients
work through association exercises, such as “If you were a car, what kind
of car would you be?” or “If you were an animal, what kind of animal
would you be?” Or you could try personification: imagine your brand as a
real person and visualize what she would look like and how she
would act.
Products and messaging keep changing over time as a company
evolves, but brand values and personality generally remain the same.
Jinal Shah says:
CHAPTER 4
66

You want to have a little bit of room to evolve and have fluidity in the mar-
ket, but there is still a core set of values that must remain consistent. Think
about you, the person. There are certain things that you would do or say,
and certain things that you would not do or say. People who know you can
probably distinguish between the two. That’s how your personal brand gets
built. It’s no different for a company.
Brand Assets and Touchpoints
Brand personality is brought to life via brand assets. Assets include the
brand name, logo, tagline, graphics, color palettes, and sounds…some-
times even scents and tastes.
Naming your company is incredibly important. A name is the most
frequently used brand asset. Customers see it and hear it. They speak it
when they tell their friends about you. Many blog posts have been written
about naming software startups: common suggestions include keeping
the name short, choosing something with an available domain (or, at
worst, a unique modified domain with the name in the title, such as GET-
startup.com or startupHQ.com) and social media handles, and selecting
something that is easily pronounceable and searchable (don’t remove too
many vowels!). A name should be distinctive and memorable. It must
also be legally available and not trademarked by anyone else.
One important difference between naming a hardware startup (or
product) and a software startup is that the name is more likely to appear
on packaging, and possibly on the device. Clarity and readability are criti-
cal. Can you tell from a glance at the name what the product does? The
ability to extend a product line in the future is also something to consider. 
Apple has done this exceptionally well. The “iDevice” naming convention
has taken it through decades of hardware products (iMac, iBook, iPod,
iPhone, iPad), and links the hardware to the software (iTunes).
Some companies use their founder’s names. That way a corporate
brand can benefit from being associated with a charismatic founder’s per-
sonal brand (Beats by Dre), but there is a risk of negative associations if
the founder endures any personal scandal or hardship (Martha Stewart).
Also, be wary of choosing a name that is a generic word. While many
successful companies have such names (such as Square and Nest), it
takes hard work to associate the word with your company in the minds of
consumers. You’ll also spend quite a bit of money acquiring the domain.
67
BRANDING

Begin your naming process by deciding what you most want the
name to evoke. You can use the work you did when identifying your val-
ues and personality. Choose several words or phrases that capture the
brand essence you’re going for, and begin to brainstorm. There are many
categories from which to pick a name:
• Emotions that you want your product to evoke
• Locations where people are likely to use it
• A distinctive physical characteristic of the product
• A metaphor that represents your user or your product
• A verb related to your product’s functionality
It’s helpful to work through this process with a group of people.
Word association and building off of the creativity of others can make it a
lot easier and more enjoyable.
Once you’ve come up with several names that you like (and checked
them for potential trademark infringement), it’s time to test them. San
Francisco naming consultancy Eat My Words has a series of criteria that
it calls the SMILE & SCRATCH test.
The SMILE test checks to see if your name has the following impor-
tant qualities:
Suggestive — evokes a positive brand experience
Meaningful — your customers “get it”
Imagery — visually evocative to aid in memory
Legs — lends itself to a theme for extended mileage
Emotional — resonates with your audience
And the SCRATCH test helps you determine if it should be scrapped:
Spelling-challenged — looks like a typo
Copycat — similar to competitor’s name
Restrictive — limits future growth
Annoying — forced
Tame — flat, uninspired
Curse of knowledge — only insiders get it
Hard-to-pronounce — not obvious, unapproachable
If your name passes these two tests, it’s time to consider testing it in
the wild. Some entrepreneurs choose not to, instead just trusting their
own judgment. Others solicit feedback solely from friends, family, or
CHAPTER 4
68

their (early) community. Naming and branding experts advise field test-
ing, because it’s often difficult for insiders to recognize that their name
has a “curse of knowledge” problem or is inscrutable to a general audi-
ence. They test names with focus groups. Common questions that nam-
ing experts ask include:
• What do you think this business does?
• Can you spell it? (Can you pronounce it?)
• Does this name remind you of any particular product?
• What do you think of when you read the name?
If you’re bootstrapping this process and decide you want to get con-
sumer feedback on your product name, online surveys are a less expen-
sive and less time-consuming way to go. You can reach a wide audience
for a minimal fee using a service such as Mechanical Turk or Crowd-
flower to find survey participants. Some founders try A/B testing names
in AdWords, driving traffic to landing pages.
Still, there’s no substitute for in-person feedback whenever you can
get it. Marc Barros, the founder of wearable-camera maker Contour,
describes its process of using the “Bar Test”: say your company name to
someone in a noisy bar. See if they understand what you do. If they can’t
pronounce or spell the name, consider it a failure. (For more lessons
learned from Marc’s experience with company naming and branding, see
“Naming Contour and Moment: A Case Study” on page 69.)
Naming Contour and Moment: A Case
Study
Marc Barros is the founder of Contour cameras, which made a wearable/
mountable point-of-view video camera until it shut its doors in August 2013. He
recently launched his new company, Moment, via a successful Kickstarter
raise. He also organizes the Hardware Startup Workshop, a daylong series of
talks by industry experts that helps founders learn best practices and avoid
potential pitfalls. As a founder who has experienced both success and failure,
Marc has a diverse perspective on the importance of early brand building for
hardware startups. Here, Marc talks about the challenges the Contour team
faced and how he’s applying the lessons he learned toward building Moment.
At Contour, Marc says, “We got branding horribly wrong at the very start.”
Contour was the third name for the company. The first, chosen when the
69
BRANDING

founders were both in college, was 20/20. They decided they didn’t like that,
and switched to VholdR. “We were trying to come up with a new name that
worked for the camera, the software, and this new social community we
wanted to make around video,” Marc says. Unfortunately, people couldn’t spell
it or pronounce it—not even members of the team. They didn’t have the money
to hire a naming firm, choosing instead to put their funds into product design.
The absence of social networks in the early days of Contour’s existence
meant that their marketing strategy relied heavily on in-person events. They
targeted the action sports and lifestyle communities. “We used a lot of event
strategy,” Mark says. “We would go to mountain biking events, skiing events,
snowboarding events. We had an RV driving around, and reps that would go
with us to help canvass the area.”
Contour also built a network of athlete influencers, giving them product
and sponsoring them. At various points in the company’s evolution, the prod-
uct was sold under the 20/20 and VholdR names. The camera achieved visibil-
ity within the target market, but the multiple rebrands meant that there wasn’t
much continuity, which is critical for building up a brand identity in the minds
of consumers.
The name changes resulted in lost time and lost market share. A full five
years into the existence of the company, the team got serious about branding.
They had managed to gain some traction (and earn some revenue) despite the
setbacks, and they began to work with an agency to shape the Contour brand
archetype and story.
Unfortunately, competitor GoPro hadn’t made the same missteps.
Founded at approximately the same time, and with a similar offering geared
toward a similar customer, GoPro continued to gain market share and move
ahead of its smaller rival. After shutting down Contour, Marc wrote an excellent
post-mortem on his blog detailing the differences between GoPro’s branding
strategy and Contour’s. In the post, he describes learning the lesson of “brand
first, distribution second.” Focusing on retail sapped Contour’s resources, leav-
ing little available to drive consumer demand. GoPro focused on emotionally
connecting with customers, creating an aspirational brand identity through the
use of thrilling action videos shot with the product. GoPro built a movement.
“Contour wasn’t the best in the world at one thing,” Marc reflects. “We
were pretty good at product, we were okay at brand, okay at distribution, but
we weren’t unbelievable at one thing.” The lack of a crystal-clear value proposi-
tion, combined with nebulous positioning, made competing with its well-
branded rival an insurmountable challenge.
CHAPTER 4
70

Moving on to Moment, Marc has applied the lessons learned from the
Contour experience. This time around, “We started by understanding who we
are and why we’re doing this,” Marc says. From the beginning, the team has
focused on identifying their core values, making those values the foundation of
the company they’re building. They have worked at understanding the compa-
nies that have come before. According to Marc, “This brand is anchored in the
history of lenses.” The design elements, the name, and the concept are all part
of a cohesive vision: segments of time. Moments.
“We all took photos, put them on an inspiration wall,” Marc says. “We
thought about what the photos made us feel and realized that photos were
really about the moments.” Photography is about remembering moments and
sharing moments, and the Moment team wants to facilitate that emotional
experience with easy-to-use, powerful lenses that attach to mobile phones.
Early indications from the Kickstarter raise suggest that the vision resonates
with many people. The team set a goal of $50,000 and raised $451,868.
Moment is focused on what Marc calls “picture takers.” Photographers
are professionals; picture takers are the people who have day jobs but love
using their mobile phones to document their lifestyle, their weekend adven-
tures, their kids. The success of Instagram suggests that there are quite a lot of
them. “We don’t really believe in building customer profiles: ‘this is Jo and she
works here and these are the products she buys.’ We look for the intrinsic
needs,” Marc says. Picture takers are creatives who happen to snap photos in
their spare time, so the Moment team is focusing on creating mobile lenses
that prioritize speed and convenience, ideal for everyday use.
“It takes a couple of years to really know your brand—to get the details
right, to know the customers, to understand why they’re buying,” Marc says.
The team is diving into their Kickstarter backer profiles to learn more about
their customers—how they heard about Moment, and why they bought it.
They’re using this data to better understand the demographic and psycho-
graphic characteristics of their target market.
However, they’d begun to reach out to potential early adopters and influ-
encers long before attempting a crowdfunding campaign. “We found a group of
picture takers local to us, so we could go have coffee, show them the product,
and get their feedback,” Marc says. That group has helped the team along the
way. Marc adds, “They buy into the vision—it’s so much more than ‘here’s a
widget.’ They’re interested in who the company is and what we believe, so
they’re helping us along the way.”
71
BRANDING

The Moment team has identified the one thing in the world that they will
be the best at: their mission is to deliver the best mobile photography prod-
ucts. With that goal in mind, they’re laser-focused on product development.
“We’re not working on retail distribution, because that would require hiring
people and spending money and margin on it,” Marc says. “We’re focusing on
building a team that’s unbelievable at product.”
While the Contour experience was painful, Marc has applied the lessons
he learned to skillfully crafting a clear brand mission and identity for his sec-
ond company. The Moment team has prioritized branding from day one, and
they’re off to a great start.
Your brand name and personality are the cornerstones for the rest of
your visual assets: logo, graphics, color palettes, and icons—and you have
many creative choices to make. Certain colors evoke specific emotions. A
logo can be a word (“Google”), a picture (Apple’s apple), or a combination
of the two (the 1992–2011 Starbucks logo). The goal is to create represen-
tative visuals that are immediately recognizable and memorable and that
retain their impact when displayed across different mediums.
The sensory experience should be coherent and in line with the
brand personality. For example, if your brand personality is elegant and
sophisticated, a low-resolution cartoon animal logo would seem incongru-
ous. Visual assets should fit cohesively with the look and feel of your
product, including any software or apps experienced by the end user. For
a good example of precise execution around visual identity, check out
Google’s Visual Assets Guidelines.
Producing quality brand assets takes time and costs money. If you
don’t have the resources or desire to work with a branding agency, your
designer is the person most likely to be responsible for this process. If
you don’t have someone with design experience on the team, hire an
expert contractor. Brand assets might evolve over time, but you’ll want a
polished appearance from day one. And just as with everything else in
life, you get what you pay for. Expect to pay $50 to $100 an hour for a
professional.
The points at which brands interact with consumers are called touch-
points. To identify touchpoints, think about your outreach channels:
media, packaging, advertising, environment (e.g., stores). Possible touch-
points include websites, emails, apps, blogs, TV, trade shows, exhibits,
CHAPTER 4
72

print materials, circulars, billboards, videos, kiosks, retail shelves, social
media…basically, anywhere in the physical or online world that a con-
sumer might encounter your brand.
Touchpoints can be quick or sustained, personalized or mass-market,
real-time or static. Product design consultancy Hello Future has an excel-
lent matrix that illustrates this, as shown in Figure 4-2. Note the position
of “campaigns” (advertising) at the bottom left: quick and mass-market.
Up at the top right are “platforms,” which are long-term and sustained.
FIGURE 4-2. Hello Future’s Brand Touchpoint Matrix (used under Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike license)
Consumers might encounter touchpoints at the prepurchase, pur-
chase, or postpurchase stage. The goal of a prepurchase interaction is to
shape a consumer’s perception of your brand and communicate your
value proposition. You are attempting to increase the consumer’s likeli-
hood of buying your product. At the point of purchase, the goal is not
only to make the sale, but also to establish a deeper relationship.
Postpurchase communications are geared toward building loyalty, ensur-
ing satisfaction, and turning customers into brand evangelists. Across all
touchpoints and at all phases of the purchasing decision, you’re selling
the brand, not just the product.
The consumer’s experience with your company at any given touch-
point is known as the brand experience. The total of interactions at various
touchpoints over time results in a cumulative experience. Both individual
and cumulative experiences matter. Chapter 10 discusses metrics in more
73
BRANDING

detail, but it’s worth noting here that you will want to have mechanisms
in place to gather data about your customer’s experience at each
touchpoint.
As soon as you begin to communicate with the public, you should be
striving for a consistent presentation of your brand across all possible
touchpoints. Consistency applies to both the message content and tone,
anywhere that your brand name or logo appears.
Positioning and Differentiation
Your brand position is the space in a given market that you occupy in the
minds of consumers. It’s your unique niche. Customers mentally rank
brands. How would you rank McDonald’s, Burger King, and Wendy’s?
Understanding what is special about your product and what position it
occupies in the market is a critical step toward gaining market share
among your target audience. In the soft-drink market, 7UP was number
three behind Coca-Cola and Pepsi. When it began to identify itself as the
“UNCOLA,” it made itself the leader in a different category: alternatives
to cola.
Positioning is a function of three elements: customers, competitors,
and a characteristic. The customers are the target market you’re going
after: whom are you trying to reach? The competitors are the other compa-
nies that are already in the market. The characteristic is your differentia-
tor; in marketing, it’s called the point of difference. Early in the process of
market research, you identified ways to differentiate your product from
the competition: by features, price, or some other factor. A powerful point
of difference for positioning your brand is something that’s both defensible
(your competitors can’t quickly replicate it) and important to your target
customer. As mentioned above: you can’t be all things to all people. Spe-
cificity is key.
Marketing expert Geoffrey Moore has a template for synthesizing a
thorough positioning statement in his book Crossing the Chasm (Harper-
Business):
For (target customer) who (statement of the need or opportunity), the
(product name) is a (product category) that (statement of key benefit—
that is, compelling reason to buy). Unlike (primary competitive alterna-
tive), our product (statement of primary differentiation).
CHAPTER 4
74

This statement incorporates all of the different preproduct considera-
tions we discussed in Chapter 2 into one sentence and synthesizes them
into a single message. Chapter 10 returns to positioning and differentia-
tion within the context of marketing. In the preproduct phase, an under-
standing of whom you are building for and what position you wish to
occupy in the market will provide you with a framework against which to
make product decisions.
Brand development is an ongoing process, and it’s worth your time.
If you create a brand synonymous with quality and a joyful experience,
the resulting loyalty and satisfaction will translate to increased customer
retention…and increased revenue. Recognizing the importance of brand-
ing to the overall success of the company, some startups make their first
in-house hires early. For example, Nest’s third employee was sales and
marketing expert Erik Charlton (see how Nest built its brand right from
the start in “Nest Branding: A Case Study” on page 75).
Other startups hire a branding agency. Regardless of the approach
you choose, it’s important to begin thinking about branding as early as
possible. From the minute you exit stealth mode and the public becomes
aware of your existence, consumers—as well as potential hires, partners,
and investors!—are forming a perception of who you are. The more
actively and thoughtfully you shape that perception, the greater your
chance of becoming a successful company.
Nest Branding: A Case Study
Nest is a connected-devices company on a mission to reinvent “unloved,” but
important, products in the home. Its first two offerings were elegant re-
imaginings of the thermostat (Nest Thermostat) and the smoke/carbon mon-
oxide detector (Nest Protect). In addition to selling direct on its website, Nest
makes its products available through retail partners, including Best Buy, Apple,
Lowe’s, and Home Depot. Matt Rogers, cofounder and VP of Engineering, was
previously a firmware engineer at Apple, where he worked on the iPod. In this
first of two case studies on the company, he discusses the importance of
branding.
The Nest team began to create their brand identity long before they pub-
licly announced the company or the product. “We knew we had to build a con-
sumer brand from very, very early on,” Matt remembers. “We made it a priority.
I think a lot of companies in our space, and a lot of companies in general that
75
BRANDING

are building for the first time, spend a lot of time on the product and the tech-
nology. The brand and how you’re going to market it is just as important.”
As evidence of the extent to which Nest prioritized branding, Matt points
to the team’s early hiring priorities. The first two hires were engineers. The
third hire was Erik Charlton, currently the VP of Business, who was originally
brought on to run sales and marketing. While Matt and the engineers worked
on building and designing the product, Erik and Tony Fadell, Matt’s cofounder,
spent a lot of time on the story behind it. “You can build a great product, but if
you can’t explain what it is and how it works really simply, and then build a
story around it, it’s not going to sell,” Matt says. The team thought about what
the brand imagery would look like, how they would talk about the brand, and
how they would portray their products.
Nest ultimately chose “unloved devices” as their way of describing the
many products in the home that were traditionally overlooked. There are many
thermostats on the market; the Nest thermostat would differentiate itself by
being a loved product. To deliver on that promise, the team worked on creating
a user experience and design replete with what Matt describes as “that ineffa-
ble quality that makes people want to touch, hold, play with your creation.”
They prioritized clean design and smart functionality, and fought feature
creep.
The brand and story are very important for selling a product to consum-
ers. But having a distinct brand identity can give you a leg up with retailers as
well, particularly for an early-stage startup. Big-box retailers are often wary of
dealing with startups, because they prefer to avoid contracts for single-SKU
companies with unproven products. Matt observes, “When you speak to retail-
ers about a product and already have the whole story around it and how you’re
going to market it, it makes you much more impressive.”
The Nest team made a strategic decision to approach Best Buy first. Tra-
ditional (unloved) thermostats are primarily sold at home-improvement and
hardware stores; Nest wanted to be on the shelves of a consumer electronics
powerhouse. The team’s first conversation with the retailer happened soon
after they started the company, before the product was even built. They
wanted to gauge Best Buy’s interest in selling a thermostat, something they
had never sold before. “When we told them what we were working on they
laughed,” Matt says. “They said, ‘Really? We don’t even sell thermostats. Why
should we be involved in this?’”
The team had anticipated this. Their first blog post—“Thermostats? Yes,
thermostats.”—introduces the company by poking fun at the skepticism and
CHAPTER 4
76

then goes on to clearly articulate Nest’s value proposition and differentiators:
beautiful design, smart (it learns user temperature preferences and habits),
remote-controlled via smartphone, and reduces energy bills. They pitched that
vision to the representatives from Best Buy.
Although they kept their product roadmap secret from everyone (includ-
ing retail representatives), Nest prioritized creating a brand mission—“We
rethink unloved devices”—that was bigger than its initial product and would
easily extend to other products. The founders applied values they’d developed
during their time at Apple—clean design, attention to detail, delightful user
experience—to every aspect of product development. The result is a product
loved by many (the first run was sold out for months) and a brand name synon-
ymous with beautiful connected devices.
Now that you’ve found your team, identified your customers, targeted
your market, and begun to formulate your brand, it’s finally time to start
building the prototype.
77
BRANDING


Why I Left Consulting and
Joined a Startup
Michelle Wetzler
Whether you’re a technology consultant or you’re in a startup, there’s a good
chance we have something in common. I call it career commitment avoidance.
The #1 reason I chose consulting as my first job after graduation was that I
didn’t want to decide where I would work, in what industry I would work, or even
what I would really do on a day-to-day basis. I wanted to do a lot of things, and
picking a single one of them just seemed too limiting.
With new projects, new clients, and the expectation that employees will “grow
into” whatever role they get next, consultants never really have to decide who they’re
going to be in life, and that can be very liberating.

Like many others entering this profession, I figured after a couple of years I
would gain the perspective I needed to hone in on my dream job. Years later, that
still hadn’t happened.
I started revising my notion of a dream job. I realized the right job for me isn’t
one job. It’s a career that changes a lot, where I get to learn new things all the time.
I began to wonder if consulting was the dream job. Maybe the reason I’d stuck
around for so long was that consulting is the combination of so many things I want
in a career:
1. Learning a lot, fast. When your clients are paying $XXX/hr for you to be there,
they expect you to know stuff. A lot of stuff. On top of absorbing obscure tech-
nical know-how for each of my projects, I learned how to be accountable and
manage a team.
2. Emphasis on people and teams. I worked on teams of 2, teams of 20, and
multimillion-dollar teams of over 100 consultants. Working on a consulting
project is truly a bonding experience. Since most people on the team fly in to
work for the week, you’re not just doing hard work together. You’re also eating
every meal together, getting shit-faced together, and living in the same hotel.
You spend more personal time with these people than with your spouse. What’s
the #1 reason consultants give when asked what they like about their job? “The
people.”
428 | MANAGING STARTUPS: BEST BLOG POSTS
428
| 75

3. Merit-based compensation. Some people would hate it, but knowing that I
would be ranked against everyone else at my level, then recognized and paid
accordingly, was motivating for me (I’m a little bit competitive).
4. Work hard, play hard. That’s such a clichéd phrase, but there are some really
intense people in consulting, and it can be energizing to be around them. They
run marathons, go snowboarding on weeknights, run charity events, and more
—all on top of working inhuman hours. There were times when I would work
13-hour days, party until 3 a.m., then do it again the next day. Seems a bit crazy
now, but it wasn’t a drain. It was fun.
So why did I quit a great job and join a startup for less pay, less job security,
and significant risk to the relationships I have with my fiancé (Keen’s CEO) and
best friends (everyone else at Keen)?
Mostly, I was growing tired of implementing <some old-school technology> to
solve <some generic enterprise problem>. I’m a builder at heart, and I wanted to
contribute to Creating a Thing, not just bolting together boring software other peo-
ple had halfheartedly built 8 years ago.
Figure 75-1. Crying at the bottom of the shower
There are also some, um, less pleasant aspects of being a consultant. Unless
you are really lucky, you will at some point wind up on a project with asshole ex-
ecutives and a commute that makes you hate life (see Figure 75-1). Some people say
these projects build backbone. I think the only good thing about them is that they
are catalysts for a career change. It was one of these projects that finally changed
my thinking from “I need to figure out what to do with my career” to “I need to
make a change right now.” I quit my job and started looking for the next great thing.
WHY I LEFT CONSULTING AND JOINED A STARTUP | 429

That’s how I wound up here at Keen. And guess what? Startups share many of
the qualities I love about consulting:
1. Learning a lot, fast. Here are just a handful of things I’ve learned in the past
few weeks:
• How startup financials work, so I could comprehend seed round financing
and negotiate my own salary and equity compensation
• Our system architecture and associated vocabulary (JSON, REST, Flask,
Mongo, map reduce, etc.)
• How to create my first Ruby program, and integrate it with Keen
• What differentiates our company from other players in the analytics space
• How to get strangers on the Internet (and at conferences, meetups, and par-
ties) to talk to me about analytics (we call this customer development)
You get the picture. In a startup, you get to be involved in all kinds of aspects
of the company, and there’s always more to learn and build.
2. Emphasis on people and teams. While people are important in a consulting
firm, they’re absolutely critical in a startup. With an industry average of a 20%
turnover rate, consulting just doesn’t offer the same level of quality you can get
in a six-person startup, especially when it’s six people who took great risks based
on their faith in each other. The team at Keen is the #1 reason I joined the
company.
3. Merit-based compensation. My equity stake and the small size of our team
means my work directly contributes to the value of the company, which in turn
contributes to my own personal net worth. In short, I can enjoy the company’s
successes as if they were my own successes, because they are. That’s a reward-
ing feeling, and it definitely outweighs the salary cut I took to join Keen. Besides,
I’m smart enough to have figured out that making anything over a certain
amount of “comfortable income” contributes very little to my overall happiness.
4. Travel. Travel is one area where startup perks are not going to compare to con-
sulting, but startups offer significantly less pain in this area. I don’t get to fly
much for work these days, but I also don’t have to spend two hours a day driving
to a client’s office. My daily commute is now measured in steps, not hours.
430 | MANAGING STARTUPS: BEST BLOG POSTS

5. Work hard, play hard. There’s this perception about tech startups that the em-
ployees are working all night, sleeping under desks, pooping in socks, and
bleeding code. Startup pace is supposedly so fast you can’t even imagine it.
People say things like “a year in startup will advance your career 37 years!”
I’ve worked around the clock before. One time, Kyle literally spoon-fed me
dinner while I coordinated a critical go-live issue. Later that month, a lead told
me that the overall productivity and health of our Mumbai team were declining
because people kept coming to work sick. But perhaps the most eye-opening
experience came when one of my direct reports asked my permission to eat dinner.
That isn’t cool. It’s fucking embarrassing.
Consulting firms say they value “work-life balance,” but the truth is that
consultants themselves tend to be workaholic types, especially senior leaders.
No matter how many vacation days, flexible work schedules, or company well-
ness policies are offered, there are folks who are going to work as much as
possible. In projects where this is taken to extremes, you get consequences like
the ones I just described.
That’s why it’s a huge relief to join a team that values a sustainable pace.
The Keen founders have a term for it: “rested racehorses.” We are an elite team
that can run fast, but we don’t sprint every day. We need to be rested so we can
sprint when it’s truly important.
Finally, I want to circle back to the original lure of consulting—the lack of
commitment to a “job.” Startups take this freedom to the next level. There is a strong
culture of making it your own way, building your own brand, and focusing on
whatever you feel is important. After spending a certain amount of time around
entrepreneurs, you begin to wonder where you ever got the idea of a “career,” an
“employer,” or a “profession.” This is a much more creative and opportunistic life-
style.
WHY I LEFT CONSULTING AND JOINED A STARTUP | 431

If you’re stuck in the consulting rut, consider joining a startup. Just like con-
sulting firms, startups value smart, hardworking generalists who can learn quickly.
You’ll have significantly more ownership of the business, the product, your day-to-
day activities, and your career path. You’ll have the opportunity not only to build a
great team and product, but a great company. So, what’s stopping you from making
the switch?
If you’re thinking about a consulting career or joining a startup (I would highly
recommend either!), I’m happy to help in any way I can.
432 | MANAGING STARTUPS: BEST BLOG POSTS

