Scanned by Highroller.
Proofed by .
Made prettier by use of EBook Design Group Stylesheet.
The Warlock Insane by
Christopher Stasheff
Chapter One
"Yeah, but you don't have to shovel it!"
"Oh, come, husband." Gwen tightened her grip on his arm, mouth
pursed in amusement. " Tis beautiful by moonlight, naetheless. And thou
hast no need to clear it by main force, in any event."
Rod smiled, watching the kids frolic up ahead, carefully avoiding the
well-cleared road and slogging through the snowbanks, where they could
get nice and wet. Geoffrey had started a snowball fight, and Magnus was
retaliating with enthusiasm.
"Gregory's trying, anyway."
"He is merely distracted by watching the snowballs' trajectories, Rod,
instead of their targets." The voice of the great black horse behind him
sounded through the earphone implanted in his mastoid process. "He is a
son to be proud of."
"Yes. He certainly is, Fess—he certainly is." Rod smiled down into
Gwen's eyes, and she radiated back up at him. "They all are—each in his
own way." He looked up with a sparkle of mischief in his eye. "Or hers."
Cordelia was standing by, watching her brothers with her nose in the
air, pretending to be above such things— while she packed a snowball
behind her back, waiting for a clear target.
The moonlight was lovely, throwing the shadow of the castle's turrets
before them, glinting off the piled snow to either side of the hilly road, and

frosting the village below. Not that Rod could admit that, when he was in
the middle of a perfectly good banter with his wife. "But as to the
shoveling—you're the one who's always saying we shouldn't use magic for
daily tasks."
"Indeed we should not," Gwen said with prim rectitude. "Yet thou hast
stalwart lads for the task, and thy lass…"
"Swings a mean broom, yeah. Okay, you win—I have to admit I like it.
Of course, I'm still suffused with the glow, of Twelfth Night. Tuan and
Catharine throw a great party!"
"They are a most excellent host and hostess, aye—the more so on a feast
day."
"Feast day is right! Talk about a royal banquet. You nearly had to roll
me home." Rod smiled with nostalgic fondness, remembering the
goose—and the ham, and the sausages, and the trifle… "Sorry there wasn't
anything for you, Fess."
"On the contrary, Rod, there was a plenitude of oats and hay—and I had
to pretend to eat, to avoid making the grooms suspicious. Still, there was
ample interest in observing the infinite variation in their customs."
Rod frowned. "I would have thought you knew every habit of every
groom in Gramarye by now."
"Knowing is one thing. Understanding is quite another."
"Oh." Rod pushed his tongue into his cheek. "Learn anything new?"
"There were some fascinating variations on courting rituals…"
Rod grinned. "That's right, it was a holiday for them, too, wasn't it? Of
course, the banquet was over four hours ago." He frowned at the thought.
"Y'know, I could've sworn I'd never have an appetite again."
Gregory came charging up, eyes and cheeks aglow. "Papa, Papa! A
beldame doth linger by the roadside yon, hawking hot chestnuts! May
we?"
"Oh, please!" Cordelia pleaded, appearing just behind him.

"I was talking about being a mite peckish, wasn't I?" Rod fished in his
purse and pulled out a copper. "Okay, kids— but save a few for us, will
you?"
"Thou shalt have the half of them!" Gregory snatched the coin and shot
off, Cordelia hot on his heels.
"Glad we could do something." Rod could see the old lady now,
shivering by the roadside in her shawl, popping chestnuts into Cordelia's
kerchief.
"Aye." Gwen snuggled closer. " 'Tis beastly to have to stand in the chill."
"Tuan and Catharine have brought prosperity to the land," Fess
observed, "but they have not succeeded in eliminating poverty."
"No one else ever has, either—all they do is redefine it. But at least she
has a brazier—and I must say her wares are in the proper holiday spirit…"
"Thine!" Gregory popped up in front of them again, looking like a
chipmunk. Behind him, his brothers and sister were cracking shells and
gobbling goodies with more verve than neatness.
"Gee, thanks." But Rod was talking to air; his youngest was already en
route back to his siblings. He sighed. "Well, left holding the bag, as usual.
Care for one, dear?"
"I thank thee." Gwen accepted the chestnut, broke the shell the rest of
the way, and nibbled at the meat.
Rod popped the whole kernel in his mouth and chewed.
His eyes widened. "My heavens! I didn't know chestnuts could taste so
good!"
"They do, in truth." Gwen's eyes lost focus. "There are spices added to
this. Let me see—there's rosemary, that's for remembrance…"
"Odd combination—but very good, I have to admit." Rod swallowed and
took the last chestnut. "Share?"
"Aye." Gwen dimpled. "Three for us—and how many for them?"

"Half a dozen each, at a guess. Maybe we should buy some more." Rod
looked up, just in time to see the old lady kicking snow onto her fire and
turning away down the hill, pot in hand. "No, I guess we got the last of
them."
"She had good custom, I doubt not, with all the folk of the village
coming home from the castle."
Rod nodded. "Plenty of apprentices, and a ha'penny each adds up. Glad
we happened by before she folded—it lent the perfect touch to a wonderful
day."
Cordelia came up to them. She glanced back at the old peasant
woman's retreating back, troubled. "What emptiness is that in her eyes,
Mama?"
"Ah." Gwen exchanged a look with Rod. " 'Tis only that she is very
simple, child."
"Simple?" Cordelia frowned. "Like to Their Majesties' fool?"
"Oh, no!" Rod looked up, shaking his head. "That jester is a very
intelligent man, dear, with a quick wit and a sense of humor that borders
on genius."
"Then why," said Magnus, "do they call him a fool?"
"Because some of the things he says and does are very foolish."
"Which is to say, they are things done by a fool," Gregory protested.
"What sense is there in that, Papa?"
"A rather unpleasant sense, I'm afraid," Rod answered, and Gwen said
gently, "Long ago, lords did take the simpleminded and keep them by, to
laugh at their clumsiness and mistakes of judgement, which did amuse
their masters greatly."
"How cruel!" Cordelia exclaimed indignantly, and all three of her
brothers nodded in agreement. Rod felt a glow of pride in them as he
replied, "It was cruel—and I'm afraid it wasn't exclusive to kings and
queens. Most people have laughed at the mentally retarded, down through
the ages."

"E'en today, in a small village, thou wilt find many who do make mock
of the village idiot," Gwen said softly. " Tis vile, but 'tis done."
"So maybe it's just as well that smart people who had a gift for comedy
convinced the lords that they were more foolish than the fools," Rod
concluded.
"Aye," Geoffrey said through his scowl. "At the least, they do it
willingly."
"Yet I did hear some ladies discuss him as a 'madcap,' " Gregory said.
"Do they not mean that he is maddened, in his head?"
Rod smiled, a glint in his eye. "Very good, son! Maybe that's where the
term came from. But even if that was its original meaning, it's not
now—today it means that the man behaves insanely." Then he frowned.
"Wait a minute…"
"That he doth do and say things that make no sense," Gwen explained.
"Then one who is 'insane' is senseless?" Cordelia asked.
"Nay!" Geoffrey said. "He who is senseless hath been knocked
unconscious."
"Yea and nay," Gwen said, smiling. "The term doth mean one who doth
sleep so unwillingly, aye—yet it also doth speak of one who hath lost all
judgement."
"Or whose judgement has become so distorted that he has become
completely unpredictable," Rod added. "He's as likely to hit you as to hail
you."
"Ah!" cried Gregory. "Then that is madness!"
"Well, yes, I suppose it would be," Rod said slowly, "in the way that
Count Orlando was mad."
Magnus frowned. "I have not met him."
"No, nor are likely to, son," Rod said, amused. "Roland—or Orlando, as
they called him in Italy—was nephew to Charlemagne…"

"The Emperor of the Franks?" Geoffrey looked up, round-eyed. "He is
history, not myth!"
"Why yes, he is." Rod looked up at Fess with renewed respect; any tutor
who could interest Geoffrey in history verged on being a magician. Of
course, Charlemagne was military history… "But myths grow up around
people who change the world, and Charlemagne did. Still, there's only so
much you can say about a king, because he has to spend most of his time
governing, which may be exciting in its own right, but is only occasionally
dramatic—so the tale-tellers usually find somebody near him to build their
stories around, and in Charlemagne's case, that person was his nephew."
"He did really live, then?"
"We think so," Fess said, "though he certainly did none of the
supernatural feats attributed to him. He was an excellent focus for myth,
however, and figures largely and luridly in a fairy-haunted world that
never existed."
"And he went mad?"
"For a time," Rod said, "because he fell in love with a lady who didn't
want anything to do with him—and when he found out she had married
somebody else, he went into a nonstop rage, tearing up forests and
slaughtering peasants, not to mention the occasional knight or two."
"Are the mad truly so?" Gregory asked, wide-eyed.
"Not 'mad,' Gregory—'mentally ill,' " Fess corrected, "and there are
many kinds and degrees of mental illness. But one or two varieties do
sometimes result in people going on rampages, beating and slaying
numbers of people, yes."
"Not quite on the scale that Orlando did, though," Rod said quickly. "In
fact, I think his 'madness' was more probably a magnified version of
someone suffering from rabies."
"Oh! I have heard of that!" Cordelia shuddered. "Such poor souls do
become like beasts, bereft of reason and seeking to bite and beat any who
may cross their path!"
"Unfortunate, but true," Fess agreed, "and they are referred to as being

'mad.' "
"But they are not, Fess! Tis only a sickness in the body, brought by a
germ in the bite of a dog or rat!"
"True enough," Rod agreed, "but one of the symptoms is that the victim
stops thinking, and turns homicidal."
"There are many forms of mental illness that have physical causes,
children," Fess said quietly, "even so slight a cause as an upset in the
balance of the chemicals in people's bodies."
"Now wait, wait!" Geoffrey held up a hand, squeezing his eyes shut.
"Thou dost confuse me! Thou dost say that simple folk are fools, but fools
are men of wit?"
"It is a problem in the language," Fess admitted, "brought by people
using a word that describes one condition, and applying it to another. Let
us say that a fool is a person of poor judgement, Geoffrey."
Geoffrey looked doubtful, and Cordelia said, with hesitation, "That doth
aid me somewhat in understanding…"
"I think it might cut through some of the confusion if you tell them the
story," Rod suggested.
"A story?"
"Tell it!"
"Aye, tell, Fess! Matters are always made more clear by a tale!"
"Not if it has any true literary value," the robot hedged,
"but a fable generally does clarify matters, since fables are teaching
stories."
"Then tell us a fable!"
"More pointedly," Rod said, "the fable of the Wise Man, the Jester, the
Fool, the Simpleton, and the Madman."
"Aye, tell!" And they all stopped in the road and gathered around the

great iron steed.
"As you will," Fess sighed. "The Wise Man said, 'Gentlemen, the world
will end tomorrow, if you do not save it.'
"The madman smiled with delight.
" '//"we do not save it?' said the fool. 'Will you not share the risk?"'
"Why, he was a fool in truth," Geoffrey snorted, "if he would cavil o'er
fairness at a time of peril!"
"Thou hast been known to cavil so," Cordelia pointed out.
"Yet surely not when danger did threaten!"
"Perhaps not when it is imminent," Fess temporized. "Then you
understand that the threat is more important than your pride—as the
Wise Man satisfied the Fool by saying, 7 will go with you, to show you
where to dig.'
"Then the fool felt shamed, and said, 'Do you really mean what you
say?'
" 7 really do,' the Wise Man answered.
"The Simpleton's brow furrowed with the effort of his thought. 'How
can so great a thing as the world, be destroyed?'
" 'There are tremendous fires within the earth,' the Wise Man
answered. 'They burn too quickly; if we do not let them out, their smoke
will burst the world.'
"The Simpleton stared. 'But how can there be anything within the
earth? It is only dirt underfoot.'
" 7f may seem so,' said the Wise Man, 'but it is truly a great ball, so
vast that we are mere specks upon it—and it is hollow, with fires within.'
"But the Simpleton only shook his head in bafflement, for he could not
comprehend the notion.
" 'How then shall we save the world?' asked the fool.

" 'We must dig a great hole,' said the Wise Man, 'so that the fires may
have a chimney.'
" 'Why, that is too much work!' said the fool."
"Too much work, and too great a folly," Geoffrey cried. "Did he not
know he would breed a volcano?"
"He did, and so did the jester, for he said, 'Nay, Uncle—it is not the
world that will be destroyed then, but us. It is bad enough to be smoked
meat, but it is worse to be fried.' "
"There is some wit in that," Gregory said judiciously, "but there is most
excellent sense, too."
"Nay, there is cowardice!"
"Well, there was sensible caution, at least," Fess said, "but the Wise
Man answered, 'If a few do not risk being burned to cinders, all will be
blown to bits,' and the Jester shivered and said, 'Alas the day, that I am
one of the few who are made to see the need of it! But I shall go, then, for
it is better to burn than to tarry.' ''
Gwen gave Fess a glare, and Rod murmured, "That's truly apauling."
Fess quickly went on. "Then they all took their shovels and followed the
Wise Man to an empty field, and began to dig where he showed them;
but the madman only leaned on his shovel and watched them."
"Is that all?" Magnus protested. "There is no madness in that, but
laziness and blindness, and lack of concern!"
"Aye," Cordelia agreed. "When did he aught that was mad, Fess?"
"When the others went to dinner, Cordelia—for then he filled in the
hole."
The children stared at him, shocked, while Gwen eyed Fess uncertainly,
and Rod covered a smile.
"Was the world destroyed, then?" Gregory burst out.
"Nay, surely not," Geoffrey said, "for we stand on it now!"

"This was only a fable, children, and it stood on nothing but
imagination," Fess reminded them. "But the world of the story was
destroyed, yes."
"Why," Magnus gasped, "he was mad!" Then he stared, surprised by
his own words.
"Why, indeed he was," Cordelia said slowly. "So that is madness!"
"But of only one kind." Gregory turned to Fess. "And thou hast said
there are many, and of differing degrees."
"I have," Fess agreed, "but they all have this in common: that people
who are mentally ill do things without reason—or at least, no reason that
healthy minds can see."
Rod nodded. "So don't worry about it, children—and do try to help the
simpleton and the madman when you can."
"What of the fool, Papa?"
Rod stirred uncomfortably. "I don't know if you can help a fool,
children, except to save him from total disaster. But remember, it won't
help any of them to go around looking gloomy."
Magnus grinned. "Aye, Papa. Let us help them when we can—but when
we cannot, let us take what joy we may."
"Well said." Rod smiled. "And just now, it's the end of a perfect day."
"Aye." Gwen rested her head on his shoulder for a moment, then looked
up at him, smiling. He returned the smile, gazing deeply into her eyes,
hoping that she was really giving the promise he read there.
"You two really should be careful of your footing," Fess observed.
"Okay, I get the message. We'll watch where we're going." Rod turned
back to the road with a happy sigh. "I can't complain, though. It's a
perfect winter's night— clear as a bell, with the stars at their brightest."
"Aye, and the greater moon nearly full."
"Yeah." Rod looked up at the silver circle through the twigs of the

branch above him. "Funny how every decent-sized moon always has
markings that look like a face."
"Like a face?" Gregory piped up. Rod looked down at his youngest.
"Thou hast told us some did see the whole of the man there!"
"Aye, and with a dog at his heels!" Cordelia was still in the habit of
behaving like little brother's shadow, just in case.
"And a lantern, too!" Geoffrey wasn't about to be left out—and,
suddenly, Gwen was surrounded with her whole brood again, as dapper
young Magnus came sauntering back, smoothing his first moustache with
a fingertip. (Rod had sworn he wouldn't teach him to shave until there was
enough to make the effort worthwhile.)
"The man with the dog and lantern was a medieval European
interpretation, children," Fess explained.
"Back on old Terra, kids, humanity's birthplace." Rod smiled down at
Gwen. "We did manage to find time to take a look at it, when we were
there."
"Tell us again how thou wert on that first Moon of Men," Geoffrey
demanded.
Rod shook his head. "Not tonight. But I will say that I never saw more
than a face in it, myself."
"Then is it in our minds that the Man in the Moon doth dwell, Papa,
and not truly in his silver sphere?"
Rod nodded, looking up at the satellite again. "Could be, Gregory. Of
course, I suppose it depends on the viewer, too. For myself, trying to see
what's really there and not what I've been told about, I'd have to say the
Gramarye Moon looks like…"
"A pie!" Geoffrey cried.
"A shilling!" Cordelia caroled.
"A cheese!"
"A mirror!"

"I was going to say, an eye." Rod grinned. "See? It winked at me."
"Where!"
"Let me see!"
"Will it wink for me, too, Papa?"
"It would certainly be a very odd atmospheric effect." Fess looked up at
the moon.
"/ see not so much as an eyelash," Gwen informed them.
But the shape of the pupil and iris was becoming clearer, so clear that
Rod couldn't doubt the resemblance. "It did. It winked again." Then he
realized there was another eye beside it—and he froze. "There's two of
them, and… they're narrowing!"
The branch above him moved downward, the twigs flexing, looking
more and more like woody fingers on the end of a bark-covered arm,
coming right down toward the family.
"Look out!" Rod grabbed Gwen in his right arm, Cordelia and Gregory
in his left, and dove for the roadside, bowling down Geoffrey and Magnus
on the way, as the enormous hand groped toward them.
The children howled with alarm, and Gwen cried, "Husband! What dost
thou!"
"Battle stations!" Rod shouted. "It's coming for us!"
"What doth come for us?" Magnus scrambled to his feet, looking about
wildly.
"Where? What?" Geoffrey sprang up, landing in a crouch, sword out,
darting glances to left and to right.
Fess leaped out into the road, blocking them with his huge body.
"Where is the enemy, Rod? I cannot see it!"
"There! It's a troll! That wasn't the moon, it was its eye—and that
branch was its arm and hand!"

"Husband, calm thyself!" Gwen said. " 'Tis not a troll's eye, but truly the
moon! And the branch is only a branch!"
"Can't you see it?" Rod dodged aside as the huge hand swept down past
the horse, turning into a fist.
"Nay!" Cordelia wailed. "Oh, Papa, there's naught there!"
"Don't tell me what I don't see!" Rod leaped back, sword whisking out
as the gigantic fist slammed into the snowbank in front of him and swung
up again. "Quick, fly away! It's after us!"
' 'But there is naught…"
"Do you trust me or don't you?" Rod bellowed. "Run! I can't escape
until you do!"
"Papa," Cordelia insisted through her tears, "there is no troll! 'Tis but a
dream!"
"Then it's a dream that can hurt you! Fly!"
"Quickly, children!" Gwen cried. "Whatsoe'er he doth see, he cannot be
calm while we're here! Up, aloft! Everyone!" Her broomstick appeared
from beneath her cloak.
In a whisk, Cordelia was airborne, her brothers shooting up like
skyrockets. Gwen spiraled up after them.
Fess came to Rod's side. "If there is a troll, Rod, it is invisible, and that
is contrary to the laws of physics."
"Invisible? It's right there, for crying out loud! Fess, jump out of the
way!"
But the horse stood still, so Rod leaped to the side, and the troll seemed
to pause, unsure which target to aim at.
Gwen decided the issue by calling, "We are safe, husband!"
"No, you're not!" Rod shouted as the troll turned with a gibbering
laugh, its huge hand reaching up toward Rod's daughter. " 'Delia, up to a
hundred feet! He's after you!

You obscenity of a monster—get away from my child!" And he leaped at
the troll, slashing out with his sword.
The blade cracked against a leg hard as oak, but it scored a long line,
and ichor welled out. With a howl of rage, the troll turned, huge fist
smashing down at Rod.
He leaped again, and snow fountained where the fist struck, while
Fess's voice rang inside his head. "Rod! Put up your blade! There are none
here but yourself and your family! There is no troll!"
"Then how come he's trying to tear my head off?" Rod leaped again, but
the troll's other hand caught him in a crushing squeeze, driving the air
from his lungs. He managed a sort of whinnying cry of alarm as the
ground swung away beneath his feet, and the troll's huge maw gaped wide
before him. Vision reddened as the viselike grip pushed blood into his
head, but a single thought swam through the haze: even a troll had to have
parts that were soft—relatively, at least. He saw the huge lips soaring
closer and lunged out as hard as he could. His blade jabbed into flesh that
had the texture of balsa.
The troll let out a hoot that would have attracted a female locomotive
and threw Rod down, hard—he managed to think Up! barely in time to
cushion the force of the fall. He landed on his side and rolled up to his feet
as the troll roared and stalked toward him, its eyes crimson in the night,
huge foot slamming down at him.
Rod danced aside, and dodged the huge fist that followed—then leaped
as high as he could, rocketing upward with the full power of his levitation,
sword spearing toward the troll's belly.
It hit, with a shock that jolted Rod's whole arm—but the troll howled in
agony and doubled over. Rod managed to shoot out of the way, then
lunged in to skewer the monster's ear. The sword pierced the lobe, and the
troll clapped a hand over it with a roar that shook the hillside. It snapped
back upright—until the pain in its abdomen stopped it. Rod dove in at the
inside of the elbow, feeling like a mosquito—but no insect ever brought out
a bellow like that. The troll stumbled back, away, then away again, hands
up to fend off the tiny demon that shot around and about it, darting in
and stabbing. It turned away, burbling in alarm, and stumbled off into the
forest.

The crashing of its passage faded, and Rod let himself sink back to the
earth, panting and pressing a hand against the ache in his side, wondering
if the monster's grip had cracked a bone. "Must have been—witch-moss,"
he gasped, "but a hell of a lot of it! What have we got—a whole village full
of grannies telling ogre tales?" He turned to his family. "Okay, you can
come down now."
They were down, all right—but Cordelia was huddled against her
mother sobbing, and Gregory was clutching tight to her skirts, staring up
at his father with huge, frightened eyes. Behind, Magnus and Geoffrey
stood manfully, trying to hide their apprehension.
Rod frowned. "What's the matter with you? The troll was the
monster—not me!"
Tears brimmed Gwen's eyes. "Husband, we saw naught! Thou didst
dodge from no blows!"
"Come on! It plowed up a dozen snowdrifts!"
"The surface was completely undisturbed, Rod," Fess answered, "except
by your own tumbles."
' 'Then thou didst rise up though naught did hold thee— yet thou didst
struggle as though against a giant hand."
"Believe me, I felt it!"
"But we did not see it!"
"Not see it?" Rod stilled suddenly, feeling a chill of ice that had nothing
to do with the winter. "You're all against me again, aren't you? Teaming
up!"
"Husband, no!"—as though it were torn from her.
"Then look, will you?" Rod whirled, pointing at the snow. "There're the
footprints! Fess could stand in one! In fact, he is standing in one!"
The horse looked down. "I see only snow, Rod, disturbed by no more
than my own hooves."
"Mayhap only thou couldst see it," Gregory offered. "Could it have been

shielded by a spell that denied it to our eyes?"
That gave Rod pause, but Fess answered, "We would then have been
able to see its effects, Gregory, and…"
"Save your breath, Fess." Rod's eyes narrowed as he looked down at the
boy. "He's humoring me."
Gregory shrank back against Gwen's skirts, and for a moment, the
whole family stood frozen, appalled at the memory of their father's rages,
and bracing themselves for another.
"Hell's skulls," Rod moaned, "am I near lashing out at you all?"
No one answered him.
"I am," Rod breathed, "I really am! And there is no way I'm going to let
that happen again!"
On the word, he turned and strode away into the forest.
"No, Papa!"
"Papa, come back!"
"Husband, thou hast not readied thyself for being long out of doors!"
"Sacred Blue!" Rod muttered to himself. "As though I hadn't slogged
through sixteen-hour winter days before I ever met her!"
"On the planet Pohyola, as I remember, Rod," Fess said at his shoulder,
"when you were helping the rebels to organize."
"Are you there, then?" Rod scowled up at the great black horse. "Go
away. I'm of questionable mental equilibrium, remember?"
"No one but yourself has said so, Rod."
"No one but myself has had to live in my mind." Rod stopped stock-still,
staring off into the night. "That's it!"
"What is what, Rod?"

"Why I could see a troll, and none of the rest of you could. Because it
wasn't there."
You could almost hear the relief in Fess's voice. "That is, certainly, a
logical conclusion, Rod."
"Yeah, but then isn't it equally logical that I'm hallucinating?"
"That is simply a matter of definition."
"No, it's a matter of scrambled brains. Face it, Fess—I'm insane." Rod
stopped in the snow, a beatific smile spreading across his face. "Yeah,
insane. Well! If that's all it is, then I can relax again."
"Would you… explain the basis for that attitude, Rod?"
"What's to explain? As long as I know what it is, I know what to do
about it.''
"Which is?" Fess asked, with foreboding.
"Stay far away from Gwen and the kids, for openers, so I can't hurt
them. Stay away from everybody, for that matter, until I manage to get
myself straightened out." Rod started walking again. "That forest looks
inviting. I'm overdue for a vacation, anyway."
"Now, Rod." Fess hurried to catch up with him. "Surely you are
exaggerating."
"No, I'm hallucinating. And if I'm hallucinating, I'm either starving,
drugged, suffering from heatstroke, or insane."
"That is not a warranted inference…"
"Oh, yeah? Do you know any other causes of hallucination?"
Fess was silent a moment, then said, "An excess of religious zeal,
perhaps, usually coinciding with deep meditation."
"Yeah, well, I sure haven't been praying this afternoon— and after that
banquet Their Majesties fed us, I'm certainly not starving! If any of that
food had been drugged, there'd be a hundred other people hallucinating,
too!"

"Have we any proof that they are not?"
"Judging by the ruckus I've been making, we'd have heard them by
now—or at least heard about them; Their Royalties always summon us
when something unexplain-able happens to somebody."
"That does seem valid," Fess said with reluctance.
"You bet it does! As to heatstroke, it's the middle of winter—and that
leaves insanity!"
' 'The term is perhaps a bit extreme…"
"Sure—I'm just seeing things that aren't really there. Seeing them
attack me, too—and will you really try to tell me that I haven't always been
a little bit paranoid?"
"Your grandfather did perhaps exert too strong an influence on you,
with his medieval fantasies…"
"Yes—my darling, beloved, but dotty grandfather. Is that an adjective
you'd accept, Fess? Or how about 'mad as a hatter'?"
"I think I might prefer the last," Fess said slowly, "considering its
association with the works of Lewis Carroll."
"Then it's heigh-ho! Off to Wonderland! Are you coming along, Fess?"
But Rod didn't wait for an answer.
Chapter Two
The trees closed behind him. Rod glanced back, and saw only a maze of
bare branches, outlined by the snow clinging to them. At once, he slowed
his pace with a sigh of relief. "They did it. They stayed."
"They do recognize your need for occasional solitude, Rod."
"Still there, Steel Steed?" Rod looked up at his old companion, and was
surprised to see that the great black horse was facing front, not watching
him. For some reason, this made the pressure roll off. "Well. So I'm on sick
leave."
"It would seem advisable," the robot agreed.

"Great!" Rod stretched, then relaxed with a happy sigh. "No more
emergency calls from Tuan and Catharine! At least, not for a while."
"Yet Gwen will have to manage the children alone," Fess murmured.
"She does, anyway, Fess, you know that. I'm just a security symbol for
them all, a sort of animated teddy bear."
"Oh, no, Rod! You do them an injustice. You are far more, to all of
them…" He stopped, seeing that his owner wasn't listening.
"Fess—what's that great big brown blob over there?"
"Where, Rod?" Fess followed Rod's gaze, but saw nothing.
Rod, however, saw a large, fat animal stand up on its hind legs and
wave, a cheerful smile on its face. "It's a bear, Fess—six feet tall, if it's an
inch. Very friendly-looking, too," he said, puzzled. "I thought bears were
supposed to be hibernating."
"They are, Rod." There was a cautious note to the robot's voice. "Are its
legs much thicker than is normal for its kind?"
"Yeah, and it has pink pads instead of paws… Hey!" Rod whirled,
staring up at Fess. "You don't mean it's a teddy!"
"Yes, Rod—an animated teddy bear, such as you were just discussing."
"Odd coincidence." Rod waved back to the teddy, then watched it stroll
away into the wood. It looked rather familiar. "You don't mean it showed
up because I talked about it?"
"That is a distinct possibility, Rod. If you are hallucinating, anything
that comes to your mind might appear."
"And anything that's there, waiting to surface, but hasn't come to the
fore yet?" Rod frowned. "Don't know if I like the sound of that last part.''
"It may turn out to be fallacious—but perhaps the visual images stored
in your subconscious will not arise unless some random association
triggers them."
"Like that thought about my role in the family." Rod glanced about

him, suddenly apprehensive. "Right now, Fess, it looks to me as though
I'm walking through a moonlit deciduous forest, with snow outlining the
limbs of the trees."
"You are, Rod."
"So the forest is real, anyway." Rod rubbed a glove across his chin.
A long, mournful cry echoed through the forest, and a shadow with eyes
of fire detached itself from a nearby branch. "Fess! It's a vampire!"
"No, Rod—it is only an owl."
The huge bat dove at them, its jaws lolling open to show glistening
fangs. Rod ducked, grabbed up a branch with a sharpened tip, and
stabbed at the monster's breast. With a howl of dread, it sheered off and
hurtled away into the forest. "Owl or not," Rod muttered, "I had to deal
with it in terms of the fantasy it came from." Then a sudden thought
struck him. "What am I holding, Fess?"
"A broken twig, Rod. "
"It grew amazingly." Rod threw the sharpened stake away. "This is
going to take some getting used to. Well, at least I have light." He looked
up at the planetoid overhead. "Hey! It stayed a moon!"
"It would seem that the spell has passed," Fess murmured.
"Only temporarily." Rod shook his head. "Be nice if it would stay
gone—but I think I'd better wait a while, to make sure."
The moon reddened.
"Uh—strike that."
"What is happening, Rod?"
"The moon has turned crimson. A big, fat drop is collecting on its
bottom… it's dripping…" Rod squeezed his eyes shut and shook his head.
"No, I don't think I'm ready to go home."
"It is surely a chemical imbalance," the robot protested. "A blood
analysis…"

Rod looked up, horrified. Fess had grown batwings; two long, sharp
fangs protruded from his mouth. "Get away from me!"
"But, Rod… I only meant…"
"Meant to stop by for a quick sip! What the hell is this, a vampire
horse?"
"Exactly," chuckled a rich baritone voice.
Rod whirled, and saw a tall, debonair devil lounging against a tree
trunk, twirling its tail. "Go to blazes!"
"Oh, all right," the devil grumped. "But I'll find you later." He exploded
into flame and was gone, leaving Rod trembling.
"Rod, surely the correct antidote…"
"There is no antidote!" Rod leaped back. "Because there's no poison!
You're in this with them! You're all out to get me—even you, my old tutor
and guardian! Get away! Get out of here! Go!"
The vampire horse stood, glaring at him with eyes of fire.
Rod whipped out his dagger. "Turn into a sword!" The blade sprouted,
grew three feet. "Silver!" Rod cried, and the sheen of steel turned to a
mirror finish.
"I will go," the vampire said slowly. "But I am grieved to find that your
imbalance is so severe as to make you doubt me, Rod."
"Doubt? I'm sure of it! Now get out of here, before I run you through."
"I will go." The horse turned away—and as it went, the glow in its eyes
died, the fangs shrank and were gone, the wings dwindled and flowed back
into the form of a saddle—and only familiar old Fess plodded away
through the snow, head hanging.
Rod felt a stab of remorse. "No! I mean…"
Fess paused and lifted his head, turning to face Rod. "Yes?"
"It's ebbing again," Rod explained. "It seems to come and go—and it

makes me paranoid when it happens."
"I have heard of such phenomena," Fess answered.
Rod frowned. "Just reinforcing my natural tendencies, you mean?"
Then before Fess could answer, "Never mind—it doesn't really matter.
Whatever it is, I'll have to figure it out and learn to cope with it. You'll
have to leave me alone to work it out, Fess. I know that's hard for you, but
you'll have to."
"I have always endeavored not to be overly protective, Rod, in spite of
my programming."
"Yeah—and I know how hard that is." Rod grimaced, remembering how
he had to school himself to leave Gregory and Cordelia to fend for
themselves—not always successfully. And Magnus and Geoffrey, when they
were little. "No need to override that tendency completely, though. Don't
be too far away, okay?"
The great black horse stared at him for a moment, while its eyes
seemed to quicken again. Then it said, "I will come at your call, Rod."
"Thanks, old friend." Rod grinned with relief. "But you'd better not stay 
too close."
"I understand. I will be here, but not here." And the horse turned away,
fading into the night.
Rod frowned, wondering if Fess had donned a cloak of invisibility. The
thought alarmed him—he looked about in near panic, wondering how
many invisible enemies might be looming over him.
"Magic spectacles." The devil was there again, a set of lenses dangling
from its hand. "Guaranteed to let you see anyone wearing a cloak of
invisibility, or even a Tarnhelm, anywhere nearby—and available only to
you."
"Through this special offer, eh?" Rod glowered. "What's the price?"
"Only your signature, in blood." -
Rod shook his head. "I couldn't read the fine print right now—it might

keep changing on me. Retro me, Satanus!"
"Wrong devil," the demon scoffed, "but I take your point. Just
remember, the offer remains open." It faded, and was gone.
"The offer is also empty," Rod snorted. Then he remembered that the
biggest step in invention was realizing that something could be
done—after that, research and engineering went faster. "Well, if I'm
hallucinating, I ought to get some good out of it. Magic glasses! Appear!"
He snapped his fingers, then held his hands out, cupped to catch.
Nothing happened.
"Might have known it wouldn't work when I wanted it to," he muttered,
and turned away, plodding off into the night.
Rod hadn't gone far when he began to hear the piteous wail.
He broke into a trot—the fastest pace possible in the thick snow. The
sound was that of someone in trouble and, his own natural inclination to
help aside, he had to confront the hallucinations sprung from his secret
fears, not flee from them.
Around a bend in the path, past a curving wall of trees, he saw a huge
old oak tree, its trunk riven by some long-forgotten lightning bolt. The
cleft in the trunk had closed fast around the arm of an old peasant woman
who was moaning and shivering in the cold. She saw Rod. "A rescue, kind
sir! Free me from the grip of this evil tree!"
And, so help him, the tree gave a menacing grumble.
Rod squeezed his eyes shut and gave his head a quick shake, then
looked again. The oak and the crone were still there—of course. Still, what
he saw might not be what she was seeing—or was she part of the
hallucination, too?
One way to find out. He stepped up cautiously. "How did you come to
catch your arm in that oak tree's trunk, grandmother?"
"I sought to grasp that sprig of mistletoe, sir, for the holiday!" A sprig
dangled just beyond the woman's reach, for all the world like bait. "I
reached, and the tree rocked toward me and caught my arm! Wilt free me,

good sir? Oh, I beg of thee!"
A limb reached down twiggy fingers. Rod drew his sword in a slashing
arc, and the twigs drew back with a shriek of stressed wood. The trunk
rumbled angrily.
Rod looked up, eyes alight. "Doesn't like the steel, does it? Well, then,
ma'am, all I have to do is…" He stretched out the blade, probing into the
crack in the trunk. The tree moaned in horror, and the edges of the cleft
shrank back. The old lady snatched her arm free with a shout of joy, and
the tree rocked forward, rumbling in rage.
"Run!" Rod shouted, as a branch struck at him like a club. He dodged,
but other branches began to wave and lash the air, reaching toward him,
while the tree's groans rose to thunder—and nearby trees began to stir
restlessly.
Well, if it hadn't liked the steel of the sword, what would it really fear?
Rod remembered a six-foot-long, two-handed lumberjack's saw he'd seen
in a museum once— and his sword fluxed and stretched, growing until he
found himself holding just such a toothy blade in his hands.
The tree shrank back with a moan of fear.
"Sir, behind thee!" the crone cried, and Rod spun around to see a
branch with a huge, knotted burl on its end, striking at him. He swung the
saw about, holding the teeth up. The burl halted its swing and bobbed up
while the trunk let out a positive wail. Rod turned back at the sound,
brandishing the saw like a two-handed shield, and began retreating. "Stay
behind me, Granny! We'll get out of here the slow way, but we'll get out!"
So they did, a foot at a time, away from the old oak and back toward
the pathway. The oak thundered in anger, its branches lashing the air, and
the nearby trees began to rock as though huge gusts were racking the
forest. But the farther from the oak they went, the fewer the number of
trees that were uneasy until, a hundred yards along the path, they were
walking through a calm winter forest again, with trees whose branches
moved only to the gentle night breezes.
Rod stopped in a patch of moonlight and wiped his brow. "Whew! That
was a close one, Granny!"

"It was, in truth—yet we are free, and thou has saved me." The old
woman's eyes were huge.
"Glad to help." Rod frowned at the saw, thinking what an
inconvenience it was going to be to lug around—and it shrank back into a
dagger again.
The old woman gasped. "Assuredly, sir, thou must needs be a puissant
wizard!"
"Only a warlock, ma'am." Rod slipped the dagger away, trying to hide
the trembling of his hand. "And to tell you the truth, I'm a little uneasy
about that right now. I've never been able to make things change shape
before. Unless they were made of witch-moss, of course."
"Thou art a crafter, too?" The old woman shrank back, raising a
trembling hand to her lips.
"Hey, hold on, now! Nothing to be afraid of!" Rod's fright faded before
his concern for someone else. "Don't believe all that nonsense you've heard
about magic-folk! We're just like any other people—some good, some bad,
and an awful lot in between. I'm one of the last ones—no saint, but
basically a nice guy, as long as you don't attack me."
"Oh, I shall not, sir, I assure thee!"
"I believe you. But look, you've got to be freezing. How long were you
standing there with your arm caught in that tree, anyway?"
"Since—since not long after noon, sir."
"You must be a lump of ice. Come on, I'll walk you home. Where do you
live?"
" Tis but a cottage in the wildwood, sir. And you've no need to put
thysen out for the likes of me…" But she glanced from side to side with
apprehension.
Rod's resolve firmed. "It's no trouble, Granny—I wasn't going anywhere
specific, anyway. Come on, let's go."
"Well… an it please thee, sir." She fell into step beside him, clutching

her basket to her scrawny chest, eyes still flicking from side to side, wary
of the night's dangers. "Pray the Wee Folk do not find us!"
"Why? We could use some help. Say, I can't keep calling you
'Granny'—we're not even related."
"Oh, do, kind sir, an it please thee! All other folk do—old Granny Ban,
they call me, the Woman in the Wood."
"Not too many old ladies who opt for solitude, hm? Well, I'm Rod
Gallowglass." He ignored her start of recognition, casually turning away to
eye the forest. "Personally, I think you have a nice neighborhood."
"I do find beauty in it, sir." The old woman managed a timorous smile.
"And the wild creatures do be good neighbors indeed, save the wolves and
bears."
"You're just lucky one of them didn't come by while you were stuck in
that tree." Rod frowned. "Or did it have them frightened, too?"
"I know not, sir—I ha' ne'er come near that oak aforetime. Yet I
misdoubt me an…"
The conversation went on, her answers becoming longer and
longer—and, bit by bit, he drew her out, until she was chattering like a
power loom, months' worth of pent-up talk coming out in a stream, once
she realized she had an attentive ear available. Rod listened and smiled,
nodding and prompting her with the occasional question, usually having
to do with which fork they should take; so he wasn't entirely surprised
when, having reached her door, bade her good night, and turned away, he
heard her cry, "Oh, no, sir, thou must not stay longer in this bitter cold!
Come in and warm thy sen by my fire, I prithee, until the sun hath risen to
warm the air a bit."
Rod turned back and gazed at her, weighing his habitual reluctance to
accept hospitality against his chilled feet and nose, and the possibility of
frostbite. Then he shrugged and grinned. "Why not? If you don't mind my
taking a nap. I can't do too much harm if I'm asleep."
"Assuredly, sir—yet thou must needs dine first; I doubt me not an thou
hast gone hungry this night."

Rod was surprised to realize he actually could think of food again—in
fact, he was downright famished. "Well, now that you mention it…"
' 'Thou hast as much hunger as one of those wolves we but now did
speak of, hast thou not? There, I knew it!" Granny Ban hung her worn old
cloak on a peg and bustled about the single, cozy room, much more
relaxed now that she was home again. She lifted the lid on a pot that hung
from a crane in the fireplace, and a heavenly aroma swirled through the
cottage. Rod's mouth watered. "I don't mean to put you out…"
"Oh, there's stew enough for two, and more, sir! There, as if thou
couldst put me out? When I owe my life to thee, belike. Here." A steaming
loaf plumped down on the table before him, whisked out of the oven hole
next to the fire. "Eat, and bide; the stew will be with thee ere long."
Rod didn't need urging. He munched on the crusty loaf, soaking in the
warmth—he must have grown numb, not realizing how cold he was—and
taking in his surround-ings. No, this wasn't the only room—there was a
door in the wall to his left. A scullery, probably, or an unheated
pantry—good way to keep food the winter…
"And hast thou ne'er seen trees move of their own accord afore, sir?"
"Hm?" Rod hadn't realized he'd mentioned it. "No, never.''
"Nor have I. Tis odd, for I've dwelt in the wildwood these twenty years
and more—and so puissant a warlock as thysen must needs have seen all
manner of magics."
"Well, I have seen a lot—but I must admit this land of Gramarye has
continual surprises for me." From the aroma, he judged that the stew
owed more to vegetables than to meat—but it was wonderfully seasoned,
and smelled heavenly. Rod could hardly wait for it to be served.
" 'Tis a wicked spell woven by thine enemies, I doubt not. Thou hast
enemies, hast thou not, sir? Nay, of a certainty thou hast—all do know that
the enemies of the King are the enemies of the High Warlock, too." She
shook her head with a sigh. "Our poor liege! Scarcely hath he dealt with
one foe when a new doth arise. One would think…"
"Yes, one would." Rod frowned, his attention caught. "A spell? You
think that tree coming alive could be the work of a sorcerer?"

"Might it not, sir?" She set a wooden bowl in front of him, a carven
spoon beside it—more of a ladle, really. "Never hath it chanced aforetime,
and I have paced the path past that oak twice a week or more, these
twenty years."
"But I'm the only one who can see these sights! I'm hallucinating." Rod
spooned up the stew, held it to his lips, then shook his head at the notion.
"No, that's impossible, Granny Ban! Hallucinations that other people can
see, too? How could that be?"
"Art thou not a warlock, sir? Canst thou not send thy thoughts into
others' minds?"
"Well, yeah, but… No, doggone it! My wife and kids would have picked
up on it, and they didn't see anything!"
"Well, belike 'tis some other work of thine enemies," Granny Ban
soothed; but Rod froze at the first-taste of the stew. She had almost
managed it, had almost distracted him enough for him to eat the stew
without noticing the oddness, the strange quality of its flavor…
Paranoia, the objective part of his mind said, so he knew he should
hold off, should insist on proof…
But she was watching him closely, much too closely, too intently, so he
said, "Your stew certainly has a unique taste, Granny Ban. Is there some
secret herb you use?"
She smiled as though she were flattered, but her eyes were wary—or
was that just his imagination, now? "Scarcely secret, sir—only herbs that
any wife may find in the forest. Though I will own, not many have my trick
of blending them."
It was the word "trick" that really sent the alarm bells clanging in Rod's
head. "Odd word for it. Certainly a secret blend, wouldn't you say?"
"Well… aye…"
"And a secret blend of herbs betokens a lot of experience with them."
Rod lurched to his feet, bumping the table out of the way. He could have
sworn that the mere aroma of the stew was making him light-headed.
"That door, Granny—this is a very small cottage. What's so important that

you'd go to the trouble of putting up an inside wall, even putting in a
door?"
"Naught, sir!" She caught at his arm, trying to hold him back. " 'Tis
naught but my storeroom, my pantry! Oh, sir, wherefore waste the fire's
heat on those things that are only stored away?"
She ended in a wail, as Rod thrust the door open.
For a moment, the objects inside seemed to flux and flow; then his eyes
adjusted, and the light from the fire behind him showed bunches of dried
grasses and plants hanging from the rafters. Below them stood row upon
row of earthenware jars, each with its pictograph, characters whose
meanings he was sure were known only to Granny Ban—and, below them,
a long worktable, cluttered with a mortar and pestle, a small brazier and
tripod, breakers, bowls, and a pint-sized cauldron; even—yes, primitive,
but definitely there—an alembic and a distilling tube.
"A stillery," he said. "A complete, thorough, very well equipped stillery."
" Tis but for aid of the poor village folk, sir," she wailed. "Oh, have pity!
I know not the brewing of any potions that might bring harm!"
Rod gave her a look that had been stored in dry ice. "There, you lie—for
no one can learn many medicines that will help people, without learning a
few that will cure in small doses, and kill in large doses."
"Oh, never would I abuse such knowledge, sir! Never have I given man
or woman any dose that might bring harm!"
But a glint caught Rod's eye. "You haven't, hm?" He stepped over to the
corner, wishing for light—and a torch was there in his left hand, glittering
on the gold coins visible through the open top of the bag. He pulled at it,
letting the coins run through his fingers, then looked up and saw the small
chest, lid open, showing pearls and rubies among more gold and silver.
Odd that he hadn't noticed it before. "Doing rather well for yourself, aren't
you, Granny?"
"Nay, sir! I only hold these goods in trust for a traveler, whose donkey
hath taken ill!"
"The traveler took ill, you mean—very ill, once he'd tasted your stew.

How often have you pulled that trick with the oak tree, Granny? How did
you work it—witch-moss? Telekinesis? How many gallant young men have
you murdered, for no worse sin than seeking to help an old lady?"
"None, sir! Oh, none! Nay, never have I slain! Only robbed, sir, that is
all—only taken their purses!"
"And those of their wives, to judge by this haul. What was in the stew,
Granny? Belladonna? Angel-of-Death? Deadly nightshade?"
"Poppy, sir! Only the juice of the poppy! Ah, sir, never did I seek to
slay!"
"No? Then why didn't your victims come back for their valuables once
the drug had worn off?" He whirled, drawing his sword. "Here's a quicker
death, Granny, and a cleaner!"
"Nay, thou wouldst not!" she howled, shrinking away from the
point—but the wall was at her back, and she dared not move, staring
fascinated at the blade. "Not a poor widow-woman, sir, with none to
defend her! Thou couldst not lack honor so!"
"Honor doesn't mean that much to me. Justice does."
No, Rod!
It was Fess's voice, inside his head—and Granny Ban, staring in horror
over the sword at him, couldn't hear a whisper. Rod frowned. "You're the
sort that FESSters in this wood."
Thank you for responding. I confess to eavesdropping, Rod. I have
been concerned for you.
"Concern is a good thing. Betrayal is not."
"I have never betrayed any, sir!" Granny Ban wailed.
Nor have I, Rod. But think—justice requires proof.
"Gold coins in a peasant hut? That pile of loot is all the proof I need!"
"Sir, 'twas only a fee," she howled, "a fee for a task I shunned, yet had
no choice in!"

Gold coins might indeed be proof of something, Rod—if they are truly
there.
Rod hesitated. Had he really seen gold coins? Or had his mind
manufactured them, out of a few pennies?
For that matter, was this stillery really here? Was this cottage? For all
he knew, he might be talking to a crazed old lady in a hovel, guilty of
nothing but talking too much.
He lowered his sword. "No, I won't kill you, Granny."
The old woman sagged with relief, and Fess's voice said, / commend the
wisdom of your decision, Rod.
"Oh, bless thee, sir!" Granny Ban blubbered.
"Don't bother—because I am going to leave you bound hand and foot.
Go lie down on your bed."
The old woman stiffened, appalled. "Nay, sir! Slay me, rather—for I'd
liefer a quick death than die of starvation and thirst!"
"You won't starve, though you might get a little chilly— I'll send word to
the shire-reeve, at the next village I come to. Tell him how saintly you are!
Go on, now, lie down— and you'd better pull up your blankets, too. I'll
leave more wood on the fire, but it might take the reeve's men a while to
get here."
A few minutes later, he stepped out the cottage door, closed it firmly
behind him, and wrapped his cloak about him again. "Fess?"
"Here, Rod." A darker shape detached itself from the shadows among
the trees.
"Thanks for interfering," Rod said grudgingly. "You may have just
saved me from committing a heinous crime."
"It is ever my honor to serve you, Rod. Still, may I suggest that you do
indeed summon the authorities as quickly as possible? I have seen a
keeper's cottage not far from here."
Rod nodded. "Yeah, good idea. He'll know Granny Ban personally, I'll

bet, and will know whether she's a candidate for the stocks, or for the
gallows."
"An excellent point. Shall we seek him, then?"
Rod frowned up at the horse, weighing trust against suspicion.
Then he nodded again, and slogged through the snow to mount the
steel steed. "Sorry I doubted you, old retainer. Things don't always seem
what they are any more."
"Yes, Rod. Trust is difficult when you cannot be sure of the validity of
your perceptions."
"True. But that's what logic is for, isn't it? To discover which
perceptions are real, and which aren't."
"That is one of its uses, yes. However, logic is difficult to achieve in a
highly emotional state."
"Yes—and the world does seem to be picking on me at the moment. I'm
clear-headed enough, just now, to realize that's only my perception—but
when the emotions take over, I forget."
"Of course, Rod. If you did not believe your perceptions to be true, you
would not be paranoid."
"How's that again?" Rod frowned down at the back of the horsehead,
then shook his head. "No, don't tell me. I'm happier in my ignorance. Or
do you mean that if I weren't paranoid, I would doubt my perceptions—at
least, when it seems as though everything's out to get me?"
"That is the converse of the proposition," Fess agreed.
"Glad I got it right," Rod responded. "But the main question is still
there, Fess—how come I'm having spells of paranoia, all of a sudden?''
"They are not totally new to you, Rod," the robot said slowly.
"Thank you for your tact, Mr. Hammer. But I don't usually have such
intense feelings of persecution, with such total certainty that I'm right."
"That is new, fortunately—and, since it was accompanied by the

beginning of hallucinations, I can only conjecture that…"
"It's a chemical problem, yeah. But, Fess—is the chemical imbalance
generated in me, or brought in from the outside world?"
"Whatever its source, Rod, it is in you now."
"Much more of this, and you'll have me believing it," Rod grumbled.
"That would definitely be a more desirable condition," the robot mused.
"All right, so we'll go with the working hypothesis that what I see isn't
real," Rod grumbled. "But how am I supposed to know what's real and
what isn't?"
"Of more immediate concern, perhaps," Fess said slowly, "is: when does
it truly matter?"
Rod sighed as horse and man headed deeper into the forest.
Chapter Three
Sometime later, Rod had dismounted and was walking slowly behind
Fess, when his foot hit an icy patch. He slipped, skidded, and just barely
managed to regain his balance. He looked down at the side of the trail and
saw a river's sheen below him. It was frozen solid. In the distance, he could
see a sled moving away, laden with bundles, pushed by an ice-skating
merchant. Half-timbered buildings fronted on the water, their stucco dyed
in pastels. Rod stared—it was an incongruously gay and light-hearted
scene in the midst of the winter's grimness.
Then he heard the crunch of a footstep behind him.
He whirled, blood pounding in his ears, panic stringing him as taut as a
trap. The lurker stepped out from behind a huge old oak, and Rod found
himself staring at…
Himself.
It was him to the life—hatchet face, eagle-beak nose, wide mouth, and
glower. He was even wearing the same clothing—doublet and hose, boots,
gloves, cloak, and sword, though in different colors.

Rod decided to keep an eye on the sword. "Who are you?"
"Who are youl" his double demanded.
"Rod Gallowglass," Rod snapped, "Lord High Warlock." The reminder
of magic lent insight, and anger. "And who the hell do you think you are,
to go around wearing my face?"
"It's my face! Who do you think you are, to be wearing it?"
At least the double didn't have Rod's voice, too. "The man who was
born with it, damn it!" Well, that wasn't quite true—Rod had grown into
the face. "What the devil do you mean, impersonating me?"
"Me impersonating youl The audacity, the effrontery of it!"
"I notice you don't deny it!"
"All left, I deny it!" the doppelganger bawled. "You're copying mel Just
what the hell do you think you're trying to get away with?"
Rod frowned, looking the man up and down. It was possible, it was just
possible… "What does E = MC2 mean?"
"Energy equals mass times the square of the speed of light." The
stranger frowned, too. "Which is to say, energy and mass are just different
aspects of the same thing. What the hell kind of question is thatV
"A very clear one. If you know the answer, it means you're from
off-planet."
"Yeah, sure, and you're from off-planet if you can ask it! So what does 
that prove?"
"That you're an imposter."
"Imposter! What are you talking about, you fool? I'm Rod GallowglassV
Rod stared, shocked—and the whole scene swam in front of his eyes. He
staggered, putting out a hand to brace himself against a tree trunk, afraid
he would faint. Then his vision cleared, and he saw the doppelganger
clearly again, glaring at him with hostility, and the clarity of inner insight
hit him: he remembered. He was crazy!

Well, of course. If he was crazy, he might see anything, mightn't he? I
mean, if he was having delusions, why couldn't his own self be one of those
delusions?
Apparently, it was.
Rod leaned back on one hip, folding his arms. "Let me get this straight.
You claim that you're Rod Gallowglass?"
"The very same." The doppelganger was looking wary now. "And who
do you think you are?"
"Rod Gallowglass."
But the doppelganger didn't squawk in outrage. He stood quietly,
brooding—which sent a chill shivering up Rod's spine; it was exactly what 
he would have done, at this juncture.
What he had done, in fact.
Rod shook himself back into gear. Denial hadn't worked, so it was time
for thinking.
Why not?
"There's two of us," the doppelganger pointed out.
"Sh! Don't tell!" Rod glanced around furtively. "They'd banish us, you
know."
"Banish us?" The doppelganger stared. "Who?"
"The sane people."
"You know some?"
"Well, yes, I think so," Rod admitted. "And just in case I don't, there's
always my touchstone, Fess."
"Mv touchstone." But the doppelganger's heart wasn't in it any more;
he was too busy studying the great black robot-horse. "Do you see two of
us, old boy?"

"There is only one of you, Rod."
Rod shuddered—Fess had heard the doppelganger!
"But you do seem to be talking to yourself," the robot amplified. "A
fascinating conversation, no doubt."
No doubt? But Rod didn't stop to ask. "We could try to figure out which
one of us is real…"
"Yeah, and after that, we can try to figure out what 'real' means." The
doppelganger's lip curled. "Can't you think of something a little more
productive?"
"Well," Rod said, "the sensible thing is for us to join forces. I mean, if
we can't tell ourselves apart, we should certainly make one hell of a unit."
"Makes sense," the doppelganger said judiciously. "But how are we
going to coordinate?"
"Very easily, I should think. You take the left side, and I'll take the
right."
The doppelganger seemed dubious. "How come you're willing to take
the right?"
"I just see you as sinister, I guess. Try it the other way—I'll be glad to
have you as my squire."
"Me be your squire? You can be my squire!"
"What, and try to live with your idea of tactics? I'd die first! No, amend
that—I'd die trying."
"Not much faith in yourself, have you?" the doppelganger snorted.
That brought Rod up short. He thought about it for a minute, but
didn't succeed. "Afraid not. You're obviously left."
"And will be in everything, clunkhead! You'd better take me up on my
offer, and be my squire!"
"Not if you're me, bucko! If I want dumb ideas, I can make up my own!"

"Ridiculous," the doppelganger snapped. "At least / trust my own
instincts!"
"Oh, yeah? How about mine?"
"Of course not!"
"Then you can't trust your own."
The doppelganger started to answer, shoaled on the logic, and froze
with his mouth open. After a few moments, he closed his jaw and nodded.
"Point to you. How's it feel to be one horn of a dilemma?"
"Makes me feel like wanting to blow," Rod admitted.
"Not a bad idea." The doppelganger turned away, brushing past Rod
and hurrying on down the trail. "Let's go."
Rod lifted his head with a smile. "Yeah. Not a bad idea is right." He
jumped to catch up.
As they plodded along through the snow with Fess behind, Rod offered,
"This is going to get a little confusing. What're we going to call each
other?"
"How about, 'Hey, you'?"
"Well, it certainly beats 'Hey, me.' Look, I could be Rod, and you…"
"Hold it left there." The doppelganger stopped, holding out a hand,
palm up. "/ could be 'Rod.' "
"I see your point." Rod frowned. "Won't work, will it? Well, we have
twenty middle names—can't we manage something with that?"
The doppelganger nodded. "Nice idea. Any preference?"
"Yeah." Rod grinned. "I'll be 'Rod,' and you can be 'Rodney.' "
The doppelganger winced. "You know I always hated that name!"
"But you did like your ancestor's version."

"True," the doppelganger mused. "I've always been partial to 'Roderick.'
"
"Fine by me—you can be 'Roderick,' and I'll be 'Rodney'—but 'Rod' for
short, of course." He turned away down the road.
The doppelganger gave him a dubious look as he fell into step beside
him. "How come I feel like I came out on the short end, this time?"
"Just overly sensitive," Rod said breezily. "You know we've always been
a little paranoid."
"True enough," the doppelganger said. Then his face cleared. "I know!
Tomorrow we'll change names! How's that sound?"
"If you must." Rod sighed, then came to a halt, frowning. "Hey! How
come we're walking when we could ride?"
"Good point." His other self turned back to Fess. "You don't mind
carrying double, do you, old horse?"
"Not at all, Rod," the robot said, and stepped forward.
"We'll take turns in the saddle, of course," Rod noted as the
doppelganger mounted.
"Oh, of course." The doppelganger shook the reins and clucked to the
horse, and they rode off down the road, with the saddle empty and Fess
speculating on the exact nature of the delusion that was causing Rod to
ride pillion.
The trail led along the river, then forked. Rod stopped. "I'd just as soon
not go into town right now."
The doppelganger grinned. "Don't trust yourself, eh?"
"Not at all. I mean, it looks like a very nice, quiet little village from here,
but who knows what it'll appear to be once I get there?"
"I could go ahead and scout it out," the doppelganger offered.
"Great!" Rod saw a chance to get rid of his other self. "I'll ride around
and meet you on the far side."

"Fine. And speaking of meat, I'll stop by the tavern and get you some
lunch."
"There's a tavern there?"
"Well, I saw a green bush hanging from a sign bracket, and I don't
think it was a florist's."
Rod was tempted, but the thought of dumping his unwanted
companion was stronger than the urge for hearth and ale. "I'll be obliged."
The doppelganger grinned. "I know." They both dismounted; he turned
away and struck out toward the town.
Rod turned, too, toward the woods—and stopped, one foot in the air.
He looked back to see what was holding him, but couldn't see
anything—except for his doppel-ganger, stuck in the same pose,
apparently straining against it with all his might. Rod lunged toward the
wood, exerting every iota of willpower in an attempt to put his foot
down—but he couldn't move an inch. "Fess—how come I can't go on?"
"There is no physical cause, Rod."
"Meaning it's psychosomatic. But I need to keep going." Rod turned
back to the doppelganger, just as he turned to look at him.
"Something there is that does not like a stall," he said.
Rod winced. "Don't talk about Fess that way."
"I didn't," his double assured him. "It's pretty obvious that something
doesn't want us parted."
"Have a heart!"
"I do. So do you, in fact. And something wants the union of true hearts
to be preserved."
"You mean I can't get rid of you."
"Hey! Look at it from my side—/ can't get away from you!''
"Well, what must be, must be." Rod sighed. "I guess we travel together,

or not at all. Come on, let's go."
"And I had my skin all set for heat," the doppelganger griped. "But I
have to admit, a hike through the woods is safer than letting you into a
town."
Rod scowled. "And are you so much safer than I am?"
"Oh, infinitely safer! You think I'm a figment of your subconscious,
don't you?"
"Well…"
"Right. And whoever heard of a mere figment doing any damage?"
"Ever hear of Willy Loman?" Rod jibed. "But I take your
point—hopefully on my shield. Come on, let's go."
They did.
They'd been traveling about half an hour when they heard the roar.
They jumped for cover, but it was too late. Pounding feet came thundering
up to their thicket. "I see yuh, I see yuh!" bellowed a sub-basso. "Come on
out and fight like a man!"
"Oh, don't be so tiresome!" a more mellow voice said. "They weren't
hurting you in the slightest."
"Shut up, goody-goody! Awright, come out with your hands up!"
Rod came, sword first.
The monster backed away from the point, its snout wrinkling in
consternation. "Hey, now! You ain't supposed to fight back!"
"No more than you can expect," the other voice said.
"You shaddup!"
It was a two-headed monster, like a very fat dragon with a rhinoceros's
tail and elephant's feet—and it was puce with yellow polka dots. Rod took
one look at it and was certain his hallucinations came courtesy of his
subconscious.

"I will not shut up," the other head said. "After all, you're trying to
threaten them with my body, too."
"My body! You only control the right half!"
"So I do." The right-hand head turned to the two Rods. "I'll have to ask
you to pardon this intrusion; I didn't really have much choice in the
matter. You can call me 'Dexter.' "
"You don't look very dextrous," the doppelganger pointed out.
It didn't, but the right-hand head did have a pleasant, though bothered,
look about it, in spite of being mostly snout and teeth. Its companion
head, though, managed to have a sneaky, predatory look with exactly the
same features. "Don't you dare call me 'Sinister'!" It swiveled to glare at
Rod. "I'll bite off your head! I'll roast you alive!"
"It's been tried." For some reason, Rod was taking a dislike to Sinister.
He hefted his blade. "If you think you can argue with cold steel, go ahead
and try."
"Cold steel! I'll melt that tin toothpick down into slag!" But Sinister
didn't seem eager to try.
"I take it you had some reason for coming up to us," the doppelganger
said.
"Reason! Yeah! I'm hungry!"
"Now, Sinister," Dexter murmured, "you know we discussed this."
"Disgusted, maybe! Now, look, Dex, you're gonna follow my lead this
time, or I'm gonna fry you to a crisp!"
"I'm sorry, Sinister," Dexter said in a very low voice, "but I absolutely
will have nothing to do with this charade." He turned to the two Rods.
"You really should hurry on by. This can't be very pleasant for you."
"Right." The doppelganger turned to go.
With a roar, Sinister slapped out the left foot, and the doppelganger
leaped back.

"Sinister! You know these people haven't done anything to deserve…"
"They came into my territory, didn't they?" Sinister roared. "They
walked down my road, and they didn't even offer to pay for it!"
"Oh!" Rod said, startled. "Did you build the road?"
"Build? What the hell difference does that make? I'm standing on it!"
"I know it's confusing," Dexter said to the doppelganger, "but you really
shouldn't let this little scene keep you from…"
"You shut up, jelly-back! If I wanna make these little bastards pay,
then…"
Dexter winced. "Please! You really have no reason…"
"Reason!" Sinister bellowed. "You want a reason? I'll give you…"
Rod caught the doppelganger's eye and nodded toward
Dexter's side. The doppelganger sidled toward him, and together,
displaying great interest in the argument, they moved slowly around the
right side of the creature. On the other side, Fess whinnied and stamped
to distract Sinister.
It almost worked; they almost got past him. But at the last moment,
Sinister saw them and bawled, "Hey! You come back here!" It charged.
"Back!" Rod shouted, and he and the doppelganger sprang away. Not
far enough, though—the huge head was soaring toward him, fangs first.
Dexter dug in the right-side legs and shoved back for all he was worth.
Sinister's head came to a sudden jarring halt; inertia slammed the
great jaws closed an inch from Rod's head.
"Back!" Rod snapped, and jabbed Sinister's nose with the point of his
sword. The huge head whipped up with a howl, and Rod lowered his blade,
just in time for his arm to start trembling.
"Poor Sinister! Are you hurt?" Dexter cried.

"He maimed me!" the dragon wailed. "He cut me!"
"A pinprick!" Rod snorted.
"Understandable," Dexter said reluctantly, "but unnecessary. He's really
quite harmless, though he is a bit of a bully."
"Bully? I am not! You take that back!"
"Now, Sinister… you know you…"
You're the one who's always picking on meV
"I never!"
"Oh, yeah? Then why won't yuh…"
"They were improper in using force after the danger was past, true.
Still, you must admit you…"
"Lemme at 'em!"
And Sinister hurtled toward the Rods again. Dexter dug in, of course,
and the result was that Sinister slewed around in a circle, bawling and
cursing at his better half— and around and around they went, churning
like a pocket tornado, with roaring accusations underscored by firm, quiet
counterstatements.
Rod nudged the doppelganger and pointed down the trail in the
direction in which they'd been going. The doppelganger nodded, and
together, they inched away from the arguing heads, sidling farther away
and more toward the side of the road, with Fess pacing them at a discreet
distance.
They almost made it into the thicket where the trail curved, but just
before they reached the cover of the evergreens, Sinister looked up, saw
how far they'd moved, let out a howl like a freight train whose cars had
been kidnapped, and charged them.
"Run!" Rod shouted, and did so. But he heard a roar of fury behind him
and skidded to a stop behind two evergreens, turning to look, with the
doppelganger right beside him.

They had stopped too soon; Sinister was lunging toward them
full-strength, with Dexter digging in his heels and pulling back—and their
whole body pivoted, swinging around in a huge arc with Sinister's head at
the end of it, jaws open wide, shooting right toward Rod.
Rod still had his sword out. He brought it up to guard position—and
the huge head flinched away, trying to avoid the blade. Sinister
overbalanced, and the body stumbled forward a step; Sinister's head
caught Rod side-on, slamming him head over heels into the fir tree.
"Let that learn ya!" Sinister crowed. The effect was somewhat spoiled
by the tremor in his voice, though, possibly occasioned by Fess leaping in
between the creature and his masters with a screaming whinny, rearing
back to lash out with his hooves. Sinister flinched away.
Which was just as well, because Rod came scrambling back out of the
fir tree with blood in his eye. "You chuckle-headed lumpish fugitive from
an overloaded nightmare! You crumb! Of ill-digested cheese! You…"
"Please!" Dexter protested, wounded. "I tried my best!"
"Not you—your… Well, him!" Rod aimed his sword at Sinister, who
flinched back.
The doppelganger had his sword up, too, but gave Rod a knowing look
and lowered his blade. Reluctantly, so did Rod. Fess saw, and snorted as
he stepped aside.
That was all the opening Sinister needed. "Scared, huh?" he cried in
glee, and leaped—or at least, the left-hand side of the body did. The
right-hand side planted itself firmly—and the monster tripped over its
own feet. Bellowing, it rolled heads over heels down the slope beside the
trail, crashing through twigs and underbrush, and caroming off tree
trunks.
"The poor beast," Rod whispered.
"Poor, my aunt Fanny!" his doppelganger snapped. "He's rubber—he
bounces! Our job is to get out of here before Sinister manages to get his
side moving enough to drag Dexter back up to the trail. Come on—run!"
They stopped after a mile, staggering up against tree trunks and

wheezing for breath. The chill winter air stabbed their lungs like tiny
knives. Fess slowed and stopped behind them.
"Must be getting—outa shape," Rod gasped. "A mile never did this to
me… before."
"Yeah, but this mile… was through foot-deep snow," the doppelganger
answered.
"I would have carried you, Rod," Fess reproached him.
"I didn't want to take the time to… mount." Rod forced himself back to
his feet, looking around. "Well… better keep… going. Which way… now?"
"Good… question," the doppelganger puffed, pushing himself away
from the tree.
They found themselves staring at a fork in the trail.
"Which branch?" Rod murmured.
"Dexter, or Sinister?" his doppelganger responded.
"You have but to ask."
They looked around, staring.
A trunk detached itself from the trees and stepped forward between the
two arms of the fork. They discovered, with starts of surprise, that it was a
man. He was a foot taller than either of them, and his clothes were the
dark gray of bark. The same fabric shrouded his head in a cowl.
Rod exchanged a wary look with his double. The doppelganger nodded
and sidled around the stranger, loosening his sword in its sheath.
The bark-man folded his cowl back.
Rod stared—the man's whole face seemed to curve upward on the sides.
His mouth was a grin, and the corners of his eyes tilted up. His bunched
cheeks were so red they could have been spots of paint. He looked as
though the mere idea of sadness had never even touched him.
"He's a happy-face," Rod said.

"No, he's not," the doppelganger contradicted. "You should see him
from the back! He's a sad-face."
"Gentlemen, gentlemen!" The stranger lifted both hands in appeal. "I
am both—Comedy before and Tragedy after!"
Rod didn't like what that said about the man's view of life. "And I'm
supposed to ask you which path to take to my future?'
The stranger shrugged and said gaily, "Why trouble yourself with the
future?" From behind, the same voice said, with dire tones, "To me, all
futures are past."
Rod decided the man would have done well in commodities.
"Wherever you go," counseled Mirth, "there is much to enjoy; for there
is beauty in all things, and vividness in every experience."
"Experience is a history of pain," answered Tragedy, "for ugliness and
squalor prevail."
The doppelganger cocked an eyebrow in skepticism. "You boys really
can't agree on anything, can you?"
"Aye," said Mirth, "on Unity!"
"We concur on Duality," Tragedy explained.
"They can't even agree on what they agree on," Rod said to the
doppelganger, exasperated.
"Oh, they do, if you look at it the right way." The doppelganger tilted
his head way to the side. "I mean, after all, the Duality is just the two
aspects of Eternity."
"Not you, too," Rod groaned. "Look, can we get down to basics here?"
He turned back to the two-faced man. "Which way should we go?"
"To the right," said Mirth; so of course:
"To the left," said Tragedy.
"Got a coin?" Rod asked the doppelganger.

"Why?"
" 'Cause I'm ready to flip."
"Chance brings disaster," Tragedy intoned.
"Chance may bring happiness," Mirth responded.
"Why did I know that was coming?" Rod muttered. He looked up at
Fess. "Can you make sense out of all this?"
"Not readily," Fess answered. "However, I do detect a slight depression
in the snow between the two paths of the fork."
Rod whirled, staring."I don't see anything."
"It is a matter of averaging the bumps in the snow, Rod."
"I'll take your word for it." Rod stepped forward toward the center.
"Back!" cried Mirth.
"You must not go there!" cried Tragedy.
"At last," muttered the doppelganger, "something they agree on."
Both faces whirled toward him at the same moment—or tried to. The
only real result was that the two-faced man lurched aside, and Rod dodged
past him.
"Stop!" shrieked Mirth.
"Avoid moderation!" lamented Tragedy.
But Rod was kicking the snow aside, and discovered a very faint, but
discernible, track. "Come on," he said to the doppelganger, who jumped to
follow him.
The two-faced man lumbered into motion, following them with the
ungainly stride of a man who is of two minds about an issue, reaching out
with clumsy arms. "The Middle Way is forbidden!"
"There is nothing amusing in synthesis!"

Fess took two leaps and stood astride the trail between the two Rods
and the two-faced man, who blundered into him with a loud "Oo/!" and
rebounded, falling over his own feet and collapsing. He was scrabbling
back up in a minute, but Fess had turned away, and the guardian of
extremes found himself facing a horsetail.
With a sigh and a shake of his head, he turned back to face the single
trail again.
Rod had to kick his way through leafless ground vines, last year's leaves
and fallen sticks, to find the path. He was glad he favored stout boots, and
kept them heavily waxed. "I assume this will take us someplace."
"Someplace not overly favored by those who search for fame and
fortune, at a guess," the doppelganger returned.
"Well, yes," Rod agreed, "but not too many of those find either one, do
they?"
The doppelganger shrugged. "Myself, I wouldn't know. I keep trying for
obscurity."
Rod nodded. "I know the feeling. All I want is a calm, peaceful, quiet,
contented existence."
"Wonder why we never get it?" the doppelganger mused.
"Because we want it, of course… Whoa! What's this?"
Rod had parted a screen of brush, and they found themselves staring
out at a broad road on top of a ridge.
"It's the King's Highway." said the doppelganger softly.
Rod grinned. "Of course. We go looking for a quiet life, and what do we
find?"
"I'll take the low road," the doppelganger said quickly.
"But you'll get the high one," Rod answered. "Come on—let's see what
tranquillity and solitude await us here."
It was out onto the highway then with Fess scrambling up behind them.

They mounted the great iron steed and set off down the middle of the
road.
The chill deepened as the sky darkened. To make matters worse, the
trees began to crowd in at either side of the road.
"Maybe we ought to stop and consider digging in for the night," the
doppelganger suggested.
"Just what I was thinking." Rod shivered. "A nice campfire and some
roasting pheasants…"
A huge snarling yowl tore the stillness, and six strapping figures leaped
out of the woods, three on each side, muscles rippling under fur. They
stood upright like men, but had the heads of cats. Their feet were encased
in boots, but their arms ended in genuine hands, albeit fur-covered and
clawed; and they wore knee-length mail-shirts, criscrossed by weapons
belts.
They attacked with feline screams, two of them leaping for Fess's
bridle; but the great black horse tossed his head, knocking one of them
aside, and struck the other away with a hoof.
Rod spun around on the horse's rump, drawing his sword and dagger,
setting his back against the doppelganger's. A huge cat-man sprang up on
the horsehair, scimitar swinging down. Rod parried, just barely managing
to keep his blade intact, and riposted. The point struck a leather belt,
skidded, and scored through fur. The cat shrank back, screaming—and
slipped off the rump. Another landed in its place, splitting and snarling,
sword flashing around in a flat arc. Rod ducked and lurched forward,
hooking upward with his dagger. A tremendous shock jarred him, but he
held his place, and the cat screamed, its eyes beginning to dull even as it
slipped back and away.
Then, suddenly, it was over. Two dead cats lay staining the snow with
their blood, and the other four were fleeing back into the trees, spitting
and snarling. Rod stared in surprise, then turned with a grin. "I don't
know what you managed to do to them, O alter ego, but you…"
The doppelganger slumped, slipped out of the saddle, and sprawled on
the ground.

Rod stared in shock.
"Rod?" Fess asked. "What has happened?"
"Can't you seeT' Rod leaped down and knelt beside his own huddled
form. "Where'd they get you? Quick! Maybe I can staunch the flow!"
"Too… late…" the doppelganger gasped. "Carotid… cut…"
It was true. The whole front of his doublet was soaked in blood.
"What happened? No, don't answer—one of them got past your guard.
With those claws, one swipe would do it." Rod leaped up and dug through
the saddlebag frantically. "Got to be something in here! Fess, I told you we
should have packed some plasma!"
"Don't… trouble…"the doppelganger gasped.
"Don't trouble!" Rod whirled back down, staring at his own wan visage.
"I can't let you die!"
"Do," the doppelganger urged. "Don't… trouble… I'll be back when… you
need…"
His voice trailed off, and his eyes dulled.
Rod stared, kneeling, frozen in the snow.
"Rod."
"Not now!" Rod glanced up at Fess in irritation, but when he turned
back to the doppelganger, he was gone. There wasn't even a hollow in the
snow to show where he had been.
Rod stared.
"What has happened, Rod?"
"Six cat-men just attacked us,'' Rod heard himself explaining. "We
killed two…" He glanced around. "I don't see them, either… And we chased
off the rest. But one of them slit my double's throat."
"I had surmised as much," the robot sympathized. "But how shall we

bury him, when the ground is frozen?"
'Rod glanced up at him in irritation. "Come off it! You know he wasn't
really there."
Then he stopped, startled by his own words.
"Neither were the bandits," Fess told him. "There were only two
peasants, dressed in remarkably well kept brown jerkins and leggins. You
drove them off."
But Rod wasn't listening. He was staring at the barren, unstained snow
and muttering, "All the monsters we meet can't do more damage than
cat-men do. Damn! Just when I thought I was getting to know myself,
too!"
He sighed, mounted Fess, and turned away from the road, riding
deeper into the forest.
Chapter Four
It was one of those nights that seem to last forever. As soon as Rod
realized that, he developed suspicions. "Fess, how long has it been since I
left the family?"
"Approximately three hours, Rod."
"Is that all?" Rod was appalled to realize how much had happened in so
short a time. "Is something wrong with my time sense?"
"Perhaps," the robot said slowly, "since you have experienced a
multiplicity of events during that period."
"Well how long has it been since I found Granny Ban with her arm
stuck in that tree?"
"Was that her difficulty? From the sound, I thought perhaps she had
been ensnared by a troop of bandits."
"Not that I saw." Rod frowned. "Or should I say, 'That's not what / saw.'
Anyway, how long?"
"Two hours and forty-three minutes have elapsed, Rod."

"You're kidding! That was two hours, if it was a minute!"
"It was more than a minute, Rod, but considerably less than two hours.
It is nearly midnight."
"I could have sworn it was the wee hours, not the hours of wee folk.
Y'know, I should be feeling sleepy by now."
"Perhaps you will be when the adrenaline ebbs."
" 'If,' not 'when.' What's that light up ahead?"
Fess expanded his video image. "I see no light but the moon's reflection,
Rod."
"Not another hallucination! Well, I suppose I might as well get it over
with." Rod dismounted. "Stay close, okay? And don't let me hurt anybody."
"I will endeavor to prevent damage, Rod—but I believe there is no cause
for concern. I see absolutely nothing."
"Wish I could say that." Rod turned away, gathering his cloak about
him, but he still shivered as he plowed his way through the snow toward
the glow ahead.
In the distance, the bells of the Runnymede cathedral chimed midnight.
Rod stopped on the edge of a little clearing. In its middle, a campfire
burned—a tiny campfire, its flames guttering. A man knelt before it, his
back to Rod, wearing a cowled cloak. Rod wondered what a monk was
doing out at this time of night, then remembered that foresters' cloaks
looked very much like monks' robes—especially when you couldn't make
out colors. Whoever he was, he was racked with shivers as he groped in
the snow. At last, he brought up a small branch, knocked the snow off it,
and threw it on the fire.
There had been enough light for Rod to see the boniness of the hand.
There was no doubt that the man was old, quite old. Rod felt a surge of
sympathy and stepped out into the clearing, kicking up the snow, bending
to pick up fallen branches and sticks. "Here, Grandfather!" He stepped
past the old man and knelt by the fire, holding one of the smaller sticks in
the flame till it caught, then laying it carefully on the coals and setting a

small branch over it. "We'll have it burning merrily in no time."
"It is good of you," the old man whispered, sitting back on a fallen tree.
"Glad to help. Glad of the warmth, too." Rod put a three-inch branch
over the others, then turned to the oldster. "There you go, Grandfather."
He froze, staring.
"Thank you, Grandson." From under the hood, the old eyes glinted with
amusement. "But then, you always were a generous, warmhearted boy. I
am glad to see you have grown into so fine a man."
"Grandfather," Rod whispered again. "My real grandfather. "
And it was—Count Rory d'Armand, in the flesh. Or seemingly.
"You can't be real." But Rod stretched out a hand anyway. "You died
twenty-six years ago."
Count Rory winced. "Hardly generous of you, my boy."
"Oh, I'm sorry, Grandfather! But how did you get here? I mean,
Gramarye is light-years and light-years away from this solar system!"
"Why, I came with you, Rodney." The old eyes glowed into his. "In your
genes—for surely, as long as you live, so does part of me. And in your heart
and mind, too, I would like to think!"
"Oh, be sure of that! If the foundation of my personality is Mother and
Father, you're the foundation of the foundation!"
"The sub-basement, eh?" Rory smiled, amused. "And all that I have
thought and dreamed, Rodney—what of that?"
"I can't say 'all,' " Rod said honestly, "but a large part of it—yes. I think
your ideals are within me, too—for they're embedded in the stories you
told me, and those stories will always be with me."
"Ah. My stories, yes." The Count nodded, turning his gaze to the fire.
"And if you live within my stories, then Rodney, you certainly can have no
question as to how I came to be here."

"What?" Rod frowned. "I think I missed something."
"Why, I am Rory, Lord Chronicler." The old man lifted his gaze to Rod's
again. "For surely we are in the realm of Granclarte."
Rod stared at him.
"Yes, surely," he said softly. "Why didn't I realize ^hat?"
"Because you had not thought of it," the Lord Chronicler said, smiling.
"Yet did I not tell you the tales of this magic kingdom would ever be your
shield and your refuge?"
"Why, so they have been, in metaphor," Rod said slowly, "but I never
thought they could be so, in actuality."
Rory tossed his head impatiently. "There is a sickness of the soul upon
you, my boy, a darkness of the spirit. Where else could you shelter from
that night, except in the Courts of Great Light?"
"Yes." Slowly, Rod sat down beside the old man, on the log. "God bless
you, Grandfather, for giving my soul a shield against its own lances."
"Be not so sure they are its own, my boy, for you have many enemies,
with many weapons. Yet do be sure that, in the realm of Granclarte, you
shall find a magic guardian to shield you from any of them."
"I'll remember that," Rod said fervently. "But Grandfather, I've gone
mad on Gramarye. How can I be in the realm of Granclarte?"
"Because you inherited it from me, Rodney, inherited it within your
soul, just as your body inherited my genes. The events and ideals within its
Chronicles are part of the sub-structure of your personality, of the way you
see the universe around you. It is yours now—I bequeath it to you."
"I'm not worthy…"
"On the contrary, you are eminently worthy; you have proved yourself
so. Even as the Four Kings strove to avoid war, so have you—and even as
they strove mightily when war could no longer be avoided, so have you."
Rod was quiet; he couldn't deny his accomplishments, but was too
modest to speak of them. Granclarte, after all, had been founded as a

neutral meeting place by four kings who sought to spare their subjects the
devastation of war; they had reigned all from the same palace over their
adjoining realms. How could he compare himself to any one of them? "The
Four Kings were enlightened, Grandfather, and all inspired with the same
idea at the same moment—to have a common court, and thereby bring
knowledge, wisdom, and peace. I have had no such moment of
enlightenment in my life."
"Perhaps you had, but did not recognize it. Perhaps you are having it
now. Or perhaps this is the beginning of the greatest period of your life."
"Now, when I'm forty-seven? That's too late for the glory of youth, too
early for the wisdom of age."
"Yet it is also the time when wisdom and energy most thoroughly
blend—just as the pinnacle of the Courts of Granclarte came in its middle
years, when the knight Beaubras set forth in quest, and returned with the
Rainbow Crystal. Its light suffused the nobility and, aye, all the folk of the
court, with harmony and generosity."
"And its effect spread out from them through all the Four Kingdoms,
yielding a Golden Age of peace, prosperity, and happiness. But Granclarte
endured only through the generation of the Four Kings, Grandfather. In
the time of their sons, the sorcerer Obscura stole away the Rainbow
Crystal."
"Yes, in vengeance for King Alban's refusal."
Rod nodded. "The King refused to grant Obscura the hand of his
daughter Lucina, the most beautiful damse^of the court—for he knew
Prince Dardinel loved her, and that she loved him."
"He knew also that their union would more tightly bind his kingdoms
with that of Dardinel's father, King Turpin. But Obscura did steal the
Great Crystal, and cast a death-spell on King Alban—and without its light
of harmony and grace, the king sickened and died. His son Constantine
became king in his place—but the young kings, whose hearts knew not the
importance of Glancarte, fell to vying with one another in richness and
pomp, then in their champions' passages at arms."
"And tournament gave way to battle," Rod said, remembering, "and the
confederation fell apart. But why did the young kings have to tear down

the palace, Grandfather?"
"Because each feared that the other might use it as a stronghold,
reaching out to conquer all three other kingdoms. Thus is it ever—the
center suffers the greatest strain, when balance is lost. As it was, certainly,
when Obscura ingratiated himself with King Agramant, and persuaded
him to attack King Turpin."
"And King Turpin died in battle, so Prince Dardinel became King
before he had learned restraint," Rod mused. "Then Obscura planted a
rumor that Lucina had been imprisoned by her brother, so Dardinel
declared war on King Constantine. But the knight Beaubras awoke from
his enchanted sleep, and came forth to rid the earth of the evil sorcerer.''
"Yes, Grandson, but he was slain himself in that battle. Oh, do not
grieve, for I promised you that Beaubras shall rise again; Beaubras shall
ever rise again. Yet in his death, King Dardinel realized his folly and made
peace with King Constantine. But their realms had been devastated, so
King Agramant allied with King Rodomont, and invaded."
"They conquered," Rod said, remembering, "but their own lands were
devastated in the process, for Dardinel and Constantine fought like
demons, to protect fair Lucina."
"Aye, and though they died, they sold their lives dearly. Agramant and
Rodomont held dominion, but then began to vie for power.''
"And their armies were too weak to both guard their castles and
maintain law and order—and there were many, many soldiers who had
fled defeat, and were desperate for food and shelter. So banditry became
rife."
"Then the contest of diplomacy failed, for Rodomont thought himself
strong enough to conquer Agramant."
"But he was wrong."
"Aye; they were evenly matched, and tore one another to bits. Thus the
Golden Age ended, and the Four Kingdoms sank into the barbarism from
which they had risen."
Rod sighed, gazing off into space, his head ringing with the shouting

and cries of great battles, with the thunder of hooves and the clash of
weapons. He was shocked to feel tears in his eyes. "Can it not live again,
Grandfather?"
"Aye—every time we tell its tale. I have begun it for you this time, my
grandson. You are now on the verge of its greatest of days, for the knight
Beaubras has but now set forth on his quest, and the Rainbow Crystal is
yet to be found."
"Yet to be found?" Rod whirled, eyes widening. "But that means that
Ordale hasn't come forth to show him the Faerie World yet—and Olympia
still waits at the crest of Mount Stehr! It's all still to come—the glory, the
wonder, the enchantment!"
"Aye, all yet to come." The old man nodded, his eyes aglow. "And we
have talked away the night, my grandson, and the east is burgeoning with
the sun. The hour is come when poor, tenuous ghosts, wandering here and
there, must troop home to churchyards."
"No!" Rod cried in a panic. "Don't go! We have so much still to talk
about!"
"All that truly matters has been said." The count had risen and was
backing away. "The history of Granclarte, and the good it sought to
bring."
"But I need you! I can't be without you!"
"Nor will you be." Mist was rising from the clearing, all about the old
man. "I am within your heart and your mind, Rodney—you cannot be
without me. None can take me from you."
"But what of Granclarte?" Rod cried. "How will it endure without you?"
"Through you, mine heir. I bequeath it to you, root, stock, and branch.
Let it rise again, Rodney. Let it grow, let it ever grow." And his voice was
fading now, as his outline softened and his substance blurred into the
mist, suffused with the golden light of dawn. "The night has gone, and the
day comes—your day, my grandson, and your realm now. Live in it; fare
well in it.
"Farewell…"

Rod stood, petrified, scalp prickling, seeing the ghost diffuse and fade,
hearing his voice dwindle, speaking again, but so softly that it might have
been the cry of a distant songbird: "Farewell…"
Then it was the cry of a bird, far away, calling, summoning…
Rod turned away from the clearing in the glory of the newly risen sun
and plodded back through the forest, his heart leaden, but his soul
exalted.
"He was there, Fess," he said softly. "He was really there."
"So I judged, from the words I heard you say, Rod," the great black
horse answered. "It is inspiring."
But he didn't sound joyous. Rod frowned, peering closely, then
understood, with a surge of sympathy. "Hard on you, isn't it, Old Heart, to
be reminded of your former master?"
"Robots do not grieve, Rod."
"Nor computers delight. Sure." Rod swung up into the saddle again.
"But how could the time pass so quickly all of a sudden?"
"It did not really, Rod. The passage of time was no faster than in the
evening."
"It just felt like it." Rod shook his head. "Well, then, I'm safe in a way,
Fess. I'm in Granclarte."
"Yes, Rod, safe in many ways—but remember the perils the good knight
confronted."
"How could I forget them?" Rod replied. "But how did I come to be
here, Fess? Why did I go crazy so suddenly?"
"I have given you my best answer," the robot said softly. "You must find
your own now."
"I think I have." Rod nodded. "Yes, I think I have."
"In your grandfather's stories?" The robot sounded surprised.

"Yes. After all, it makes sense, doesn't it? The knight Beaubras, I mean.
He's just beginning his quest now. He must have sent for me, must have
called me here. There must be some way in which I can help him."
The robot was quiet for a second, evaluating the statement. Then it
said, "Beaubras rode alone, Rod."
"Yes, but there were mighty deeds wrought by other knights in other
places, and their accomplishments helped him find the Rainbow Crystal,
Fess. Maybe he needed one more." Rod's eyes glittered. "Just
think—somewhere in this magic land, the knight Beaubras is riding his
good steed Balincet, right this minute!"
Fess was silent, weighing, planning for contingencies.
Lucidity pierced for a gritty moment. "Fess—I'm really far gone in
delusion, aren't I?"
"There is always a way back, Rod," the robot said quietly.
"Yes." Rod nodded. "Yes, there is, isn't there?" He turned the horse's
head toward the east. "And if it's always there, then it won't matter if we
go a little farther in before we turn back out. Right, Fess? Yes, of course
right. We'll give it a chance to wear off, at least. Shall we go?"
Chapter Five
Dawn turned the winter forest into an enchanted realm of crystal
trunks with glittering branches, a cathedral of ice carpeted with fleece.
"But then, it is an enchanted realm," Rod mused. "This is Granclarte."
Fess maintained silence.
"Ow-w-w-w-w-oo!"
Rod reined in, startled. "What the hell was thatV
"It did not have the sound of an animal," Fess answered.
"Then it's a man in trouble." Rod turned Fess's head toward the sound.
It came again, and Rod shivered. "If it's a man, he's more angry than
hurt."

"Howling in rage?" Fess asked.
He was, and he was a man. But Rod stopped in amazement, because he
was one of the few dwarfs Rod had ever seen in Gramarye, besides Brom
O'Berin.
And Brom was half elven…
The dwarf glowered up at him. "Am I so rare a sight, then, that thou
must needs stare at me?"
"Frankly, yes." Rod backpedaled quickly, trying to find a way to cover
his rudeness. "Sorry. I'm Rod Gallowglass."
He waited for the reaction, but there wasn't any, other than a sardonic,
"And I am Modwis the Smith. Now that we are met, wilt thou cease to
gawk?"
"Sorry. It's just that you don't usually see people caught in their own
traps."
" Tis not mine, dolt! Would a dwarf lay a trap like to this?"
"Like what?" Rod leaned forward, peering. "I can't even see what that
thing is, much less how to undo it."
" 'Tis but a forester's snare, like any other." The dwarf leaned against a
nearby tree trunk, lifting his right foot. A length of glitter stretched up
from the snow to his ankle. "Yet 'tis laid with a silver chain, and mine
efforts to part it have yielded naught. Were it Cold Iron, I'd have broke its
links with scarce a thought—but over silver, I've no power."
Rod frowned: Brom alone, of the elf-folk, could handle Cold Iron with
impunity—but he could work silver and gold, too.
"You are in Granclarte, Rod, not Gramarye." Fess might have read his
thoughts.
Rod lifted his head—that made sense. "Well, silver can't stand against
steel." He dismounted and stepped over to Modwis.
"What dost thou mean to do!" the dwarf cried with alarm.

"Cut the chain off your ankle. Be careful, now."
"I'll not stir." The dwarf held his leg rock-steady, eyeing Rod strangely.
Obviously, Modwis hadn't expected help. It made Rod wonder about his
relations with other people. For that matter, why was the dwarf out here,
alone, in the forest?
Not that it was any of Rod's business. He slipped the point of his dagger
through a link, then twisted. The link bulged, thinned, then parted, and
the chain fell off the dwarfs leg.
He put his foot down with a sigh of relief. "A blessing on thee, now, for
timely aid!"
"My pleasure." Rod rose, sheathing his dagger and sizing up his new
acquaintance. Modwis was about three feet tall, broad in the shoulder,
chest, and hips. He had arms as thick as Rod's thighs, and thighs as thick
as tree trunks. His long hair fell loose to his shoulders; it and his beard
were ginger, sprinkled with gray. He wore buff-colored leggings, green
boots and tunic, a red cloak, and a red cap with a fur brim. He carried a
dagger the size of a short sword, with elaborate carving on the hilt and
scabbard. He returned Rod's gaze with a frank stare, up and down.
Rod took the hint. "Who would set a silver snare?"
"One who wished to catch elf-folk, belike."
"Guess so… Hey!" Rod felt something clutch at his own ankle.
"What moves?"
"Something under the snow." Rod kicked out—and his leg jolted to a
halt. A length of silver stretched up from the frost. "You didn't tell me
there were more of them!"
"In truth, I did not know." Modwis caught up a broken branch, stepped
toward Rod—and fell flat on his face. " 'Ware!"
"Don't worry, I will." Rod reached down to take Modwis's arm—and
silver links shot round his wrist, pulling taut. "Not wary enough! Quick,
get up—before they tie you down."

Modwis was scrabbling, trying to push himself up—but silver chains
held down his forearms. "I cannot!"
"Why didn't you tell me—no, strike that. You weren't foolish enough to
go reaching down, were you?"
"Nay, though I came near to falling when first the chain pulled at me. 
Nay! Forfend!"
More chains were snaking out of the snow to wrap around his chest and
torso.
Rod sliced the links holding his wrist, then severed the chain around his
own ankle. "Well, Cold Iron works against them…"
"But thou canst not cut them more quickly than they rise against me!
Nay, leave me! Save thyself!"
"I, uh, don't think that'll be necessary." Rod turned to his mount.
"Fess?"
"Yes, Rod—my hooves are of steel." The horse strode into the patch of
writhing chains. Silver strings snaked around his fetlocks—and parted, as
the robot's strength snapped their links. He trampled carefully around
Modwis's torso, one hoof to either side, standing over him. "Tell the
gentleman to grasp the cinch."
"That's right, he can't hear you. Yo, Modwis! Reach up and grab the
horse's belly band! That'll get your upper body out of range, at least."
Modwis lunged, and caught the strap under Fess's belly. "Yet what of
my legs?"
"Oh, he's very precise." Rod watched as Fess kicked through the chains
beside Modwis's hip and right side. "Now! Get your right leg up!"
Modwis kicked high, and Fess scythed the chains along his left. "Get
ready—and hold tight!"
Fess leaped away into the trees, Modwis hanging on for dear life. The
horse landed, and Modwis scrambled free. "I thank thee, good folk!"
"Up!" Rod called. "Into the saddle! If there're any more near you…"

But Modwis was already in the air, landing in the saddle in one clean
bound. Fess turned back, and Modwis wrapped one hand in his mane,
reaching out with the other. As they swept past, Rod caught Modwis's
forearm and swung up behind him, onto Fess's rump. The horse cleared
the patch of snares and slowed, turning back toward the glitter of broken
links as he stopped.
"Nay, fear not," Modwis rumbled. "We are clear of them, and they
cannot follow."
"Still," Rod said, "we can't be sure. Better make tracks, Steel Stud."
"Rod, you should not refer to biological impossibilities…"
"Okay, Manganese Mule! Just go!"
"Well, if you insist on being rude about it," Fess huffed, but he turned
and trotted away down the trail.
Modwis turned his head to look back at Rod. "I ken not who thou art,
Rod Gallowglass, but thou art most assuredly well met. I thank thee,
mortal, and thine horse."
"Always glad to help a fellow being in distress." Interesting that he
wasn't known here, Rod thought—a relief, in a way. "Just return the favor
to the next person in trouble you meet—if you can be sure it's not a scam.
What were you doing out in the forest, anyway?"
"Gathering hazel branches, to make charcoal for mine forge. And
thou?"
Rod squirmed uncomfortably. "Deserting, I suppose you could say. Who
do you think set those snares?"
"I've little doubt," Modwis returned. "It must needs be a sorcerer, for
who else could hold sway over silver, to make it strike like a snake?"
Rod nodded. "Makes sense. I was kinda hoping chains didn't behave
like that by themselves here."
"Here?" Modwis frowned. "Whence comest thou, mortal?"
"From another world," Rod explained. "It happens, now and then."

•
"An thou sayest it, I'll believe thee." But the frown deepened. "How
didst thou come to Granclarte?"
"By magic—and not entirely reluctantly, I'll admit."
At that Modwis smiled. "Nay, surely—for who'd not wish to sojourn in
Granclarte, an he could? Yet whom didst thou desert?"
"My wife and children," Rod answered honestly. "I've gone a little crazy,
see, and I never know when I'm gonna turn mean—so I took myself off
where I couldn't hurt them. Which is by way of serving you warning, too."
"Well, I am warned." The frown settled back into place. "And 'tis this
madness which hath brought thee hither?"
Rod nodded.
"Then must I bless it, for thy coming was timely for me—yet I'd fain
return thee to thy wife and babes. Assuming thou dost wish it." Modwis
scowled. "Dost thou?"
The question took Rod by surprise. He suppressed the natural assent,
unsure whether it was genuine or conditioned. Instead, he pursed his lips,
stared up at the forest canopy, and searched his feelings. "I do," he said
slowly, "but I must admit I wouldn't mind taking my time about it."
Modwis rumbled; Rod assumed it was amusement, but he couldn't tell
through the whiskers. Either amusement or a nervous stomach. "Then let
us seek a means of returning thee, for 'tis like to take long enough in the
finding. Was the magic that brought thee here good or ill? There lies the
nubbin."
"Well, whoever did it, I don't think he had my good in mind."
"Yet perchance did have ours. Yet I think it may be that he who laid the
snares for me laid another sort for thee."
"I'm limed, then. Have any particular trapper in mind?"
"Aye." Modwis looked grim. "He dwells to the east, in a ruined castle
perched high on a crag, and all the countryside about him abides in

corruption and putrefaction. Vultures are his nightingales, and carrion
jackals his dogs."
"Sounds like a real charmer. Does this nice guy have a name?"
"Gormlin is he called, though few dare say his name openly." Modwis
glowered off to the east. "Yet I do, for I'm sworn to find his bane! Gormlin,
an thou canst hear, do thy worst! For I'll yet find a means of bringing thy
foul castle down on thy head!"
Modwis was silent, taut, as though expecting an answer. Rod found
that he was, too, and shifted in his seat just to break the mood. "Any, uh,
particular reason why you've got it in for him? Or do you just have an
obsession about destroying evil?"
"There is that, but there is the other, too," Modwis growled. "There was
a maiden, Rod Gallowglass, and though there was no chance that she
might smile upon me, yet I ached to do all that I might to bring her
happiness."
"And she was stolen away by Brume?"
"Aye, and none know her fate. I will tear that castle down stone by stone
if I must, I shall free her or learn of her death! That, though it take all my
life!"
"Valiantly said," Rod said softly. "Can I help?"
" 'Tis not thy coil, Rod Gallowglass."
"Maybe not," Rod said slowly, "but weren't you working your way up to
telling me Gormlin might have been the one who brought me here?"
Modwis was silent.
"Or that someone else might have brought me here, to fight him?"
Reluctantly, Modwis nodded.
"So," Rod said, "if he brought me here, I have to persuade him to send
me back, somehow—and if he didn't, the wizard who did might let me go
when I've done what he brought me here for."

"Mayhap," Modwis said, "and 'mayhap' again and again, and thrice
more. I can promise thee naught, Rod Gallowglass."
"That's okay—I can't, either." Rod shrugged. "Either way, sounds like a
good way to see the country. Let's go."
Modwis whirled to stare at him, thunderstruck. "Art thou mad?"
"Frankly—yes."
"Assuredly, thou must needs be, an thou wilt speak so easily of
marching down the throat of the dragon! How dost thou think to come
alive to his walls?"
"I'll have to develop a plan of attack when I've seen his castle. As to
getting there, well—I have this hobby, you see…"
"Summat to do with enchanted horses that can break ensorcelled
silver?"
"Oh, you noticed Fess isn't the average stallion, eh? Yes, I had
something like that in mind—he and I have a few weapons we're too
modest to show. And some of mine never show at all—only their effects."
Modwis stared directly into his eyes. "Dost say thou art a sorcerer?"
"No, an esper. It isn't magic, but it sure looks like it."
"How doth it differ?"
"Well," Rod said, "I don't get my magic from evil."
"From God, then?"
Rod shrugged. "It's a talent I was born with. In itself, it's neither good
nor bad."
" Tis in how thou dost use it, then?"
Rod nodded. "And for what purpose. Yes."
"And thou hast ne'er met one who could best thee, eh?" Modwis's voice
was flat with sarcasm.

"I'm still alive, aren't I?"
Modwis turned thoughtful. "There is that."
"It's my most convincing argument. So what do you say? Feel like
giving me a tour of the road to the east?"
Modwis grinned like a shark. "Aye, and right gladly! If we die, we die!"
"It wasn't really on my agenda—but if we have to go, do you suppose we
could go with full stomachs? It's been a while since I ate."
"I have a small house, not far from here." Modwis turned back toward
Fess's head. "Mystical horse, set forth! Turn to the south on this next
branch of the trail, and we will come to a warm stable, and sweet hay!"
Fess dutifully took the next southward fork. After all, one had to keep
up appearances.
Chapter Six
Modwis propped Rod on a bench by the fire with a mug of ale while he
clanged and pottered about the stove. It was noisy enough for Rod to have
a quiet discussion with Fess.
"So what do you think, Iron Id? Was it a setup, or what?"
' 'There was certainly some element of hallucination involved, Rod,"
Fess answered, his tone cautious.
Rod frowned. "Care to expand on that?"
"No."
Rod pressed his lips thin. "All right, I'm making it an order. What did
you see?"
Fess sighed. "The person you perceive as a dwarf, Rod, is in fact a
leprechaun."
"Leprechaun! Who—Kelly?"
"No, Rod—a stranger. He seems to speak truly when he says his name is

'Modwis.' "
"Not terribly Irish."
"Neither is Kelly's last name."
Alarm bells rang. "So what have I got now? Brom assigning me a
baby-sitter?"
"There is no evidence of prior arrangement," the robot answered. "The
elf was indeed snared in a silver chain when you found him."
"Who would do such a dirty trick? No, strike that— anyone who wanted
a crock of gold. But why wasn't the trapper there to watch his snare?"
"Perhaps he fled at your approach."
"Do I look that bad?"
Fess was silent, and Rod decided not to press the point. "How about the
attack of the chains?"
"I saw only ground vines, Rod—but they were green, which is odd for
winter, and they did entangle both you and Modwis."
"Odd, to say the least." Rod said. "Maybe the trapper is a telekinetic,
and didn't run all that far away?"
"That is possible…"
"Or it's possible that Modwis staged the whole thing." Rod began to feel
prickles of suspicion along the back of his scalp.
"The leprechaun might have some psi power, yes."
Rod grimaced, beginning to wonder if the robot was humoring him.
"Be careful not to drink too much of the ale, Rod," Fess cautioned. "You
have not eaten in some time."
That, at least, was reassuring.
Then the time for speculation was done, because Modwis set a platter

heaped with eggs and meats and a basket of rolls on the table. Rod
returned to more important matters.
Modwis's hospitality was cozy, but lavish—if Rod had eaten everything
offered, he would have been comatose. But strangely, he found that his
appetite vanished with a few bites, leaving him edgy and nervous. "It was
very good," he said. "Thanks for the hospitality, Modwis, but I need to get
back on the road again."
The dwarf peered at him. "How long is't sin thou hast slept?"
Rod considered, and decided that the question wasn't relevant. "I
couldn't stand to sleep right now. Thanks, but I'll be off."
(Come to think of it, he was.)
Without a word, the dwarf carried the dishes to the door, gave a fluting
birdcall, swept the crumbs off, scoured the plates with sand, and removed
a pack from the wall. He put the dishes in it, then wrapped up each of the
items of food from the table. He scraped more crumbs into his hand from
the table, walked to the door and tossed them out, shouldered his pack,
and took down a large iron key from a hook on the wall. Then he bowed
Rod out the door.
Rod suddenly realized what the ceremony meant. "Hey, wait a minute!
We don't have to look for Gormlin—and you don't have to come along!"
"True." Modwis turned the key in the great lock, hung it around his
neck, and took up a walking staff from its place by the jamb. "Yet surely
thou'It not deny me thy companionship upon the road?"
"Well—no, of course not. Glad of it, really. But where are you going?"'
"Down the road some miles. Whither goest thou?"
"Uh—well… down the road a way, actually."
"Well met!" Modwis beamed and clapped him on the arm. "By some
fair chance, we journey toward the same destination! Then thou wilt not
be amazed an I keep pace with thee for the full length of the journey."
And they set off into the forest, with Rod having that old, nagging

feeling that, somehow, he'd been conned. Again.
After an hour, Rod reined in and dismounted. "Okay, your turn to ride
now."
Modwis looked up, amused. "Dost think me so weak as to need
another's limbs?"
"Well… No, not when you put it that way. But it is more restful. And
faster."
"It shall take more than a day's walk to tire me. And as to speed, set thy
pace, and I'll match it."
Rod wasn't about to test it—but he was in no hurry, anyway, so he kept
Fess to a walk. Modwis would not relent, so, after a while, Rod quit trying.
But when they stopped to rest at a village, Rod bought a donkey, leaving a
peasant blessing heaven for the good fortune of a real gold crown, and
offered it to Modwis. The dwarf still would not ride, but only led the
donkey, until Rod let his embarrassment begin to show. Then, finally,
Modwis relented and climbed onto the donkey. So, both mounted, they
rode on toward romance and adventure.
By late afternoon, they were out of the forest and in open country again,
coming down from the Crag Mountains into the northern plateau.
Plateau? Runnymede was on a plateau, not the northern baronies! Rod
realized, with a sudden sense of vertigo, that he really was in Granclarte,
not just a thinly disguised Gramarye.
At least, he seemed to be…
Well, you couldn't tell it by the look of the rider who was coming up the
road toward them. He was clad in black armor, and rode a horse that
would have done credit to a beer wagon. It was hard to tell who wore the
better armor, horse or rider…
The knight reined in alongside and lifted his visor. "Hail! Art thou
knight or yeoman?"
"Neither, really," Rod said with a smile. "No one ever got around to
knighting me, but I was raised to the peer-age. Born to it, too, but I was a

second son of a second son."
"Then assuredly, thou art a knight born!"
"Seemed that way to me, too, but nobody ever made it official." Then
Rod saw the device on the knight's shield, and froze.
It was a silver arm with a closed fist, slanting across a black field—and
Rod knew that plain, severe sight as well as he knew the form of Fess. "My
pardon, Sir Knight. You are a man of virtue rare!"
"Thou dost me too much honor, good sir. Yet thou hast the advantage
of me, an thou knowest me by repute. Say who thou art."
Rod swallowed. "I am Rod Gallowglass, Lord High Warlock of the
Kingdom of Gramarye."
"A warlock!" The sword's point was at Rod's throat. He didn't
remember the knight drawing it, but it was there. "Is thy magic white or
black?"
"Neither, really—it just is." Rod ignored the sword (while sweat trickled
off his brow) and looked steadily into the sky-blue eyes beneath the noble
brow. "Is your sword crafted by white magic or black?"
The point didn't waver, and the face behind it turned more flinten than
ever. "Smiths do own magic, aye—they chant strength as they forge the
blade, and carve runes down its length. Yet whether the magic is white or
black depends upon the smith."
Rod nodded. "So it is with me. I am no saint, and I cannot work
miracles—but neither am I devoted to Satan; I abhor him, and all his
works."
Still the sword did not waver. "Magic must be from either God or
Satan. Which is thine?"
"It's certainly not from Satan—and I do live in hope of Heaven."
The knight held his gaze a moment more, then sheathed the great
sword. "Thou art a white warlock."
"If you say so." Rod felt a surge of hubris coming, and somehow knew

better than to squelch it. "But if you want to make sure, why don't you test
my mettle? I'll withhold my magic, if you withhold your sword."
The knight still gazed at him, then smiled just a little. " 'Tis apt. With
what weapon shall we contend?"
Rod jerked his head toward the willows bordering the stream by the
road. "I suspect two enterprising gentlemen could find a couple of six-foot
staves in there."
Now the knight grinned. "Even as thou sayest. Sin that I lack a squire,
wilt thine choose my weapon for me?"
"Well, he's not really my squire…"
"Nay, be assured that I am!" Modwis was off his donkey in an instant,
his eyes huge. "A moment only, good knights!" And he vanished into the
copse with remarkable speed.
The knight frowned. "An he is not thy squire, who is he?"
"Only a friend," Rod said, "and a new one at that. But he strikes me as
reliable."
The knight nodded. "The dwarves are known for their hearts of oak.
Their loyalty is rarely given, yet when 'tis, 'twill stand like a mountain."
Modwis was back, holding up two green poles, sliced through at each
end, twigs trimmed to smoothness. "Thou dost me honor, sirs and
knights."
"As thou dost for us," the knight said, in the best tradition of chivalry.
He dismounted. Rod couldn't help staring—any man who could get on or
off a horse with a full load of plate armor and no derrick was fantastically
strong.
But of course, this was fantasy…
"I would prefer not to take advantage," he said, nonetheless. "Your
armor must weigh you down, sir."
The knight tossed his helm with impatience. "What matters such
weight to a true knight? Yet to yield mine advantage, I must bare my pate

for thee." He set hands to his helm, unfastened and removed it. Golden
locks flowed down to his shoulders; a flat, sloping forehead ran up against
a brace of bony brow-ridges, somewhat camouflaged by bushy blond
eyebrows. They overhung two large deeply-set blue eyes, thresholded by
high, prominent cheekbones, divided by a blade of a nose. Beneath the
nose was a wide, thin-lipped mouth above a strong, squarish jawbone and
a jutting chin. Rod felt his heart skip a beat—the knight was just as he'd
always imagined him.
Of course, said his monitor-mind.
The knight took up his staff, twirled it around his head to warm up,
then brought it down. "At thy convenience, milord."
Rod grinned, feeling the joy of battle start—and against such an
opponent! He knew he'd be lucky to manage a draw, but that didn't
matter—the thrill was equivalent to singing at Covent Garden with
Domingo.
Modwis stood by, fairly bursting with excitement.
They circled each other, both grinning, eyes alight, quarterstaves held
slanting, on guard. Then the knight cried, "Avaunt!" and his pole tip shot
through the air so fast Rod could scarcely see it. But he managed to get his
own stick up just high enough, somehow, and the crack of their meeting
echoed off the rock face a hundred yards behind them.
It also left Rod's hands stinging so badly he could have sworn his bones
were vibrating.
No time to think about it—the bottom of the knight's staff was
sweeping toward Rod's kneecap. He barely managed to block, and the
blow knocked his own staff into his kneecap. He stepped back, alarmed to
feel his knee buckle, and blocked the knight's next blow from a great
defensive position on one knee. At last he realized that he had to go pn the
offensive, and the low position was handy for a knock at the shins. It
landed, but it was more like a clang, with a rebound Rod didn't believe. He
used it, though, to aim the top of his staff at the knight's head. The
knight's staff swept up to block, of course, and Rod seized the chance to
shove himself back upright. He found his balance just in time, for the
knight's staff was shooting right at his sinuses. He blocked and, getting
the rhythm of it (finally!), swung the lower end of the staff at a joint in the

knight's armor. The tip hit chain mail between the plates, but it jolted the
man momentarily, long enough for Rod to slam a knock at his helmetless
head.
He actually connected! Nasty hollow sound, too. Not that it did much
harm. Oh, the knight fell back a step, but he simply gave his head a shake
and waded back in.
But it had been time enough for Rod to get his own speciality back in
play. He whirled his staff around in a circle, so fast it was a blur,
describing a plane that was angled at forty-five degrees—it was supposed
to be upright, but a quarterstaff was really too long for single-stick play.
The knight frowned; this was apparently new to him. But he slammed a
blow bravely at Rod's head.
Crack! The knight's stick snapped itself out of his hands. "Parbleu!" He
wrung his hands—they were stinging, too; pretty good, since he was
wearing gauntlets. He leaped back, catching up his staff, and his lips
firmed with impatience.
Rod stopped his whirligig, limped to the nearest tree, propped his back
against it, and set himself, staff up between both hands. It was coming
now.
It did. He was the center of a tornado of blows, cracking about him like
lightning bursts. He plied his own stick frantically, blocking blow for blow
and countering when he could, down low, up high, up high again, down
low, up high…
But the knight's staff tip came in down low again, somehow, and
caught Rod right in the midriff. The breath whooshed out of his lungs; he
gasped, gulping for air, not gaining any, fighting against the pain that
racked him as the day darkened about him, and fell.
Then it was light again, and he could actually breathe, and Modwis was
running a cool, damp rag over his face. He pulled in a long breath,
deciding it was the sweetest draft he'd had in a long time, and struggled to
sit up. The dwarf's arm was around his shoulders in a second, helping, and
he saw the golden-haired knight leaning on his staff, smiling
enigmatically. "My thanks for a worthy bout, milord. Thy skill is great."

"Not quite as great as yours." Rod grinned, and shoved himself
painfully up, saying. "Not that I expected it to be."
"Still, you comported yourself most excellently." The knight clasped his
forearm and hauled him to his feet. "I would be glad of your company in
my travels, milord."
Rod stared, unable to believe his ears. He travel with this hero? This
man who always rode alone? "I—I'd be honored." He was suddenly aware
of Modwis's arm under his own hand. "But I couldn't leave my squire."
"So faithful and stalwart a companion must needs be of inestimable
value. Wilt thou both aid me awhile?"
"Why… of course," Rod said, overcome. "Whatever we can do."
"Aye," Modwis rumbled.
"Thou mayest be of great aid indeed, the more so an thou knowest the
land hereabouts." The knight turned to survey the valley below with a
frown.
"I have dwelt here all my life," Modwis answered.
"There's not a stump nor a stone for ten miles that I know not."
"I have need of such knowledge," the knight conceded. "I oppose a fell
sorcerer, dost thou see, and he hath cast a glamour over my sight, which
doth so change the appearance of all the country hereabouts that I can no
longer find my way."
"A foul spell in truth," the dwarf muttered.
"Even so. Three times now have I fallen into a bog, and once fallen from
a height, when I could have sworn naught lay before me but open land. I
could not even be sure that thou wast truly nigh, when I saw thee."
"Vile," Rod agreed. "I'm under something of the same enchantment,
myself."
Modwis stared at him in sudden surprise, which was reassuring, as did
the knight. "Thou hast a glamour about thee?"

"I wouldn't have thought so," Rod muttered, "but I do seem to be seeing
things that aren't there." For a moment, the spell thinned, and he saw only
an open road before him, bound with fog under a leaden sky, with deep
ruts in the snow heaped high upon it.
" 'Tis the sorcerer hath cast this dimness o'er thy sight," Modwis
averred, "the foul sorcerer, who doth seek to blind thee to such things as
are real!"
The sun shone again, on a dusty road amid summer greenery, and the
knight was back. Rod relaxed and explained, "But the only illusions I see
are of people and monsters." A lingering regard for truth made him add,
"And seasons. I don't seem to be having trouble with geographical
features."
The knight grinned and clapped him on the shoulder. "Then we are well
met, thou and I! I shall see the folk aright, and thou shalt see the terrain!
Come, let us march against this fell sorcerer, and root him from the land!"
The grin was infectious; Rod couldn't help but return it. "And just in
case I'm fooled, Modwis will check us. And my horse, of course—he's very
good at discerning reality." He ignored the buzz behind his ear. "What
sorcerer is this?"
"Some country churl, and a weak-kneed 'prentice of a magic-worker, I
doubt not," the knight answered with disdain. "None have e'er heard of
him aforetime, nor shall after, I warrant."
"But his name?" Rod insisted.
"He doth call himself 'Saltique,' " the knight answered, "and I trust we
shall salt him indeed."
It was a strange name, right enough, which was odd, because Rod knew
all the Chronicles of Granclarte by heart.
"Your grandfather's ghost did say that you were to continue the saga,
Rod," Fess murmured behind his ear.
"Salt him away for future use?" Rod pretended dismay. "Why not just
put him out of business permanently?"

"I warrant we'll send him to his just reward," the knight answered. "Yet
first, we must needs discover his lair."
"I have heard summat of him," Modwis grated. "We must track him to
the Wastelands, milords."
"Why, we are nearly there!" the knight cried, and clapped Modwis on
the shoulder. "How can we fail, with a true guide before us? To horse,
milord! And away!"
They mounted and rode out, heading down into the valley—and Fess
couldn't avoid the realization that his master was riding back into his
childhood.
"Fess, just think of it!" Rod burbled. "I'm riding with him! I'm actually
riding with him!"
"It is a rare honor indeed." Fess was growing increasingly concerned,
even more so now that Rod had begun talking to himself. That was bad
enough, but it was worse that he was making perfect sense.
Rod sobered, some of his exuberance absorbed into the robot's caution.
"Where's the worm in the apple, huh? Y'know, he looks almost familiar…
hauntingly familiar…"
"Should he not?"
"Well, yeah, he should look the way I've always pictured him." Rod
frowned at the tall, broad figure riding straight in the saddle in front of
him. "But then he should look familiar, period. Why this niggling
reminder of someone I once knew?"
"It is entirely natural."
"Yeah, I guess my childish mind built him after some adult I'd met."
Fess kept silent.
"Just think—riding with him, on his quest!" Rod felt his spirits bubble
up again. "I may never go back to the real world!"
"That," said Fess, "may be exactly what your enemies are hoping for."

"Oh, don't be a killjoy! Ho, for adventure! I ride in quest of the Rainbow
Crystal, with the great knight Beaubras!"
Chapter Seven
They had traveled some time before Rod thought to ask, "Where do you
wish to go, Sir Knight?"
"To the rescue of my fair lady Haughteur, Lord Gal-lowglass," the
knight replied.
Great. But not quite as helpful as Rod needed. "Where is she
imprisoned?"
The knight shook his head in sorrow. "Not bound in a prison, Lord
Gallowglass, but in a glamour. She dwells within the keep of High
Dudgeon, in the sway of Lady Aggravate."
A new one again, an element not in Grandfather's saga. Rod frowned.
"Where is High Dudgeon?" Modwis asked.
Nice to know it was new to him, too.
"Hid within the clouds at the top of Mount Sullen," Beaubras answered.
" 'Tis a keep nigh eighty feet tall— yet for the first sixty of those feet, it
hath not one single opening. Nay, not so much as an arrow-slit."
"Quite secure," Rod said. "Yet not the most sensible arrangement for
defense, to say nothing of aesthetics. Any particular reason for the lack of
windows?"
"So that all within may look down on those beneath them—as they
believe everyone to be, who doth not view the world from High Dudgeon."
Rod said slowly, "I take it they like to have everyone beneath them."
"Aye. None come there who do not—sad to say." The knight hung his
head. "My lady is the fairest in the land, but many among us hath a
weakness—and this is hers."
"But you don't seem to think going there was entirely her doing."

Beaubras rode in thought for a while, then nodded. "There may be
truth in that—for, though she may have come willingly, the glamour may
also have been wrapped about her aforetime."
"Therefore she may have wished to come, because she had been
enchanted." Rod nodded; it was ever the way of young girls and high
living. Still, he took Sir Beaubras's point—the lady had to find the glamour
tempting, for the glamour to ensnare her. "The chatelaine, Lady
Aggravate— she is something of a magician."
"She is a sorceress entire, sir, who doth gain her strength by sapping
the vitality of the young folk she doth call to her. The mark of her
corruption may be seen in her abhorrence of the cleansing touch of
water."
"No water?" Rod stared. "What do her people drink?"
"Only wine, and brandy wine, which doth render them the more
susceptible to her whims."
"Good grief!" Rod turned away, shaken. "How can they stand to be near
each other?"
"Oh, she doth ever fill her halls with sweet aromas, by the burning of
fragrant gums and resins, so that those who dwell within her courts
cannot sense the corruption about them."
"You mean the people who dwell in High Dudgeon are always
incensed?" Rod gave his head a shake. "No, what's the matter with me? Of
course they are." He shuddered. "A grim and awful keep indeed, Sir
Beaubras! You must not go alone against such a horrible castle!"
"I cannot ask thee to accompany me into so fell a place, Lord
Gallowglass.''
"You didn't—I volunteered. Unless you think I'll be in the way, of
course."
The knight turned, a smile making his countenance radiant. "Of a
certainty, thou shalt not! Thou art a wizard, art thou not? And assuredly,
thou shalt be of most timely aid against this sorceress Aggravate!"

Rod hoped he was right.
The sun was just past noon, and Rod was on the watch for an inn, when
Modwis brought them up with a raised hand. They reined in, and the
knight frowned. "What stirs, friend?"
"I mislike the sense of this place." Modwis scowled at the roadway
ahead of them. The farmlands narrowed, then gave way to tall, dark oaks
and elms that overhung the road. "There have been bandits here in times
gone by."
"Like enough; 'tis well suited to an ambush." Beaubras lifted his head,
baring his teeth in a grin. "So much the worse for them, then. How good of
thee, Modwis, to find that with which to cheer me! Lord Gallowglass, an
there do be bandits, I doubt me not they warrant punishment. What
sayest thou?"
"Mostly surely," Rod said bravely, but his spine crawled with
apprehension as they rode under the boughs. He wished he could be as
delighted at the prospect of…
A roar like a score of locomotives let loose at once, and a handful of
bandits leaped out from the trees. They were scruffy but stocky, their
clothes as ragged and dirty as their weapons were bright. Two of them had
halberds; two had swords; one had only a club. But the club was huge and
had a spike, and the spike was swooping toward Rod's temple. He ducked,
shouting a totally unnecessary warning to his companions. Fess dodged,
and between the two of them, he only got hit with the side of the club as it
shot past. But the blow hit a lot harder than a five-and-a-half-foot
malnourished thug should have been able to manage; Rod flew from the
saddle and landed, hard, on his back. It knocked the wind out of him and
paralyzed his diaphragm; he struggled to pull in a breath at the same time
as he struggled to get up. Fess screamed a threat and warning, and leaped
to stand over him, shielding Rod with his own steel body from the
ministrations of the club-wielder and a sword-swinger who swerved over
to join in. Fess tried to lash out with a front hoof and a back hoof
simultaneously, and promptly had a seizure, legs locking stiff over his
master, head dropping to swing between his fetlocks.
But he had given Rod enough time to thrash his way up on one elbow
and get a look at the bandits, through the tears in his eyes. They looked
wobbly and out of focus— but they also looked to be moving inside vague,

hulking, translucent outlines that were half again as tall as they were, and
much more misshapen. Then he blinked away the tears, and saw only
bandits again—but the clue was enough. "Trolls!" he shouted to his
companions. "They're really trolls in disguise!"
It was enough for Beaubras. He changed his style of attack on the
instant, aiming a ringing blow two feet above the head of the nearest
bandit.
The blow rang indeed, and struck sparks, too. The bandit gave a scream
and fell back a pace, shocked.
As well he might be. Beaubras's magic blade, Coupetou, had carved a
gash out of the troll's granite hide. For all that Rod could see, the sword
hadn't come anywhere near the bandit—but a gash had opened in the air
above him, welling bright green ichor, and Beaubras was slashing at it
again.
Not that Rod had time to look. He had spared a quick glance before he
turned to block the next blow, dodging aside from it as he thought Long!
at his dagger. It sprouted amazingly, shooting out like a switchblade.
Behind him, Coupetou rang like an alarm bell, and Modwis
underscored its melody with a percussion of dull thuds as he laid about
him with an iron club.
Rod thought Hard! and his sword's edge glittered like a diamond.
In fact, it was diamond, as the next bandit found out when Rod
sidestepped and chopped right through his club. The "man" stared at the
sheared stub in surprise, and Rod scored a line across the air directly
above his head.
The bandit screamed and fell back, but his mate with the sword
stepped in—and toppled as Modwis straightened up, holding the bandit's
ankle. Rod didn't pause to debate points of chivalry—he chopped while he
could. The blade clanged and rebounded, vibrating so hard it stung his
hands. Bright green lined the air above it and the bandit screamed like a
factory whistle, rolling to his feet and pelting back toward the forest. His
mate with the stub of club joined him, and Rod started to run after them,
then thought of confronting them on their home territory, and slowed to a
halt. He turned back, and saw right away that Beaubras and Modwis had

done considerably better than he had. Two bandits lay writhing on the
ground; another gave one last shudder, and lay still. All three were
growing hazy around the edges, but the dead bandit was the first whose
form blurred completely, then re-formed into an eight-foot monster, wide
in the shoulders and chest, absurdly short in the legs, that looked
somehow like a turnip—with arms five feet long, muscled like steel cables,
and hands that had claws, not fingernails.
Rod stared, appalled. He had had the temerity to fight a thing like that!
He looked up quickly—and, sure enough, the other two bandits had
turned into the same type of monster. They thrashed about on the ground,
moaning and howling.
"We must aid them." Beaubras took a flask of brandy from his
saddlebag.
Modwis nodded, and found a roll of bandage in his own saddlebag.
Rod felt very much at a loss. He disguised it with protest. "Wait a
minute! We were just trying to chop these things into pieces!"
"Only for that they sought to injure us, Lord Gallow-glass." Beaubras
looked up, then went back to trying to wipe up ichor and pour in brandy.
Rod couldn't help thinking that the brandy would do more good in the
creature's mouth—especially since it roared at the burning of the alcohol
and slammed a huge fist at the knight, who adroitly stepped back. "I bid
thee hold thy peace, poor creature. The brandy doth sting, aye, but 'twill
prevent infection."
How considerate of Grandfather to construct the land of Granclarte
with a rudimentary, but accurate, knowledge of medicine! "Look, I hate to
sound like a heel, but wouldn't it be a bit more practical to put them out
of their misery?"
Beaubras stared, appalled. "Only they themselves can do that, Lord
Gallowglass, by repenting of their evil ways and turning to God."
"Revenge," one of the fallen monsters snarled. "Kill slow!"
"Well, not slowly." Rod fingered his sword. "I have a little mercy, after

all."
The knight protested, and even Modwis paled. "Thou canst not mean to
do it, Lord Gallowglass!"
"No, I can, actually. Look at it this way—these aren't civilized beings
you're dealing with, or even ones that can be civilized. They're sadistic
monsters who enjoy nothing so much as watching people suffer. Heal 'em,
and they'll come right back to attack us—and if not us, then the next
traveler who comes down this road."
"We must do our Christian duty," the knight responded sternly, "no
matter the cost!"
"With respect, Sir Knight, it won't be us who have to pay that cost."
"If we treat them with mercy, Lord Gallowglass, they may give mercy in
their own steads," Modwis explained.
"Fat chance!"
"He doth speak truth." Beaubras frowned. "Works of charity may ope
the hearts of others to God's grace, Lord Gallowglass. Yet whether they do
or not, we can but do our part, and be merciful toward fallen foes."
Rod had it on the tip of his tongue, but he bit it back. This was, after
all, his grandfather's universe, and a realm of complete fantasy. Here it
was quite possible that bloodthirsty monsters could be reformed and
recruited. In fact, wasn't there a story, in his childhood, of the giant
Blunderthud, who became one of the Four Kings' most ardent supporters?
He sighed and turned away to grope beneath Fess's saddle for the reset
switch, then in one of the saddlebags for the medical kit. As he knelt
beside a moaning troll, a thought of reality intruded for a moment, and he
seemed to see a genuine peasant rolling in agony, not a troll.
Then the moment was gone, and the troll was back.
Shaken, Rod sponged up ichor and sprinkled in antiseptic powder. He
pressed down firmly as the troll roared and tried to rise, murmuring, "Yes,
I know it hurts, but that's the medicine burning up all the nasty little
germs that would try to give you gangrene and make your arm fall off. Just

hang in there, and the pain will fade."
Suddenly, he was very glad that Beaubras had been such a stickler
about chivalry. If his flash of insight was accurate, he was treating a
human being, and the troll was only a hallucination.
Or was the troll real, and the peasant a hallucination? He went to reset
his horse. "Fess?"
"Uhhaaaeee… chadd… uh seizurrre, Rrrrodd?"
"Yeah, you did." He'd have to wait a little while for the truth; it took
Fess's perceptions a few minutes to clear.
When they were back on the road, the moaning trolls staggering to
their feet behind them, Rod asked, under his breath, "What did we fight
back there, Fess?"
"Five peasants, Rod—though they were remarkably tall and well fed for
Gramarye field hands."
"Futurians?" Rod wondered. "What're they doing here?"
"More probably local agents brought up by the Futurians. But
high-technology intervention is quite likely—the heads of those halberds
were strangely free of the slightest trace of rust, and the shafts were tipped
with lenses."
"Lasers?" Rod frowned. "Good thing they didn't get a chance to use
them."
Then the shocking thought hit—if Beaubras wasn't really there, who
had finished off that one bandit, and wounded the other two?
Fortunately, Modwis spoke up before Rod could try to answer that
question, and Modwis was real—within limits. "Sir and lord, trolls own
little magic, and assuredly cannot change their shapes."
Beaubras and Rod were both silent, digesting the point. Then Beaubras
said, "Thou speakest sooth, good Modwis. What dost thou infer from this
impossibility?''
"Why, that a sorcerer must have aided them."

"The Lady Aggravate?" Rod asked.
"More likely the crazed old sorcerer who set silver snares for me, and
caught thee in glamours—the wicked Saltique."
Rod tried that one on for size, and didn't like the fit. "What's he got
against us, anyway?"
"Mayhap he doth see the future," Beaubras said slowly, "and doth know
that we shall be his bane."
"He doth fear us for some reason, that's certain," Modwis qualified,
"and doth seek to prevent our coming to his lair."
Beaubras grinned, with a toss of his head. "Why, then, let us not
dispute his sagacity, my companions! Ride, for the death of sorcerers!"
And he kicked his horse into a trot.
Modwis and Rod had perforce to hurry to keep up with him.
"Do I detect a certain lack of logic there?" Rod sub-vocalized.
"If you do, your perceptions are fallacious," Fess assured him.
"Modwis's logic is correct, the more so since he is careful to state his
inference as a hypothesis. It is Beaubras who leaps to the conclusion that
what Modwis infers must be fact."
"Yes, Beaubras was never in doubt," Rod said with a sardonic smile.
"But you don't think there really is a genuine sorcerer involved here?"
"In Granclarte, Rod, anything may be real."
"Right. Uh… how about in Gramarye, Fess? Or isn't that an issue, at the
moment?"
"The coincidence of both worlds is desirable," Fess admitted. "In
Gramarye, there well could be an esper, allied with the Futurians, who is
somewhat unbalanced."
"So instead of a mad scientist, we have a mad warlock. Just great. Is he
really out to get us, do you think?"
The robot was silent as he plodded ahead.

"Fess?" Rod pressed. "Am I just being paranoid? Or am I really being
persecuted?"
The horse said, with reluctance, "I do not think your hallucinations
were naturally induced, Rod."
Rod knew better than to ask him to explain.
Chapter Eight
They didn't stop for lunch, but for some reason, Rod didn't miss it. He
was growing a mite peckish, however, as the sun declined toward teatime,
and asked Modwis, "Are we apt to come to an inn before nightfall?"
"Nay," the dwarf replied. "We have taken the road less traveled by, Lord
Gallowglass, and come into lands rarely visited. There is not even a keep
'twixt here and High Dudgeon."
Rod sighed. "We get to rough it, then. How romantic."
Both Beaubras and Modwis frowned at him as though he'd said a very
strange word and, all things considered, he was just as glad the
opportunity to explain himself vanished with the appearance of another
pair of travelers.
"Hail!" cried Beaubras. "Wilt thou break a lance with me?"
"Gladly," came the muffled reply, and the other knight spurred his
great golden war-horse into a gallop, leveling his lance as he did. He wore
gleaming silver armor, but his helmet winked golden in the rays of the
setting sun. Rod strained to make out the device on his shield, but
couldn't.
Beaubras, of course, had taken the position of disadvantage, and had to
ride with the sun in his eyes. He kicked his mount into a gallop, and the
two juggernauts rode down on each other with all the grace and deftness
of a matched pair of tanks.
Rod pressed his hands over his ears.
Even so, he could hear the crash as the knights slammed into each
other—and, sure enough, the stranger's lance broke. He reeled in his
saddle, then regained his seat, and was almost to Rod as he reined in and

turned his horse. "A brave joust!" he cried, unshipping his sword. "Wilt
thou do me the honor of measuring thy blade against mine, good knight?"
"I thank thee," Beaubras answered, riding up, "yet must I decline; for I
must save my steel to deflect the spells of an evil sorceress."
"A sorceress!" The knight lifted the visor of his golden helmet, revealing
a gaunt face with white eyebrows and moustaches, lined by the cares of
years. Yet there was fire in those farseeing eyes, and a zeal for living that
lit his whole countenance. "How marvelous an adventure! Assuredly, thou
wilt not be so pinch-fisted as to hold all chance of glory to thyself alone!"
"Why, nay." Beaubras looked as though he would have liked to do just
that, but chivalry forbade such selfishness. "Wilt thou join with us in this
gallant battle, Sir Knight?"
"That will I gladly!" cried the Knight of the Golden Helmet. "Ho, squire
of mine! Glory awaits!"
His squire approached, a short, compact man with a smile, riding on a
donkey and carrying a spare spear. He proffered it, but the knight waved
him away. "Nay, nay! One passage at arms must suffice; we have true foes
to conquer now!" And he took his squire aside to explain the new mission.
Beaubras turned to Rod, his eyes alight, his voice low with suppressed
excitement. "He is the paladin Rinaldo, grown old!"
"One of Charlemagne's heroes?" Rod looked after the old man,
frowning. "What makes you think that?"
"He wears the golden helmet of Mambrino!" Beaubras whispered to
Rod. "Only to Rinaldo was that enchanted helm given!"
"No," Rod said slowly, "I can think of another who wore it, eight
hundred years after. Except that he didn't really have it, actually, he only
thought he did…"
And he ran down. Who was he, to criticize someone else's delusions?
Beaubras turned away, opening his helmet, and fell into an animated
discussion with the old knight, comparing notes about weapons and
monsters. From the occasional scrap of conversation that floated his way,

Rod gathered that they were taking turns telling of their adventures, each
one eagerly prompting the other. The stranger's squire looked up at him
with a smile and a shrug, but he didn't really seem to mind at all.
Nor did Modwis. He rode leaning forward a little, eyes bright, ears
straining, and began to edge closer and closer to the two knights, hanging
on their every word.
The other squire kicked his feet, leaned back in the saddle, and began
whistling a little tune.
Rod rode after them all in a daze, wondering into what sort of world
he'd ridden. Or perhaps what sorts of worlds.
However, some compromise with reality was necessary, especially after
the sun went down and the two knights kept riding blissfully through the
gloaming, still rattling on with shop talk. "Enough is enough," Rod
muttered, and kicked Fess into a trot. The robot-horse swerved around in
front of the two armored ones, and Rod said, "O valorous knights, I blush
to intrude upon your lofty conversation, but I really do think we might do
well to rest through the hours of darkness."
"Eh? Why, it has become dark!" said the stranger, looking about him in
surprise. "Bless me! We must indeed halt!"
"Aye, evil walks at night, and we must be ready in defense," Beaubras
responded. "We must make a camp, indeed."
Rod noticed that neither of the knights said a word about sleeping. He
also noticed that neither of them lifted a finger to pitch the tents; they left
that to Rod, Modwis, and the squire.
"Leave this to us, Lord Gallowglass," Modwis rumbled. "Sit thee with
the other knights, and talk of matters befitting thy station."
"A little rabbit stew or some roasted partridge would fit my station just
fine, thank you," Rod grumbled. "You go listen to 'em, Modwis."
The dwarf looked up at the two knights, sitting unhelmed on a log
chattering merrily away, and for a moment, his longing showed naked in
his face. Then he mastered his feelings, turning away and grumbling,
"Nay. 'Twould not befit my station."

Rod disagreed, but he knew there wasn't much point in saying so. So he
moved as fast as he could, and at least had the campfire burning merrily
by the time darkness fell.
He woke to the sound of conversation, followed shortly by the cry of a
distant rooster. He scowled, looking about; the sky was just barely
beginning to turn rosy behind the two knights, who sat where he had left
them, comparing notes on villains dead but hopefully not deathless. Rod
squeezed his eyes shut, gave his head a shake, and looked again. No, they
were still there, just as fresh as they had ever been, with just as much to
talk about.
Could you call it boasting, when they were both doing it, and each
fascinated by the other's accounts?
This really was a fantasy world, wasn't it?
Which reminded Rod of reality. "Fess—it's really the dead of winter,
isn't it?"
"Yes, Rod. The night's temperature was close to zero."
"How'd I make it through?" Rod frowned; he had some memory of
having conjured up a sleeping bag. He looked down and, sure enough, he
was in one. "Where'd this come from? In the real world, I mean."
"From your spaceship, Rod, buried though it may be."
"That's right, it is navy issue, isn't it?"
"Designed to maintain an interior temperature of seventy degrees
Fahrenheit, down to an exterior temperature of negative twenty degrees,
Rod, and using the temperature differential as…"
"Yeah, yeah, I read the instruction manual, too. But how'd it get here?"
The robot hesitated.
"Go on, tell me. I can take it."
"It appeared with a small thunderclap, Rod. Modwis and the other
squire found it quite impressive."

Rod glanced at the fire; the squire gave him a cheery smile. He already
had a kettle hanging from a tripod over the flames. Modwis was folding up
his blankets. "No doubt that's why they slept on the far side of the fire.
But how did the sleeping bag get here?"
Fess was very slow in answering. "Only you and I knew of its existence,
Rod."
"You mean that, even in the real world, I conjured it here?" Rod asked.
"No doubt an exercise in teleportation."
"Yeah, but I've never been able to do much in that line before." Rod
frowned. "Except projecting myself, and anything I'm holding on to…"
"Your talents continue to amaze me, Rod."
"You're not the only one. Well, let's start the day."
The knights were induced to stop their conversation long enough to
partake of some porridge Modwis concocted, and some quick bread the
squire produced. Not much, though—Rod didn't see how they could fuel
enough muscle to support all that steel, on so few calories. On the other
hand, he could appreciate the difficulties of becoming obese inside a suit
of armor.
With camp struck and the fire doused, they hit the road again, Rod
riding right behind the two knights, whether he wanted to or not, the
squire and Modwis bringing up the rear—whether they wanted to or not.
Rod was wondering whether he was really hearing a new story coming
from the Knight of the Golden Helmet, or whether the old man was
beginning to repeat himself—all the battles began to blur together, after a
while—when there was a mad cawing, and a featherball struck out of a
cloudless sky.
It may have come cloaked in feathers, but it had sharp claws that tore
through his clothing—and it stank't Rod batted the thing away, and it
squawked, "Well, I never! What a way to treat a lady! Take that't" And a
wing slammed into his face. It didn't hurt much, but it blinded him
enough to keep him from fending off the claws—and this time, they took
out a chunk of his chest. Rod bellowed in fury and shoved the thing away,
pulling his sword.

"Oh, that's right, use a blade on a poor defenseless female!" his attacker
cackled. "Well, if you want to use weapons . . ." It swooped away from
him, and something cracked into the top of his head. It didn't hurt, but he
felt a warm fluid oozing down through his hair—and it stank at least as
bad as the bird!
What kind of fowl laid rotten eggs?
He pushed the mess back away from his forehead, shuddering at the
feel of the goo, and got a good look at his attacker. It was indeed a foul
fowl, a huge female bird, the size of a condor—but she had a woman's
head, and pendulous breasts. Her hair had never heard of a comb, much
less shampoo, and her feathers were filthy. Rod obviously wasn't smelling
her natural odor, but that of her food—several years' worth of it.
A harpy.
Beyond him, the two knights were thrashing about, knocking harpies
out of the air—but they weren't using their swords, so the birds just kept
swooping back.
Rod could understand. Somehow it didn't feel right, using a sword on
something that looked like a woman.
The harpy was screeching back to the attack like a dive-bomber, and
Rod suddenly saw the advantages of a shield. Not having one, he glared at
the egg that plummeted toward him and thought Feedback! at it. The egg
halted, looped up, and began chasing the harpy. She saw it coming, gave a
squawk of dismay, and swerved out of its way.
It swerved to follow.
"He's doing it," her buddy called. "Distract him, and it'll drop!" She
suited the action to the word; her idea of distraction was aiming for the
eyes, claws first.
Rod ducked, came up fast, and caught her under his arm, managing
two good swats on the tail feathers before his nose couldn't take any more.
She went off in a flutter of fluster—but the egg was still chasing her buddy.
"Take it back!" she cried, arrowing straight for Rod and swerving aside
at the last minute. He saw it coming, with horror, and ducked, but not fast

enough. The shell broke on his forehead and his head filled with the
sulphurous reek. He swatted at his face, trying to clear the mess, and
intercepted the talons that were reaching for his eyes. He caught them,
and rage boiled up. Chivalry countered it, but chivalry was wearing thin.
He swung the harpy around his head. She cried, "Don't you dareV so he
did—he tossed her right into her colleague, and the two of them went
down in a squawking, milling cloud of pinfeathers.
Rod barely had time to see Modwis and the squire flailing about them
with quarterstaves, swatting at harpies. They didn't hit them, of
course—the harpies sheered off, squawking, "You're not supposed to do
that, boys!"
"You've got to play the game!"
Then the two who had chosen him were on him again, clawing and
screeching. "You think it's time to stroke him, Phyla?"
"Don't be silly, Chlamys—he's not in a position to do you any good!"
Rod decided it was time to be offensive. "Charge!"
Fess leaped straight at the two harpies.
They got out of the way in time, with squawks of indignation. "Stay
away from him, Phyla—you've got to associate with the right people."
"Yes, it's all in who you know."
"Where to, Rod?"
"Around in a circle, Fess. Get 'em chasing their tail feathers."
The heinous hens were right behind him. "Oh, so you think you can get
away with it, eh? He doesn't know much about harpies, does he, Phyla?"
"Let's show him!" her mate cackled, and they peeled off into the blue,
going for altitude.
Now! while they were away for a moment. Rod leaned down and caught
up, not a staff, but a whole fallen branch, late of a pine tree. As the female
Fokkers roared down at him, he swirled the branch around his head in a 
moulinet.

"Oh, isn't that nice! He's sweeping up for us!"
"No, wait, Phyla! He's…"
The bough crashed into her, sweeping them both out of the sky with a
flurry of indignant screeches.
Modwis and the squire advanced, with determination and upraised
staves.
"Get out, Chlamys! They look like they've got their mouths set for fried
drumsticks!"
And they were off and running, flapping like albatrosses, barely
managing to get into the air a few feet in front of the quarterstaves.
"Enough is enough!" Rod fumed.
One of the harpies banked back toward him. "Don't talk that way! You
can't be honest and hope to get ahead!"
Rod swirled his bough at her, then squeezed his eyes shut and thought
hard.
The squires shouted in surprise, and the knights exclaimed.
Rod looked up and saw three cats with twelve-foot wings sailing toward
the flock with happy yowls.
The harpies shrieked with horror and flew for the coop.
"Art whole, Sir Knight?" Beaubras cried.
"I am well, though reeking." The old knight was trembling with rage.
"How dare such filthy creatures so befoul a belted knight!"
"Be mindful of thy chivalry, brave paladin!"
"Why, so I am." The old knight finished wiping yolk off his golden
helmet and unlimbered his lance. "Those brave felines are sadly
outnumbered, Sir Beaubras! See! Even now, the birds of foul feather turn
upon them!"

He was right. The whole flock had pulled together and were wheeling
back with caws of delight, straight for the winged cats.
The cats yowled and dove straight on.
"What brave creatures!" Beaubras exclaimed.
"The cats are females, too!" Rod called. And they were; he'd had a
last-minute inspiration.
"Then we must give them rescue! Charge!" And the old knight galloped
off, lance spearing straight up toward the flock. His squire kicked his
donkey and galloped after him, staff whirling.
The harpies saw them coming and changed their minds; this looked too
much like an even fight. With squawks of dismay, the whole flock wheeled
and headed back toward its roost in an old windmill.
The old knight streaked away in pursuit, his squire riding frantically
after.
"I shall be sorry to lose their company," Beaubras mused, watching
knight and squire depart, "though I cannot deny they are needed here."
"They've got the right stuff," Rod demurred, "but they weren't really all
that great as fighters, you know."
"Nay—though who knows what doughty deeds they may once have
done?"
Rod privately thought that Beaubras should know if anybody did, after
all that talk, but he was polite enough not to say so.
The flock of harpies dove into the old windmill. It was dilapidated with
the years, its sails torn and dusty. With a high, clear call, the old knight
charged straight at it, his squire close behind him.
"Yet their faith in chivalry is inspiring," Sir Beaubras said.
"Oh, yes," Rod said softly. "Oh, yes."
Modwis nodded. " 'Tis such as they who will ever cheer the hearts of
those who suffer for the doing of the deeds they believe to be right."

Chapter Nine
The sun was directly overhead, and Rod was beginning to think about
lunch when something roared. He noticed a Doppler effect and looked up,
just in time to see a nine-foot-tall man with a hideous face and six arms
charging down at him.
Beaubras shouted, reining his horse around and couching his lance.
Modwis blanched, but he pulled out his iron club.
What else could Rod do? He drew his sword.
Then the ogre struck like an avalanche.
Rod went down under the first onslaught; he had a brief vision of huge
legs churning past, of Fess's steel body flying through the air. Then he
managed to fold his arms over his head, roll, and come up, his sword
somehow still in his hand, bellowing with anger.
Not that he could hear himself. The ogre was bellowing loudly enough
for all of them, and Beaubras, who had somehow managed to stay
mounted through the first charge, sailed into him with sword and shield.
Modwis was picking himself up, casting about for his iron club, and Fess
was scrambling to his feet on the far side of the ogre.
Relief shot through Rod, with anger in its wake. He charged the huge
humanoid, howling like a banshee. The ogre immediately assigned two of
his arms to take care of Rod with shield and sword, slashing and
feinting—and Rod was startled to find himself giving ground, slowly but
surely. So, even more surprisingly, was Beaubras, and Modwis had found
his club but was having trouble avoiding the cuts of another sword on the
ogre's far side. Rod couldn't understand how the monster could coordinate
three fights at the same time—but, then, he was too busy blocking and
parrying to give it much thought.
"I cannot prevail!" Beaubras shouted. "He is enchanted!"
Well, that was as good an excuse as any.
'Tis more work of the foul sorcerer Brume!" Modwis howled.
Within Granclarte, he had a point—nothing short of a duke could fight

Beaubras to a standoff.
Which meant it was magic.
But what kind of magic?
Fess slammed into the ogre's back, screaming; nice that one member of
the party didn't need to worry about chivalry. But two of the ogre's arms
immediately grabbed the horse and shoved him aside, almost as though
they had a sub-brain all their own.
This was magic, and of no mean order! But how could it really work?
A huge foot sent Modwis flying, and a blade scored Rod's forearm. The
hot, bright pain brought a surge of rage that somehow made Rod instantly
clearheaded, and he realized that in the real world, the ogre must be made
of witch-moss.
Change! he thought at it grimly, and pictured a huge ball of bread
dough rolling down the road.
The ogre obstinately remained an ogre. Rod was floored— nothing in
Granclarte had refused to change when he wished it to. He'd done some
numbers on Gramarye witch-moss constructs, too.
He was so astounded that he was late blocking as the huge broadsword
slashed straight at his face. Panic clawed as he yanked his sword up,
knowing it was too late, knowing he was going to feel agony as the steel
cut his head in two…
Then the sword jolted aside, and the huge mass of muscle toppled,
leaving Rod seeing clear sky, with a roaring in his ears.
He looked down. The roaring was coming from the ogre, but that was
his left ear; the right ear was picking up even more noise, coming from a
normal-sized man who was holding one of the ogre's feet, face contorted
with rage.
Fairly normal-sized, anyway—he was only six feet tall, maybe a few
inches more. But he had the most fantastic build Rod had ever seen,
outside of a health-spa catalogue. His shoulders were at least thirty inches
across with slabs of muscle a foot thick, and his arms bulged like a normal

man's thighs. His legs were virtual tree trunks, and he was naked except
for a filthy rag of a loincloth. Not that it was easy to see—his whole body
was encrusted with dirt. His hair was either brown or coated with grime,
and it was so stringy that Rod favored the latter hypothesis. His beard was
matted and mangy, hanging down onto the huge slabs of muscle that
passed for his chest. His face was all staring eyes and snarling mouth, and
Rod could have sworn he had fangs.
Even Beaubras had sense enough to step back and let this stranger do
his work.
The ogre was on his feet again, thundering like a volcano erupting. Four
boughs of arms grabbed for the wild man, but he leaped inside the
squeeze and slammed a fist into the ogre's belly—way in. The ogre hooted
in pain and doubled over, and the wild man slammed an uppercut into his
jaw. The ogre snapped upright—but even as he did, one huge foot lashed
out, catching the wild man in the midriff. He went flying and slammed
into a thicket. The ogre jumped on that thicket with both feet—but the
wild man squirmed out behind his heels, flipped over on his back, and
kicked the ogre's legs out from under him.
The ogre fell—backward.
The wild man moved fast, incredibly fast. The ogre landed on hard
ground, and the wild man jumped on him with both feet. The ogre's
breath whooshed out, but he caught the wild man's ankles and threw him
away into the forest.
"We must aid!" Somehow, Beaubras had come up with a new lance.
"No, wait!" Rod set a hand on his arm. "The wild man's not out yet!"
No, not a bit. He came charging back out of the brush, bellowing like a
bull, and hit the ogre like a fullback, shoulder into the monster's hips. The
two of them went sailing ten feet before the ogre smashed into a tree. The
tree went over, and so did the ogre.
"Whence came this champion?" Beaubras gasped. "Olympus?"
"No," Rod answered. "Ariosto."
The fighters were all thrashing legs and grabbing hands, but somehow,

the ogre was on his belly, and the wild man was slamming the monster's
head against a rock, again and again, actually shouting something that
sounded like numbers.
The rock was splitting.
The wild man had mercy on the granite and tossed the ogre down with
something that certainly had the right intonation for an oath of disgust.
The six arms twitched feebly, and the wild man kicked the huge ribs with
contempt. He spat, and turned away.
And saw Rod, Beaubras, and Modwis.
For a long moment, they stood there, staring at each other, while
prickles of apprehension flitted their way up Rod's spine.
Then the wild man bellowed and charged.
"Split up!" Rod yelled, and Fess leaped to the side. Modwis took him at
his word and jumped away into the thicket—but Beaubras leveled his
lance and charged straight ahead.
Rod moaned, then stared. If he hadn't seen it, he wouldn't have believed
it—but the wild man caught the knight's lance, turning as he did, and
heaving—and Sir Beaubras went sailing through the air to slam down into
the thicket.
Rod couldn't let him be killed! He shouted and rode straight for the
wild man.
On the other side, Modwis came at full donkey-gallop.
The wild man turned to grapple Rod, ignoring Modwis— and found
himself facing flashing steel hooves as Fess reared, whinnying. But he
dodged adroitly, caught Fess's fetlocks, and was turning to heave when
Modwis crashed into him headfirst.
His head had a steel cap on it.
The wild man said "Hunh!" very clearly, in that tone that indicates a
tightening of the stomach muscles, and was immobile for just a moment.
Rod seized the moment—also the wild man's hair.

He almost dropped it in disgust, and he could have sworn he felt
something crawling over his fingers—but he called, "Reverse!" and Fess
kicked free of the wild man's hold, slamming his forehooves down and
pushing back hard. The wild man bellowed in anger, but he was off
balance for another second, as Modwis dismounted and yanked up his
ankles. The wild man fell with a roar. Rod dropped his hair (thankfully)
and shouted, "Roll him, Fess!"
As the wild man tried to get an arm under himself, the great black
horse pushed with a hoof, rolling him over, and shoved hard between the
shoulder blades. The wild man went down hard.
Rod knew that sheer strength couldn't hold this superman, not even the
strength of Fess's relay reflexes and servo-powered "muscles." But they 
were in the domain of fantasy, and it was Rod's universe now, after
all—hadn't he inherited it? So he thought of a force field, and saw the air
thicken around the wild man.
Incredibly, he still moved. More slowly—he was slowed down to normal
speed for a man with quick reflexes—but he still thrashed, roaring, and
probably would have toppled Fess in another second. But the spell delayed
him just long enough for Beaubras to leap in, grabbing at the wild man's
left arm. Rod jumped out of the saddle to grab his right. The wild man
kicked, roaring, and Modwis went flying, but Rod caught the ankle on the
rebound and yanked it up to the buttock. "Cradle hold!"
Beaubras got the idea, if not the term, and managed to catch the other
leg and shove it up in similar fashion. The wild man thrashed and roared,
but there really wasn't much he could look forward to from that position,
except possibly a hot shower.
Beaubras looked up at Rod. "What can we do with him now, Lord
Gallowglass?"
How did Rod become the expert, all of a sudden?
It was a good question. It was a very good question. If they let go, one
very angry wild man would be on his feet in a second, pounding their
heads in—but if they tried to hold on, sooner or later they'd tire, and he'd
kick loose on his own.
"Only hold him a moment longer, good sirs!"

Excellent idea. Rod renewed his grip and wondered who had said that.
It was a new knight who had said that, a knight who had dropped in on
a flying horse—well, no, not a horse, really; its wings and head were those
of an eagle. He leaped to the ground and came running—never mind that
he wore full plate armor; none of the chroniclers had ever minded— and
knelt by the wild man's head while he pulled out a very large test tube.
There was a label on it, but Rod couldn't make it out; he was a little busy
at the moment. The new knight ignored the wild man's roaring and
popped the wax cap off the vial right under the wild man's nose.
What was it, his grandmother's smelling salts?
Whatever it was, it worked like a charm, which it probably was. The
wild man stilled instantly, utter astonishment on his face. Then he looked
back up over his shoulder at Beaubras and Rod, took in the situation,
nodded slowly—and, wonder of wonders, spoke. "I thank thee for thine aid,
kind sirs—yet my wits are of a sudden restored to me. Thou mayest loose
me now; be assured, I'll not attack thee."
Rod looked the question at Beaubras. The knight nodded and, very
carefully, they loosed their holds—then jumped back.
The wild man rolled to his feet in a single, sinuous movement, looking
down at his body with a mortified expression, "Alas! Am I become a
savage beast, then?"
"Thou art returned to us now," the new knight said tactfully. "Yet are
thy wits all of a whole again, lord Count?"
"Aye." The wild man looked up with a pensive frown. "And now that I
mind me, that first sickness of the brain is vanished also—that spellbound
desire for the maid Angelica." His voice took on a note of wonder. "She is
naught to me now—only another woman that I have met, and not a
pleasant one, though still must I acknowledge her beauty. Yet I could not
care less for her, though 'twas the news of her marriage that did drive me
mad. Is't not wondrous, my lord Duke?"
"It is, surely," the duke answered. "Thou dost remember, then?"
"Remember! Ah, would that I did not!" The count squeezed his eyes
shut. "Every wild, senseless act of utter destruction that I have

wrought—the flocks scattered, the cattle torn limb from limb, the trees
uprooted, the fields laid waste! Ah, the poor folk who have suffered from
my madness!" A tear glittered on his cheek.
" 'Tis done, my lord Count," the new knight said softly. " 'Tis done; thou
hast regained thy wits, and are restored to thy lord and uncle, Charles."
"Aye, thanks to thee, brave Duke." The wild man raised his head with a
frown. "But mine uncle? What of him?"
"He is in Paris, my lord, besieged by a Saracen host."
"Why, we must go to him, then!" the wild man cried. "Come, my lord!
Away!" But he remembered to turn to Beaubras, Rod, and Modwis,
inclining his head. "Knight and gentlemen, I thank thee. Most gracious aid
hast thou given, and at no small peril to thyselves. This act of charity shall
be numbered among thy glories; the minstrels shall sing of it."
Rod and his companions could only return the bow in mute
acknowledgement.
Then the count turned and marched away, clothed in dignity and
grime, grim resolution in every line of his filthy body.
The duke hurried after him, whipping the cloak off his own shoulders
and throwing it over the count's.
The hippogriff took wing, circled once over the new clearing (the ogre
and the wild man had knocked down a lot of trees in their fight), and flew
off after his master.
"A most noble count," Beaubras murmured.
"As noble as yourself," Rod agreed, but inside, he was wondering just
how a classic epic and a classic parody had both become mixed up in his
grandfather's romance.
He shrugged and turned away—it had been a thrill, anyway, and he'd
manage to sort it out someday.
The ogre groaned and stirred.
"Oh. Yes." Rod turned, frowning. "We still have this little problem to

dispose of, don't we?"
"Aye." Beaubras drew his sword, just in case. "What shall we do with
him, Lord Gallowglass?"
Rod shrugged. "Why take chances? We know he's got to be guilty of
something." And he whipped out his blade, poised for the death blow.
Inside him, someone was screaming and protesting, but the world
seemed to be reddening, Rod could feel his pulse pounding in his temples,
and suddenly, he knew that if he let this creature live, it would hunt him
down and kill him, it and all its ilk, tracking him down day by day until
finally, exhausted, he could run no more…
But there was a hand staying his arm, a hand that didn't push or grab,
just rested there, and a voice that filled his head, saying, "Nay, Lord
Gallowglass. To slay in cold blood is a woeful transgression 'gainst
chivalry!"
Rod wanted to put down the sword, but the image of the ogre stalking
him still made his heart race, the dark, misshapen thing tracking him
through a moonless night… "If we don't kill him in cold blood, he'll kill us
in hot blood!"
The ogre suddenly stirred, muttering something that sounded like
agreement. Rod lifted the sword a little higher, but another voice filled his
head, Fess's, saying, "Remember, Rod, that what you see may not be what
truly exists."
The sword wavered, and beneath its point, as though mist were
clearing, the ogre's shape became translucent.
Rod seemed to see inside it, see three men heaped one atop another,
jostling each other as they regained consciousness. Not filthy half-beasts,
either, but clean-shaven men dressed in neat tunics and hose, made of
good cloth— far better than real peasants wore, though they resembled
peasant styles.
Rod's voice shook. "Ogre or assassins, they're still enemies who will kill
me if I give them the chance!"
"Then we will not give him that chance," Beaubras said simply. "We

will leave him bound hand and foot, and will be long gone ere he can work
himself free." .
And it was an "it," not a "them"—it was only a single ogre again,
thrusting himself up on one elbow.
The sword trembled as Rod lowered it with a single, short nod. "All
right. All right, we'll show mercy. But let's be quick/about it, eh? Before it
can fight again."
On the instant, Modwis cast rope about the ogre, and Beaubras bent to
push, rolling the monster over and over until he was wrapped in rope from
shoulder to hip. It roared and gnashed its teeth, but Beaubras and Modwis
stayed clear of its kicking feet as they tied the knots, the knight supplying
the strength, the dwarf shaping the rope into a devious puzzle that only a
wizard could unravel. Then they cast loops about the feet, tightening them
so as not to prevent circulation, and bound the ankles together on the
other side of a thick old tree.
As for Rod, he was feeling too sick to even wonder where Modwis had
found the rope. His stomach was churning, and his head was rent with a
stabbing pain. He turned away, hands trembling too much to even sheathe
his sword, and held on to a tree, hoping the world would stop whirling.
"Rod," said Fess's voice, "are you ill?"
"Yes," Rod croaked, "and I deserve it. I would have run that ogre
through if you and Beaubras hadn't prevented me, Fess."
"But you have relented, and it will live long enough for the foresters to
find it and bring troops. You have done well, after all, Rod."
"But why do I feel so… ill, all of a sudden?" Rod let himself slide down to
the forest floor, leaning against the trunk. "My pulse is hammering, my
head is splitting… Look, Fess! I'm shaking all over!"
"It will pass, Rod."
"You… sure about that?"
The great black horsehead dipped down, nuzzling Rod's neck. "Your
temperature is elevated, and your pulse is erratic. Your blood pressure is

high. But there is no cause for concern if these symptoms do not persist."
"I'll… take your word… for it…" Rod swallowed. "But… why, Fess? So
suddenly…"
"It could be an adrenaline reaction, Rod. You are feeling the effects of
exposure, you know, and your body is weakening."
That was a horrifying thought. "What do I… need to do?"
"Come in out of the rain, Rod—or the snow, in this case."
"I… can't. Not till I'm sure I'm… safe. To be around, I mean."
"I appreciate the double entendre, Rod. I assure you that you do need
shelter, though."
"But not just my body! Where'd that… homicidal fear come from? 
That's why I can't come in!"
Fess was quiet a moment, then said, "You are aware that you have
always had an element of paranoia in your personality, Rod."
"An element, yeah, a streak—but what's letting it run wild and take
over? I mean, if I had some warning, I could deal with it, maybe, but… No,
don't give me any of that 'chemical analysis' business again—especially
since it might be true!" There was a little anger now, born of indignation,
and it was helping, his pulse was beginning to steady, but his head still felt
as though it were built around live coals…
"You need proper medical facilities, Rod."
"Well, medical facilities mean medical people." Rod clawed at the tree.
"And the condition I'm in, I'm likely to think they've turned into monsters,
and go berserk. No, I have to weather it as well as I can, Fess. Please! I'm
just going to have to, that's all!" Rod staggered to his feet and turned back
to Beaubras and Modwis, who stood by, watching him with concern.
"I'm—all right, guys. Just a… bad spell, there."
"Let thine heart be at peace," the knight assured him. "Thou hast done
aright."
"Because the ogre may not be as evil as I see it, yes. At the least, it

deserves a trial by somebody objective—which I am definitely not, right
now."
"Thou art wise to see it so," Modwis rumbled.
"Wise, and gracious," Beaubras murmured. "I must commend thee for
thy chivalry."
"Thanks—but it's really just chronic self-doubt. Right now, I can't really
believe in my own good judgement."
"Then believe in me," Beaubras returned, and Rod said, "I do. I always
have."
Then he wondered what he'd meant by that.
Chapter Ten
High Dudgeon was high indeed. It stood atop a cliff that thrust out
from the foothills in a sort of peninsula, surrounded by lowlands instead of
water, connected to the hills by a narrow causeway. The cliffsides rose a
sheer hundred feet from the fields below, and the keep soared straight up
from the edges of the cliff.
They, however, were still in the mountains, just coming out of the pass
above. Beaubras pointed at the causeway. "We may work our way down to
their bridge unseen. Then, though, we must charge directly, and quite
quickly, too, ere they can lower the portcullis, or send a party of monster
footmen out to grapple with us."
"Where shall we grapple with them, then?" Modwis rumbled. "For
certes, thou dost not wish to avoid this conflict."
"Nay, assuredly not." Beaubras grinned. "As to where, I care not, so
long as 'tis within the castle."
"Well, it won't be," Rod said with complete certainty. "That causeway is
a good three quarters of a mile if it's an inch. If they keep any kind of
watch at all, they'll have plenty of time to drop the portcullis. Then they
can sit there and laugh at us—or throw rocks, more likely."
"Naught can stand 'gainst courage and valor, Lord Gallowglass!"

"Yeah, but anything can stand against stupidity. With respect, Sir
Beaubras, we might do better to consider a more indirect approach."
Beaubras turned, frowning at the impatience in Rod's tone. "Thou has
ne'er spoke in such fashion to me aforetime, Lord Gallowglass. I must
needs think thou dost know more of this craft than thou dost tell."
"What—invading a castle? Well, I've been in on it once or twice, and
I've found that courage and valor are no excuse for not using common
sense."
"Why, how wouldst thou come within, then? That keep is
impregnable!"
"An interesting hypothesis," Rod said, nodding, "but you can always
attack any hypothesis by questioning the assumptions on which it's based,
Sir Knight."
"And on what is this castle based?"
"Why, on the cliff," Modwis rumbled.
"Exactly." Rod pointed. "And unless my eyes deceive me, Sir Beaubras, I
see a crack in that foundation."
The knight and dwarf looked and, sure enough, there was an irregular
line zigzagging down the side of the cliff.
" 'Tis but a hairline," Beaubras protested.
"Aye, but is not the whole castle only a child's toy, from this distance?"
Modwis asked. "From the ground nearby, that hairline might be a
crevasse."
"Assuredly, they who built the keep would have known of it!"
"And decided to build, anyway." Rod nodded. "So either their escalier
doesn't go all the way to the top, or it's just as strongly guarded as the
gate. This way, though, they can't see us approaching—at least, not if we
wait for nightfall."
Sir Beaubras looked dubious, but he shook his head with a sigh and
dismounted. "Thou art haply in error, Lord Gallowglass, yet if thou hast

the right of it, thou dost offer a more sure road to my lady than the more
obvious. Come, pitch our tents again! An we are going to work o' night, we
must sleep while we may."
It was times like this that Rod was glad Beaubras wore black armor and
rode a black horse. The lowland lay still and dark; even an overcast
obligingly hid the moon. But high above them, the keep of High Dudgeon
glittered with late light. Snatches of song and laughter drifted down to
them.
"Even their laughter sounds nasty," Rod muttered.
"None can rejoice with a light heart in such a place," Modwis agreed.
"They must ever be probing to discern at whom they may sneer, and to
whom they must bow— ever, for this ranking may change at any moment."
" 'Tis at Lady Aggravated whim," Sir Beaubras agreed. "Who shall be
Queen of the Hill an she is overthrown?"
"Let's try the experiment, shall we?" Rod said. "As soon as we can get
up there. Let's see, now—where is the base of that crack in the cliff?"
"Off to your right, Rod, and around the bend of the rock face," Fess
answered. "My light amplification is boosted to maximum, but the
contrast is causing difficulties."
Rod sighed. "Ah, wouldn't it be nice if we could see sentries in the
dark."
Beaubras gave him a peculiar look, but Fess answered, "I have activated
my infrared receptors, too, Rod. At this moment, there are only traces of
small animals."
"Around this way," Rod instructed the knight. "It winds down around
the corner.''
It wasn't exactly a crevasse, but it was certainly wider than a man,
spiraling down the cliff face and into the ground, its shadows darker than
the granite.
"Canst thou not give us light, wizard?" Beaubras hissed.

Rod glanced up. The castle walls blended into the rock without the
slightest trace of an overhang, but they were only thirty feet away, and the
chances of a sentry looking straight down from the battlements were
small. "It's worth the risk." Rod drew his dagger, twisted the pommel, and
pointed it at the crack.
Nothing happened.
"Why dost thou wait?"
"I'd, uh, like to be a lot closer before I show a light," Rod improvised,
wondering frantically what had gone wrong. He was sure he had
recharged the batteries.
Batteries.
He was in a magical realm, and batteries weren't magic. They didn't
work here.
However, his own magic did. He cupped a palm and frowned at it,
imagining a ball of light in his hand.
The fox fire glowed to life.
Modwis caught his breath, and Beaubras murmured in wonder, "Thou 
art a wizard."
"More than I know, apparently." Rod turned the will-o'-the-wisp toward
the crack, cupping his other hand behind it to keep the back-glow from
dazzling his eyes.
He wondered why Fess made no comment. Ordinarily, any new
phenomenon was enough to send the robot into a tizzy. But the great black
horse only paced slowly toward the gouge in the rock, and Rod thrust the
ball of light in, looking about.
The crack was about three feet wide, and perhaps ten feet deep.
"That's why the builders didn't worry," Rod murmured. "It doesn't go
deep enough to weaken the support."
" Tis not a knight's view," Beaubras pointed out.

"No." But Rod was peering downward, his attention caught by the
lower depths. "I, uh, don't see any bottom here…"
Fess looked down, too, opening his mouth. A bat suddenly fell spinning
down the shaft, its ears dazzled by the supersonic the robot had just
emitted. "Sonar indicates bottom at fifty feet, Rod."
"Don't the riverboat captains wish they'd had you," Rod muttered. To
Beaubras, he said, "It goes down for another fifty feet. Think the face is
rough enough to climb?"
The knight, with a full load of armor, looked up into the gloom,
frowning.
"There is a stairway," Modwis rumbled.
Rod looked—and, sure enough, what he had mistaken for natural
irregularities were indeed a set of rough-hewn, uneven steps. He felt his
scalp prickle. "What is this, an invitation to dinner?" He wondered who
was supposed to be the main course.
But Beaubras shook his head, smiling again. "Nay, Lord Gallowglass.
'Tis the postern gate. No knight would build a castle that had only one
door.''
Rod relaxed a little. "But if the castle-builder knew about it, it will be
strongly defended."
f'Aye, yet only with such wards as he could render harmless—and what
one man can knit, another can unravel. My misgivings are answered; it is
naught that valor and courage cannot meet." He swung down from his
horse and clanked toward the cliff. "Come, gentles! Let us walk!"
Rod stared. Then he glanced back at the knight's horse, jumped down,
and caught up with Beaubras. "Aren't you going to tether your mount?"
"Nay. He will hide himself, and come at my whistle."
Talk about training.
Beaubras smiled. "Wherefore dost thou not tether thy beast, Lord
Gallowglass?"

"Oh, he'll, uh, come at my whistle, too." Rod took time for a quick
glance back at Fess.
"I shall, Rod," the robot assured him, "and the portcullis cannot keep
me out. Call at the first indication of need."
"Thanks, Old Iron." Rod turned back to Beaubras with a grin, just as
Modwis caught up. "Shall we go?"
They stepped onto the rock face, lit by Rod's will-o'-the wisp. He tried
to ignore the flat denial his stomach was giving him—it felt as though he
were trying to walk up the side of the cliff like a fly, stairway or no. His
skin crawled at the thought of the fifty-foot drop just an inch away—it
might not look all that bad, but it was enough to kill. It would be more
than enough, as they climbed higher. "Uh, you might want to look for
handholds, gentlemen." He suited the action to the word, finding a narrow
cleft with his fingertips. "Just in case."
"In which case, Lord Gallowglass?" Modwis called up.
Black on black, leathery wings and putrid smell, flapping in Rod's face.
He swallowed a cry of fright, emitting only a choked yelp as his body
swung back, and he clawed frantically at the cliff face. Then it was gone,
and he had to haul himself in while his stomach did backflips.
"Thou hadst but to say," Modwis rumbled. "We do comprehend words."
"Well, you know how it is, actions speak louder, and all that." Rod drew
a trembling hand across his brow, removed a fine sheen of sweat, and
trudged on up, clawing for fingerholds as he went.
Then it was all over his face, clutching at his arms and chest, unseen
but grasping. The ghost light revealed a vast many-legged monster
running toward his eyes. Rod gasped and jerked back. " 'Ware!"
Metal hissed behind him, and Beaubras's sword tip probed past his
shoulder. Cobwebs gathered in faint traceries on the metal, and the
monster jolted, then swung aside. Perspective returned, and the vast
obscenity was suddenly reduced to an ordinary spider, though a very large
one, the size of Rod's palm. It scuttled away toward the top of its web, but
the sword tip slashed through it, and it tumbled into the abyss.

"It was just a spider," Rod said in faint protest.
" 'Twas as deadly as the greatest dragon," Modwis answered. " 'Twas a
Death's-Scythe spider, with venom that can fell an ox in a minute."
Rod went limp with aftereffects. Apparently there were a lot of things
about Grandfather's kingdom that he hadn't known.
He wondered if Grandfather had.
"We must press on," Beaubras murmured. "Yet 'ware these beasts,
Master Gallowglass—if there is one, there may be many."
"Inspiring thought." Rod hoped he'd hidden the quaver in his voice. He
pulled himself together and groped on up the stair, holding his fox fire
higher.
They were halfway up when the kobold hit.
It came hopping and leaping down the stair toward them, whooping
and giggling with glee, a bat-eared, snub-nosed, fang-toothed obscenity
with gorilla's arms and talons for fingers.
" 'Tis a thing of evil!" Beaubras gasped, and his sword snickered out.
Rod braced himself to keep from falling back against the knight, fervently
reminding himself that anything in here, the lord of the keep must have
known a way to guard against!
Then the kobold was on him, all teeth and claws, ripping a huge gash in
Rod's cheek, another in his side. Rod cried out as fear flared though him,
and the knight's sword thrust past him, skewering the kobold neatly—but
it only gibbered and cackled, and clawed up Rod's chest as it strove to
reach Beaubras.
Anger followed the fright, a searing anger that revealed, in sudden
clarity, the impossibility that a member of the elfin kind could be pierced
with Cold Iron and not even feel it—and could have claws that could rend
but, now that Rod thought of it, brought no pain, nor blood. Suddenly,
Rod knew what he was facing, though how it had been made, he couldn't
guess.
Beaubras bellowed, slashing, and Rod just barely managed to grab the

knight's arm, throwing his own weight back against the cliff, as Beaubras
thrust too hard and jolted toward the drop. His weight hauled at Rod,
then swung back, while Rod glared at the kobold, willing it away, willing it
to appear as it really was…
And a huge moth battered Modwis with its wings, upon which were
two great ovals suggesting evil-looking eyes. But only the moth was there;
the kobold was gone.
With an oath, the dwarf swatted the insect away. It bumbled on down
the rock face, bouncing off the cliff, then turned, arrowing back toward
the will-o'-the-wisp that floated where Rod had left it.
"I thank thee, Lord Gallowglass," the dwarf gasped, "though how thou
didst banish that fell sprite, I know not."
"Easy—it was never really there." Rod took a deep breath to stop his
voice from trembling. "Whoever built this castle laid a very thorough
illusion-spell on this stair. He knew the counterspell, of course, but no
intruder would. Almost did its job, too." '
"It would have," said Beaubras, "hadst thou not been with us."
"And I would be decorating the floor of this shaft now if you hadn't
speared that spider for me. Hey, maybe the three of us will make it, after
all. Want to take the lead, Modwis? The next monster should be yours."
"By thy leave, I'll decline the honor."
"Yeah, it would be a little tough to squeeze past us on this stair. Next
monster ought to be in about another twenty feet, gents, if they keep on
coming regularly. All ready?"
"Lead on," Beaubras grunted.
Rod toiled upward, trying to look jaunty.
But the attack didn't come, and didn't come, and Rod found himself
going more and more slowly, sweat running down his sides, waiting and
waiting.
Then, suddenly, the sides of the shaft were gone. Hardly able to believe

it, Rod stepped out into a large open space. He stepped aside—carefully,
but there were no more stairs—to let Beaubras out. The knight stepped up,
muttering, and Modwis followed. Rod thought of more light, and the fox
fire brightened. He held it up high, turning slowly. The crack of night sky
was gone; they were in some kind of cave.
"We made it," Rod whispered, not quite believing it. "We're inside the
keep—and nothing else attacked us."
"Not fully inside yet." Modwis pointed.
Light winked off faceted surfaces. Rod stepped closer, frowning, and
saw a large oaken door set in the rock wall, fastened with a large, gleaming
steel lock.
" 'Tis enchanted 'gainst rust," Beaubras murmured in wonder.
"Makes sense, if they only want to use the key every dozen years or so."
Rod frowned though, and stepped closer to investigate—steel made
stainless by any means struck a warning note within him.
But it wasn't the lock he needed to guard against, for, as he bent down
to investigate, something flickered through the light, pain seared his calf,
and Modwis shouted, kicking and stabbing at something beside Rod,
before the light dimmed, and Rod felt himself tumbling into the shaft,
down and down, into darkness.
Chapter Eleven
Rod seemed to have an affinity for dungeons; if there was one around,
sooner or later, he'd wind up in it. It was a convenient place for baring the
soul, not necessarily his.
In this case, he found out where he was after he got the aftertaste out of
his mouth. The medicine hit him like a jolt of electricity, wrinkling his
tongue with the intensity of its sourness and blowing off the back of his
head. He levered himself up far enough to free a hand to feel his scalp,
reassuring himself it was still there, and perforce opened his eyes.
He saw Beaubras, unhelmed and anxious, frowning down at him. His
face lightened with relief when he saw Rod's eyes. "So, then. Thou'it with
us once again."

"So it would seem." Rod wiped his mouth with the back of his hand.
"Pffah! What was that stuff?"
"A restorative potion. The wizard who gave it assured that it would
raise me from any wound, no matter how grievous, provided only that I
could still swallow."
"But after that, would you really want to? Though I
have to admit, it works like a charm." He frowned. "Wait a minute—it
is a charm."
"It hath restored thee most remarkably," Modwis rumbled.
"All right for you—you didn't have to take it. Wouldn't recommend it,
would you, Beaubras?"
"I know not, friend," the knight said with a gentle smile. "I ha' ne'er
tasted it."
"What!" Rod stared, appalled. "Your only dose of a magic restorative,
and you gave it to me? What's going to happen when you're really badly
hurt?"
"I will mend," the knight assured him. "I will ever have mine amulet."
"Oh, yes—the Astounding Amulet of Ambrosius." Beaubras wore a
magic pendant that could turn into whatever charm he needed, to get him
out of any bind that Grandfather had put him in. It had been Rory's
standard deus ex machina, which Rod had always regarded with amused
tolerance, once he had been taught about such things. All of a sudden, it
didn't seem so lame an excuse, after all.
Still, Rod felt like a robber. He opened his mouth to protest again, but
Modwis laid a hand on his arm. "Let it rest, Lord Gallowglass."
Rod locked gazes with him, and realized just how ungracious he was
being. "I thank you deeply, Sir Knight," he said. "I stand in your debt."
"Then help me to rescue my lady," Beaubras enjoined him.
Rod looked up, managing a crooked smile. Then he frowned around at
the gloom, relieved only by the yellow glow coming in through the grille in

the door. "We don't seem to have come up in the world."
"Not so," Beaubras assured him. "We have come into the keep. Our
friend Modwis hath something of a gift with
Cold Iron and its intricacies, and hath managed most wondrously with
the lock."
" 'Twas a gross old thing." There was too little light to tell, but Rod
would have been willing to bet Modwis was flushed with pleasure at the
compliment. " 'Twas quick enough work to turn it. In truth, the rust did
withhold me longer than the mechanism."
Rod nodded slowly. "Very good, Master Modwis. Then the two of you
hauled me in here, I take it?"
"The knight slew the serpent first," the dwarf rumbled.
Rod had a brief vision of a bisected carcass, and wondered whether it
had been Beaubras's sword or his iron boot. "So. At least we're inside."
"Aye," said Modwis, "and with none the wiser, so far as we know."
"We have but to find the stair, and climb up to the hall," Beaubras
assured him.
"Oh, is that all?" Rod levered himself to his feet cautiously, but was
amazed to find not the slightest trace of headache or dizziness. "Say, that
potion worked like magic!"
"What else?" Modwis murmured.
"Poor choice of phrase," Rod admitted.
"Here is a better," Beaubras offered. " 'Onward and upward!' "
"I think I've heard that somewhere before—but never mind. Which way
is up?"
"Well asked," Beaubras admitted. "There is naught but a barren
hallway which doth stretch out before us."
"You can see that much?" Rod peered into the darkness. "You've got

better eyes than I have!"
"Nay—I went forth to scout, whiles the knight did tend thee," Modwis
explained. " 'Tis naught but a narrow hall of stone blocks, with another
door at its end."
"Another door?"
"Aye. Who can say where it doth lead?"
"We can, as soon as we've gone through it. Think you can handle the
lock on this one, too?"
Modwis grinned. "Can an otter catch fish?"
"So I hear, though whenever they see me coming, they just play
around."
"Then let us disport ourselves," Beaubras urged.
Modwis turned and strode to the door. He laid his palm over the
keyhole, frowned in concentration, then muttered something under his
breath and rotated his hand a quarter of an inch.
The lock groaned like a ghost in mourning, then made a crack like a
breaking stick. Modwis grinned and pulled the door open. He stepped
aside and bowed them in. "Gentles, will you enter?"
"Don't mind if I do." Rod hurried to jump through the door ahead of
Beaubras, expecting a booby trap.
The steel-bound log slammed down directly behind him.
Beaubras stopped, staring in surprise.
"Nay," Modwis said, "they warded well."
"Nice to be right about something now and then." Rod stooped to haul
up the log, then frowned. "No, wait a minute. It's easier to climb over it,
isn't it?"
"It is, in truth." Beaubras swung a leg over the log. "What is this gin,
Lord Gallowglass?"

"We call it a 'deadfall,' where I come from."
"Aptly named," Beaubras judged. "Hadst thou not brought it down, I
would have fallen dead indeed, beneath its weight."
Rod had his doubts about that. There were things that could kill
Beaubras, but a foot-thick log wasn't one of them.
On the other hand, Rod wasn't Beaubras, was he? Nice to know that the
knight's apprehensions, at least, were normal.
Modwis vaulted over the log and trudged ahead. "Thy light, milord?"
"Huh? Oh!" Rod looked back at the fox fire and whistled. It rose into
the air and bobbed over to him.
Modwis stared at it for a moment. Then he said, "Yes," and cleared his
throat. "Shall we climb?"
"By all means."
The dwarf started up the stairs, calling back over his shoulder, " 'Ware,
gentlemen. An there be one trap, there may indeed be others."
But there were no more traps. Small wonder; the stairs were almost
enough to finish Rod off by themselves. By the time he came to the top, he
was panting and dragging feet that felt like lead—but Beaubras plodded
steadily upward, not even noticing the extra hundred pounds in steel plate
he was carrying. "Talk about fantasy," Rod muttered.
"What sayest thou, Lord Gallowglass?"
"Nothing worth hearing." Rod leaned against the stairhead and
wheezed. "How… about this door… Modwis?"
"We shall see." The dwarf stepped up and set his palm over the keyhole.
He frowned, then shook his head. " 'Tis strange."
"What?" Rod was instantly on his guard. "Is it rigged?"
"There is naught linked to it, no. Yet there is no warding magic, either.
I should have thought there would have been."

"Overconfidence?" Rod said, but he felt uneasy.
"There was magic enough in the cleft below," Beaubras pointed out. "I
misdoubt me an the builder looked for any to come so far as we have,
gentles."
"Good point," Rod admitted. "Who knows? Maybe this door is here to
keep people /«."
"There is that," Modwis admitted. Then the lock groaned, and the door
swung open.
Candlelight assaulted their eyes, seeming as bright as noon on a chalk
cliff after the glow of the will-o'-the-wisp. Music and laughter swirled
about them, punctuated by voices in sneering badinage. Rod squinted
against the light and made out a multitude of forms, gaily dressed in rich
apparel, milling about a huge open space. Distant walls hung with glorious
tapestries, lit by sconces and chandeliers. "We did it," he said, half to
himself. "We actually made it. Gentlemen, we're in the Great Hall!"
Then the draft blew his way, and he nearly keeled over from the
thickness of the incense. It smelled as though the Buddhists and the
Catholics were having a contest to see which of them was in better aroma
with God. In his weakened condition, it hit him like a padded hammer.
His eyes glazed and his knees buckled.
The steel chest of Beaubras held him up, and the knight murmured,
"Courage, Lord Gallowglass. We must face whatever horrors the Lady
Aggravate can conjure."
"I'll—adjust." Rod gasped. "I just hadn't expected the keep to be so
odorous."
"Yet surely thou thyself did say that they who dwell in High Dudgeon
are always incensed!"
"Yes, but I hadn't quite registered the notion emotionally. I'll manage."
Rod pulled himself together and stood forth.
Actually, he stood second—Modwis had managed to push past him, so
he was first in line when the guards attacked.

They seemed to materialize from each side of the portal, shouting and
stabbing with pikes and halberds. Modwis's iron club whirled out,
blocking desperately, and Beaubras shouldered past Rod, drawing his
sword. Fear stabbed harder than the halberds, with anger right behind it;
the adrenaline tightened Rod's sinews and pulled him back into fighting
trim. He drew his own sword and plunged into the melee, hacking and
slashing, but the only heads he managed to chop off were spear points.
Beaubras's sword was a blur, and guardsmen fell back from his blade;
their broken weapons littered the floor, and the circle around the
companions widened as the guards retreated, step by step. Rod bellowed
with joy and followed the knight, hewing mightily, with the fleeting hope
that all he was really doing was stacking up kindling for the rest of the
winter.
Then, suddenly, a low moan went through the throng, and the guards
right in front of them drew away. The guards to either side stepped back a
pace, holding their weapons at guard, and Beaubras hesitated, glancing
up at the parting circle, then looking again as an avenue opened in front of
them. He straightened, head high and sword ready, but he left off
chopping. Modwis stepped back, too, but with a murderous glare and a
ready mace. Rod was feeling a little more ready and lot more murderous,
but he held off, anyway.
Fess's voice sounded in his ear. "Rod, why has the fighting stilled?"
"Because," Rod said slowly, "the Grande Dame approacheth."
Down the aisle she came, a walking mound of brocades and velvets, a
maze of houppelandes and bustles and panniers. Her lantern-jawed
horseface was crowned with a lofty headdress surrounded by a chaplet
enclosing a coronet, and the amount of veiling that floated about her
would have appalled even Salome.
"Nothing succeeds like excess," Rod murmured.
The lady stalked to a halt in front of them, jammed her fists on her
hips, and demanded, "Who art thou, who dost come so unmannerly into
my castle?"
Her effluvium hit like a ton of atomizers, and Rod understood why she
burned all that incense. Having nearly fainted once, he was better able to
withstand the onslaught, but Beaubras had had no such hardening. The

knight staggered back, and Rod had to catch him, throwing all his weight
against the knight to shove him upright. Even then, he tilted slowly
backward until Modwis jammed a shoulder in under the knight's hip, and
the two of them together managed to restabilize him. Unfortunately,
Beaubras was still at an angle, and Rod was not inclined to hold up two
hundred pounds of knight and a hundred pounds of armor all morning.
"The amulet," he hissed. "Pull out the amulet!"
Weakly, Beaubras fumbled at his gorget, pulling the bauble out of his
armor. "O magic charm," he gasped, "ward me from this olfactory
ambuscade!"
The amulet's outlines softened. It seemed to flow, elongating, then
became hard and clear again—as a necklace of bulbous, tissue-wrapped
lumps. A reek emanated from it, surrounding Beaubras's head like an
invisible shield, and spreading out to enclose his whole entourage, all two
of them. The knight's nose wrinkled with disdain, but he managed to
clamber back upright, protected from the lady's aroma by a necklace of
garlic.
"I am the knight Beaubras, and these are my companions, the dwarf
Modwis, and the Lord Gallowglass. Art thou the Lady Aggravate?"
"I am." She tilted her head back and somehow managed to look down
her nose at a man a good foot and a half taller than herself. "Wherefore
hast thou come?"
"Why," said Beaubras, "to free my dear Lady Haughteur from the toils
of this keep!"
"Ha!" the lady cried, and managed to follow the syllable with something
approximating a laugh. "Toils? All is lighthearted gaiety, in High
Dudgeon! And as for thy leman, she hath not been borne here, nor is held
by aught but her own desire!"
"Why," said Beaubras, "then bid her come nigh me."
"I move at no man's bidding, sirrah!"
Beaubras winced at the insult of the "sirrah."
"An she doth wish converse with thee," the dame went on, "she will

come of her own accord."
"I misdoubt me of that," Beaubras said, his lips thin, "and I will judge it
for myself. In what chamber dwells my lady?"
"Thou shalt not learn of her dwelling, nor shalt thou seek it out!" the
dame stated, affronted. "Thou shalt betake thee out as thou didst come
in!"
"Nay," said Beaubras, "that shall I not. An thou dost give so little
courtesy, thou hast small cause to look for it in others." So saying, he
stepped forward, shouldered past the dame, and bulled his way through
the guardsmen.
Rod and Modwis leaped to catch up.
Lady Aggravate gave a howl of indignation, and her guardsmen closed
ranks with a shout—or tried to. Beaubras slammed into them like a tank
with a sword in place of its cannon, all but sending up a bow wave as he
plowed through their ranks.
"Where to, O valiant and noble one?" Rod puffed, blocking a halberd
and cutting off its head with the riposte.
"To the tower," Beaubras called back. "My Lady Haughteur would seek
the highest chamber.''
"So would everyone else here." But Rod couldn't say it loudly enough to
be heard; he was too busy blocking chops and thrusts, and occasionally
finding time to wonder why none of the guards was receiving so much as a
scratch. A spear point jabbed at him; he struck it up, caught the guard by
the front of his doublet, and tossed him back overhead (he was amazingly
light). The guard sailed by with his mouth forming a perfect "O," and Rod
stabbed up as he went by, experimentally—but the guardsman rose up just
enough to miss the point of Rod's sword. He brought it down in time to
chop off a halberd head and, on the riposte, to thrust full into the
halberdier's midriff—but the man started to turn back, and the sword tip
slid past his tunic without the slightest tear. Rod recovered and called out,
"How come I can't stab any of these guys?" Not that he really wanted to,
but it was frustrating.
" Tis because they dwell in High Dudgeon, and are therefore not of a

piece with the world," Modwis huffed.
There was no time to figure out what he meant, because Beaubras
smashed through a door at that point (quicker than Modwis's technique,
but not advisable for sneak attacks) and charged for the stair. Strangely,
they seemed to be going down, not up. Rod and Modwis followed, backing
down step by step, fending off thrusts and chops. At least the guardsmen
couldn't quite hit Rod and Modwis, either. One missed his footing and fell,
shooting upward, with an echoing wail. There was a crash from the
landing above, echoed by a low and growing moan from the guardsmen.
They lowered their weapons and stopped their advance.
"Can we trust them?"
"Aye," Modwis said with grim certainty. "They have failed in their
purpose. They have no need to attack now."
"Well, we're still taking a chance—so, when I say 'Run,' we'll both barrel
up the stairs. Okay?"
"As thou sayest," the dwarf grunted. "Save that our 'up' hath become
'down.' "
"Down we go, then. Okay—run!"
They turned tail and shot down the stairs like rockets, but the
guardsmen made no move to follow.
Rod managed to catch the doorjamb and swing into the room not too
many steps behind Modwis, and saw a spectacle of breathtaking beauty
and sadness. Beaubras knelt, head bowed, before a lady who stood by the
win-dow, clad in a gown of shimmering iridescence—with a collar that
rose up in points, along her cheeks to her eyes.
"It's a gown of her own tears," Rod gasped.
"And a sorrow her own making," Modwis explained.
"My lady," Beaubras murmured, "wherefore dost thou weep?"
"Oh, I weep with humiliation, Sir Beaubras! For all here do delight in
belittling me!"

"The churls! How dare they!"
"They cry that they are affronted by my effrontery in coming hither,"
the lady explained, "and do therefore treat me with contempt and
condescension. This chamber is of a piece with it—they pretend to exalt
me, yet truly place me beneath them. Oh, how grievous is mine error! And
how miserable my penance!"
"They who seek to dwell in High Dudgeon must needs beware of finding
their places," intoned a gravelly voice, and they turned to see Lady
Aggravate in the chamber door.
"Thou shalt rue the day thou didst thus to my Lady Haughteur!"
Beaubras cried, springing to his feet.
Lady Aggravate laughed, a harsh and unpleasant bark, but Beaubras's
lady moaned, "Oh, call me 'Lady Haughteur' no longer, but rather 'Lady
Bountiful'—for surely never again will I think myself above my fellow
mortals, nor deny aught that Charity may require!"
Beaubras turned, a delighted smile on his face, but Lady Aggravate
screeched as though she'd been mortally wounded. "How durst thou speak
so within my keep! Out, out and away! Be gone from High Dudgeon!"
"Thou shalt not so address my lady!" Beaubras bellowed, turning on
Lady Aggravate; but she only grinned wickedly, malice and delight
competing in her gaze. The knight flushed and stepped toward her, balling
one iron fist, but Modwis caught it, crying, "Nay, good knight!
Dost not see? She hath near to caught thee, too, in her net of wiles! For
surely, thou dost approach her in High Dudgeon!"
Sir Beaubras blanched, but Rod heard a different voice in his ears.
"Rod! I have detected a disturbance! Come down from that cliff
immediately, for your own safety's sake!"
"What kind of a disturbance?" Rod muttered, though his nerves
screamed panic. "A mob? An upheaval in public opinion?"
"No, on the Richter scale! Come out, quickly!"
"Out!" Rod shouted. He grabbed Lady Bountiful's arm in one hand and

Sir Beaubras's in the other. "Up the stairs and out the door, wherever we
can find it—and now!"
"Wouldst thou have me run from conflict?" Sir Beaubras protested.
"No. You can walk. Besides, there won't be any conflict if you go fast
enough."
He had the right idea, for once—Lady Aggravate saw them coming and
dodged aside with an outraged squawk, and the guardsmen were no
longer in any mood to argue. They broke before the knight's charge, and
the courtiers scattered before them.
"Which way out?" Rod panted.
"Through the Great Hall, then the antechamber!" Lady Bountiful
answered. "Yet wherefore must we flee in such haste?"
"You want to stick around?"
Modwis was cranking up the portcullis by the time they got to it.
Beaubras lent his weight, and Rod blocked off the porter. "Six feet is
enough!"
Modwis locked the winch, and they stormed out. The porter leaped
back to his job, and the portcullis clashed down behind them. Rod didn't
slow, though—he led the way across the causeway at a pace that he hoped
wouldn't tire a knight in full armor. But when he glanced back over his
shoulder, he saw he was worrying about nothing— Beaubras was right
behind him, Lady Bountiful in his arms. Finally, they reached the far side
and the foothills, but Rod called, "Not yet! Keep going! A hundred yards
from the causeway, at least!"
"But wherefore do we flee?" Beaubras panted.
"Just a hunch." Rod finally slewed to a halt and dropped down on the
grass. "We should be safe here…"
You should, with a hundred feet to spare, Fess assured him.
"Yet whence cometh this premonition of thine?" Lady Bountiful sank
down to sit beside him.

"You wouldn't want to know," Rod muttered.
"I assure thee, I would." Beaubras stood over him, frowning. "To leave
without chastising that vile dame was galling, and to accept her slights
thus was woefully less than honorable. Wherefore have I fled, Lord
Gallowglass?"
"Because somehow, all of a sudden, I knew this castle didn't have long
to stand. Look at the cleft in the cliff!"
They turned back to look, just as the earth began to tremble, and the
cleft beneath the castle began to vibrate along its edges. The vibration
grew greater and greater, till the whole cleft was in turmoil, tossing and
heaving the castle at its top like a load of potatoes on a lumpy road. The
rumbling reached them, then the wholesale roar as the cliff abruptly split
asunder, and the whole keep of High Dudgeon came thundering down into
a heap of rubble.
They stood staring, appalled, as the earth stilled beneath them and the
thundering died away.
Then Beaubras said softly, "Gentlemen, uncover," and removed his
helmet.
Modwis snatched off his hat, a tear running down his cheek.
But Lady Bountiful jumped to her feet and ran toward the winding
downward path.
"Whoa, there!" Rod leaped, and caught her arm. "No, milady! The rocks
haven't stopped falling! You could still be crushed!"
"Yet we must search to aid any who may still be living!"
"They couldn't be," Rod assured her. "That was a hundred feet, straight
down. No one could have survived it, even without the castle falling on top
of them."
"What a horrible death!"
"Yes. It would have been, if any of it had been real."
"How sayest thou, sir! How can they have been otherwise?"

"He doth speak so because all have no substance, who build themselves
up through false pride," Modwis answered. "Is't not so, Lord Gallowglass?"
"Or false modesty, either," Rod agreed. "Either way, what little there
was of them that might have been genuine is lost. Come away, Sir Knight
and Fair Lady—this is no place for such virtuous folk as yourselves."
And slowly, they turned their eyes from the sight of the ruins of High
Dudgeon, and came down to a less exalted, but also less spurious, world.
Chapter Twelve
Beaubras's horse was as good as his master's word, and came at his
whistle. Fess, of course, had already arrived, holding the reins of Modwis's
donkey in his teeth. So, horsed again, and with Lady Bountiful riding
pillion, they set off into the sunrise.
Unfortunately, the sun never quite made it that morning, and the
rooster lived up to his name. The reason hit them in midafternoon, hit
them by the gallon—or a gallon a minute, more likely. The wind lashed
them with rain and howled in delight at their discomfiture, without the
slightest impediment—they were on an open moor, and the wind was
bound and determined to drive them out of its domain.
Modwis gasped, "Wizard! Canst thou not find shelter?"
"Yeah—right over there!" Rod pointed toward a dim glow in the murk.
"Sir Beaubras! Lady Bountiful! Head for the light!"
They looked up, saw him veering away, and saw the glow beyond him,
too. They turned to follow.
It seemed a lot farther than it was, but finally they found themselves
pounding on the door of a ramshackle cottage. Rod waited, then pounded
again and, finally, the door creaked open a crack, revealing a suspicious
yellowed eyeball surmounted by off-white fuzz.
"We're travelers, caught in the storm!" Rod called. "Can you let us in till
it's over?"
The eye seemed to snarl something like, "Into the sea with 'ee," and the
crack narrowed; but Rod had shoved the toe of his boot in, and kept

enough room to call out, "Our party includes a knight and his lady!"
The pressure on his toe eased, and the yellowed eye widened. So did the
crack, revealing a mate to the yellowed eye, a whetstone of a nose, and all
around both of them, a wealth of wild, disordered hair that would have
been white if it had been washed within the last month. It was hard to tell
where the beard left off and the mane began, and the mouth was hidden in
a curve between moustache and beard.
The eye locked onto Beaubras and Bountiful, and the door opened all
the way, revealing an emaciated, wrinkled form inside a long tunic, almost
long enough to be called a robe, with two lumps of rags showing under it.
"Aye, then. Come in, come in from the damp."
Rod streamed in thankfully, wondering what the old man considered
"wet," and very much misliking the gleam in the eye as Lady Bountiful
passed in front of it.
"Blessing on thee, goodman," Beaubras said, taking off his helmet.
"I've no robes to offer ye, but there be fire." The old man turned away to
throw some more peat on the single flame. The fire licked up, and the
knight and lady came to it. Rod stepped up beside them. "Are there but
the three of ye, then?"
"We have another comrade, who said he would take our beasts around
to thy shed. Wilt thou permit it?"
"Aye," said the hermit, looking distinctly unhappy about it. "Yet there
be grain within; let them not eat of it too greatly."
"We shall pay for whatsoever they eat, and that with gold," Beaubras
assured him, and the hermit's eye lit with a gleam that was almost a blaze.
Rod resolved to keep his own eye on their host.
The door creaked, and Modwis stamped in, streaming buckets. He saw
his friends and moved over toward the hearth, holding out his hands to
the flames with a sigh. "Bless thee, goodman, for thine hospitality!"
Rod could have sworn he saw the hermit wince, possibly due to the
reminder that he was a host, which in turn reminded him that he was
supposed to offer food to his guests. "I've little enough, gentles, yet thou

art welcome to what I have." His tone belied the statement. "There is beer
and barley, and a sack of turnips. An egg, too, if the fowl is right-minded."
Rod suppressed a shudder, and Beaubras said delicately, "We have
provision, goodman. Wilt thou share our provender?''
"Wine." Modwis held up a pair of saddlebags. "Salt beef and biscuit."
The hermit's mouth watered. "Aye, certes that will be welcome! And
now that I think on't, I may have a tuber or two laid by. Shall we fill the
kettle, then?"
The stew brewed stronger as the daylight faded, and they ate from
wooden bowls (from the saddlebags) by firelight. It made the squalid hut
seem almost cozy, chiefly by hiding the worst of the grime and filth.
"Meat and drink do ever cheer the heart." Beaubras sighed, setting
down his bowl.
"Yes." Rod smiled. "A full stomach and a warm fire always do make the
future seem more rosy."
Modwis sighed and leaned back. "Who can look to tomorrow, when the
day is long and the body weary?"
"Do ye not ken yer fortunes, then?" asked the old hermit, a gleam in his
eye again.
His eye spent a lot of time gleaming, Rod thought—too much time. He
sat forward, deciding to give the man all the rope he wanted. "No, I don't,
matter of fact. Seeing the future is one gift I lack." Strictly true, on the
face of it, though he could have made arrangements…
" 'Tis one I do not lack," the old man said, sitting rock-still.
The hovel was quiet for a moment.
Then Lady Bountiful smiled, eyes bright. "Hast thou truly the Sight?"
"In very fact," the hermit averred. "Give me thine hand, and I shall tell
thy fortune."
"Tell, then!" Lady Bountiful held out her hand with a merry smile.

The hermit took it, caressed the back long and lovingly as he turned her
palm up, then stroked it twice, a rapt smile coming over his face.
Rod frowned and glanced at Beaubras, but the knight was leaning back
with a genial smile, apparently seeing nothing amiss. Rod turned again to
Lady Bountiful, who was managing not to shudder at the hermit's touch.
"Thou shalt have wealth and happiness," the old man claimed. "See, thy
Line of Life is long, and crosses with the Line of Love near to its beginning.
Thou shalt wed a man most excellent, and that quite soon."
Beaubras frowned, but Lady Bountiful seemed to find nothing amiss.
She turned back to give Beaubras a roguish glance. "Shall we wed so soon,
then, my lord?"
"As soon as thou shalt say," the knight returned gallantly.
"And thou." Regretfully, the old man let go of the lady's hand and
reached out for the knight's. Beaubras frowned, but held out his palm. The
hermit took it, looked, then stared. "How can this be? Thy Line of Life is
broke in five places!"
"What meaning hath that?"
"Why, it doth signify that thou shalt die, yet shall live again, and not
once, but five times whole!"
" Tis but a seeming." The knight smiled, amused. "I never truly die."
The old man gave him a very fearful look, but seemed to be reassured
by the knight's open, smiling face. "As thou wilt have it, my lord." He
turned to Modwis, dropping Beaubras's hand like a hot rock. "And thou?"
"By your leave, I'd liefer not."
"Wherefore?" The hermit demanded.
"A man lives ill, if he doth know his end."
"I'll second that," Rod said quickly. "But you might tell us of the future
of this land."
"Aye!" Beaubras agreed, "what shall pass for our court of Granclarte,

goodman? And for the Four Kingdoms that have their union here?"
The hermit stared at him. Then, slowly, he knelt, and splayed his palms
against the bare earthen floor. Gazing off into space, he began to mutter.
The others fell so quiet that the flames seemed louder than his words.
Finally, they became comprehensible.
"… will rise 'gainst Alban. She shall not go, Yet shall find woe, And
lovers' plight Shall bring a blight Upon the land And palace grand! The
Courts of Light Shall break in fright And portions flee Until a sea Of
darkness shall The lands enthrall!"
He thundered the last couplet, then knelt rigid a minute longer, eyes
glazed. Finally, he began to loosen, till he sat in the dirt, holding his head
in his hands.
"Magnificent!" Beaubras said. "Thou dost conjure a vision that doth
make my brain to reel!"
"Do I so?" The hermit looked up. "I cannot tell."
"Why, how is this?" The knight questioned.
"When the Power doth seize me, good sir, it doth speak through my
mouth—yet I have no remembrance of what I've said."
" 'Tis not so strange," Modwis rumbled. "I've heard of such aforetimes."
The knight frowned. "Then thou canst not tell us its meaning."
The hermit shook his head. "Was it so senseless, then?"
"Thy words were verse," Lady Bountiful explained, "and grand were
they, and awe-bringing. Yet we know not that of which they spoke."
Rod did, of course—he knew the whole story of Granclarte, including its
ending. But it wouldn't have been polite to mention it to the people
involved.
" 'Twas a tale of doom, though," Beaubras said quietly. "That much of
the sense of it, I caught—yet the doom of whom, or how it came, I could
not tell."

The hermit nodded, mouth twisting. " 'Tis ever thus." He shrugged. "I
cannot say, then, what shall come. Yet I may tell thee this." He looked up,
glaring with sudden energy. "An there be doom for Granclarte, it shall
come from the foul sorcerer who doth dwell in the castle to the east!"
"We know of him," Modwis said quietly. "He is evil, aye!"
"Evil! He is the source of every evil that may come to Granclarte! Even
his apprentice hath left him, and his apprentice is evil enough, I wot! His
castle is haunted, and the evil spirits therein have seeped their vile
influence into his soul!"
"Thou knowest much of him, then?" the knight asked.
"More than I wish," the hermit said darkly. "If there is a doom on
Granclarte, I can tell thee he shall bring it—yet how or when, I cannot
say."
" Tis better thus," Modwis said, by way of comfort.
"Mayhap." But the hermit didn't sound convinced.
He climbed to his feet, slowly and painfully, and sighed. "Ah, me! But
the evening's fled, and wise folk should be in their beds. I have some
comfort that I've set by, to aid me in my rest.'' He took an earthenware
bottle and a horn from a dark corner. "Wilt thou drink?"
No one answered immediately, but he didn't seem to notice. He pulled
the cork and poured. A rich amber fluid streamed into the cup, catching
the firelight with ruby glints. He held it out to Beaubras. " 'Tis most
excellent."
The knight took it—reluctantly, Rod thought, but courtesy must be
paid. He sipped, then looked up, surprised. " 'Tis mead, and I misdoubt
me an I've ever had a better drop!"
"A taste." Lady Bountiful took the cup and drank a substantial draft,
then passed the horn to Modwis. The dwarf drank, too, then nodded and
passed it on to Rod, who wet his lips with it only enough to assure himself
that it was indeed mead, then passed it back to the hermit. "Quite good."
"I thank thee." His eyes were glittering again. He drained the horn as

he turned away—but Rod, watching closely, was quite certain he'd poured
the mead out onto the floor under cover of putting both horn and bottle
back in their nook.
He turned back with a look of regret. "I've but the one chamber,
gentles; we must all sleep herein. Yet the lady and knight shall have the
hearth."
"Nay, we could not deprive thee," the knight objected. "Thy chamber's
warm enough!"
The hermit protested, and the upshot was Lady Bountiful sleeping next
to the fire on a pallet of old straw, wrapped in Beaubras's cloak. Modwis
helped Sir Beaubras remove his armor, and the knight scrupulously piled
it between himself and the lady, then lay down in his gambe-son. Modwis
bunked down above their heads, and the hermit hunkered down on his
pallet in the corner. Rod lay beside Beaubras on his own pile of straw,
wondering how he was going to get the fleas out of his cape and listening
to the rain on the roof. "Fess?" he muttered.
Yes, Rod?
"If I sound as though I'm sleeping, wake me up with a buzz, will you?"
You need your rest, Rod.
"I need my breath more. I don't trust this old geezer, Fess. If you could
see the look in his eyes, you wouldn't, either. Besides, he didn't drink the
mead he fed us."
Very well, Rod. The robot put the resigned tone into it. / will assure
your wakefulness.
"I appreciate that." Rod lapsed into silence and lay still, very still,
listening for the slightest movement from the hermit's couch.
It came after about an hour—an hour of fighting heavy eyelids; it was
hard to stay awake when he was taking even, slow breaths, to simulate the
sound of sleep—but Rod managed it. At last, his vigilance was rewarded by
some heavy rustling in the corner. The old hermit appeared again,
crawling out with a breathless giggle, a long rusty blade in his paw.

Rod rolled over with a mutter, still feigning sleep.
The hermit froze.
Rod snored.
The hermit smiled and crept forward again, lifting the knife.
But the fake roll-over had served for Rod to gather himself. He braced
against the earth, ready to spring.
The hermit crouched beside Beaubras and raised the dagger high.
Rod sprang.
The dagger flashed down, burying itself in Beaubras's chest with a
sickeningly soft, wet sound.
A split second later, Rod's shoulder slammed into the old murderer
even as Beaubras cried out and Lady Bountiful sat bolt upright. She took
one look and screamed, then screamed again and again.
Modwis was beside her in an instant.
Rod was battling for his life. The old hermit lashed out with the dagger,
howling in terror, and Rod barely managed to lean aside from the thrust,
then rolled back in, catching the old man's shoulder and pushing hard. He
slammed over onto his front with a wail.
Lady Bountiful managed to slacken her scream to low moans, with
Modwis's help.
Rod pulled his own dagger and yanked the hermit over onto his back
again, blade ready for the death blow.
It wasn't necessary. The old man's own knife stuck out of his belly just
below the sternum. His lips moved, almost soundlessly, with his dying
words: "Brume… mine old pupil… he shall avenge…" Then he shuddered,
his throat rattled, and his eyes glazed as his whole body went limp.
The thrill of victory coursed through Rod's veins, even as something
inside him sickened at the sight.

Brume, this geezer's pupil? This was the sorcerer Saltique?
Beaubras groaned.
Rod whipped back to him. "Your murderer is dead, Sir Knight."
"It… matters not…"
"But I was too slow! I didn't think the old lecher could move that fast!"
"The lady… is well…"
Lady Bountiful moaned.
"Oh, yes. That was why he killed you, of course, and would have killed
Modwis and me—but not her. Not until later." Rod's face contorted. "I
should have struck sooner!"
"It… matters not… I shall… rise…"
And, with the promise on his lips, the knight faded from sight.
Rod stared, unbelieving.
Then he turned to console the lady—just in time to see the last faint
wisp of her form, before it, too, vanished.
"Where he will go," Modwis whispered, "she will go"
"And you?" Rod reached out to touch the man, but didn't quite dare.
"Will you fade away, too?"
"Nay, Lord Gallowglass. I may diminish, but I shall not cease."
But even with the words, he seemed to shrink, dwindling to a foot-high
mannikin, and the whole hut seemed to grow more barren filled with dust
and cobwebs, with gaps between the boards and holes in the roof. The rain
had stopped, but coals still glowed on the hearth, giving off enough light
for Rod to make out a form dressed in peasant garb with the handle of a
knife sticking out of its belly—but the beard was neat and well trimmed,
the hair was dark, and the form was stocky.
"Fess?" Rod whispered. "Who is this I've killed? Where's the old

hermit?"
The door creaked open, and the robot filled the doorway. It looked, and
nodded. "This man is indeed the one who admitted you, Rod. The old
hermit was of your making, not his own. This hut shows signs of
abandonment; I conjecture that the quondam peasant came only a few
hours in advance of you."
"Quondam? He's not a real peasant? But… the dagger's real…"
"Yes, Rod, and he really did try to murder you in your sleep. If he died
on his own knife, it is his doing more than yours."
The anger returned then, but nausea followed it. Rod lurched to his feet
and stumbled out into the night, catching the saddle to hold himself up.
Pain hammered through his head from one temple to the other, and he
found that his hands were trembling. "Fess… I'm sick… very sick…"
"Yes, Rod. It seems to follow each spell of delusion."
"They're… getting worse."
"They are. You must lie down and rest."
"Not… here…"
"Then climb on, and I shall carry you to shelter." The robot knelt. Rod
scrabbled into the saddle, lay down on the horse's neck, and held on for
dear life. Carefully, Fess climbed to his feet and turned away into the
darkness and mist.
Chapter Thirteen
According to an authority (i.e., a survivor) on Nile River black water
disease, "The first day, you only think you're going to die. The second day,
you wish you were."
Rod's malaise was something along that line, though it fortunately
didn't last anywhere nearly as long. By sunrise, he was beginning to feel
better, and when the sun rose, he had pretty much decided he was going
to live. Of course, that didn't mean he was happy about it.
"The spells are getting worse," he muttered, "the paranoia and the

aftereffects."
"You are still restraining your impulse toward violence very well," Fess
contradicted, "though your physiological reactions are increasing in
severity."
"But what is it?" Rod gasped. "It can't be something I ate—it's going on
too long."
"That does not necessarily preclude the ingestion of a substance, Rod."
"If I did, it's one that really lasts. I don't know how much longer I can
keep going, Fess."
"There is no particular reason why you should right now, Rod."
Rod jolted bolt upright. "You don't mean I should just sit down and
die."
"Rod! Of course I mean no such thing! But it would be beneficial for
you to lie down and sleep. You have not slept for twenty-five hours, now."
"A telling point." Rod suddenly realized his eyelids were drooping.
"Maybe a few winks would help. Find me a cave, would you, Fess?"
Caves were not to be had, but Fess did find a fallen tree whose crown
had caught in its neighbor's fork. Rod spread his cloak over a mound of
leaves under the trunk as Fess began to drag brush to pile against it.
Suddenly, Rod stood straight. "Fess… somebody's on my trail."
The robot was still, then said, "I detect only animal life, Rod."
"Don't ask me how I know, but I do! I didn't say they were watching,
but they will be!"
"Have you become precognitive, Rod?"
"Who knows? Anything can happen now! But they're on my trail, and
they're going to catch up soon! Ambush stations!"
He disappeared into the brush. Reluctantly, Fess stepped away into the
density of a thicket.

The forest was quiet. After a few minutes, birds began to chirp again.
Then a hand parted the brush along the trail, and someone pushed
through. Others followed him.
Rod parted the leaves, but in the shadows of dawn, he could only make
out three forms. He waited for them to pass, then slipped out onto the
trail, sword in hand, and hooked an arm around the throat of the last
person in line, yanking him off balance and lifting the sword.
The person gargled, flailing for balance, and Rod froze, realizing that
the person was female. Then someone else shouted, "Papa, no!" and the
ground slipped out from under his feet. He found he was floating, saw
Gregory over the girl's shoulder, and realized he had almost stabbed his
daughter. He dropped the sword as though it burned his fingers, let go of
Cordelia, and thought Down! furiously. Rage kindled as his heels touched
ground—slowly, as though he were sinking through molasses. "Damn it, let
me down't What the deuce do you think you're doing following me!"
"Husband," Gwen protested, "we feared for thee!"
"Who asked you, blast it! Here I go freezing and starving, nearly being
drugged and poisoned, just to stay far enough away from you to be sure I
can't hurt you, and what do you do? You come sneaking after me without
even telling me! Thank Heaven I realized in time!"
Geoffrey's lip quivered, but he maintained, "Thou hast enemies, Papa!
We feared they might…"
"Well, they didn't!" Rod thawed a little. "Your concern is appreciated,
but not your interference! I was fighting off murderous sneaks for ten
years before I met any of you! Look, if you don't trust me to take care of
myself, at least trust Fess!"
"Why, so we do," little Gregory said gravely. "Yet thou must needs own,
Papa, that on Gramarye, thou hast had more enemies than e'er before."
The kid was right, and that just made it worse. The anger turned hot.
"Yes, and I never know how many! Anyone I meet might be a futurian
agent, any peasant, any knight, any forester! And how in Heaven's name
am I going to be able to fight them off if my family won't at least do as I
ask and stay out of itV

"We cannot," Gwen said simply. "We are of thee, as thou art of us!"
"And you! You have never given me a chance to see if I can handle my
enemies on my own! Right from the first, you were in there interfering."
"Interfering!" Gwen paled.
But Magnus intervened. "Thou hast told us, Papa, that thy greatest
strength is uniting folk to fight along with thee."
"Aye!" Cordelia cried. "Thou didst say thy first great achievement was
in winning our mother to thy side!"
It was true, and Rod had virtually bragged of it—but that was not
exactly what he wanted to hear at this moment in time. "I can handle
them on my own, thank you! Look, just say I'm on leave of absence. It's
enemies to myself I'm fighting now, not enemies to the whole kingdom!"
"They are one and the same." Gwen had begun to harden. "They seek
thy death, so that they may work their will upon the kingdom."
"Well, they don't have a chance any more, do they? You folks are there
to handle things if anything happens to me! And you can handle them,
can't you? You can handle them just fine! You don't need me at all!"
"We shall ever need thee!" Cordelia protested, and Gregory threw his
arms around Rod's waist, clinging like a leech.
Rod felt himself thawing—but he looked at Gwen, and saw that all the
walls were up. He hardened his own heart again and gently disengaged his
son. "Then stop chasing me. Let me deal with my own demons in my own
way. If you need me, then leave me. I'll come back when I'm well. This is
one time you can't help—but, boy, can you hinder! Follow me any more,
and you'll have me afraid to strike a single blow in my own defense, for
fear what I'm fighting might really be one of you! Try to help, and yoi 'll do
me in!"
"Husband, thou dost wrong us! We would ne'er…"
"Not intentionally, you wouldn't, but…" Rod broke off, staring, feeling
as though an electric current were tingling all across his back and up into
his brain, making his hair stand on end. "Or is it intentional?" he

whispered. "After all, you really can handle things without me. I'm just in
the way now, aren't I?"
"Papa, no!" Cordelia cried, and Gwen stared, horrified.
"I notice your mother doesn't have anything to say, does she?" The
anger flowed. "Not a thing! I've only been getting in her way, slowing her
down all these years! Maybe she's finally realized she could have been the
greatest witch in all Gramarye without me, that she could have led the
revolution to put the witch-folk in power, and I was the only thing holding
her back!"
Tears filled Gwen's eyes, and she shook her head, faster and faster, her
lips forming words, but no sound coming.
"See? She can't deny it, even when she tries!" And Rod knew he had
paused, more than long enough for Gwen to reply.
"Papa, there is not a word of truth in all of this!" Magnus stepped
between his parents, anger beginning to show through a pallor of
apprehension. "Mama hath never sought aught but thine happiness!"
"Who are you to speak, Heir Apparent? Who's the next High Warlock,
eh? Who will be their king, after the uprising?"
"Thou canst not mean it!" Magnus said, hotly.
"But I do!" Rod caught up a stick and slashed out at them. "Away from
me, all of you! Stay back in Runnymede! Run your power play without me!
And whatever you do, don't follow me any more V He turned on his heel
and strode off into the forest.
The trees swam past him, not quite in focus; blood pounded in his ears.
He bulldozed through the woods, brush crashing around him.
Then he realized that there was more crashing than he was making. He
looked up and saw Fess pacing beside him. "What are you doing here?"
"You were unjust, Rod," the robot answered. "They never sought to hurt
you."
"Whose side are you on!" Rod whirled to face the robot-horse.

"Only yours, Rod. I cannot be on anyone else's side, while you are my
owner; it is contrary to my programming."
"But if you had a different owner, you wouldn't have to stand by me—is
that it? Help the heir move up a little faster, eh?"
"Never, Rod, and you know it! Do not pretend to have forgotten your
knowledge of computer programming!"
Rod glared back, confounded for the moment. He knew Fess was the
one being who couldn't lie to him.
In the real world. Even in Gramarye.
But in Granclarte?
The horse pressed his advantage. "I cannot stand silent when I see
induced paranoia distorting your perceptions of those who love you best,
and most support you. Your wife and children are as loyal as I
am—perhaps more so."
"I don't see how they could be," Rod growled. "/ wouldn't, if I had to live
with me. In fact, I do, and I'm not."
"Hear your own words," Fess advised. "Are you disloyal to yourself,
then?"
"So you have to be even more loyal, to make up for it?" Rod's glare
narrowed. "Even granting that, there's one big problem. How do you know
what their motives are?"
"There are semiotic indications…"
"Interpreting signs can't let you read their thoughts."
"I can listen on human thought frequencies…"
"Yes, and if they want you to hear them, you will. But if they slip into
family mode, you can't pick up their tiniest scrap of thought."
"I cannot decipher simultaneous multiplexing of decay modulation, it is
true. However, I am working on the program…"

"But don't have it yet—which means you can't know what my tender
chicks and their doting mother are planning in their hearts of hearts."
"Rod, you cannot honestly believe they would conspire against you!"
"Why not? Everything else does! Including you! Go ahead, side with
them! Cozy up to the heirs! Just don't try to pretend you're still on my
side!" Rod turned and stalked off into the forest.
"Rod! My devotion has always been…"
"Go away!" Rod thundered. "Get out of my sight! Leave me alone!"
He stumped off into the snow, and the bare branches closed behind
him like whips.
Half an hour later, he had begun to calm down.
Then the nausea hit, and the headache started.
If it had been bad before, this time it was hellish. He cast about, frantic
for cover, stumbled into the nearest thicket, and fell to his knees. His
stomach turned inside out, but there was nothing there to come up,
except a little bile.
When the spasms passed, he tumbled sideways into a mound of dead
brush, managing to gather his cloak about him, and lay shivering as pain
throbbed through his head. Finally, it slackened, and he fell into an
exhausted slumber.
He woke to the glow of coals. Frowning, he started to rise, then
remembered the headache and lifted his head very carefully. But there was
no pain, so he dared sit up, though slowly. Something fell off him, and he
looked down, amazed, to see that he was covered by a fur blanket. Who
had thrown it over him?
For that matter, who had kindled the fire?
He stared at it, absorbing the fact that somebody had been close
enough to kill him while he lay totally helpless, but instead had made sure
he wouldn't freeze. Finally, he decided he would just have to accept the
fact that the world really did contain some people who cared about him,

whether it was Fess or his family.
Guilt hit, and hard, as he remembered what he had said to them, and
the manner in which he had said it. It seemed incredible now, that he
could actually have thought they wished his downfall, totally crazy…
Yes. It had been crazy. That was why he had gone away from them, to
make sure he wouldn't hurt them while he was mired in delusion.
He lifted his head, feeling a little better about it all. There was still guilt
about his rage, mind you—but at least he had been right in telling them to
stay away from him.
Then he started at a sudden thought. How had his family come to be in
Granclarte, anyway?
He thought about that for a little while, and decided that he had had a
temporary lapse back into reality—sort of swapping delusions, Granclarte
for persecution complex.
Was that to be the limit of his existence—just a choice of delusions?
He thought about it—and the more he thought, the angrier he became.
Oddly, that seemed all right now— maybe because his anger had no one to
focus on. After all, who could be responsible for his current state of
existence?
Whoever had pushed him into delusions, of course.
Who was that?
Modwis had said it was the sorcerer Brume, from his haunted castle in
the east.
But Modwis was part of Granclarte. Who had sent him the affliction in
Gramarye?
Maybe the sorcerer Brume.
Why not? So far as Rod could tell, the fantasy enemies who attacked
him in the delusion realm of Granclarte corresponded to real
enemies—real people, he corrected himself, then corrected the correction,
remembering Fess's verification that the man who Rod had thought was a

homicidal old hermit had really tried to kill him. If the hermit had been a
real assassin in disguise, why not Brume?
It was worth a try, at least—especially in Gramarye, where evil
magicians were a definite possibility. For that matter, Fess had identified
Modwis as being, in real life, a leprechaun…
Rod looked around, frowning. Come to that, where was Modwis? He
remembered the dwarf shrinking down to elf size…
His gaze focused on the flames.
Could it have been Modwis who threw the robe over him and lit the
campfire?
Rod stumbled to his feet in turmoil, apprehension coiling through his
belly at the thought that a friend might be within striking range. He stood
a moment, taking stock of himself. He felt well, though, surprisingly well;
the spell had really passed. He resolved not to hallucinate again— the
aftereffects were murder.
"Murder"—he didn't like the sound of that. He shrugged off the thought
and started walking. If Modwis were here, he didn't want to see him,
though Rod couldn't have said exactly why. There was a lingering distrust
of anybody who professed to be on his side right now—or was it a distrust
of himself?
No matter. The result was the same—stay solitary. For a moment, he
wavered, tempted to take the fur robe, then decided against it; it would
have felt too much like theft. Whatever kind soul had loaned it to him
didn't deserve to have it stolen. He strode off into the gloaming, feeling
renewed and invigorated—and hungry enough to eat a bear. Which might
not have been a bad idea, if he'd met one—then he could have made his 
own robe.
Chapter Fourteen
If anyone was following him, they were smart enough to stay hidden.
He trekked through snow-bound country for three days, building
campfires when his toes grew numb and building brush huts when the sun
went down. Roast partridge wasn't bad as rations went, and neither was
the odd rabbit. Rod drew the line at deer, though—he couldn't possibly

have eaten one before it spoiled.
Then the game became scarce, the occasional homesteads began to look
very run-down, and Rod began to suspect he was in country that the
sorcerer had milked dry.
So, replete with chilblains and chapped lips, but strangely refreshed,
Rod came to the eastern shore, and found himself looking up at the
sorcerer's castle atop a sea cliff.
It wasn't hard to tell it was a sorcerer's castle—the clouds turned dark
and thick as they came swirling behind its turrets, and emitted bolts of
lightning that always struck the battlements but, strangely, never did any
damage. Rod worked his way up the cliff face, climbing higher and higher
into constant thunder. Not for the first time, he began to wish he had Fess
along or, better yet, Modwis.
Then the first dragon attacked.
It wasn't much for size, only a couple of meters long, but it roared with
great verve, and its two-foot tongue of flame was very impressive.
"Shoo!" Rod shouted, trying to bat it away with one hand while the
other clung to a fingerhold. The dragon shied away, and Rod yelped,
shaking his hand—that beast was hot't If it was an illusion, it was a very
vivid one.
The dragon circled and came roaring back. Rod drew his sword,
sighted along it at the dragon's mouth, and cried, "£>i brochette!"
Unfortunately, the beast didn't know French. It slammed into Rod full
tilt, the sword ramming straight into its brain. It died on the instant,
plummeting down the height—and dragging Rod's sword with it. He
gritted his teeth and yanked back, knowing he'd be lost without the
sword—but his poor numb fingers slipped from their hold, and sea reeled
about him into the sky as he fell, howling in horror. It took the sight of the
rocks shooting up at him to remind him he could levitate. He thought how
repulsive the rocks looked and, sure enough, they repulsed him, slowing
his fall, stopping him two feet from their hungry, jagged teeth, then
raising him slowly back up. With a sigh of relief, he settled onto his former
footholds, felt himself start to grow limp, and sternly reminded his body
that it had a task to complete. It complied with protest, pulling itself back

into semblance of firmness, and started climbing on up the cliff—at which
point, his brain came into play and sneeringly reminded him that, if he
could levitate to save himself, he could also levitate to get to the top more
easily. Astounded, Rod stood still for a minute, then smiled, stepped off
into space, thinking Up! and silently drifted toward the base of the keep.
Then the next dragon hit.
It came roaring down like a V-l rocket, flaming out of a darkening sky
like a reminder of doom. Rod swooped aside, but the monster changed
course and came flaming up his backside. Rod whooped, did a backflip,
and landed just behind the lizard's batwings, shouting, "Hi-yo,
Iguanodon!" The dragon took umbrage at the epithet and tried to twist
back on itself enough to scorch Rod. Unfortunately, it succeeded;
fortunately, he managed to lean aside just enough for the flame to miss
him. Its heat fanned his arm—and he twitched a little farther away—a
little bit too much. He tumbled sideways with a shout, knees still locked on
the dragon's ribs, perforce twisting it with him. It bellowed butane, trying
to twist itself back upright, and the upshot was a downshot, the two of
them twirling and tumbling down through the air toward the jagged rocks
below.
This won't do, Rod thought dizzily, and managed to catch the beast
under the jaw. The flame cut off with a burp, and the beast fought
wildly—but followed its head. Rod managed to get its nose pointed upward
and rode, swooping and swirling, back toward the battlements, clinging
for dear life, and trying to hold on to his dinner. Rugged cliff face gave way
to granite blocks with a five-foot ledge between masonry and precipice;
Rod felt a surge of panic as he had a sudden mental image of himself
rising up above the battlements and turning into a pincushion as the
sentries gleefully took the chance for a little target practice. Inspiration
struck, and so did the dragon, as Rod turned its head toward the castle. It
roared toward the granite full tilt and slammed headfirst into the wall.
Rod jumped off and sagged against the wall as the dragon flipped
backward, its eyes rolling and wings fluttering, to coast spiraling down.
Rod didn't worry; it was only stunned, and would probably recover before
it hit the rocks.
On the other hand, if it did, it might come back for him.
It behooved him to find some way to get into the castle before then. He
shoved off and rose once more, then remembered his vision of skewering

archers, and decided to settle down to exploring. He cast along the base of
the wall, searching for some sort of opening—and, not surprisingly, came
to the drawbridge.
However, he did feel surprised to find it down. Rod frowned up at the
gate towers. "Got to be sentries," he muttered. "If they're going to be
anywhere, they're going to be here."
But there was no sign of a single mortal sentry; the gate towers looked
to be completely deserted, not to say ruined…
A single mortal sentry…
Rod shivered. This was Granclarte; what kinds of sentry might a
sorcerer employ?
Well, there was only one way to find out—but with great caution. Rod
stepped out onto the drawbridge, then carefully let his weight down onto
the planks.
The wood crumbled away.
Rod drew back, heart thumping as he watched chunks of rotten wood
splash into the greenish oily waters of the moat. Yes, definitely there was
more to this drawbridge than met the eye—more threat, less substance.
He thought of floating, felt his heels leave the ground, and stepped out
onto the drawbridge again, pretending to walk, though he really drifted
across. But he let his toes touch the wood for appearance's sake.
Something cold slapped around his ankle and yanked.
Rod toppled off the drawbridge, saw the waters coming up at him, then
a long, rubbery arm reaching up from the scum to his ankle. He thought
repulsive thoughts in a panic and began to float up, the tentacle drawing
out straight. Apparently it didn't like the resistance; it yanked again; hard.
Rod was caught off balance and slammed down into the water. He just
managed to catch a deep breath before the waters closed over his head,
and he reached for his sword.
Something cold coiled around his wrist.
Another one slapped around his waist.

Revulsion filled him, and he thought Up! frantically, but the
tentacle-owner was ready, and pulled down harder as he pulled up. His
chest ached—this was taking too long. In a panic, Rod thought of water
boiling into vapor inside a skin.
The tentacle on his wrist exploded.
Rod snapped his sword out and slashed through the manacle around
his ankle as something huge hooted in pain and wrath beneath him, its
voice filling all the watery world. Fear and horror battled inside him, and
he chopped at the tentacle around his waist. Blood spurted from it,
deepening the reddish cast of the water. He chopped again, saw another
tentacle slamming down out of the murk and slashed at it, then chopped
one more time at the arm around his waist. It fell free and he rocketed
upward, agonized hooting echoing about him.
Rod shot out of the moat twenty feet into the air before he managed to
contain his emotions enough to level off. Then the guilt hit, because the
whole crag echoed with the agonized hoots coming from under the water.
At least he could put the poor beast out of its misery.
So he did; he opened his mind, searching, winced at the pain coming
from under the water but zeroed in on it, and poured every ounce of
mental energy into a sudden searing stab.
Three arms lanced out of the water, straight and stiff, then went limp
and fell back.
Rod floated in the air, shaken but relieved; the hooting had died, and so
had the monster. The air and water were quiet once more. Rod sighed,
then turned his attention to the gate before him. Shadows clustered there;
below the iron teeth of the portcullis, it was dark and filled with gloom.
Rod screwed his courage to the sticking place and floated on in.
Darkness enveloped him, darkness filled with eerie moans. Not just one,
mind you, but a dozen—first one, then another, then a third, then a fourth
and a fifth and a sixth, a tenth, a twelfth, each on a different pitch, in a
different voice, one dying as another began. Each voice held a different
emotion, but the spectrum wasn't narrow—anger, lust for revenge, agony,
horror, remorse—filling the whole castle with a droning, heartsick chord.

Something glowed in front of Rod, quickly becoming clear—the gowned
form of a young woman with a bare skull beneath long, flowing hair, jaws
parted in a wail of despair. Before Rod could shrink back, she faded, and a
man appeared off to the side, a man with a sinister, scarred, malevolent
face, and a skeletal body clothed in rags. He lifted a hand as though to
strike, but faded even as he swung. A third spectre appeared opposite him,
cloaked and hooded, baleful eyes glowing from the shadows within, a bony
hand reaching out toward Rod.
He stepped right through it. There was a deep chill as the ghost's hand
passed through his arm; then it was fading behind him. The next ghost
appeared, but Rod drifted straight ahead, ignoring the fear that clamored
within him—he was used to ghosts.
Not that he was ruling out a booby trap in phantom's guise, mind you.
He was also drifting six inches off the floor, in case of sudden trapdoors or
bear traps.
Finally, he grew tired of the phantoms and remembered his
will-o'-the-wisp. With an impatient mental shrug, he made the ball of light
appear in his hand. It gave off enough light to show him the stone walls
and the arch-way beyond, but not enough to banish the ghosts; they kept
appearing and disappearing before him as he moved toward the Great
Hall, flanked by an honor guard of phantoms. The fear was still there, but
it was contained by a feeling of irritation—after all the strain of getting in,
he had expected something more than a trip through the Fun House.
Then he went through the archway, and found it.
The dais at the end of the hall was lighted by fireballs. Between them,
on a tall, skinny throne, sat a bald man in a long red robe.
"Who comes against the sorcerer Brume?" demanded a deep and
cavernous voice.
It was spooky, considering that the old man's lips hadn't moved; but
Rod rechanneled the spurt of additional fear into irritation. He frowned. "
Against you? Why do you automatically think I'm against you?"
The sorcerer sat immobile for a minute, nonplussed (Rod hoped), then
answered, "None would come nigh Brume with goodwill. What seekest
thou?"

"My right mind," Rod said instantly. "You cast a spell of madness on
me, sorcerer. Take it off."
The man's lips peeled back from pointed teeth, and shrill, manic
laughter filled the hall. Even though he was braced, Rod was shaken.
"Come closer," the deep voice commanded, though the laughter still
echoed. "I would see the worm that dares command Brume."
Rod narrowed his eyes and marched right up to the dais—and wished
he hadn't. Here, he could see the man's eyes. They were bloodshot, staring,
and unfocused—mad.
Now the sorcerer spoke through his own lips, and his voice was like the
wind through a thin reed. "Why dost thou think 'tis I that have laid
madness on thee?"
"Who else would?" Rod countered.
"Hast no enemies?" the sorcerer demanded. "Are there none else who
would wish thee ill?"
"There are a few," Rod admitted. Privately, he was beginning to wonder
to whom the deep voice had belonged.
"Ask of those who have fought thee, then," the sorcerer commanded,
and the deep voice proclaimed, "Thou art naught to Brume, mortal man.
Why should he care for thee, he who hath ranked demons at his
command?"
"Not the only thing that's rank," Rod growled. "As to the 'why,' I think
you know who I am, and what I'm capable of. I tell you again: remove your
spell!"
"I tire of this game," the sorcerer snapped, and fire blazed up between
them, a sheet of flame that quickly ran in a circle around Rod, then began
pressing in.
Smoke rose from his cloak, and Rod yelped at the burn. Hallucination
or not, this was entirely too convincing for comfort. He fought to
concentrate, managed a semi-trance where he thought of an ice cube
crunching in on itself at absolute zero—and the flames died down.

The sorcerer stared.
"You mean you didn't know who I was?" Rod set a foot on the step up to
the dais. "Now, about that spell…"
"Avaunt!" Brume threw a lightning ball.
Rob hopped aside, drawing his sword, dropped to one knee, and leaned
the sword against the dais. The lightning ball swerved toward him, hit the
sword, and grounded out with a huge explosion.
The sorcerer's eyes bulged.
Rod tapped the charred remnant of sword, frowning, to see if it was too
hot to touch. He thought of the ice cube again, then picked up the sword,
envisioning a yard-long rapier. The blade renewed itself, taking on the
sheen of good steel once more. Rod nodded, satisfied, and looked up at
Brume. "I get it. You really are a magic-worker—in Gramarye, I mean;
there, you're an esper. A pyrotic."
"What fool's words are these!" the huge voice boomed, and a spear
detached itself from the wall and shot toward Rod.
Rod sidestepped, parrying with the sword. "Okay, so you're a
telekinetic, too! Want me to show you what / can do?"
The sorcerer's eyes narrowed and, suddenly, Rod was floating off the
floor, turning upside down. "Hey, look! You already showed me you were a
TK! Okay for vow!" He dove at Brume, pushed with his own mind. He felt
the thrust of force that tried to deflect him, but bored on through it. The
sorcerer shouted in alarm and shot out of his chair, dodging aside from
Rod in the nick of time.
Rod sank into a crouch on the side of the throne, turning to follow
Brume with his eyes, belatedly remembering that Gramarye warlocks
couldn't accomplish telekinesis—it was a sex-linked trait. Only he and his
boys were exceptions. So where was Brume getting that ability?
Fantasy, obviously. That part was Granclarte.
"Blasphemer!" the huge voice tolled. "Who art thou to so profane the
castle of the great sorcerer!"

"It's pretty profane already, really." Rod lifted the point of the sword
toward Brume. "If you want to get rid of me, just remove the spell."
But Brume's eyes suddenly flared red, swelling and growing until they
filled Rod's whole field of vision, as the grandfather of all aches split his
head. Dimly, he realized he'd just been hit with the most powerful blast of
projective telepathy he'd ever experienced. He tried to strike back with a
mental stab of his own, but his whole head seemed to be burning, and all
he could see was red haze, filling the whole Great Hall, obscuring the
sorcerer, the dais, the fireballs, and Rod's own sense of who and where he
was, filling the whole universe so that there was nothing there but red
mist and burning pain, in a present that had no past and no future, but
existed and endured without hope of cessation.
But it did cease, finally; it slackened, the pain receding to only a normal
headache, splitting Rod's head anew with every beat of his pulse, the red
mist fading until he could see again. His ears gave him a hollow boom
followed by a metallic grating and clunk, then a gloating laugh fading
away into the distance. Sight, though, seemed to be limited to afterimages
in brilliantly colored geometric patterns. Finally, he began to be able to
make out stripes of orange through the afterimages. Then the colors
darkened down to purple and blue, and through them, he could see the
stone blocks that the orange stripes revealed. He frowned, turning his
head, and saw a rectangle of orange light across from the stripes, a
rectangle that was itself striped with black lines.
Iron bars.
He was in a dungeon again.
Rod let himself go limp. He might be in eventual mortal peril, but he
was safe for the instant. He found himself wondering why he was still
alive. If the sorcerer had been able to knock him out long enough to put
him down here, why hadn't he just killed Rod outright?
"Because he wants to use you for bargaining."
Rod frowned, looking up, staring through the darkness, trying to see to
whom he was talking.
It wasn't hard. The person in question provided his own glow—a very
ruddy glow. He had a black moustache and goatee, with red horns and a

barbed red tail. All of him was red, actually, except his black cloak, and he
looked very familiar.
"Ready to think about that contract now?"
Rod sank back with a groan, and braced himself to resist a sales pitch.
He made a valiant try to forestall it. "I think I'll hold out a while longer,
thanks."
The devil shrugged. "It's your choice. Take him, boys!"
With a howl, a dozen demons swooped down at Rod, batwinged,
scarlet-skinned, and horned. Rod yelped, "No fair!" and thought of an
invisible shield.
The air glimmered in front of him.
The foremost demon splattered against an invisible win-do wpane, lay
spread-eagle for a second, then peeled off backward and fell.
"What in hell do you think you're doing?" the debonair devil cried.
"Wrong origin." Rod tried to think holy thoughts. Who was the
appropriate saint in charge of this sort of situation? Saint Vidicon? Saint
Jude?
The other demons put on the brakes, but they didn't quite make it; they
piled into Rod's invisible barrier like a stack of animated dominoes.
"All right, remember your duty!" the devil called. "Let's get about the
torturing now!"
"But, boss," one little demon said, "how can we torture him if we can't
get at him?"
"Think of something! Find a way!"
"I thought that was your department."
At a guess, Rod decided, none of them was particularly long on
brainpower.
"Yes, it is." The big devil scowled. Then he grinned a devilish grin. "I

have it! You can't reach him—but he can see you and hear you."
"So?"
"Tell him about himself." The grin widened, revealing shark teeth.
"Start with the truth."
"The truth?'" the little devils cried, appalled.
"You heard me, truth!" the big devil snarled. "You want to hurt him,
don't you? Tell him about his real self!"
Of course, Rod reminded himself quickly, the big devil could have been
lying.
Not a moment too soon, either. The first little devil pranced up to the
unseen barrier, eyes alight with malice. "You've got a vicious temper, you
know that? Oh, you're slow to boil, but when you do, you don't care who
you burn!"
"I know that," Rod growled, but even so, he winced within.
The demon ignored him; it turned to one of its fellows, whose form had
melted into something approximating a female in skirt and bodice.
"Gwen, you're vile! Always after me, always nagging, never giving me a
moment's peace!"
"Me after youV the female demon shrilled. "Who came after who in the
first place, huh? You think I made all these brats by myself? Let me tell
you, monster…"
Rod kept a stony face on it, but inside, he was quailing. He didn't really
think that about Gwen, did he? And he hoped she didn't think that about
him. Though she had reason enough, Lord knew.
Then the "female" demon pranced aside, and the others stepped back
into the shadows, leaving the one who was impersonating Rod—and
looking more and more like him all the time—alone in the darkness.
Eyes open, yellow and glowing. Something snarled in the night.
"Oh, no!" the demon cried. "Get me outa here! Somebody help me!" His
knees began to knock, and the trembling spread to his whole body. "I'm 

scared, damn it! He-e-e-e-1-p!" He turned to run, but more yellow eyes
blinked open, and he backed up, moaning. "Oh-h-h-h— what'm I gonna 
doV
Rod lifted his head in indignation. Whatever he was, he wasn't a
coward. Fearful, yes, there were a lot of things that scared him—but he
didn't run from them.
They'd just catch up with him, anyway.
"I'm gonna kill 'em!" the demon wailed, and it whipped out its sword.
"If I can't run from 'em, I'll cut out their hearts!"
"They might be innocent," the big devil suggested. '' They might be
harmless."
"They will be when / get through with em!"
Rod emptied out inside. They had him pegged; he realized, with a sick
sense of certainty, that the charge was true. He did strike out from
fear—and, frequently, out of all proportion.
The Rod-demon seemed to shrivel as his clothes shredded into rags,
darkening with filth. His shoulders slumped, his knees bent, and he moved
toward the real Rod with a dispirited shuffle. He lifted his head and Rod
saw rheumy, bloodshot eyes and a dirty, unshaven face. An icicle seemed
to impale Rod.
The beggarman clasped the shreds of his cloak about him with his left
hand and held out his right, cupped. "Got a coin, bo? Anything'll do…
Alms, goodman! Alms!"
A prosperous couple brushed past, and the beggar swiv-eled toward
them, hand out. "Spare me a penny, kind sir!"
Somewhere, someone was moaning.
The lady gave him a furtive glance, then turned to her escort, but he
rumbled, "He isn't worth it, my dear. If he was, he wouldn't be begging."
"If you say so…"
Another prosperous gentleman pushed past him with a snarl. "Out of

my way, human garbage!"
Someone was moaning, and Rod realized it was himself.
"Worthless," sneered another passerby. "Not worth a damn."
"No-o-o-o!" Rod howled. "It's not true! Not a bit! I am good! I do work!
I am worthwhile!"
But the prosperous passersby were gathered around him now, pointing
and gesticulating, sneering and spitting, and laughing with malice and
sarcasm, laughing, laughing, and Rod was shouting now, wailing,
"No-o-o-o-o! No, no No-o-o-o…"
"NO!" a deep voice bellowed, and the word stretched out into an
inarticulate roar of anger. Something small swelled hugely as it swooped
toward them, roaring down on them like an express train, hollow eyes
narrowed in rage, mouth a circle of thundering wrath, bulking huge over
the little demons. They fled screaming, and the apparition turned on the
big devil, who stuttered in fear and turned to flee, but the spirit of wrath
seized it in huge ham-hands, tore it in shreds, and threw it yammering
away. Its wails faded; the devil and his demons were gone, and Rod
cowered in abject terror as the huge spirit turned toward him.
Then he froze, unable to believe his eyes. He reached out toward the
spirit and whispered:
"Big Tom."
Chapter Fifteen
Rod stared, galvanized. He knew that face, that form, even as the anger
left it for a mordant grin.
"They'll not bother ye more, that ragtag horde," the spectre assured
him.
"Big Tom," Rod whispered.
"Aye, 'tis me. Wherefore dost thou look so grim?"
Rod's mouth moved, but he couldn't force the words out.

The ghost frowned, then lifted its head as understanding came. "Thou
dost feel guilt for my death, dost thou not?"
"I should have prevented it," Rod whispered.
"Thou couldst not. 'Twas done in battle, and 'twas an enemy's blow, not
thine."
"But you were my man."
"I was mine own man, never aught else's. An I served thee as squire,
'twas for mine own ends—as well thou didst know."
"Yes." The reminder of deception helped; Rod got his voice back. He
cleared his throat and spoke aloud. "Yes.
you were trying to manipulate me for your totalitarian buddies."
"There! Tis easily said, is't not? And as I sought to maneuver thee, so
thou didst seek to make use of me."
Rod twitched uncomfortably. "Well, I wouldn't put it that way…"
' 'Thou didst not seek to sway me to support thee? Thou didst not seek
to recruit me to fight for the Queen?"
"There! I knew I was responsible for your death!"
"Thou art not, and thou dost know't!" the ghost snapped. "I did join in
the fray to advance mine own cause, not thine! 'Twas my doing, never
thine! What! Art thou so arrogant as to claim all achievement for thine
own?''
"Of course not! You know me better than that!"
"Aye, and therefore know that 'twas mine own fault, not thine to steal!
An thou wilt not steal credit, thou must needs not steal blame! So, an thou
didst not wish to make me thy pawn, what didst thou seek?" i "To make
you my ally."
The ghost was silent, a glow kindling in its cavernous eyes. Slowly, it
nodded. "In that, thou didst succeed. Yet couldst thou have sustained that
alliance, an I had lived?"

"I'd like to think so," Rod said carefully. "We'd shared quite a few
dangers together, not to mention a dungeon other than this. I had hoped
that I could have persuaded you to stay my friend."
The ghost smiled, and said, "Thou hast."
Rod just stared.
Then, slowly, he smiled, too. "So. That's why you chased away my
persecutors."
Big Tom dismissed them with a snort of contempt and a wave of his
hand. "That pusillanimous crew? They were not fit to torment a merchant,
much less a doughty agent!"
Rod smiled. Gramarye born or not, Big Tom had had a modern
education—very modern; he was from hundreds of years down the
time-line—and was a devout totalitarian. To him, the capitalist, not the
criminal, was the lowest form of human life. "They were doing a good
enough job on me just the same." He shuddered. "I didn't know I was like
that.''
"Thou didst, or thou wouldst not say so. Thou didst, yet thou art
not—for each of thine evil impulses is controlled so tightly it ne'er can
force action."
"Not now, it's not." Rod turned somber, remembering. "I'm
hallucinating and attacking anything that moves, almost."
"Thou art, and hast therefore sought the wilderness, where thou hast
the least chance to hurt any soul. If thou canst not control thine impulses,
thou canst control thy body so as to minimize aught chance of damage."
Rod looked up. "You make me sound better than I am."
"I think I do not." The ghost sat down cross-legged and leaned forward,
elbows on knees, looking into Rod's eyes with orbs of fire. "Thou art a good
man, Rod Gallow-glass, and a most excellent companion. Be mindful of
that. Be ever mindful."
"I am," Rod said in a small voice.

The ghost raised an eyebrow.
"Well… I'll try, Big Tom. I'll try."
"Do." The ghost straightened up. "And know that this madness is not of
thine own making."
Rod frowned. "My own making? How can insanity be 'made'?"
"By slipping a drug in a glass of wine," Big Tom returned, "or, in thy
case, in a chestnut."
Rod stared. ^
Then he said, "You've been talking to Fess."
"In a manner of speaking." The ghost leaned back, smiling. "What he
hath said is in thy memory, is't not? And I am thy hallucination, am I
not?"
"Well… I suppose, if you say so." Rod looked forlorn. "But I had kinda
hoped you were real."
"Thou dost believe that I am, but in an Afterworld," Big Tom reminded.
"If thou'rt right, it may be my spirit speaks to thee through this
seeming—or it may be 'tis thine own unconscious mind that doth speak
through me, for surely 'tis of that unconscious that thine hallucinations
are made."
"I've heard that, that hallucinations are projections of your unconscious
mind, as dreams are."
"To be sure thou hast heard it, or I could not say it."
"So you're the voice of my subconscious." Rod sat back, too. "Okay, tell
me—what has my subconscious figured out?"
"Why, that the robot's computer brain hath the right of it, as it ever
doth in problems of reason, and thy Futurian enemies did taint the old
woman's chestnuts with some substance that doth induce hallucinations."
"And paranoia?" Rod nodded. "Yes, I've heard of drugs that will do
that. But how about my family, Big Tom? How come they didn't start

hallucinating?"
"Why, for that the drug given thee was summat which did affect them
not at all, yet did wreak havoc within thy brain."
Rod shook his head. "Mighty picky of it. Do you know offhand of any
substance that could discriminate that way?"
"Aye—witch-moss, the fungus that doth respond to telepathic
projection."
"Witch-moss? But that's poison!"
"Would thine enemies be concerned therefore?"
"Well… no," Rod said slowly. "And come to that, I don't know that it's
poisonous; I had just naturally assumed it was."
"Ask the elves—mayhap they know."
Rod looked up, his brain making connections. "But it wouldn't be
poisonous to them—they're made of witch-moss!"
Big Tom sat there and nodded.
"And Gwen's father," Rod said slowly, "is Brom O'Berin, who's half
elven. So Gwen is a quarter elven, and each of my kids is one-eighth…"
"No great amount," Big Tom agreed, "Yet mayhap enough."
"Yeah, enough so that the witch-moss responds to their subconsciouses,
and molds itself right into their DNA! Of course it wouldn't hurt them—it
would give them a little more psi power, if anything! But me…"
"It would magnify thy subconscious," Big Tom said, "out of all control
of thy conscious mind—and here I am."
"Yes, here you are," Rod murmured.
He was silent for a few minutes, trying to get used to the idea. Finally,
he said, "But why give me something that would make me see monsters?"
"Why," Big Tom said, "dost thou think thine enemy would leave thee to

wander whole?"
"Yes, while he makes hay at home—or at least an insurrection." Rod
stiffened as he caught Big Tom's meaning. "Hey! You don't mean the agent
who masterminded this little scheme is still following me, do you?"
"Wherefore not? Would he not wish to be sure of thee?"
" 'Be sure' sounds uncomfortably like 'execute ' "
"It doth, and 'tis like to be uncomfortable^m the extreme."
Rod wondered whether it was Big Tom talking or his own paranoia.
What was the difference?
Nothing—if Big Tom really was a product of Rod's overactive
imagination.
If.
"Of course," Rod said slowly, "you could be a real ghost."
"There are no ghosts." But Big Tom was smiling.
"Oh, yeah? How about Horatio Loguire and his corps of courtiers that I
met in the abandoned quarter of Castle Loquire?"
"They were witch-moss constructs," Big Tom said immediately.
Rod nodded. "Possible. Very tenuous, but nonetheless crafted
unwittingly by some ancient bard who had known the originals while they
were alive, and sang of them after their deaths. Probably shocked him as
much as anyone when they 'came back.' But…"
"What else?" Big Tom leaned forward with professional interest.
"I have this son," Rod said slowly, "who has lately turned out to be a
psychometricist. He hears thoughts people left in the objects around them,
and if he isn't careful, he starts seeing the people, too."
"He doth wake the dead?"

"I always said he made enough noise to, when he was a baby. Now, let's
just say some innocent who didn't know he was a psychometricist
happened to walk into the haunted part of Castle Loguire…"
"Was his name Rod Gallowglass?"
"If it was, he didn't know it at the time. Besides, the first one who had
that little 'accident' was probably several hundred years ago—and the
scare story he brought back was reinforced by a few others down through
the centuries. Who knows? Maybe they did it so often that they set up a
psionic standing wave, and after a while, the ghosts existed without them.
Or maybe I just did a little bit to raise their spirits, after all."
"Mayhap thou didst. And if their spirits, why not mine, eh?"
"Right. Got an answer?"
"Aye—my bones are not here, nor did I haunt this castle whilst alive. In
truth, I knew not of it."
"A point," Rod admitted, "but not an insuperable one. You seem to
have caught the popular imagination, Big Tom. I still hear beggars who
were at the battle tell of the giant Tom who fell fighting the lords, and died
blessing the High Warlock."
Big Tom answered with a mordant grin. "I would not call it 'blessing.' "
"In your death, you gave me words for life."
"I but enjoined thee not to die for a dream." The ghost's gaze
sharpened. "I see though hast not."
"No," Rod said slowly, "I'm still alive."
"As I am dead. Yet I would die thus again, if I could be sure 'twould
bring greater happiness to the poor folk for whom I fought."
"Yes," Rod said softly. "They knew that. That's why they still tell your
story, all over the country."
"And doth greater happiness come to them?" the ghost demanded, an
edge to his voice.

"They're better off than they were," Rod said. "Fewer of them die in the
lords' civil wars now, b^ause Tuan enforces the peace. And more of them
have enough to eat, and clothes to wear."
"Yet not all?"
Rod spread his hands. "I'm doing what I can, Big Tom. After all, I can't
spring modern farming methods and medicine on them all in one instant."
"Nay, nor would I have thee do so—for to bring it to them from
off-planet would mean they would collapse when thy government
withdrew it. Then would there be great famine indeed, and pestilence with
it."
"There would," Rod agreed. "We have to help them build it up on their
own, so it'll be self-sustaining. But we're making progress."
"And thou dost not seek the welfare of thy children in this?"
"Of course I do. But my kids' welfare is tied up with the people's
welfare, Big Tom. Modern technology doesn't come in one generation.
Who will be their teachers after I'm gone?"
"There is no shortage of volunteers."
"Yes—the futurian anarchists."
Big Tom turned and spat. "They would abandon all technology, and
have my people scratching the dirt with a stick once more!"
Rod nodded. "Can't support the current population level that way, no.
But do you still believe your futurian totalitarian pals would do any
better?"
"Mayhap," Big Tom said, scowling, "yet they've little concern for the
people themselves. Their devotion is to the idea, not the folk. Nay, I will
take the cash, and let the credit go."
"Nice to know I'm coin of the realm," Rod grunted.
"Hast not wished to be a medium?"
"A medium of exchange? No, thank you. I don't even want to be a

channel for ghosts, though I'm finding present company quite acceptable.
Why—were you wanting me to broadcast your spirit to your peasant
followers?"
" 'Twould be pleasant," Big Tom admitted.
"Then enjoy, because it's happening—and without any assistance from
me. You gave the poor people the notion that they're worth something in
their own right, not just in terms of how valuable they are to their
lords—and the idea seems to be catching on."
" Tis good to know I have been busy."
"What do you mean, 'good to know'?" Rod frowned. "You've been
walking this land ever since your death, haven't you? A guest at every
peasant's fireside, and a nemesis at every lord's bedside."
"Why, how could I be?" Big Tom asked with a sly grin. "I am but thine
hallucination."
"I wonder," Rod murmured, eyeing his old henchman and friendly
enemy. "I really wonder…"
"Do not. 'Tis superstition."
"But there's nothing wrong with wishing the dead quiet repose. What
keeps you awake, Big Tom?"
"Why, certes, the people, dost thou not see? I cannot rest till all are free
from want and fear, till all are masters of their own destinies."
"Then you'd better get to working on some mental health schemes, not
just economic and political. You're not exactly scot-free yourself, are you?''
"The people are my tyrant," Big Tom agreed. "An thou dost wish me
sweet repose, do all thou canst to raise them up."
"I do," Rod said. "I will."
"First thou must needs win back thy wits. Thou knowest that any who
have offered thee hospitality have been false, dost thou not?" ^
Rod stared.

Then he said, "I thought that was my own paranoia."
"Thinking that they seek thy death? Aye, that was false. Yet think—each
hath offered thee food or drink.''
Rod lifted his head slowly. "It was drugged!"
"Aye, though not with extract of poppy. There was witch-moss in the
bread and water of thy hostels."
"Modwis? Even the dwarf?"
"I think not, or he'd have ne'er abided thy making meals at campfires."
"Well, he did make some remarks aboutmy cooking…"
"Truth will out. This is why thou tlast not shaken these
hallucinations—because thou hast taken more witch-moss brews as thou
hast traveled."
"That's it! I'm going on a diet. No food or drink unless I collect it
myself!"
"The game thou didst slay was untainted, aye. Yet I would not bid thee
eat such wildlife as thou wilt find within this dungeon."
"Don't worry-—low cuisine never caught my fancy. But who's going to
all this trouble, and why?"
"Wherefore dost thou ask?"
"Because I can't trust my own hunches right now. I'm paranoid,
remember?"
"And am I any less? Be mindful, I'm the voice of thy subconscious."
"More likely my conscience. Of course, you could be a real ghost—in
which case, you could give me an unbiased view."
"Scarcely unbiased—yet I'll tell thee that thine old enemies, and mine,
did thus taint thy food, and thy mind, and do reinforce the dose whene'er
they can, to keep thee crazed and disabled."

"The anarchists? Then there's an uprising going on back in
Runnymede!"
Big Tom nodded, eyes glowing.
"How about your old buddies? Don't tell me the totali-tarians are
letting a chance like this slip away!"
"As thou dost wish—I shall not. There's no need, sin that thou hast said
it thyself.''
Rod scrambled to his feet. "I've got to get back to Runnymede! Tuan
and Catharine must be going crazy." He stopped, jarred by the sound of
his own words.
"Crazed, in truth," Big Tom murmured. "What of thine own mind?"
"With a rebellion going on, what's a little paranoia more or less?"
"And thy wife and bairns?"
"I'll stay far away from them, of course."
"Thou canst not; they'll be working in aid of the King and Queen."
Rod froze.
"And what of thine hallucinations?" Big Tom demanded. "Shalt thou
see an enemy knight, when 'tis truly thy son?"
"So I can't go help fight." Rod turned slowly, eyes narrowed. "Did you
come here only to gloat?"
"Thou dost know I did not. Yet I bid thee cure thyself ere thou dost
return."
"Look, I don't know how long it will take for these chemicals to pass out
of my system, but by the time I've purged myself, the war will be over!"
"Mayhap," Big Tom said judiciously, "or mayhap thou canst learn to
master the witch-moss."
Rod stilled, gazing at him intently.

" 'Tis witch-moss, after all," Big Tom explained, "and thou hast crafted
the stuff aforetime. Canst thou not assert dominion o'er it even now, when
'tis within thee?"
"I might be able to learn," Rod said slowly, "but how will I know if I
have or not? It couId just be hallucination!"
Big Tom shook his head. "Thou dost speak as though thou art truly
crazed. I tell thee, thou art not. 'Tis but a substance in thy system."
"A substance that has changed my ability to see the world as it really is.
No, Big Tom—that's a description of a crazy man. Just because the
madness is artificially induced doesn't make it any less a madness."
The ghost shrugged. "Mayhap. Yet an thou art beset by delusions,
mayhap thou canst counter them with illusions."
Rod pondered. "Why, how do I do that?"
"I cannot say." Big Tom sighed and shoved himself to his feet. "Thou
must needs find those who know the manner of dealing with such
unbonded imagery."
"A poet, you mean?"
"A poet, or a priest—or both. A doctor of the arts who is also a doctor of
the soul."
"Great," Rod said with a sardonic smile. "Where do I find somebody
with that combination?"
"I ken not. Yet thou canst, at least, take arms against the illusions thou
dost know to be false."
"Wait a minute," Rod protested. "You're saying that I'm not really
crazy—I'm just going to have to learn a new way of thinking?"
"In some fashion. Thou must needs learn to think in lifelike images, to
oppose these false illusions with counterillusions. Thy wife and bairns
were born to this mode of thought, and have no difficulty in dealing with
it—yet to thee, 'tis alien."
"Then I'm not so much poisoned, as simply having had my mind

fouled," Rod said slowly, "and I have to learn to deal with the foulness in
its own terms." He squeezed his eyes shut and shook his head. "That
doesn't make sense."
"Then strive until it doth," Big Tom said. "Thy subconscious hath
emerged into the perceptions of thy conscious mind, which cannot deal
with its wild and rampant nature. As a beginning, take arms against those
illusions thou canst be sure are only that—or are truly evil things."
"You mean Brume." Rod nodded. "Yes, I think I can go up against him
with a clear conscience. He's either a total hallucination, or an esper who's
out to victimize the whole countryside."
"Therefore," said Big Tom, "let us strike."
Somewhere there was a banshee howl, and a myriad of imps descended
on them out of some nameless dimension.
Big Tom looked up with disgust. "The sorcerer Brume hath heard my
thought, and hath called up his minions." He turned, setting his arms
akimbo, and bellowed, "Avaunt!"
The imps halted in a hollow globe around them, shocked. Then their
faces creased with anger, and their mouths opened in yowling.
"I bade thee hold!" Big Tom thundered, and their tentative advance
halted. The yowling took on a definite halfhearted tone.
"They dare not strike whiles I am nigh," Big Tom said aside to Rod. "Do
thou ope the door, whilst I hold them at bay."
"Good division of labor," Rod agreed, and he turned to the door, letting
his mind drift into a trance, reaching out to the lock, probing, finding,
pulling…
The bolt slid back.
Rod hauled the door open. "Care to join me?"
"Aye, and gladly." Big Tom stepped up to the doorway with a grin. The
gibbering chorus started up again behind them, and the big ghost called
back, without even looking at them, "Follow, an thou durst." And to Rod,

"I doubt me not Brume hath penned them in here, to torment his enemies.
Let them now come loose!"
Chapter Sixteen
A lone torch burned in the hallways outside the cell, illuminating a
curving stair that rose up into gloom. As they started climbing, the
gibbering behind them grew louder. By the time they'd reached the top of
the stair, it was turning into yowling again, with the occasional manic
giggle.
They came out of the stairwell into the Great Hall, and the imps spilled
free in their wake, filling the hall with batwings and howling.
The sorcerer was ready for them—whatever kind of psionic warning
system he had, had worked perfectly. The first fireball hit before they were
five steps from the stairwell. Rod dodged aside, but the fireball swerved to
follow, and swords yanked themselves off the walls to come arrowing
toward Rod.
He saw them through clear syrup, for he was in a trance, willing
entropy—and the fireball faded and died before it reached him. His own
blade was out, parrying, and with a thought, he wrenched a shield off the
wall. It flew to interpose itself between Rod and the other two swords,
hovering as he slipped his arm through the old, stiff straps.
Then the floor heaved under his feet and, on top of everything else, he
had to frantically levitate. The distraction was enough—one sword shot
past his guard. He parried frantically, but it nicked his chest before he
could swat it down.
Then the imps hit Brume, and the swords fell to the floor as the
sorcerer shifted his attention to the little devils. They burst into flame,
filling the air with shrieks of agony.
Rod set himself and marched toward the throne.
Brume glanced up, saw him, and a knife flicked itself from his belt,
flying straight toward Rod.
Rod caught it on his shield, batted it out of the air—and the other knife
he hadn't seen flashed before his eyes. He recoiled, falling back, and the

blade shot by—but it opened his forehead on its way, and blood welled up.
Rod bellowed with anger and leaped back to his feet, charging toward
Brume through a rain of charred imps.
Brume turned to glare at him, and Rod quickly averted his eyes—he
wouldn't be caught with the projected migraine again! But flame exploded
all around Rod, and every nerve in his body screamed with pain. He ran
toward the sorcerer, trying to break through the wall of fire, but it stayed
with him, and he couldn't breathe, the flames had swallowed the oxygen…
Through the sheet of fire, he saw Big Tom's ghost towering over the
sorcerer, fist slamming down toward the bald head. But the sorcerer's
hands were sawing the air, and Big Tom disappeared like a soap bubble
on the breeze.
Rod shouted in rage; a huge surge of anger tore out of him, and his
envelope of flames scattered in shreds. He leaped up to the dais, his sword
high…
Brume turned, hand flashing out as though throwing something, and a
ball of force slammed into Rod's belly, knocking him down. For a moment,
the world turned dim, the sorcerer's mocking laughter rang in his ears…
The laughter turned abruptly into a scream of pain and fear. Rod
caught his breath, could see again—and saw a living torch, darting here
and there at the sorcerer's head. Brume fended it off, but it came again,
and again—and while it did, a lean young wolf clawed at his midriff, jaws
snapping for his throat. A broadsword flashed through the air, cutting and
slashing as it sang a song of bloodlust, filling all the room with its high,
clear tone. The sorcerer had gained a shield somehow, but was hard put to
block the sword cuts, the more so as a ball of lightning danced and dodged
about him, seeking for an opening through the magical screen that he had
managed to build, that glimmered about him like an aura.
Behind them stood their animating force—a fairy lady, impossibly tall,
impossibly slender, an elongated woman with a coronet binding her silver
rain of hair, her eyes hard and pitiless.
Brume fell back before her onslaught. He couldn't do anything else; he
was barely able to keep his guard up, let alone strike.
Rod closed in, narrow-eyed but silent.

The sorcerer glanced his way, saw him, and howled in anger and
frustration. Suddenly, flames sprang up around him—a veil of green fire,
billowing up to hide Brume, then slackening and thinning into a green fog.
It dimmed and diminished, thinned, and was gone.
So was the sorcerer.
Rod stood staring, amazed. "That is one trick that no esper has ever
been able to do!"
Or had he? Brume might have teleported, under cover of his green fire.
That was why it had dimmed and thinned, instead of dying down.
Or had he seen nothing but what really happened? That was the tricky
part, the word "really."
"Am I in Grama-rye or Granclarte?"
"What is Granclarte?"
It was the fairy lady who spoke. Her voice was rich and melodious, and
her eyes had become more human, but were still guarded and remote.
"Why, it is a fancy," Rod said slowly, turning to her, "or is at least just a
figment of imagination. I thank you, lady, for your timely rescue. I doubt
that I could have lived through that onslaught, without your aid."
" 'Twas given gladly, Lord Warlock—yet thanks is also due these
instruments of mine." Her hand rested on the young wolf's head, her other
hand cupping the ball of lightning. The torch flared by her side, and the
singing sword balanced itself before her.
"Thanks due to things of enchantment, to your creations?" Rod
frowned. "Well, if you say so. Sir Wolf—I thank you." Rod inclined his head
and shoulders in a small bow. "And you also, Lightning, Torch, and
Sword—I thank you all. Without your aid, I might have been a cinder."
The ball of lightning crackled in approval, and the torch flared brighter.
The sword's pure tone rose to a high, clear pitch that rang on through the
hall after the sword itself had ceased to sound.
"Though I greatly appreciate your assistance," Rod said, "I cannot help

but wonder at it. What am I to you, milady, that you should aid me so?"
The wolf's jaw lolled as though it were laughing, but the lady only said,
in cold, clear tones, "This vile sorcerer did cast awry the balance of Water,
Earth, Air, and Fire within my domain. Therefore did I wish to move
against him. Yet with all my force, I still could not break through his
wards. Then thou didst come into his castle as though naught did prevent
thee—and when thou didst come out from the dungeon, why, thou wast
already within. Thou didst then so catch and hold the sorcerer's mind that
I could come in past his wards, and these mine helpers. Thus did we come;
thus were we right glad to aid thee.
"Yet he hath escaped," she went on, face hard, "and therefore must we
beware. He will come again, I doubt not."
"He will," Rod agreed, "or I'm totally wrong about what he is."
The faerie tossed her head impatiently. " 'Tis plainly seen."
"Quite," Rod agreed. "Still, 1 don't think we should wait here for him to
return. We should leave, milady, before he can bring back
reinforcements."
The wolf sniffed and wrinkled its nose as it peered about into the
gloom.
"Well said," the faerie agreed, "and the more so for that there may be
all manner of venomous spirits that the sorcerer hath called up, but left
here without restraint or ward, now that he hath fled. Aye, certes we
should be out from this place."
Rod turned toward the portal. "And since you're leaving, could I ask a
favor of you? Would you go to Runnymede, and see how Their Majesties
fare? I'm afraid the rebellion might be too much for them, without
supernatural aid."
The wolf stopped, staring, and the sword hummed with surprise. The
faerie asked, "How didst thou know of the uprising?"
Rod shrugged. "Stood to reason." He didn't say whose. He ushered
them out under the portcullis and came after them over the drawbridge.
"It's probably nothing they can't handle—but they have some enemies who

keep springing some nasty surprises on them."
"We shall go, then." The faerie frowned. "Yet I must profess concern for
thee, mine ally. How wouldst thou fare an the sorcerer should come upon
thee alone?"
"Oh, I have another ally who will forgive my last outburst, and come
back to protect me, never fear. His patience and forgiveness are
unlimited."
"Thou hast most amazing trust in thy deity."
"Only ultimately—I don't see much of a guarantee for immediate needs.
But I had a different ally in mind."
"An thou sayest it." But the lady hesitated. "Still, an thou hast need, but
cry aloud my name, and we will come."
"What name is that?" Rod asked politely.
"Mirabile."
"I thank you, Lady Mirabile." Rod bowed. "Be assured that I will call."
"Then for thy sake, I shall rescue thy monarchs." Mirabile drifted up
into the air. "Farewell!"
Rod waved as she sped south, flanked by the ball of lightning and the
torch, sword arrowing on ahead of her. The wolf looked up at Rod as
though doubting his sanity (animals can be very perceptive), then gave a
snort and turned away to lope south after his mistress.
Rod watched them go with a smile.
Then he turned back, to say goodbye to the one spirit that he was sure
had not been raised by the sorcerer.
Mirabile and her ensemble flew down into a stand of pine trees. The
faerie looked back over her shoulder, saw that Brume's castle was hidden
from view, and said, "Well enough, children. We may come down to earth,
and shed these forms." She suited the action to the word, drifting
earthward like thistledown. As her toes touched, her form wavered and
shimmered, and the faerie turned into a mother. She hopped off her

broomstick with a sigh as the torch settled down beside her and turned
into Cordelia. The ball of lightning resolved itself into Gregory; the singing
sword keened down the scale to a snort, and turned into Geoffrey.
"Ere thou dost wear thy guise again," Cordelia told him, "thou must
needs learn to hold a pitch."
Geoffrey's eyes narrowed. "Dost thou truly wish to burn?"
"Where is thy brother?" Gwen said sharply.
They looked up, startled. "We know not, Mama," Cordelia said after a
moment. "How should we?"
"Belike hot afoot," Geoffrey said, scowling, "sin that his guise could not
fly. He need not have stayed within it, though."
"An he had flown," Gregory pointed out, "Papa would ha' known him on
the instant."
Before Geoffrey could think up a comeback, the lean and hungry one
leaped out of the evergreens, came bounding up to Gwen, and sat up and
begged, whining.
"Oh, be done with thy jesting!" Cordelia said crossly.
" Tis no matter for mirth, my son," Gwen agreed.
The wolf sighed. His form blurred, stretched, flexed— and Magnus
stood before them. "And I thought the form became me, too."
" 'Tis thy very self," Cordelia assured him, "and that shall I tell all the
lasses of the county."
Alarmed, Magnus started to answer, but his mother's forefinger got in
the way. "Hush. We must think what to do in regard to thy father."
"He would make the matter so involved," Cordelia pouted. "Wherefore
could he not simply have accepted the fairie's company? Wherefore had he
need to send her away?" A shadow crossed her face. "Mama, now and
again I wonder…"
"Do not," her mother assured her. "He hath the urge to hermitage

within him, aye, but would not long abide the state."
"Doth he seek after holiness, then?" Gregory asked.
"Nay," Magnus answered. "In his heart, he doth think himself
unworthy—and the greater we grow, the lesser doth he feel himself to be."
"Magnus!" Gwen gasped, scandalized, but Cordelia scoffed, "How
couldst thou know such of him?"
"I am his son," Magnus answered simply.
His sister frowned, and his mother looked worried.
Then she shook her head and said, "Enough. His soul's his own, to care
for. How shall we ward his body?"
"I was too slow," Geoffrey said with chagrin. "I should ha' slain the
fellow outright." He turned to Magnus. "He cannot truly be a knight, can
he?"
"Nay," Big Brother assured him, "and I doubt me not the King's Herald
will ne'er have heard of his device. As to his armor, why! Any squire may
wear a breastplate 'neath a robe, and carry a shield."
"What did Papa see him as?" Gregory wondered.
"He spoke of a sorcerer," Geoffrey reminded.
"Small wonder," said Cordelia, "sin that he is a warlock."
"A traitor!" Magnus's face was grim. "Would that I could ha' caught
some shred of thought, of whence he did teleport himself!"
"He warded his mind well," Geoffrey agreed. " Tis no hedge-witch we
face."
"At least, his henchmen will not follow Papa—they're affrighted."
Cordelia sighed, shaking her head. "Thy husband is too good, Mama. I
could wish he'd left them dead."
"Do not," Gwen assured her. "The master may be an agent of thy
father's enemies from Tomorrow, yet I doubt me not his henchmen are

but poor, unlettered peasant men, who, like as not, followed a promise of
riches. Still, some stay in the royal dungeons may enrich their souls."
Magnus looked up in the castle's direction anxiously. "The soldiers
should ha' come within the palisade, ere now."
"I doubt me not an they have," Gwen assured him. "Despite his
troubles, the King was good as his word; his soldiers came as soon as we
summoned, and have reaped a rich harvest of felons as they have followed
in thy father's wake."
"As should we." Magnus's face was pinched with anxiety. "This false
knight, Brume, may spring upon him at any moment."
"Not without an army at his back; he hath too much fear of Papa for
that." But Geoffrey didn't exactly look sanguine, either.
"Here's a true how-de-do!" said Magnus. "His delusions are too deep for
him to fare safely alone—yet an we throw over all to follow him, his
enemies will hale down the Crown."
"And thy father's life's work with it," Gwen agreed. "Nay, that we
cannot permit, either."
"Nor the grief that would come to all the poor folk, in the turmoil that
would follow such a catastrophe," Cordelia added.
" 'Tis indeed a dilemma," Gregory agreed. "Yet are there not enough of
us to do both?"
"Aye," Gwen said. "There is no aid for it. Magnus, thou shalt go back in
thy guise to follow thy father, and protect him from any who seek to abuse
him in his madness."
"And to protect any he might chance to abuse?" the young man
returned.
"How now!" Geoffrey protested. "Wherefore doth this honor fall to
Magnus, and not to me?"
"For that he's the eldest," Gwen said in a voice of steel that softened
amazingly for the next sentence. "Bide thy time, my son. When thou art

come to thy young manhood, thou, too, shalt undertake such a quest
alone. Yet for now, thou art still a boy. Come away!" She turned to kiss
Magnus on the forehead. "Fare thee well, my son—and call at the slightest
sign of peril; thy brother Geoffrey, at least, may come to aid thee on the
instant.''
"I shall be glad of his strong right arm, to ward my back," Magnus
returned. "Godspeed, Mama—and thee, my sibs."
Cordelia took a quick peck at his cheek, too, while Geoffrey made a
face, and Gregory watched, frowning faintly, as though he were puzzled.
Then Magnus turned and loped off toward the forest, and Gwen turned to
her younger three, saying, "Let us fly," and hopped on her broomstick. It
wafted up and streaked away south, with Cordelia behind her and the boys
to each side.
"Fess?"
"Here, Rod." The great black horse shouldered out of the underbrush
and onto the road.
"I knew I could depend on you." But Rod felt very sheepish. "Sorry
about that last outburst."
"There is no need for apology."
"But there is—my own need, at least. Will you accompany me again?"
"Surely, Rod." The robot stepped up beside him.
Rob mounted. "That was nice of Gwen and the kids, to disguise
themselves like that.''
The robot was still for a moment, which, for him, amounted to major
shock. "You saw through their disguises, Rod?"
"Not really—so they did serve their purpose; they allowed me to accept
their help, before I figured out who they were. But it didn't take much
deduction, after the fighting was over." Rod smiled. "It gives me a very
warm feeling, to know that they insist on watching over me—especially
when I'd just been so vile to them. Doesn't say much for their confidence
in me, though."

"It does, in its way, Rod. They understood that you were ill when you
spoke."
"I don't deserve them. Or you, for that matter."
"Or myself?"
Rod looked down, startled, and saw the dwarf striding along beside
him. He grinned. "Hey, Modwis! Good of you to find me again! How'd you
manage?"
"I but followed the sounds of clashing magics," the dwarf answered. "An
thou wouldst wait for me, Lord Gallowglass, thou wouldst ease my toil."
"I will, I promise. Sure you want to come along on this quest, though?"
"I am still wroth that I missed my chance to battle Brume," the dwarf
answered. "Whither goest thou?"
"North," Rod said, "until Brume finds me again. Feel like baiting the
foe?"
Modwis looked up quickly, then slowly smiled. "Aye, that I do. Let us
march."
Chapter Seventeen
By midmorning, Rod was becoming acutely aware that they had set out
on this jaunt without food or water. "Y'know, Modwis, I'm getting a mite
peckish."
The dwarf took a sling from his pouch and unwound the strings. "Shall
I seek us a brace of partridges?"
Rod's mouth watered. "Sounds good. Know how to cook 'em?"
"Aye. 'Twill be some time, though—I must seek and bait them first."
"That's okay, I can use a break. Say, can I help?"
The dwarf flashed him a grin. "I shall hunt more quickly alone—yet I
thank thee."

"However you like." Rod reined in by a stream. "I'll get the fire going."
"An thou wilt." Modwis dismounted and tied his donkey to a bush. "Ere
noon, we shall dine. Wish me a hunter's luck."
"Hunter's luck!" Rod called, and waved a hand as Modwis rode away
into the wood. Then he went down to the stream.
"Be careful, Rod."
"I will, Fess—but I'm thirsty enough to drink water now." Rod took up a
fallen branch and brought its end down sharply on the ice. It cracked
through; water welled up, and Rod knelt to drink.
And froze—for he saw the top of a shaven head with a knot of hair in
the center, floating just below the water. He backed away, but the head
rose up out of the ice, with a bull neck and a massive torso beneath it. It
was a face with hard, narrow eyes, high cheekbones, and long, drooping
black moustaches. Adrenaline tuned Rod's system. What's a Mongol doing
here?
Then he realized he could see through the man.
"I am come again." The apparition's voice was thin and whispery, but
had the echo of a rotund basso.
"For the first time, as far as I'm concerned! Who the hell are youT'
"Aye, feign innocence! Thou knowest well I am the warrior Pantagre,
whom thou didst most treacherously slay in battle—and am come now for
revenge!"
The ghost suddenly lashed out with an arm, and Rod had no doubt
that, if he'd really been the guilty party, that mean left hook would have
managed to drag him down into the water. Because he was innocent,
though, the ghost's hand went right through him.
The spectre stared at his palm. "How can this hand fail me!"
"Because I'm innocent," Rod explained. "Look, I don't know who killed
you—but it wasn't me."
"Thou dost lie! 'Twas thee, or thy very likeness!"

"That's not impossible—I seem to have a lot of duplicates running
around—but it wasn't me."
The ghost's eyes narrowed. "Art bold enough to prove thy claim?"
"Generally, yes."
The ghost reached up to a low-hanging branch of the oak tree above
them, and plucked a sprig of mistletoe. He pulled off one of the little white
globes, then held the sprig out to Rod. "My hands cannot grasp thee, yet
thine can serve. Take thou this berry, and eat, as I eat. Whiche'er doth lie
shall sink."
"Sink?" Rod asked. "I can understand what that means for you—but
what does it mean if / sink?"
"That thou wilt die, and become a ghost, as I am— whereupon we may
fight on equal terms."
Rod's scalp prickled as his hair tried to stand up. It might have looked
like mistletoe, but the berry he held was poison.
"Art afeard?" the ghost jeered. "Dost own to thy guilt?"
"Never," Rod snapped. He opened his mouth and lifted the berry…
With a howl, a wolf shot from the brush and leaped on him.
Rod shouted and rolled aside—and the wolf caught the berry in his
mouth and barreled on past Rod. He landed and wheeled toward the ghost
with a manic growl.
The ghost wailed in dismay and sank from sight.
Rod stared. What kind of ghost was afraid of a wolf? And what kind of
wolf would charge a ghost?
A young one. The beast turned to Rod, tongue lolling out—and Rod
could have sworn he was smiling. Slowly, he let his own mouth curve, too.
"So. Mirabile left a guardian over me, did she?"
The wolf nodded and came right up to Rod, sat down, and held up a
paw.

Rod took it with a grave bow. "Delighted to have the opportunity to
further our acquaintance, Sir Wolf." Then he looked up in alarm. "Hey,
wait a minute! If that berry was poison, we'd better take you and get your
stomach pumped!" Every protective instinct in him screamed—he might
play along with the charade, but he knew who the wolf was!
But White Fang shook his head, still smiling, and Rod realized, Of
course. If Big Tom was right, the berry was made of witch-moss—and if
the wolf was who he knew it was, then the berry wouldn't hurt it. Just the
opposite, if anything.
Either that, or the wolf meant it had had the sense to spit the berry out.
For a moment, Rod was tempted to ask it, then decided he didn't want to
hear the animal speak. Why weaken the illusion? "Okay, Fang—and thanks
for the vote of confidence. I knew I was innocent, but it's nice to have
somebody confirm it."
When Modwis came back, he stepped into the clearing and dropped the
partridges, staring in alarm.
Rod looked up from the fireside and smiled, resting a hand on the wolf's
head. "Hi, Modwis. Meet my friend."
He hoped he was right.
They traveled together all the next day, and Rod and Modwis found the
young wolf to be remarkably good company. But when the sun's rays were
stretching the shadows of the trees halfway up their neighbors' trunks,
Rod finally admitted, "We're not going to find an inn tonight."
"Even so," Modwis said.
Rod sighed. "Time to find a campsite." He turned to the wolf. "Want to
run ahead and find us a clearing?"
The wolf grinned, then loped off ahead among the trees.
"Art thou certain 'tis safe to have him with us?" Modwis asked.
"That particular young wolf, I would trust with my life," Rod answered.
Fess, of course, said nothing.

The wolf came loping back, still grinning, slewed to a halt on its
haunches, and jerked its head back over its shoulder, as though pointing.
"Right ahead, huh?" Rod nodded. "Well, let's see."
The clearing was only about twenty feet across, and would have been
fully roofed with leaves in summer—but now the darkening sky showed
clearly through the bare branches. Modwis tethered his donkey and hung
its oat bag over its ears. Rod watched him, muttering under his breath,
"Just how conspicuous should we be, Alloy Ally?"
"So far as Modwis knows, you have already left me to graze once,
Rod—as Beaubras left his horse, outside High Dudgeon."
Rod nodded. "Good point." He dropped the reins and strolled away to
hunt for firewood.
"There are pine boughs." Modwis took out a long knife. "I shall make
our beds."
"Great," Rod called back, "and I'll get the fire going. Then it's my turn
to hunt." He turned to the wolf. "I'll find dinner for Modwis and me, but
you'd better go dig up a rabbit for yourself.''
The wolf grinned up into his eyes, then turned and trotted off into the
underbrush.
Rod watched him go, reflecting that he was being mean— but he had to
play along with the boy's charade, didn't he? Either that, or reveal his own
knowledge of it, which would no doubt dampen Magnus's spirits like an
autumn rain.
Of course, he could have been mistaken—the wolf might have really
been a wolf, though a fairie's pet. What then?
Well, then the wolf might not be back until late, or might not come
back at all, for that matter. Rod felt a chill, and hoped it would come back.
Out of sight of the camp, the wolf's form fluxed; it turned back into
Magnus. He slipped from trunk to trunk until he could see the camp
clearly through a screen of branches, waited until Rod and Modwis were
both facing the other way, then stepped out where Fess could see him, and

waved. The great black horse lifted its head, and Magnus nodded, then
stepped back into cover, satisfied that his father's other guardian knew of
his own presence. He leaned back against a trunk and reached into his
pouch for some dried beef. It wasn't going to be much of a dinner, but he
didn't intend to let Papa out of his sight. Like father, like son—only now, it
was Magnus's turn to be overprotective.
Rod lay awake, listening to Modwis's deep, even breathing, and trying
to imitate it. He kept telling himself he was being silly, that there was no
way Magnus could come to harm. Nonetheless, he knew there was equally
no way he was going to sleep until the wolf came back. He'd even saved
him some stew, too…
Then he realized that the shimmering through the trees wasn't all
moonlight.
He tensed even more, staring off toward the south, weighing his worry
about Magnus against the possibility that the boy might have run afoul of
whatever was shedding that eldritch light—and wishing heartily that his
son had not insisted on coming along into the wild.
He finally decided that knowledge was better than worry. If Magnus
came back while he was gone, Modwis would waken to take care of the
lad—assuming the wolf disguise didn't bother him too much. Even if it
did, there was always Fess. "I'm going to investigate that light," Rod
murmured to the robot-horse. "Stay here and take care of the 'wolf,' will
you?"
"Rod—the only light is that of the moon."
Rod shook his head. "No. I thought so, too, but I took a closer look, and
there's another kind. It looks like moon-light, yes, but it's different. Hold
the fort, Fess." And he slipped off into the forest.
The robot hung poised between obedience and concern for his
owner—but Rod had ordered him to stay, and there was no sign of an
external threat, only Rod's own hallucination…
Which could be dangerous enough; but Rod had given an order. Fess
heaved white noise and settled himself to wait—but he opened the channel
to Rod's maxillary microphone, and boosted the gain.

Magnus's head nodded heavily, and the jerk woke him from his doze.
Blinking, he glanced toward the campfire—
And saw Rod's bedroll empty.
Instantly, the boy was alert. He scanned the campsite and saw Rod
slipping into the trees on the far side. Magnus pulled himself together and
set off around the clearing, being careful where he stepped, moving almost
silently through the winter wood.
He was a quarter of the way around when something hard and blunt
cracked into his skull just behind the ear, and he dropped, senseless.
Chapter Eighteen
The ground sloped up, and the light grew brighter, until Rod found
himself thinking dawn was near. But that was silly, of course—it couldn't
even be midnight; Magnus wasn't back yet, and he never stayed out that
late.
Then he came out of the trees into a hilltop meadow, one not made by
nature—for in its center was a castle, glowing with its own inner light. The
walls were translucent. It looked like a child's night-light, or a
Christmas-tree ornament.
An ornament sixty feet high and a hundred yards square.
He came up to the drawbridge warily, but with determination—his son
might be in there. After all, if it had drawn him, why might it not draw
Magnus?
As he neared the drawbridge, the sight of the stone caught him. He
stopped to take a closer look—and gazed at it, fascinated.
It was marble, all marble. By the subtle variations of shading, he could
tell it was made of several different kinds of the stone—but all without a
trace of grain. That was why it glowed—because it was completely pure.
No, not quite unmarked—there was something there, within the stone.
He stepped nearer, went across the drawbridge to look more closely—and
saw a man's torso and face, looking back at him. The stranger was
surprisingly good-looking, and wore a doublet and cloak identical to Rod's

own.
It took him a few minutes to admit that it was his own image.
But not himself as he had ever seen himself, for every mirror had always
showed him a homely stranger who looked very competent, but strangely
lacking in self-confidence. This image, however, wasn't homely at all, but
was very good-looking—and if the modesty was there, it was balanced by a
certain hardness, almost ruthlessness. In fact, Rod found himself
recoiling—this was a very dangerous man!
But dangerous, he saw, not just because of his abilities, but because of
his morality. He was safe to anyone who followed his moral code—but to
anyone who lived far enough outside that code, he could be a ruthless and
efficient killer; for if anyone broke the Law this man lived by, that person
was completely outside that Law's protection, and the murderer before
him felt justified in unleashing the fullest of his mayhem.
Rod felt himself cringing inside, even though he couldn't look away; he
had always thought of himself as a nice guy.
And not without reason, he saw—there was mercy in that man's eyes,
and his savagery was tempered by humor. Yes, he could be sudden death
to anyone who lived outside his own ethical code—but very few people
lived so completely within that code that they could knowingly break it
enough to give the murderer his moral excuse. Only occasionally did he
encounter such a person, a man or woman that he could truly say was evil,
and then…
He enjoyed what he did.
Rod felt his soul shrivel, but there was no denying it. This man before
him was a cold-blooded killer who enjoyed practicing his craft. That was
the spectre that had been haunting Rod since he left Maxima; that was
why he had felt the compulsion to chain this beast in morality; that was
why, in his heart of hearts, he knew he was unworthy of Gwen, and of the
children.
His children. What would happen if one of them ever broke that man's
rules? Not just broke them—but smashed them, trampled on them.
A fierce surge of paternal protectiveness swept him. Never, he vowed

silently, never would he risk a single one of them coming to harm. He
swore to himself that he would kill the lizard before he could raise a hand
against those kids.
But how could he kill himself?
Easy.
But he could see, behind the reflection, images of his children growing
and striving in their own right, and felt reassured. They had been raised
within his fence, and Gwen's. They might kick against it, they might break
a rail or two in anger or resentment, but they would never try to tear it
down. It was their protection as much as their prison.
But now that the scenes had begun, they continued— scenes of Rod's
youth, not of the children. He saw himself again, among the mercenaries
attacking a city guilty of no more than the urge to be free; he saw himself,
a year later, struggling to atone by helping another band of patriots
overthrow an off-planet tyranny. He watched himself duel with and kill the
tyrant's bodyguard, while the locals swamped the tyrant himself. He saw
himself between the stars, studying the history of the next planet Fess was
taking him to in their asteroid-ship, saw himself strug-gling,
manipulating, again and again, and all the time searching, hunting, for
the love he knew he did not deserve.
He couldn't take his eyes off the pageant. Spellbound, he watched the
scenes he remembered, but not as he remembered them; they were shown
objectively, impartially. What he saw made him proud one instant and
ashamed the next—exalted his spirit, but also left it humbled.
As he watched spellbound, his enemies stole up behind him.
Rod couldn't have said what it was that warned him—a creak of leather,
a heavy tread—some signal that filtered through to him and broke his
trance. He spun around, whipping his sword out, just in time to see an
ogre followed by a handful of trolls, all advancing across the drawbridge.
The ogre was ten feet tall, with legs a foot and a half thick, foot-thick
arms, massive chest and shoulders, and nothing but a twist of loincloth for
clothing. He was hairy and filthy. His eyes were tiny and bright with
greed, peering out from under shaggy eyebrows. His nose was a blob, and
two long fangs thrust up from his jaw. His trolls shambled behind him,
their faces brutal, their bodies formidable, their fingers sprouting talons.

The ogre gave a little gloating laugh and slammed his club down at
Rod.
Rod shouted and leaped back; the club spun by him. Then he leaped in
again, slamming a kick into the ogre's solar plexus; but the monster only
grunted, and swung from the hip. Rod was just landing as the blow struck,
still a little off balance; he leaped to the side, but not enough; the club
caught him a glancing blow on the shoulder, and his whole right arm went
numb. He tumbled into the snow on the drawbridge and saw a troll
pouncing on him, claws winking in the castle's glow. Rod scrabbled
frantically for the sword and managed to get it up between the troll and
himself, clumsily, left-handed.
The troll couldn't stop; he skewered himself on the sword, knocking Rod
backward onto the drawbridge. The monster screamed and died, but his
flailing talons flexed in death, shredding Rod's doublet and chest. Blood
welled, and his whole front blazed with pain. He yelled and struggled up,
barely able to wrench his sword free in time to see the ogre towering over
him, club high in both hands, trolls pressing in all about him, and the
dead troll's scream still rang in his ears…
Only the scream was coming from behind the trolls, and something
struck the ogre hard in the back. He stumbled and turned with a roar, and
Rod saw Fess, reared up and lashing out with hooves and teeth. He lunged
at a troll; the monster stumbled back and fell into the moat with a howl,
where it began to dissolve. Another troll grabbed at Fess, bellowing; steel
teeth reached for him, but the ogre was smashing out with the club, and
Fess was trying to hit him with a hoof, rearing high and slamming down…
Down stiff-legged, knees locked, head swinging between the fetlocks. He
had had a seizure.
And the ogre's club was slamming down.
Rod bellowed and barreled into the ogre with his full weight, driving
into the small of his back. The ogre wobbled, swung around, and lashed
out at Rod with a roar. Rod fell back, but the club caught him alongside
the head, and his ears rang while stars danced before his eyes. He
struggled to clear his head, waiting for the blow to fall, knowing he was
doomed, hearing the roaring still…
Then the stars were gone, but the bellowing was still there. The ogre

had turned away from him, and was battling something on his other side.
Then one of the trolls lurched and fell into the river. Modwis rose up where
he'd been, buckler on his arm, mace in his hand—and behind him,
Beaubras battled the ogre with axe and sword while his charger guarded
his back, lashing out at the trolls with hoof and tooth.
Gasping for breath, Rod limped toward them. He couldn't let the knight
die in his defense without at least helping, though Heaven only knew what
Beaubras was doing alive again.
The horse struck out, and the last troll fell into the moat with a wail of
despair—but the ogre's club finally battered down Beaubras's guard, and a
huge blow slammed the knight's own axe flat against his head. Beaubras
reeled and fell, and the ogre swung up a huge foot, to stamp on him.
Rod finally got there and stabbed the foot.
The ogre howled, flailing for balance on the edge of the moat. He almost
recovered—but Modwis was there, throwing all his weight against a huge
kneecap, and the ogre tottered and fell, with a roar of wrath that changed
to terror. He hit the water with a huge splash, and his howl cut off. The
moat heaved, and was still.
"Allergic to water, too, I guess," Rod muttered, and turned back to the
knight, his own head whirling.
Modwis was there before him, kneeling beside Beaubras, cradling the
knight's head in the dwarf's arm. The knight looked up at him, and Rod
saw the slick of blood that covered the whole side of his head. "Do not
weep for me, friend," he whispered, but Modwis's eyes were filled with
tears, anyway.
"Hang in there," Rod grated. "You'll make it—somehow."
Beaubras turned back to him with a sad smile. "Nay, Lord
Gallowglass—though I thank Heaven I… came in time."
"But how did you… I mean, you were…"
"Dead?" The knight gave him a weak smile. "Only gone—as I go now.
You must act for both of us, Lord Gallowglass, for both of us together, in
this world and your own. Yet fear not—for I shall come again. I shall

always come again."
Then he sighed, and went limp.
Rod stared, aghast.
The knight's form rippled, thinned, and was gone.
Modwis looked at his empty hands in disbelief, then looked up at Rod
in mute appeal—but the light glinted stars off the tears in his eyes, and the
stars grew and dazzled, filling Rod's vision with a fall of light. Dimly
through it, he thought he saw a beautiful lady, with long, blond hair
bound by a coronet, followed by several nuns. But that couldn't have been,
there weren't any nuns on Gramarye, and Rod found himself tumbling
again, into a world of light.
The leprechaun crouched over the Lord Warlock's body, hammer in his
hand, glaring at the tall woman.
"Peace, Old One," she said. "We come to aid your friend, not to hurt
him."
"Who be these women by ye?" Modwis demanded. "Wherefore are they
garbed in monks' robes?"
"Why, for that they are monks—though with ladies, they are spoken of
as 'nuns.' "
"We are Sisters of Saint Vidicon, Old One," the first woman said. She
was plump, with kindly eyes peering from under the white headband that
separated her face from her hood. "We have dedicated our lives to the
worship of God, and the service of our fellow sinners."
The leprechaun winced at the name of God, but held his ground, and
his suspicion lessened. "Ye are healers, then?"
"Aye, and we could not help but see what befell at our very gate. Dost
know who was that half-armored fellow in the red robe?"
"A fell knave hight Brume, who hath followed this man through half of
Gramarye, to plague him. Beyond that, I
know only that his peasant band fled as soon as they were struck. Will

ye mend my companion, then?"
"We will that," the lady replied. "Sisters, take him up."
Two of the nuns unrolled a stretcher, placed it beside Rod, set
themselves, and heaved him onto the canvas. Then they rose and carried
him in through the Gothic arch, past the low walls.
The lady with the coronet turned back to Modwis. "Thou art welcome,
an thou dost wish to enter and rest."
"Nay," the leprechaun returned, "for thy holy places are bane to us. Yet
I will abide in a hollow tree nearby. An thou hast need of me, lady, but call
out, 'Modwis, come hither!' "
"I shall, friend—and fear not; my friends shall care for thine. Canst thou
tell me his name?"
But the leprechaun was gone, vanished like a dream. The lady smiled
sadly and turned away, going into the convent. The porter closed the
oaken shutters behind her.
Chapter Nineteen
In the darkness, a spot of light appeared, dim and nebulous, but
growing, until Rod realized he was looking at the moon through a heavy
haze. But it kept growing, larger and larger, until it was swollen greater
than the harvest moon—and it kept on swelling.
Finally, Rod realized he was moving toward it.
In a panic, he looked about, trying to see the spaceship that contained
him, the scooter, even just the space suit… and saw an old man drifting
beside him in the void. His long white hair flowed down around his
shoulders; his beard streamed down over his chest, held there by
acceleration, not gravity. He was wearing a long white robe with a golden
chasuble over it, and had a huge, thick book under one arm—
And no space suit. Not even a helmet.
"Be at peace, my son," he intoned. "Thou art in a realm of magic; thou
shalt not want for air to breathe, nor heat to warm thee. Aye, and if thou
dost hearken, thou mayest hear the music of the spheres."

Rod swallowed an automatic protest and listened. Sure enough, he
heard a harmonious chord of clear, crystalline tones, each beginning and
dying in a staggered progression, so that the music kept changing, but
never ceased.
He turned back to the old man, amazed. "But these are things that
cannot be!"
"Save in a realm of magic," the old man reminded him. "Thou art not
in the Earth of Mankind's childhood now, nor on the Isle of Gramarye, nor
even in thy grandfather's Granclarte. Thou art in a realm of magic, pure
magic, and naught else."
Rod began to suspect his schoolboy memory was working harder than
his subconscious.
"You are a knight, after all," the old man said, as though reading his
thoughts. "Where would your soul find rest, save in a realm enchanted?"
"Not really a knight—I only have a title." But Rod felt a certain sick
certainty that the old man was right. "Still, if I am a knight, what are
you?"
"I am only a watcher now," the old man said, "and mayhap a guardian.
I was a writer of books once, but my work in that is done, and therefore
have I time to journey here and there for pleasure, now and again. And
thou, sir, are not only a knight but also a wizard, art thou not? For unless I
mistake, you are the Lord Gallowglass."
"That is my real name, I guess," Rod said slowly. "And you, honored
sir—whom have I the pleasure of addressing?"
"I am that John whom men call the Evangelist," the venerable father
returned. " 'Twas I who beheld the visions of the end of Time, and set
them forth for all to read."
"The Book of Revelation? That John? The saint?"
The old man smiled, amused. "There are many saints named John,
praise Heaven. Yet I am one among them, aye."
And probably the first one, Rod noted. "I am honored, Father." Well,

after all, he had been a priest, hadn't he?
Or was he still?
"Thou hast honor because thou dost give honor," the old man replied.
Rod thought about that for a minute. "How is it that I am so fortunate
as to meet you? And why are we going to the moon?"
Saint John laughed gently. "Thou art in my company, Lord
Gallowglass, because thou must needs go to the moon—and must needs go
there to recover thy wits."
"My wits?" Rod asked. "How'd they get to the moon?"
"The celestial beauty doth draw men's minds," Saint John explained,
"and those whose hold upon their wits is feeble do yield them up unto
her."
Rod remembered an old tradition that the full moon could bring
madness. In fact, he believed that was the origin of the term "lunatic."
"All that is lost from men's hearts or minds doth come to the surface of
the moon," the Evangelist explained, "and is there transmogrified, into
shapes that the eye can perceive, and the hand can touch. But come—the
Sphere draws nigh."
And so it had, Rod realized with a start—the face of the moon had
grown to fill their whole field of view. Under the strange magic of
planetary approach, he suddenly realized he was falling toward the
surface, not sailing through space.
But they slowed as they fell, swinging around to the dark side of the
moon—only it wasn't dark here, not in this universe. Rather, it was
suffused with a strange, muted, sourceless light. They drifted down past
the huge, rugged peaks of Luna. But, in the strange fashion of this magical
universe, those slopes were no longer barren rock, but clothed with brush,
then with somber evergreens. Looking down, Rod could see a few people
wandering over grassy plains and by dark, still pools—but all the colors
were muted, as though seen through a haze. "Good Father," said Rod,
"who are they who wander this bleak plain?"

"Poor, lost souls, my son," the Evangelist said sadly, "who have lost
their way in Life, and lost the Faith that might give them purpose. They
wander here, without direction, waiting for death. But come—the land
awaits."
They swung their feet down and touched, not dust, but gray-green turf.
Rod looked up and saw a mound of paired circlets, attached so tightly they
must have been cast-joined—but each circle was broken opposite the joint.
"Good Father, what are these?"
"Promises of love," the old man said, "broken and forgot. Anon some
lost soul may come and sort through this heap, find a promise made and
broken long before, and with it find his way again—but few are they, and
rarely come."
Rod saw a broken heart engraved on one, and felt a stab of guilt,
remembering a few liaisons in his younger days. He reached for the pile,
wondering whose names were engraved on the circlets nearest him, but
the Evangelist took his arm and ushered him firmly on. "Enough, Sir
Knight. 'Tis lost wits we seek, not their cause."
They went around the pile, past an azure pond whose brim was
encrusted with salt, through a meadow of pale valentines that were
drooping for lack of light, and into a grove of willows. "What trees are
these, good Father?"
"Ones that weep, my son. They are fed by the springs of remorse and
pity that should soften every human heart— yet some have lost each drop
of compassion, and their hearts are hard and sere."
Rod saw names and pictographs engraved on the trunks of the trees. He
recognized a bar of steel on one, and a sail from a ship on another, but the
old man kept him moving too fast to read.
On they went, past a giant honeycomb holding crystal glasses of muted
luster, through a tunnel lined with sealed caskets, and out onto a plain of
dust. This, at least, looked a little like the Luna with which Rod was
familiar—only an endless, flat plain of shifting particles, with stark crags
rising in the distance.
But in the middle of that plain rose a mountain of shields made of
darkened metal.

The saint took Rod's arm and stepped out onto the lake of dust. Rod
followed, with a sinking stomach—he knew that the dust-pits of Luna
could be worse than quicksand. But the saint walked that treacherous
surface as lightly as a dove borne up by Faith, or by the magic of that
world— and Rod walked with him. "What is this pile of shields, Father
John?"
"Blotted escutcheons, my son. Here are arms of honor, made of
brightest silver, but tarnished now with disdain or neglect. Their number
has always been legion, yet never more so than in these darkened, latter
days."
Rod leaned close as they passed, and saw a lectern on one, and a tall hat
with a puffy top on another, but he couldn't make sense of the icons.
They rounded a huge mound of shredded paper, through which two
pale shadows sifted wearily.
"What are they looking for?" Rod hissed to Saint John.
"A Seal of Confidence, my son," the Evangelist answered, "yet they are
doomed not to find it, for it was a thing of their own devising."
Then the rugged peaks loomed closer, and Rod saw that one of them
was composed of millions of shards of glittering glass. "Father, these are
not merely lost, but broken also."
"Aye, my son, and wondrous would be that soul who could find all the
pieces of any one cup, let alone weld them back together. Yet those who
have lost these vessels have no such interest—for this is the resting place of
broken integrity, where those who have fragmented themselves, seeking to
give a bit to each who can aid them, will end their days. Yet sadly, they've
often much of life to live ere death."
Rod craned his neck as they went by, and made out a compass with its
needle pointing upward, a playing card with a knave holding an antique
pistol, and a sort of rusty machinery jack. Beyond that, there were a few
initials, some in the Roman alphabet, some in Cyrillic, some in Arabic,
and many in Oriental ideograms. He wondered what was at the bottom of
the pile.
Then, finally, they came to a huge mound of stoppered test tubes. A few

lay open; all were engraved with people's names. On some, the letters had
been so thoroughly eroded by time that only the initials were clear; on one,
Rod could make out something that looked like the word "AH." Some were
so old (or so new) that they had, not writing, but pictograms; one had a
picture of two elks with wide, spatulate antlers. Rod could even see one
with a picture of a Buck Rogers-style blaster. "What artifacts are these,
sainted Father?"
"These vials hold the wits of men and women, my son—the reasoning
faculty of they who have lost the power of logical thought."
Rod could see a very large test tube that read, "Conte Orlando," and
decided that he had come in in the middle of more stories than one.
That tube, at least, was unstopped. "Why is that vial still here, if it's
empty?"
"It awaits the return of the wits it held," Saint John explained.
It would wait forever, Rod knew. "Am I in there?"
' 'That part of thee that doth lend clarity and judgement to thy
thinking, aye—that aspect of thy mind that doth see the material world
about thee as it truly is."
"Only the material world? What about that part of my mind that
discerns the intangible world?"
"That, at least," said the saint, "thou hast not yet lost."
Rod was about to ask about the "yet," then decided against it. He
turned to start sorting through the test tubes. "This could be a long
search, Father."
"Not so," said the holy one. "Thy wits are only a few days' fled; thou wilt
find them near to the top."
Then a large tube caught Rod's eye—one of the ones that was stoppered
with rubber, instead of being sealed with wax. Engraved on it, in large,
plain letters, was the name "Rod Gallowglass, ne d'Armand."
Beside it, of course, lay Rory's. Rod was surprised to see that it was

empty.
He lifted his own test tube, frowning at the murky vapor inside. "How
come everybody else's is clear?"
"Ask, rather," murmured the Evangelist, "why thine is beclouded."
Rod noticed that he didn't answer.
"Hold it 'neath thy nostrils," the old man urged, "and ope it."
Frowning, Rod did as he was told—and the mist curled up out of the
tube, shrouding his whole head in fog, then streaming into his nostrils, his
eyes, and his ears. A tendril brushed his lips, leaving a trace so tantalizing
that Rod opened his mouth before he could think—and the vapor cascaded
over his tongue and down his throat.
' 'The cloud of thy wits hath entered thine head through each of its
orifices," the Evangelist explained.
Rod's senses reeled; he suddenly felt that he was tasting color, and
feeling flavors. He listened to warmth for a moment, as the world went
fuzzy; then the mist rose up and obscured it all. Only sound remained, the
sound of the old man's voice right next to his ear, to each ear, intoning,
almost inside his head, "Remember this—and, whensoe'er thou dost begin
to doubt what thou dost see, or to suspect that thou dost see things that
are not there, only close thine eyes, recall this moment and this place. Find
thy vial again, if need be—and thou shalt have thy wits about thee once
again."
Someone was asking, a long way away, "How can this work, good
Father?" and the old man answered, "Through manipulation of symbols,
my son. Through signs of what is not, thou shalt awaken to what truly is…
to what truly is… truly is…"
Somewhere in the distance, Gwen was crying, "See the world as it truly
is, I implore thee! Husband, awake!"
Rod blinked, and the murk thinned. He squeezed his eyes shut, then
opened them, and saw daylight on a whitewashed wall.
Chapter Twenty

Rod woke with the familiar nausea upon him. He moaned and clasped
his belly; all he wanted to do was lie down and die.
Then he realized that he was lying down. He was staring at
whitewashed walls, a low rough-made table beside his narrow cot, a
similarly rough-hewn chair by the table, and a crucifix on the wall. He
contemplated the crucifix and decided he could bear the nausea.
Something cold and wet touched his forehead. He recoiled
automatically—and saw a plump lady with a kindly face and a
no-nonsense manner, in a brown monk's robe, cowl thrown back to show a
sort of white bonnet covering her hair, with a broad white band standing
up above her face.
"Be easy," she said softly. "The pain will pass. Thou hast been wounded
sorely, gentleman, and hast lost some blood; thou must needs rest."
"I…1 think I can do that," Rod moaned. "And… don't get me wrong, I
really appreciate all this, especially the fire, but… where am I?"
"In our convent," the nun answered, "and I am Sister Patema Testa.
Hast pain in thy belly?"
"Nausea…" Rod gasped.
The lady took an earthenware bowl from under the table and set it on
the boards. "Use it, an thou hast need. Hast thou but now awaked with
nausea, or hath it been with thee afore the battle?"
"Battle? That's right, the ogre… No, good woman. I… well, I've been…
seeing things that aren't there, for a few days now, and… well, afterward, I
feel weak, and dizzy, and nauseous…" Rod bit down against the pain,
closing his eyes. When the spasm passed, he gasped, "Cramps, this time,
too."
Sister Paterna Testa reached down under the table again and took up a
bottle of pink fluid. She decanted a little into a vessel that looked for all
the world like an eggcup and held it out to him, commanding, "Drink.
'Twill ease thy stomach."
Warily, Rod took it. He was tempted to think he was still hallucinating,
but the nausea usually came after, not during. He swallowed the potion

and frowned. "Odd. That almost tasted good."
"Give it a moment to work." The nun took the eggcup, then leaned back
in the chair. "How long hast thou seen things not truly there?"
"Since I ate a chestnut sold by a stranger. You said I've just been in a
battle?"
"Aye."
"Then you saw it, too. Who was I fighting?"
"A warrior with five peasant men-at-arms at his back."
"Hm." Rod shook his head. "I saw an ogre with a handful of trolls. Say,
did you see a tall, blond knight help me out?"
The nun shook her head. "Only a tall, black horse and a leprechaun—yet
thou didst lay about thee as though there were two of thee."
So. Beaubras, at least, had not been real.
Then the first part of her sentence bored through, and Rod sat up,
wide-eyed. "My horse! I've got to go help him!"
He scrabbled toward the edge of the bed, but the woman put a hand
against his chest and said firmly, "Thou must needs rest. As to thine
horse…"
Here, Rod.
Rod stared, startled to hear Fess's voice. "He's all right!"
"Aye," Sister Paterna Testa said, unperturbed. "A young man came to
the gate, did summat to the horse, and it did lift its head and follow him.
He knocked at our portal, and we took him in, for he was yet dizzy from a
knock on the head that had laid him low."
"A knock on the head!" Rod bleated. "Good grief! Did you check for
concussion?''
"A cracked pate? Aye—and be assured, the lad hath sustained no injury,
though his head aches as badly as thine, I warrant."

"Wait a minute." Rod protested. "You're not supposed to know what
'concussion' means."
The nun shrugged. "A monk taught me of it, long years ago; 'twas his
knowledge showed me my calling to this House."
"You mean you started the convent?"
"Nay; it hath been here nearly two hundreds of years, and hath several
buildings; thou art in our guesthouse. We call ourselves the Order of
Cassettes, belike from our call to healing, especially the head and the mind
it contains. Thou dost know that 'casse tete' doth mean a broken head,
dost thou not?"
Rod did, but the woman obviously didn't know what a cassette was.
"You're not officially of the Order of Saint Vidicon, are you?"
"Nay; we have no formal charter, though we do have our Rule. We are
only a group of women who wish to live apart from the world, yet to go out
and give aid where we may."
Rod nodded. "Who's the abbess?"
"None; we are not so clear in our ranks and standing as that. We are, as
I say, but a group of women who live like sisters; yet the others do call me
'Mother.' I know not whether they jest, yet am honored."
"Mother Paterna Testa, then." Rod had a notion the appellation was
anything but a joke. "Then I'll call you 'Mother,' too, while I'm your guest."
" 'Tis not needful."
"Yes, it is." Rod frowned, pressing a hand against his forehead; the ache
was dulled, but still there. "I wonder whether I've stopped hallucinating or
not—the monks never mentioned a convent to me."
"They wot not of it, I trust; we ha' ne'er sent to tell them, nor have we
wish to. We desire only to be left to do our work in peace."
"Without having to take orders from the abbot, eh?"
"There is that," Mother Paterna Testa admitted, "though I've more
concern that he might bid us disband. Yet whiles we are not truly a

convent, but only call ourselves such, we cannot come under his authority,
to make or break."
Rod nodded. "I can understand that—and although the present abbot's
a good and understanding young man, his successor might not be. No, I
can see your point."
"Yet I assure thee, we are nonetheless real for all that."
Rod shrugged. "That's what the other hallucinations thought, too."
"Aye, but did they know that thou didst see things that were not there?"
"I never told them," Rod admitted. "But I have told you—so why don't
you vanish?"
"Because I am real, whether thou art here or no."
The last statement had an uncomfortably philosophical ring to it. Rod
eyed Mother Paterna Testa warily.
"Yet now tell me," the good woman pressed, "why thou dost roam the
wild wood, an thou dost know thou art ill in thy mind."
"Why, that's just the reason, don't you see? I start feeling my
hallucinations are out to get me, so I fight back—and I might hurt
someone real that way. Especially my wife and children." He struggled to
sit up. "That reminds me—my boy. The young man with the horse.
Where…"
The room lurched, and he found himself staring up at the ceiling with a
chill wet cloth on his forehead again. "Thou must needs rest for some
hours yet,'* Mother Paterna Testa assured him. "We shall bring thy son to
thee presently—yet first I must speak more of thine illness."
Rod shrugged. "It's only chemical—at least, according to the ghost of an
old friend I met along the way." He glanced at her out of the corner of his
eye, but Mother Paterna Testa nodded, unruffled. "What said this
spectre?"
"Why, that the chestnut I ate was made of witch-moss, and my system
didn't know how to handle it."

" 'Tis likely true," the nun agreed, "for look you, there are many who are
witch-moss crafters unbeknownst, even to themselves—and the eldritch
substance, when in their blood, doth shape itself to the forms that come
from that part of our minds that doth dream. Thus do they see waking
dreams, and cannot rule them."
That did pretty much agree with Big Tom's hypothesis. "So how do I
get well, Mother?"
The nun reached under the table again and produced a little jar. She
took a parchment cover off it and dipped her finger in, saying, "This is a
fairy ointment, brought to us by the Wee Folk, for no better reason than
that they did applaud our healing. They use it themselves, that they may
see through the glamours they shape, and not thereby be entrapped."
With a quick, deft movement, she touched Rod's eyes directly above the
lower lid, so quickly that he was just pulling his head back as she was
sitting up, the pot in her lap, smiling like the Mona Lisa. "Thou wilt now
see all things as they truly are."
Rod suspected the cure was mostly psychological, if it did any good at
all—why else the tale about the Little People?—but he was ready to try
anything. "Thank you, Mother.''
"I am glad to do it," she said simply. "Wouldst thou now see thy son?"
"I would," Rod said emphatically.
The Mother Paterna Testa bent over to put the jar away and stood up,
drawing out from underneath the table a pouch that she slipped over her
shoulder. She turned away to the door, still with her gentle, enigmatic
smile, and opened it.
The princess stood there, clad in pastel clouds, coronet glowing. "I greet
thee, Mother. What of our patient?"
"He doth mend," the nun answered, and turned to Rod. "This is our
most constant patron, gentleman—the Countess Bene."
"My pleasure, Countess." Rod struggled up on one elbow, but the
countess crossed to him with a quick, lithe stride, saying, "Do not rise for
courtesy, I prithee. Thou hast need of rest."

"So." Rod sank back. "You weren't a hallucination, either.''
The countess raised her eyebrows. "Thou didst think me a dream?"
"Yes, and the Mother, here. I've been seeing things, you understand. For
example, I thought your convent was a castle of marble so pure that
anyone looking into its walls would see himself as he truly is."
The countess raised her eyebrows. "A puissant charm would that be,
and a blessing."
"Not completely," Rod assured her.
"Is any blessing unmixed?" But the countess didn't give him time to
answer—she turned away toward the door. "I must be about my lord's
affairs, yet let me first usher in one who did speak of thee. Young man, is
this the father thou didst seek?"
Magnus stepped in through the door, tense as a lute string. When he
saw Rod looking back at him, he almost sagged with relief. Then he was
beside the bed, kneeling, holding his father's hand in his own. "Thy
pardon, sir! I did seek to mount guard over thee, but some churl whose
mind was hidden did come upon me unawares and smite me senseless!"
"No pardon needed, I assure you." Rod clapped the boy on the shoulder,
and couldn't stop the grin. "So. You thought it was your turn to guard me,
huh?"
Magnus flushed and lowered his eyes.
"Nice to know," Rod said gently. "Very nice to know. But then, I always
have been glad to have you by my side."
Magnus looked up again, saw the unmistakable look of pride in his
father's eyes, and smiled again.
"And thanks for taking care of Fess," Rod added. "I wasn't quite up to
it."
"Nay." Magnus's face darkened with anxiety. "What struck thee, sir?
The elf did speak of thy battling six, with no aid."
"He underrates himself," Rod grunted, "and he forgot about Fess." But

he wondered—had Beaubras's deeds really been his own?
There was a knock at the door again.
Mother Paterna Testa opened it. A younger nun stood just outside.
"Mother, there are men come before the wall, and they call for thy
patient."
"I shall come."
"Me, too." Rod struggled up.
"Nay," Mother Paterna Testa commanded.
"I tell you, I can walk!" Rod felt the surge of adrenaline. "Give me a
hand, son." Rod didn't wait; he grabbed Magnus's shoulder and hoisted
himself up.
"Thou hast lost blood, good gentleman! Thou must needs rest!"
Rod exchanged a glance with Magnus, then turned back to Mother
Paterna Testa. "Can you take a shock? Without thinking I'm some sort of
monster, that is."
The nun frowned. "I am a healer; I can accustom myself. Of what dost
thou speak?"
Rod let the outside world go hang, and paid attention to rejecting the
floor. He drifted upward six inches.
Mother Paterna Testa's eyes widened. Slowly, she nodded. "Thou art a
warlock, then."
"Sorry about that."
"Rejoice—'tis a gift from God." The nun turned away to the door. "As
thou wilt have it, then. Come with us."
She followed the nun out, across the cloister to the chapel, went in, and
climbed up into the steeple. The top chamber held a large bell. They went
around it to look out a high, thin window.
Below them, in front of the convent gates, a half-dozen men-at-arms

leaned on their spears. Actually, they looked like well-to-do bandits—each
wearing different colors and garments, but none ragged. Before them, a
tall man in a red robe paced impatiently. His head was bald, and he was in
his prime, with a sword at his waist, but Rod would have known that face
anywhere.
"Brume!" Rod cried.
"Thou dost know him, then?"
"You bet I do! He's the sorcerer who cast this whole madness on me!"
Magnus stared; then his eyes narrowed.
Mother Paterna Testa nodded. "And behind him?"
"I see a dozen mercenaries," Rod answered. "What else could I see?"
"An ogre and trolls," the nun answered. "These are they who set upon
thee last night."
Rod's gaze whipped back to the men. Then he said, "Well. Nice to know
I'm in touch with reality again." He didn't say whether or not it was a
pleasant sensation.
Mother Paterna Testa smiled with satisfaction. "Thou didst lay about
thee like a veritable demon, like two men or three. The ointment has cured
thy sight, then."
"It certainly has. But how could a simple paste do so much?"
" 'Tis that part of thy mind that doth make dreams," the nun reminded
him. "The witch-moss doth lend it strength, doth enhance its power, so
that thy waking mind doth perceive the dreams it doth show. Yet now
thou hast had fairy ointment on thine eyes, and whatsoever the Wee Folk
did place in it hath convinced thy mind that thou wilt no longer have
waking dreams, and thereby doth banish any vision that the witch-moss
within thee doth show."
Rod frowned, wondering about residual effects, but he didn't want to
know—that word "enhance" worried him.
The man in the red robe turned toward the gate with a gesture of

exasperation and called, "Wilt thou speak or not? We know thou hast ta'en
the High Warlock within thy wall, sore wounded! Surrender him now, or it
shall go hard!"
Mother Paterna Testa looked up at Rod in mild surprise. "So, then.
Thou art the High Warlock."
"Sorry not to mention it," Rod muttered. "It's just that some clergy
have strong ideas about people like me."
"We know that magic is a gift from God, and that on this Isle of
Gramarye, those whom the simple folk call 'warlock' are no more like to be
wicked than any other men. Why doth this man seek thee?"
"To kill him," Magnus grated. "My father doth stand between him and
the power he doth seek."
Rod stood immobile.
" 'Tis true, what the lad doth say?" the nun asked quietly.
Rod nodded. "This man is part of a crew that seek to overthrow the
King and Queen. So far, the only thing that's been stopping them is me
and my family."
The nun stood quiet for a moment. Then she turned and called out,
"The High Warlock hath claimed the sanctuary of the Church! He shall
have it! And thou must needs honor this sanctuary; it must not be
violated, at thy soul's peril!"
The men behind Brume stirred and muttered uneasily, but he turned
on them, crying, "What! Wilt thou be frightened by a nurse's fable? Dost
truly think thou hast souls to imperil?"
The men stopped stirring, but they glared at him, stone-faced.
Mother Paterna Testa relaxed.
Brume tossed his head, exasperated. "Well enough, then! Bring the
stake, and the woman!"
This, the men were willing enough to do. They ran into the forest and
ran back a moment later with a post and some bundles of wood. They

jammed the stake into a hole in the ground that they had already dug and
piled sticks around it. Then another pair hustled a woman in pastel robes
and a coronet out of the forest.
Mother Paterna Testa gasped. "The countess!"
"She rode out a half hour since," said the nun beside her, pale-faced.
"She did say her lord did need her ere noon. We begged her to take escort,
but she would not hear of it!"
The countess fought them every inch of the way, kicking and biting, but
the bandits brought her up onto the pile of wood and bound her to the
post. Brume turned back to the convent, a sneering grin on his face. "Send
out the High Warlock, or thy patron shall go to her ancestors!"
The nuns' faces were pale, but the countess herself cried, "Do not! Thou
must needs not violate sanctuary!"
"That's right, you mustn't." Rod turned back to the stairwell. "So I'll
go."
"Sisters!" Mother Paterna Testa called, and two nuns stepped together,
to block Rod's path. He turned back to Mother Paterna Testa, his face
thunderous. "I'm not that important."
"Thou hast had thy warning!" Brume shouted, and threw a torch into
the kindling. Flame billowed up, and smoke rose in a shroud.
"See!" Brume gestured. "Her ancestors come to escort her!"
And as they gazed, the smoke formed itself into amorphous heads with
empty eyes and moaning mouths, surging up toward heaven.
The nuns cried out, but Rod called, "Don't let him scare you! We know
he's a projective—and smoke is even easier to move around than
witch-moss! He's making those heads, not her ancestors!"
"But she will burn!" moaned one of the nuns.
"Not if I go," Rod answered, and dove out the steeple window.
"Papa!" Magnus protested, and plunged out after him. "Thou hast not
thy full strength! Thou shalt fall!"

But Rod had leveled off and was flying nicely. He looked back over his
shoulder. "What was that?"
Magnus gulped and said, "Naught."
Rod landed with a jolt, right in front of Brume, sword out and
thrusting. Brume parried, riposted, and returned the thrust. Rod leaned
aside and thought, Fess!
The monastery gates burst open, and the great black horse charged out
with a screaming whinny.
Chapter Twenty-One
Rod was rather busy cutting and parrying, but he did manage the
occasional glimpse out of the corner of his eye. Fess was knocking over
bandits with his front hooves, then reaching out to grasp a collar with his
teeth and toss the man aside. They were coming at him from all
directions, of course, which would ordinarily have given him a
seizure—but Magnus was on his back, keeping three captured swords
busy, two with his hands and one behind him with his mind, fending off
culprits until Fess could take care of them.
Then a flying squad charged out of the underbrush and hit the convent
wall. Since it was only eight feet high, they were up and over in a matter of
seconds.
Magnus whirled, appalled.
In the steeple, Mother Paterna Testa narrowed her eyes. "Aid me, Sister
Lynne."
As the bandits hurdled the wall, their feet shot out from under them,
and they kept hurdling, slamming down to the ground on their backs.
Then Modwis rose up with his mace.
The Mother Superior squeezed her eyes shut, then shook her head
sadly. "Pray God they may live!"
"Amen," murmured Sister Lynne.
But Magnus's concentration had flagged, and bandits hit Fess from all

four sides. Magnus shouted and lashed out with his right and back
swords, and the bandits there danced away as Fess reached for the one in
front while he tried to strike a hoof at the one on the left, then caught the
one in the front while he lashed out with his hind legs— and went stiff.
Magnus gave a cry of anger and exasperation, and the soldiers in front
of him shot bodily off the ground and went flying toward the trees.
Meanwhile, Rod was cutting and thrusting with panic and anger, afraid
for the poor, innocent countess. Already she was coughing in the smoke of
her bogus ancestors.
Then a brisk breeze whipped up and blew the ghosts away to her right.
Rod didn't want to know where the breeze had come from, but he was
afraid he knew, anyway. He blocked a cut, parried a thrust, riposted, and
thrust, scoring Brume's shoulder. The sorcerer shouted an oath and leaped
back, then narrowed his eyes and growled.
Yes, growled—and right about then, the elves' ointment must have worn
off, because he seemed to grow and swell, towering eight feet above Rod
with a fanged mouth and a huge club.
The ogre was back.
All about them, trolls shambled, stabbing with crude spears—and the
young wolf danced about them, leaping in to slash with his teeth, then
darting out before they could strike.
He was in horrible danger, and Rod's heart lurched. "Magnus! Get out
of here, quick…"
The instant's distraction was enough. The huge club smashed down.
Rod saw it coming, too late to more than lean away, and the bludgeon
smashed into his side, sending him flying. He landed with cracking and
crunching, and extra pains shot up his back and sides. Flame danced by
his head, and he realized, with horror, that he'd fallen into the pyre
around the stake. He struggled to rise—but even as he did, he realized the
flames hadn't grown, and were even now dying. He scrambled to his feet,
racked with pain, the world swimming about him, and staggered toward
the ogre, aiming his sword at its navel…

Modwis was there in front of him, mace slamming into the ogre's
kneecap.
The ogre howled and fell back, clasping at its collarbone.
"Back, quickly!" Modwis tugged at Rod.
"But… but…" The scene swam in front of him, but Rod remembered
priorities. "The countess…"
"She is freed, and safe! Quickly, back through the gate!"
Rod turned, startled. Sure enough, the stake was empty, and the flames
were dead.
He didn't ask—he yielded and backed in through the gate.
The ogre roared and charged.
Flame exploded, filling the gateway.
The ogre scrabbled to a stop, and the trolls fell back, muttering
fearfully.
Rod had a second to think. What was he supposed to do when the
hallucinations hit again? And who had told him…Oh, yes, Saint John. And
he was supposed to remember opening the vial, that was right. He closed
his eyes for a second, and the vision was there, clear and vivid, a huge pile
of test tubes, and one of them right under his nose, its fumes wreathing
his head…
"Lord Gallowglass!" Modwis cried, and Rod looked up through the
flame to see the ogre shrink and diminish, becoming Brume again. Behind
him, only four bandits stood, and they were looking distinctly nervous.
" Tis naught but illusion!" Brume shouted with contempt. "Walk boldly,
and thou shalt not even feel the heat!"
The bandits muttered to one another. They didn't look convinced.
"See! I shall go to root out this vile warlock!" Brume called, and
marched boldly into the flames.

He made it through, all right, but he came out howling, beating at his
burning robe. His men stared; then they turned tail and ran.
But they skidded to a halt as they hit the treeline, then backed up
slowly, their arms out and away from their sides—for a singing sword
whipped figure eights in the air before them, and a firebrand and a ball of
lightning drifted out of the wood on their flanks.
Not that Rod saw any of that—he and Modwis were too busy beating
out the flames on Brume's robe. When they had it down to a smolder, Rod
looked up at the steeple— and, sure enough, the Mother Superior stood
there, face stony, staring at the fire. Rod felt his stomach sink; apparently
these nuns had something in common with the monks of Saint Vidicon,
after all.
Then Brume snarled and lashed out at him.
Rod fell back, startled, but Brume scrambled up and thrust with his
sword. Rod managed to bring his own blade up in time to parry—but just
as he did, Modwis struck, and Brume's thrust went wide as he pitched
forward. Rod rolled to the side, and the sorcerer landed, out cold.
Rod knelt over him, staring, panting, unbelieving.
Modwis, much more practically, unwound a coil of rope from his belt
and started tying Brume up.
"He's—he's a psi," Rod croaked. "The rope—won't do much good when
he wakes up."
"He shall not waken."
Rod looked up, startled, to see his wife standing over them.
"Thou hast done well," she said to the leprechaun. "I cannot give thee
sufficient thanks."
"The knowledge that I have aided thee and thine husband, lady, is
thanks enough," Modwis muttered, clearly awed.
"Yet we stand in thy debt," Gwen insisted, "and the enchantment that
bound thee is broke now, is't not?"

"It is," Modwis confirmed. "I have, at least, made reparation."
"And brought down another villain betime." Gwen turned—just as the
countess came in over the scorched threshold accompanied by Cordelia
and Gregory, and Mother Paterna Testa approached from the chapel.
First things first. "What of the bandits?" Gwen demanded.
"They sleep, Mama," Cordelia assured her, "and will not waken, whiles
Geoffrey doth guard them."
"They had best not." Gwen's tone hinted at mayhem. "He doth know
better than to let one awaken for sport, doth he not?"
"Aye!" came a voice from the other side of the wall, clearly
disappointed.
The countess stared. "What manner of dame art thou, that hast the
ordering of such terrors?"
"Their mother," Gwen said shortly.
"And my wife," Rod said, senselessly proud. He turned to the other
Mother present. "I take it you and your sisters know a little bit more about
magic than you led me to believe."
"We are healers," Mother Paterna Testa said noncom-mittally, "and
where there's power to heal, there's power to harm." With that, she knelt,
lifted Brume's head, and poured the contents of a vial down his throat.
"Do not wake him!" Modwis cried, alarmed.
"I do not." The nun stood again. "The draught I've given will assure his
sleep for a day and a night, at the least." She looked up at Gwen. "How
didst thou come to be near when we had need of thee, lady?"
"We had finished some business my husband bade us see to, in
Runnymede," Gwen answered, "and mine eldest did cry for aid. We came
quickly."
"Aye, thou didst that!" said the Countess. "And I cannot thank thee
enough, lady, for loosing me from that stake!"

"Thou hast aided these good sisters, who did aid mine husband," Gwen
returned. "An we could do more for thee, we would." She turned to the
nuns. "And for thee, sisters."
"We are glad to aid," said Mother Paterna Testa, but she turned to Rod
with a frown. "Yet we bade thee rest."
Rod shook his head. "I couldn't see an innocent lady burned for my
sake."
"Yet thou shouldst not have been able to lift thy sword," said the nun,
"for the loss of blood, and need of rest. How hast thou raised thyself to
fight?''
"Sheer adrenaline," Rod answered, but even as he said it, he realized it
had ebbed. His weakness suddenly hit him redoubled, and the lights went
out again.
Chapter Twenty-Two
Remarkably, Rod's head felt totally clear, so clear that he couldn't
believe he hadn't noticed how muzzy it had felt.
"What happened to the castle of Brume?"
"Is that what thou didst see?" Geoffrey asked, amazed. "We saw naught
but a log house, with a palisade of sharpened stakes."
' 'That was enough for my subconscious to build a horror-show castle,"
Rod explained.
Gwen was riding beside him on a Fess-drawn sleigh, heading south on
a winter road, escorted by a self-propelled sled with four children aboard.
Rod asked, "How about the sorcerer, Brume?"
"Ah. He, my husband, was real enough," Gwen said, "though his powers
were no more than those of any other warlock of Gramarye. Stronger, yes,
but no more numerous."
"Yet he did have henchmen," Geoffrey said darkly, "and queerly clad
were they."

"Aye." Cordelia frowned. "They went all in black, even to hiding their
faces amidst black scarves, and slashed at thee with swords of strange
design, and keen-edged stars which they hurled."
Rod recognized the descriptions and nodded. "My mind just didn't see
anything draped in black, just as the Oriental theater intended. Less seen,
less guilt. Tell me—how many of them did I kill?"
"Only one," Geoffrey said, wooden-faced. "Mama lulled the rest to
sleep."
"Where are they?"
"Taken, by a squadron of guards," Gwen assured him.
"Guards? How come there just happened to be…" Then Rod turned to
her, understanding dawning. "They've been following me ever since I went
berserk, haven't they?"
"Aye," Gwen admitted, "though somewhat tardily, for we knew thou
wouldst not wish to be seen."
"So all the bandits are headed for Tuan's dungeon?"
"Even so, with the squadron of guardsmen who did follow thee."
"And the sorcerer will wake to find himself bound with silver," said
Magnus, "in the midst of a dozen warlocks and witches."
Rod wondered if even that would hold him. "Tell Tuan to make the trial
short."
"If he doth feel need of a trial at all. A dozen peasants have cried mercy,
and blamed him for their subversion— and Granny Ban did gush forth all
her tale when we came upon her, so glad was she to be delivered."
"Yeah, from me." Rod felt guilt weigh him down. "Was she innocent?"
"She was sore affrighted, Papa," Cordelia explained, "yet unhurt."
Rod's mouth tightened with chagrin. "Thank Heaven I had a vestige of
self-control—Heaven, and Fess. So I scared an innocent old lady half to
death?"

"Well, not so innocent as all that," Magnus hedged.
Rod turned, eyes widening. "The stew was drugged?"
"There were vegetables of witch-moss in't," Gwen confirmed, "though
there may be truth in her claim that she knew not what they were."
"She had been terrified by men she did speak of as bandits," Geoffrey
explained, "foul villains, who did bid her feed thee so, under pain of
death!"
"And the one of them," said Magnus, "did come clad in a red robe, with
a bald head."
"Brume himself, huh? Well, there's evidence, anyway. So she didn't
really want to do it."
"It may be so," Gwen said carefully. "Her neighbors speak well of her, at
the least. All do bless her for her cures and midwifing."
"And she did rejoice that thou hadst caught her out," Cordelia added,
"so that she had not slain thee."
"What did the bandits do to her?"
"Naught; the Crown's men did take her first, and I misdoubt me an
ever a woman was so glad to see a dungeon," said Gwen. "There will be no
danger to her now, sin that we have ta'en Brume and his henchmen."
"Been busy, haven't you? Not that I've left you much choice. How about
Modwis?"
"He is a true leprechaun," Gregory explained, "who doth dwell in this
wood. The King of the Elves bade him watch o'er thee, and he was sore
distressed when he woke from his enchanted sleep in Brume's keep, to find
thee gone."
"So that's why he seemed to dwindle away." Rod frowned. "What was
this reparation you spoke of? Was his guarding me a sort of punishment?"
"Nay; 'twas a chance to redeem himself. The Wee Folks have laws, too,
husband, and Modwis slew a man without leave of the Elfin King.''

Rod stared. "Modwis? Sentimental, good-hearted Modwis? What had
the man done?"
Gwen glanced at the children. "That which we may speak of at another
time; yet I think he may have told thee some part of it."
Rod nodded; he remembered Modwis saying something about a
damsel, and another wicked sorcerer named Gormlin—but apparently,
Gwen didn't want to be specific in front of the children. "So the man he
killed was a real villain?"
"Aye," said Gwen. "No elf could truly blame him— yet he had broke
their Law."
"So he undertook the dangerous task of escorting a mad warlock, to win
his way back from exile. Lord knows he deserved it. Nice to know he was
real, if not really as I saw him."
"But where did Modwis get such good information? No, strike that—the
elves always do have all the answers, don't they? And you say you found
the old lady who sold us the chestnuts?"
Gwen said grimly, "We have learned that the Lord Mayor of
Runnymede did go homeward with his wife just before us, and did not see
her by the roadside."
"No wonder nobody else started seeing things! Nobody else ate
them—except you five; but a witch-moss chestnut wouldn't bother you't"
The children exchanged startled glances and backed their sled off a
little. Gwen stilled. "How couldst thou know that?"
"Sheer deduction." Rod felt the heat on his face, and hoped he wasn't
blushing. "How did you confirm it?"
"The warlock Toby did track her thoughts, and we did seize her basket.
When Gregory did make the chestnuts turn to apricocks, we knew them
for what they were."
Rod nodded. "What did you do with the old lady?"
"Call her not a lady," Gwen said with asperity, "and her age owed more

to skill with paint, than to years. Nay, she doth abide in a dungeon cell,
awaiting thy testimony, and judgment."
"So she came by just for us?"
"Solely," Gwen said sourly.
"I never did like special treatment," Rod groused.
"Thou wilt have to abide it, for some time," Cordelia informed him.
"Thou hast fearfully abused thy body, Papa."
"Yeah, well, that's what happens when you let it get out of balance with
your mind," Rod answered. "Don't worry, though—I'll rest."
Cordelia and Gwen exchanged looks.
"We rejoice that thy mind, at least, is healed," Gregory intervened.
Rod frowned. "Well, don't be too sure of that, son. Once something like
this gets into your body, it may never get out. For all I know, I might have
a relapse. If I start talking about demons, duck."
"Of demons, at least, thou hast no need to be anxious," Gwen assured
him. "Those thou didst see came from the twisted mind of the the sorcerer
Brume."
"Give the fellow his due," Geoffrey said. "He is a thought-caster of
amazing strength."
"He is a top-notch projective," Rod agreed.
"He did cast into thy mind only the embodiments of the terrors and
rages that did fill his soul."
Rod nodded. "Just as the monsters I saw were really only projections of
my own secret fears."
Geoffrey started. "Hast thou so many fears, then, Papa?"
"Oh, yes," Rod said softly. "Oh, yes—though I usually keep them locked
away in the dungeons of my mind. It is nice to know that the only reason
they were able to get out was that someone fed me the wrong

chemical—but that has its bad side, too." Rod winced; the worst of the
nausea and headache was gone, but there was still enough left to make
him wish for a Dramamine.
"Thou must not be so anxious," Gwen scolded. "Thy bairns and I shall
handle thee with such care, thou wilt think thou art made of porcelain."
"Well, if I get too bad, you can always send me back to the Mother
Superior," Rod said with a smile. "Say, why do you suppose she looked so
horrified when I told her I'd put in a good word for her with the abbot?"
Gwen smiled, amused. "She did take me aside, and beg me to dissuade
thee. She doth fear that the good they do would be sorely diminished an
folk did know of them, the more so since the abbot might disagree with
them as to the nature of their mission."
"Oh? And just what do they see their mission as being, pray tell?"
"They have taken it upon themselves to aid in keeping all of Gramarye
from madness," Gwen explained, "by discovering the worst of the
monsters that do haunt people's nighttimes, and taking action against
them."
"What kind of action?"
"Prayers, most often—yet their prayers do seem to be most singularly
effective."
"I'll bet they are," Rod said. "A bunch of projectives and telekinetics,
focusing their powers on a common goal by means of communal
meditation? I'll just bet they're effective!"
"I rejoice that they are, my lord, so that they were able to heal thee."
Rod looked up at her in astonishment. "You mean it wasn't just an
accident that I wandered toward their gates?"
"I can get you a really good deal on favorable accidents," somebody
said.
Rod looked up, and saw the debonair devil leaning against a tree just
ahead of them. Rod smiled. "No, thanks. I can make my own."

Then he made a circle of his forefinger and thumb and let the forefinger
shoot out as though he were flicking away a fly.
And the devil disappeared.

