v2.0
The Warlock's Companion
Christopher Stasheff
 
THE BIRTH OF FESS
 
"That's  the  'Faithful  Cybernetic  Companion'  series.  The  program's  for  extreme
loyalty, as well as the usual total obedience." Al turned to his screen and called up the
program. "It just might be strong enough to counter the Declaration of Independence."
Jose  frowned.  "How  could  it…"  Then  his  face  lit  up.  "Of  course!  If  the  robot's
extremely loyal to you, it can be totally independent, and still be on your side!"
Al  nodded.  "Independence  might  counter  an  inclination  toward  obedience,  but
loyalty would make the robot do what his owner said to, anyway—unless there was a
damn  good  reason  not  to."  He  shrugged.  "But  all  our  programs  have  overrides  for
illegal or blatantly unethical commands, anyway."
Jose felt excitement building. "Then the robot might not have to be destroyed?"
"And you might not have to be fired."
 
 
Praise for the WARLOCK series
 
" Fresh… well written and entertaining."
—W. D. Stevens, Fantasy Review
 
"Enchanting adventure… One starts to get the feeling of what it's like to be a child
with magical powers."
—Fanzine
 
"It is refreshing to see a fantasy hero aided by his wife and children."
—Rick Osborne, Fantasy Review
contents

Prologue
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Epilogue
 
 
 
 
Christopher Stasheff
THE WARLOCK'S COMPANION
 
ACE BOOKS, NEW YORK
 
This book is an Ace original edition, and has never been previously published.
THE WARLOCK'S COMPANION
An Ace Book/published by arrangement with the author
 
PRINTING HISTORY
Ace edition/December 1988
All rights reserved.
Copyright © 1988 by Christopher Stasheff.
 
This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, by mimeograph or any other means, without permission.
For information address: The Berkley Publishing Group,
200 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
 
ISBN: 0-441-87341-3
 
Ace Books are published by The Berkley Publishing Group,
200 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
 
The name "ACE" and the "A" logo are trademarks belonging to Charter Communications, Inc.
 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Prologue
^ »
Jose frowned at the screen and typed, "RUN COPY BRAIN." The screen went blank,
then rippled into a display of cues and standard responses. "LOAD BRAINPAN."
Jose squeezed his eyes shut  and  gave  his  head  a  shake.  Time  enough  to  think
about Marcia later. Right now, he was on the job. He was being paid for  this, and he
wouldn't get any money if he didn't do the job right. In fact, he wouldn't have a job. He
hit  the  keystroke  that  opened  the  window  to  the  production  lab  below  and  typed,
"CHECK BRAINPAN."
The words "BRAINPAN LOADED" rippled across the screen.
Jose nodded, feeling satisfied to know  that,  in  the  sterilized  white  room  below,  a
technician had clamped a stainless steel basketball into the  padded  hemisphere  that
would hold it while the program was copied into it. The sphere held a brand-new robot
brain, a giant crystal, a three-dimensional lattice that could hold a pattern of electrical
charges  forever,  but  was  so  far  just  a  carefully-grown  rock.  The  technician  had
connected the leads from Jose's computer to the brain's  read-only  memory  bank.  It
was ready to receive its basic operating program.
The cue and response disappeared from the screen,  leaving the next one in line:
SPECIFY ROUTE.
Jose typed in, "A = B =…"
"Equals."  Those  two  little  parallel  lines  made  something  twist  inside  him.  He  was
stunned by  the  intensity  of  his  own  reaction,  by  how  much  the  idea  of  equality,  to
which he had always been dedicated, could bother him, and all because Marcia had
started in on him again this morning, started in on him about whether or not the two of
them  were  really  equal  in  their  relationship,  as  they  were  supposed  to  be.  And,  of
course, once she had started, she wouldn't let go.
It had all begun when he had announced, "Breakfast is ready," as she came out of
the shower.
Marcia paused in the hallway, holding the towel tight around her, and gave him her
haughtiest  look.  "I  can  punch  the  right  code  into  the  autochef  as  well  as  you  can,
Jose."
Jose looked up in surprise. "Of course you can. I just thought it would be nice to…"
"To make me feel as though I'm not doing  my  job?  Women  don't  have  to  be  the
cooks any more, you know."
"Of course I know! You're not my servant."
"But men aren't servants either, right?" Marcia said, with sarcasm.
Jose frowned. "Hey. Nobody's supposed to be anybody's servant, right?"
"Don't be ridiculous!" she snapped. "If the men don't do it, who will?"

"We'll each do it for ourselves. Right?"
"Not right at all." She retorted. "How could it be?"
"Because if we each cook our own food, no one's serving anybody."
"Oh, so the high-and-mighty man can't stoop to doing the servile jobs?''
Jose was puzzled. "Does that mean I can't make breakfast for you now and then?"
Marcia reddened, snapped, "Don't be an ass!" and whirled away into the bedroom.
With a feeling of dread, Jose glanced at the calendar. "Beware the Ides," indeed…
He sighed and took a bite of toast. Somehow, it didn't taste very good.
He had just finished watching the quick-scan  of the news on the screen,  and was
punching in the stories he  wanted  in  detail,  when  Marcia  came  storming  out  of  the
bedroom,  immaculately  clad  and  coifed,  calling,  "The  Declaration  of  Independence
says we're supposed to be equal, right?"
Jose spun to face her, totally taken aback. "What… How…"
"The Declaration! And we can't really be equal as long as we're dependent on each
other.  To  be  really  equal,  you  have  to  be  totally  in-dependent.  That's  what  the
Declaration is all about!"
Jose paled. "You don't really mean that!"
"Of course I do! You can let me make my own breakfast!" She bit into an English
muffin and made a face. "Besides, it's cold."
"All right, so I shouldn't have punched the autochef for you!" Jose stamped over to
the counter, jaw set, rolled up her breakfast and turned to stuff it into the disposal.
"Hey!" Marcia squawked. "Now what am I supposed to eat?"
Jose looked up in surprise. "Punch up a new one, of course! So it'll at least be hot!"
"I don't have time for that now! All because your silly masculine ego was wounded!"
"My silly masculine  ego  didn't  have  a  damn  thing  to  do  with  your  not  liking  cold
muffins!"
"Did I say I didn't like it?"
"You said it was cold…"
"But I was eating it! The least you could do would be to make me a new one!"
"I  don't  know  where  I'll  find  the  energy."  Jose  turned  to  punch  buttons  on  the
autochef.
"Oh,  so  now  it's  sarcasm,  is  it?"  Marcia  was  standing  straight,  chin  lifted,  eyes
sparkling. "Well, tell me, Mister Big Egalitarian, how you're going to be sarcastic about
your sacred Declaration!"
Jose whirled, staring. "I wouldn't dream of it!"
"But you'll break every principle in it, won't you?"
"I'm not breaking a single phrase!"
"Oh, yeah? Well, how about where it says that 'the Creator has endowed all people
with certain unalienable rights'?"

"I never…"
She overrode him. "And Jefferson shows how that means that 'these persons ought
to be free and independent entities'!''
Jose frowned. "I don't think that's quite…"
"Oh,  sure,  nitpick  about  words!  But  let  me  tell  you,  Mister  Know-It-All—if  'these
persons ought to be free  and independent entities,' then wives ought to  be  free  and
independent of their husbands!"
"But he was talking about states!" Jose wailed.
"He was talking about principles!" Marcia whirled away to the door. "Come on, we'll
be late!"
She  settled  into  one  corner  of  the  wraparound  sofa  and  told  the  computer,
"Eight-Mile and Adams." She told Jose, "Close the door."
Jose  frowned  at  her  as  the  door  closed  behind  him,  but  he  schooled  himself  to
patience.
But not today. She was already saying, "If the principle applies to states, it applies
to people. If New Jersey was supposed to be independent of England, a wife should be
independent of her husband!"
"But you are!" The aircar moved, and Jose lurched into a seat.
"Then why do you still expect me to make breakfast?"
"Breakfast!" Jose hit his forehead with the heel of his hand. "Your muffins are sitting
in the autochef!"
"Oh, don't worry, I won't starve!" She certainly didn't look as though she would; her
whole form seemed almost radiant. "After  all, I  can stop and pick  up a munch at the
Bite-tique. And all because you had to start this silly argument!"
Jose  bit  back  the  retort  about  who  had  started  what  and  took  a  deep  breath.
Breakfast? What did she want breakfast for? She thrived on arguments!
"Oh, that's right, do the martyred patience act!"  Marcia snapped. "Can't you stand
up for yourself at all?"
"The question is, should I?" Jose said carefully.  "After  all, if  the Declaration really
does say…"
"Oh, leave the Declaration out of this! Can't you think for yourself?"
Jose looked up, hurt.
"And now it's the wounded puppy,"  Marcia said  contemptuously.  "Honestly,  Jose,
sometimes  you  cling  to  me  so  much  that  it's  smothering!  I  mean,  if  your  precious
Declaration says to be a free and independent entity, you can at least let me be one,
can't you?"
Jose's face crumpled. "All right! If that's what you want, you can have it! I'll give you
a divorce!"
"Divorce?" Marcia bleated, horrified.  "Jose!  How could you  even  think  of  such  a
thing?''
Jose just stared at her.

"Just because I'm a little snappish… Jose! You don't mean it!"
"But… but I thought… You said you wanted to be…"
"Don't you dare!"
"A free and independent entity!" Jose bawled.
"That's  the  Declaration,  not  me.'  How  could  you  possibly  think  I  would  want  a
divorce?"
"But that's what it means, to be independent…"
"Oh, that's just a word!" Marcia leaned forward to squeeze his hand. "I mean, can't I
even have a little light conversation with you in the mornings?"
The aircar grounded, and its grille announced, "Eight-Mile and Adams."
"Don't you even think about a divorce!" Marcia commanded, darting a quick kiss at
him. "Have a good day, darling."
 
 
Well, that was something of a tall order. How could Jose "have a good day" when it
had started with such turmoil? He sighed philosophically, then sighed again to try to get
his  emotions  under  control,  and  wondered  whether  he'd  ever  be  able  to  tell  when
Marcia was serious, and when she was just talking.
But he couldn't help thinking about it. Every time he tried to do something else, the
argument came back to him. He heaved a sigh and took his hands off  the keyboard,
closing his eyes and leaning back in his chair, trying  to think the experience through
so he could put it to rest.
The Declaration. That was it. That had been the keystone of Marcia's argument, the
phrases "that all people are endowed by  their Creator with certain  unalienable rights"
and "these colonies ought to be  free  and  independent  states."  He  knew  she'd  been
misquoting, twisting Jefferson's words to suit her argument. Not that it mattered; when
she was in one of those moods, she'd  use  any  ammunition  that  was  handy.  Still,  it
might help him to get the argument out of his mind if he could see the phrases the way
Jefferson  had  written  them,  and  reassure  himself  that  he  wasn't  really  violating  the
Declaration's principles by the way he was living.
So  he  cleared  his  screen  and  punched  in  the  code  for  the  central  library's
database, feeling like an idiot—he knew very well that he was living according  to his
own  ideals,  and  knew  he  was  letting  his  weakness  show  by  having  to  prove  it  to
himself.
The screen lit up with the library's logo and a request for a request. Jose punched
in "The Declaration of Independence" with a feeling of relief;  at least something was
being reasonable.
The  political  entity  that  the  Declaration  had  founded  still  existed,  though  it  had
become  so  completely  involved  in  the  complex  of  nations  that  it  was  one  part  of  a
united Gestalt, as were all the other nations of Terra. But the words that had begun that
union still rang down the corridors of human history, firing youthful minds with zeal and
exalting older spirits—and, through them, had in turn become the basis of the Terran
Union.

Then it jumped at him from the screen, a full facsimile of the document itself, but he
knew that each letter was also in binary. Not that he would dream of moving sentences
around in it.
But  he  could  scroll  through  it,  of  course,  and  he  did.  He  read  it  word  by  word,
feeling  a  measure  of  calmness  returning  to  him  as  the  clarion  phrases  rang  out
through his mind.
There  they  were,  right  at  the  beginning,  the  truths  Jefferson  had  held  to  be
self-evident—that all men were created equal, that they were endowed by their Creator
with certain unalienable rights…
His mind came to a screeching halt. "All men are created equal?" Yes, Marcia had
been misquoting. Only one word changed, though—right?
He dismissed the notion as unworthy. The distinction wasn't  significant;  Jefferson
had probably had all people in mind, men and women; and if  he hadn't  in  1776,  he
surely would have in 3035.
But it did rather undercut Marcia's argument, didn't it? And since all she was using it
for was argument…
Sexist  document. He could almost  hear  her  voice  dismissing  it  angrily.  And  she
might have a point there—but then, she shouldn't have cited the Declaration.
That  wasn't  germane,  either,  though.  What  mattered  was  knowing  that  he,  Jose,
hadn't tried to treat her as inferior—and he knew damned well that he hadn't. He'd been
showing her a bit of consideration, not being condescending.
He scrolled on through the document, feeling a little better, reading as he went, until
he came to the phrase, "These United Colonies are,  and of Right ought to be, FREE
AND INDEPENDENT STATES." He held the phrase centered on the screen,  nodding
with satisfaction—he'd remembered the quotation almost accurately.  And Marcia had
been wrong as well as right—there was a difference between a colony's having a right
to govern itself, and a woman's right to not have to take orders any more than a man
did.
Of  course,  everybody  had  to  take  orders,  unless  they  were  royalty—and  these
days, even the kings and queens had to obey the law. But a woman shouldn't have to
take orders from her husband any more than he should have to take orders from her…
For a moment, Jose's head whirled, and he found himself wondering what he was
doing in that marriage. Or was it really a marriage?
Heresy. He brought his attention back firmly to the issue at hand. He was living in
accord with the Declaration's principles; he didn't have anything to feel badly about.
Unless, said a niggling doubt in the back of his mind—unless Jefferson's  principle
of independence really meant that no one should ever become so fully dependent on
another  person  that  you  could  really  say  they  were  married.  But  Jose  was  sure
Jefferson hadn't meant that.
But the principle itself… ?
The principle could wait. Jose pulled himself together firmly. He could work out that
principle now and again, for the rest of his life; it was only one more problem to solve,
the problem of being independent but married, and he was sure he could figure it out
in time. Meanwhile, there was an important issue of a robot brain  that needed to  be

programmed, and had been waiting far longer than it should have.
But he was almost at the end of the document. He punched for "Scroll" and read the
rest of the Declaration, letting it fill him with pride in being human, in being…
"Hey, Jose!"
Jose frowned, turning to the programmer next to him. "Yeah, Bob?"
"It won't access the original." Bob sat back, waving at his screen. "What am I doing
wrong?"
Jose suppressed a smile. Bob was very young, and very new to the job. He knew
computers better than Jose did,  but he hadn't learned  much  about  the  asininities  of
bureaucracy yet, or the arbitrary nature of its decisions. "Here, let me see." He shoved
his chair over to Bob's workstation and frowned at the screen, pursing his lips. "What
access code were you using?"
"RB-34h-Z." Bob shoved the manual over and pointed to the entry.
Jose  let  the  smile  show.  "We  quit  making  that  model  five  years  ago,  Bob.  The
RB-34h-Z series is a mile long now."
Bob frowned. "Then how am I supposed to know which one to call up?"
"The catalogue is supposed to appear on your screen automatically when you enter
the code."
"Then how come it didn't?"
"Because  you're  supposed  to  enter  that  code  before  you  initiate  the  copying
procedure."  Jose  aborted  the  copy  program,  clearing  the  screen,  then  punched  in
"RB-34H-Z." The screen lit up with a scrolling display on the left, while a note on the
right informed them that those models marked with an asterisk were still in production.
Bob frowned. "Why didn't the manual tell me about this?"
"Because the guy who wrote it is a cretin."
Bob just stared for  a  second,  then  smiled.  "Well,  not  much  I  can  say  to  that,  is
there?"
"Other than asking why he keeps his job, no." Jose smiled. "Fact is,  he was fired
last year, but they figure everybody who works here knows the routine, so they haven't
bothered to update the manual."
Bob sighed. "Makes it tough on a beginner, doesn't it?"
"That's why they mix you in with us old fogies." Jose was thirty-two. "Now—you get
to guess which model you're supposed to load."
Bob's head came up; he stared, taken aback. "What… ? How the hell can I… ?"
"It's right here." Jose pointed to the fine print in the lower right-hand corner of Bob's
duty sheet.
Bob frowned. "I thought that was supposed to be the final code in the routine."
"Looks that way, doesn't it? But it's really the suffix you're  supposed to enter after
RB-34h-Z."
"Then  why  don't  they…No.  Cancel  that."  Bob  sighed.  "They  assume  every
programmer who works here knows that, don't they?"

Jose nodded. "The duty sheets are boilerplate. They just add the suffix and route it
to you."
Bob spread his hands and shook his head. "Well, now I know. Thanks, Jose."
"Anytime." Jose suppressed a smile again. "Call me the next time they foul you up."
Bob's  grin  followed  him  back  to  his  own  station.  He  smiled  at  the  blank
screen—nothing  to  clear  your  own  funk,  like  helping  somebody  else.  He  gave  a
contented sigh and typed in "RUN COPY BRAIN."
The  screen  responded,  "LOAD  BRAINPAN,"  and  Jose  was  off  again.  Now  he
zipped through the program and had it all set up in ten minutes. He pressed "execute"
and sat back to smile and monitor the copying, making sure nothing went wrong.
Nothing did. It ran without a flaw. An hour later, the screen lit up the "END COPY"
light, then the query "ENGRAVE?" Jose nodded with satisfaction. The program had run
flawlessly; he  entered  "YES"  and  the  computer  cued  the  final  changes  in  electrical
charges in the huge crystal below him, making the electronic matrix it had just copied a
permanent characteristic of the brain. The program was now impervious to flood, fire,
earthquake—and electromagnetic fields of all sizes and strengths. The only thing that
could erase that program now would be an  electrical  charge  so  strong  that  it  would
fuse  the  whole  brain  into  a  lump  of  slag.  The  screen  lit  up  with  "ENGRAVING
COMPLETE," and Jose smiled and typed in "REMOVE BRAIN," cuing  the production
lab below to take the sphere out of its clamps.
Then he remembered the Declaration.
It had still been on his board when he started the copying procedure.
It was now part of the robot's basic operating program.
Jose stared at the screen  with  a  sinking  feeling  in  his  stomach.  He  had  already
routed the end-of-program through to Production; the program was indelibly encoded
into the brain. He couldn't remove the Declaration.
The new brain was wasted.
So, Jose thought, was his job. He stared at the screen, feeling numb.
Chapter 1
« ^ »
"All right, I'll bite—why do we have to take six packs? We could just leave the clothes in
the drawers and teleport clean outfits to us every morning."
" 'Tis not right to misuse our powers thus," Gwen said primly. " 'Twould be wrong of
us to set so poor an example for the children—and 'twould make us, too, slothful."
"And, Papa," said Magnus, "it doth take some effort. Wouldst thou wish to labor so,
when thou art but newly waked, every morn?"
"Frankly, I  was planning to," Rod said, "and I'd  rather  do  that  than  carry  a  pack
twenty miles. Still, your mother is right—we should save magic for the things we can't

do  by  ordinary  means.  Oh,  I  can  see  making  the  pots  vibrate  at  a  supersonic
frequency to shake off the dirt, because we didn't want to wash them." He swung about
to glare at Geoffrey.  "Get that gleam out of your  eye!  It's bad enough  watching  you
clear the table by telekinesis!"
Geoffrey tried to glower, but he was feeling too ebullient, and had to make do with a
mischievous grin. " 'Tis far more fun, Papa, and faster too, though 'tis as much work.
Where is the harm in it?"
"It's  like  bragging,"  Rod  explained.  "You're  showing  off—and  if  a  non-esper  was
around to see it,  it would make him furiously  jealous. Of such things are witch-hunts
born."
"Then wherefore dost thou allow it, Papa?" Geoffrey asked.
"Because  the  non-espers  aren't  around,  and  it's  good  practice  for  you—you're
each increasing the number of things you can lift at one time, every day."
"Let us hear some words of sympathy for  the poor woman who must needs watch
thee, and catch the one-too-many thou dost ever let slip," Gwen reminded.
Cordelia flung her arms around her mother. "Ah,  poor dame, who must ever ward
us from our own foolishness! Yet 'tis good of thee, Mama, to aid us in our play!"
"Aptly said." Gwen smiled, amused. "I thank thee, daughter." She looked up at Rod.
"Yet they have each proved their ability to whisk things to themselves by thought."
"I suppose they have," Rod sighed, "so there's no point in not packing the clothes.
But it always makes such turmoil at the last minute."
"  'Always'?"  Magnus  grinned  wickedly.  "When  have  we  e're  gone  on  holiday
aforetime, Papa?"
"Well, there was the trip up into Romanov…"
"To spy out an evil sorcerer, as it eventuated," Gwen reminded him.
"And there was that ocean cruise, where we were teaching you kids how to make a
ship sail…"
"… And a storm came up, and blew us to that isle where the wicked magician did
seek to brew magics that would enslave the beastmen," Gregory reminded him.
"Well, then, there was that little educational trip  south, to check  on  the  source  of
those funny stones you kids had found…"
"Which ended in the discovery of evil magic worked unwittingly," Cordelia reminded
him.
"It was only the peasant who was unwitting of it, dear, not the futurians behind him."
"Yet 'twas scarcely restful," Geoffrey pointed out. Then he grinned. "Though we did
take some pleasure in it."
Cordelia's eyes lighted, and she began to dance, remembering.
"Enough," Rod commanded. "I'll never trust music again."
"In that case," Fess's voice murmured in his ear, "you should be all the more willing
to take your clothes in packs."
Rod  frowned.  "Any  particular  reason  for  eavesdropping?  You're  supposed  to  be

chomping your oats in the stable, like a good horse! Or a real one, at least."
"No non-espers are watching inside the stable, Rod—though I  am tempted to think
you are being rather mulish when it comes to bearing your pack."
Rod winced. "All right for you, steel steed—just for that, you get to carry them when
we get tired!"
"Then 'tis agreed we are to bear packs?" Cordelia asked.
Rod stilled, his mouth open.
"Well, 'tis done." Gwen buckled the last strap, hefted the pack, and tossed it to him.
"Let us away, husband."
 
 
Rod reined in just before they went into the trees and turned to look back at their
house. It had been a cottage once, but you couldn't call it that any more—they'd added
on too many rooms. Or the elves had, for them.
" 'Tis secure, husband," Gwen said softly.
"Come, Papa! Away!" Cordelia tugged at his arm.
"You need not worry about a national emergency occurring in your absence, Rod,"
Fess's voice murmured inside his ear.  "The Royal Coven will find  you in seconds, if
anything is amiss."
"I know, I know. But I didn't check to make sure the fire was out…"
"I did, Papa," Magnus said quickly.
"… And the doors were locked…"
Cordelia  closed  her  eyes  for  a  moment,  then  looked  up  and  smiled.  "They  are,
Papa."
"… And the cupboards were closed…"
Gregory gazed off into space, then said, "One was open, Papa. It is closed now."
"And if  there is aught else amiss, the elves will set it to rights,"  Gwen said  firmly,
taking him by the arm.
"None will seek to enter, sin the whole countryside  do know a legion of elves doth
keep watch o'er it," Gregory assured him.
Gwen nodded and said softly,  "Come away, husband.  Our  home  will  be  safe  the
whiles we are gone."
"I know, I know. I'm just a worrywart." But Rod gazed at the little house a moment
longer, smiling ever so slightly. Gwen looked up at his face, then turned to gaze at the
cottage with him, letting her head rest against his shoulder.
Finally, Rod turned to smile down at her. "We haven't done badly, have we?"
Her eyes glowed up at him, and she nodded. "Yet 'twill bide, and await our return.
Come away, husband, and let the poor house rest."
 
 

"Thou art silent, my lord," Gwen noted.
"Is it all that unusual?" Rod looked up in surprise.
"Well, nay," Gwen said carefully, "yet it doth usually betoken…"
"You mean the only time I shut up is when I'm surly."
"Nay, I had not said…"
"Actually, I thought I was a pretty good listener."
"Oh, thou art, thou ever art!" Gwen clasped his hand, where it held the reins in front
of her. "When I have need, thou art ever ready  to hearken! Yet I  do feel lorn, when
thou dost lose thyself in thoughts I ken not."
"Silly goose! Come, share my silence awhile!" And his arms tightened around her.
So she was quiet, leaning back against him, watching the children as they swooped
and  soared  over  the  fields  along  the  roadside;  their  laughter  came  to  her  like  the
chiming of wind-bells on the breeze. Then she looked up at the forest looming before
them and said, "I do, my lord—yet I know thy thoughts are not of me."
It took a second before she heard his gentle laugh. "Are  you so selfish, then, that
you can never spare my mind for other matters?"
She  heard  the  humor,  and  relaxed  a  bit.  "Ever,  though  I  do  rejoice  to  hear
them—yet there's thought, and there's brooding. Where do thy dark thoughts stray, my
lord?"
Rod sighed. "To the past, my dear. Just trying to reckon how long it's been since I
had a real, genuine vacation. Of course, while I was a bachelor, I wound up with a lot
of free  time between jobs—but those weren't vacations,  they  were  bouts  of  periodic
unemployment. Does our honeymoon count?"
Gwen smiled, and nestled back against him more snugly. "Mayhap, though we had
great tasks indeed before us that fortnight, coming to know one another in a new and
wondrous  way.  Yet  there  was  the  score  of  months  thereafter,  when  thou  wert
estranged from the King and Queen, whiles I  did carry  Magnus and thou didst build
our cottage…"
"Yeah, and the elves showed me how. I still think they did more of the building…"
Gwen hurried past that part; no point in telling him what had really  held the stones
up while the elves finished setting them. "… And that first year of his infant life, 'til Their
Majesties had need of thee again, and sought to heal the breach."
"I'm the one who did the healing, as I remember it; they just found a job for me. And
it seems as though they've kept it up; even when the big fights are over, they find these
little  informational  trips  for  me  to  make,  or  need  my  advice  about  so-and-so's  new
idea…"
"Mayhap a part of it is that we do abide close by them."
Rod sighed. "Yeah, maybe we do need a change of  scenery  to  really  relax."  He
looked up about himself, somewhat surprised. "And it looks as though we've had one.
When did we come into the forest?"
Broad  branches  spread  a  canopy  above  them,  stemming  from  tall  old  trees,
foot-thick and rough-barked, with here and there a yard-wide  veteran soaring up into

the dim, dark greenery above—a murmuring roof, lanced by shafts of light so pale as
to  be  almost  silver.  They  gazed  up,  exalted,  feeling  their  souls  expand  in  the
openness…
Until a four-foot  body shot through a beam, laughing in delight while a half-grown
juggernaut  speared  after  him  on  a  broomstick,  shouting  happy  predictions  of  dire
doom.
"Children!" Gwen cried, and Geoffrey jerked to a halt in midair, then swerved over to
the nearest tree. Cordelia dropped to the ground, trying to hide her broomstick behind
her back, while the elm next to her brother seemed to waver, then solidified again, a bit
wider than it had been—and Geoffrey was nowhere to be seen.
"Nay, then, I ken thy presence," Gwen said in tones that evoked dread, "and thou
knowest  thou  hast  gone  against  the  rule.  Come  out  from  that  elm  where  thou  dost
hide."
"He could not help it,  Mama!" Cordelia cried.  "I  did  spring  upon  him  and…"  She
hushed and bit her lip at a glare from Gwen.
"Thy sister's intercession will not save thee," Gwen informed the elm, "for thou hadst
no need to fly an thou didst wish to flee. Come out!"
The silence stretched to the point of snapping, and Rod was just opening his mouth
to point out that, after all, nobody had been hurt, and it wasn't really all that great an
infraction  (though he knew he shouldn't), when  Geoffrey  saved  him  by  stepping  out
from the tree. His head was down and his shoulders hunched, but he was there, and
the tree was slender again. Rod swung down from Fess's back,  bracing  himself for  a
shouting match—then decided to let Gwen start it. He was tired.
Gwen sat on her high horse, glaring down.
Geoffrey glowered back up at her.
Gwen's face was stone.
Geoffrey held his glare, but began to fidget.
Gwen waited.
"Well, then, I did wrongly!" Geoffrey burst out. "Thou hast told us time and again not
to fly in a forest, and I disobeyed!"
"A good beginning," Gwen said, with an air of finality.
Geoffrey  glowered  up  again,  slowly  wilting.  Finally,  he  dropped  his  gaze  and
muttered, "I am sorry, Mama."
"Better," Gwen pronounced. "And wilt thou do it again?"
"Nay, Mama."
"Wherefore?"
"For that thou hast said so."
"Nay! Though 'twould be good, 'tis not enough! Wherefore have I forbade thee to fly
in a wood?"
"For that I might dash out my brains 'gainst a tree trunk," Geoffrey  muttered. Then
he glared up at her again. "Yet I never have!"

Gwen only stared.
"Oh, aye, there was that time two years agone, when I did knock myself senseless."
Geoffrey dropped his eyes again. "And three years  agone, when I  came home quite
dazed—yet I was little then!"
"And hast better aim now, surely. Nay, now thou'lt strike squarely on the center of
thy crown."
"I'll not strike at all!" Geoffrey's jaw jutted. "I am more practiced now, Mama!"
"Yes,"  Rod  agreed,  "he's  gotten  so  good  at  it  that  now  he  can  flatten  his  head
completely."
"I shall not! I shall slip 'twixt the trees like a sky-borne eel!"
"Quite a vision, that." Rod imagined a flock of flying eels, wriggling their way across
the heavens. "But with all those eels, wouldn't it be a little dangerous for you?"
Geoffrey rolled his eyes in exasperation. "Canst thou never be serious, Papa?"
"Thou wouldst not wish him to be," Gwen assured the boy.
But Rod shrugged. "I'm willing." He pointed a finger at Geoffrey. "Just for that, you
can walk all the way to the castle."
Geoffrey glared at him, and Rod felt a surge upward. In the split second before it
could happen, though, he thought downward. Geoffrey  frowned as though something
were wrong; his face tightened with effort. Rod felt the boy's power of levitation pushing
against his own telekinetic force, and pressed harder. Then Gwen dismounted, and he
felt her effort join his. He eased up.
But Geoffrey didn't. His face reddened; his shoulders hunched with the effort.
Gwen leaned back against Rod, showing not the slightest sign of strain.
Geoffrey  abandoned  the  effort,  foreboding  shadowing  his  gaze.  "Thou  dost
conspire against me!"
"No, we just agree on the rules and the punishments."
" 'Tis even as I've said." Geoffrey gave them his best glower, or tried to. He couldn't
simply capitulate, of course. Rod understood that, and allowed him his face-saver.
"It is indeed—but it does let you know what happens if you disobey."
"Didst thou never disobey when thou wast small?" Geoffrey squalled.
Rod reddened. "That's beside the point—and that's enough nattering about it,  too.
Come on, let's go."
He turned  away,  shouldering  through  the  brush.  Gwen  watched  him  go  in  mild
surprise, then turned back to her children  with a slight smile and a nod of the head.
"Come, then. Thou hast heard."
They followed her away through the trees, Cordelia and Gregory now perched on
Fess's back.
"There could have been worse punishments," Cordelia ventured.
"Oh, he still!" Geoffrey snapped. " 'Tis not the effort doth chafe me."
"Nay, 'tis the shame," Magnus agreed. "Yet there's naught to rue in giving respect to

thine elders."
"Including thee, belike?" Geoffrey  said, with  scorn.  "Nay,  I  wager  that  Papa  was
mindful of enduring just such shame as this! Didst thou not see him redden when I did
ask?"
"I did," said Magnus, with a wicked grin. "Nay, I do wonder what naughtiness he did
recollect?"
They were all silent for a minute, imagining calamities.
"Fess would know," Gregory said suddenly.
"Aye, thou wouldst!" Geoffrey turned to Fess with a glint in his eye. "Nay, tell! What
did chance when Papa did disobey Grandpapa?"
"That is his tale to tell, not mine," the robot said slowly.
"Oh, come, Fess!" Cordelia pleaded prettily. "Canst thou not give but a hint?"
"Your father's personal matters are  confidential,  children."  Robots  are  immune  to
charm.
"But a clue," Magnus said, "is not telling."
"My  programming  does  not  allow  disclosure  of  classified  materials,"  Fess  said
sternly.
They were silent again, brains whirling in an attempt to bypass the program.
"Yet thou art free to tell us aught of thine own past," Gregory said.
Fess was silent  a  moment,  then  said,  "I  am,  and  will  speak  to  you  gladly  of  the
history of your House and of your ancestors…"
"Only  of  our  father,"  Gregory  said  quickly.  He'd  heard  Fess's  lectures  before.
"Canst thou not tell what thou didst when he did disobey?"
"Certainly  not!  At  any  point  at  which  my  own  actions  became  involved  in  your
father's personal matters, even my own memories become confidential!"
"I must learn Cobol," Gregory sighed.
"Wherefore wouldst thou wish to make their acquaintance?" Geoffrey frowned up at
him. "Kobolds are vile creatures!"
"He speaks of the speech, not the speaker," Fess explained.
Geoffrey stared. "How… ?"
" 'Tis wizards' talk," Magnus said airily. "Of greater moment is thy past, Fess."
"You will not desist, will you?" Fess sighed. "Forebear the attempt, children—I shall
not disclose your father's secrets, either accidentally or deliberately."
"Yet thou hast said thou  wilt  tell  us  of  thy  deeds,"  Magnus  reminded.  "Hast  thou
never disobeyed, Fess?"
Geoffrey  glared  at  him  in  exasperation,  but  Gregory  waved  him  back,  eyes  on
Magnus. Geoffrey frowned up at him, but his frown turned to a stare as understanding
dawned. He began to grin.
"Your  question  may  be  interpreted  as  referring  to  an  action  counter  to  my
programming," the robot said slowly, "and in those terms, I  must answer, 'No. I  have

never acted in violation of my program.' "
Geoffrey slapped  his  thigh  in  exasperation,  but  Gregory  asked,  "Yet  what  of  the
words of thy master? Didst thou never work counter to his commands?"
Fess  was  quiet  long  enough  for  Geoffrey  to  perk  up  again.  Finally,  the  robot
admitted, "There have been a few instances in which my owner's orders contradicted
my program, yes."
"Then thou didst disobey!" Geoffrey crowed.
"Only to obey a  higher  authority,"  Fess  said  quickly.  "Disobedience  is  not  to  be
done at one's own whim, children."
"At whose whim is it, then?" Cordelia asked.
Fess  emitted  a  burst  of  static,  his  equivalent  of  a  sigh.  "My  basic  program  was
designed  by  Peter  Petrok,  children,  but  it  was  tested,  revised,  retested,  and  finally
approved by  his section chief,  then by  the Vice  President  for  Programming,  by  the
President of Coherent Imperatives, Limited, and finally approved by a unanimous vote
of the Board of Directors."
Geoffrey stared, somewhat stunned.
"Thus, in answer to your question," the robot went on, "disobedience is not done at
anyone's  whim,  but  at  the  considered,  carefully  weighed  opinions  of  a  group  of
responsible  individuals,  acting  upon  thorough  evidence  and  elaborate  validation,  in
accordance with well-established principles."
The children were silent, overawed.
Then Magnus ventured, "Wherefore was such a gamut needful?"
"Because a robot could do a great deal of damage, if adequate safeguards were not
built into its programming," Fess answered. "You have seen the occasional, restrained
attacks I have made in defense of your father, your mother, and yourselves, children.
Imagine what I could do if I had no inhibitions at all."
"Thou  wouldst  be  havoc  infernal,"  Geoffrey  said  instantly,  eyes  wide.  "Sweet
Heaven, Fess! Thou couldst lay waste all of Gramarye!"
"That is a warranted conclusion,"  Fess agreed, "and I  am only a general purpose
robot, children, not specialized for warfare."
Gregory shuddered, and Geoffrey said, "That thou art restrained, praise the saints!"
"Or, at least, the originators of the study of robotics.  The thought has crossed my
mind occasionally, yes."
"Then how canst thou ever be permitted to disobey?" Cordelia said, frowning.
"When obedience would require me to wreak the devastation Geoffrey noted," Fess
explained,  "or  even  the  injury  of  a  living  being,  beyond  what  would  be  absolutely
necessary to preserve my owner's safety."
Gregory  frowned.  "Dost  thou  say  thou  must  needs  guard  other  folk  from  thine
owner?"
"That  is  perhaps  an  overstatement,"  Fess  said  slowly,  "though  I  can  think  of
circumstances in which it might apply."
"Yet it never hath, for thee," Cordelia inferred. "Who hast thou had need to guard

from thy master?''
"Himself," Fess answered.
"What?"
"How can that be?"
"Wherefore would he…"
"Children, chil-dren," Fess admonished.
They quieted.
Fess sighed, "I  see  I  must  tell  you  how  it  happened,  chronologically,  or  you  will
never understand the principle."
"Aye,  do!"  Cordelia  crooked  a  knee  around  the  saddlehorn,  patted  her  skirt  into
place around it, and settled down to listen. "We attend, Fess."
"Do, for  it becomes somewhat convoluted. I  was brought to consciousness  at  the
factory of Amalgamated Automatons, Inc., in accordance with a Coherent Imperatives
program…"
"We have no wish to hear thy whole life," Geoffrey said hastily.
"You have asked for it, Geoffrey, for this incident befell with my first owner. He had
purchased  a  new  antigravity  aircar,  and  the  law  required  that  such  vehicles  be
equipped with guidance computers of the most  recent  model  designed  to  safeguard
human life. That 'latest model' was the FCC series, of which I was one…"
Chapter 2
« ^ »
"Time enough for you to learn the business next year." Reggie's father handed him the
check for a million. "All I want is, you should have a good time, Joe."
"How can I help it?" Reggie looked at the check, gloating. He was so grateful that he
didn't even remind the old man about the name change. "Thanks, Pop!"
"  'S  all  right."  The  elder  Vapochek  waved  his  cigar  negligently.  "The  dog  bootie
sales're going pretty good, and the parakeet sweater production is way up. We  can
afford some time for you to, like, sow your wild oats. Just get 'em outa your  system."
Pop gave a leering chuckle. "You got a lotta sowing to do, boy, if you wanna break my
record—and I had to do it when I had time off from the steelworks!"
"Boy, you can bet I will, Pop! Starting with a sports car!"
"Oh?" Pop's eye glinted. "What you got your eye on?"
"One  of  those  new  Heatrash  jobs,  Pop,  with  the  afterburners  and  the
double-strength antigrav."
"Yeah, I heard about them. Got one of them new FCC robot brains for  a guidance
computer, don't it?"

"Yeah—and cashmere upholstery half a foot thick,  a  built-in  autobar,  360-degree
sound, light show on the ceiling…"
"So  who's  gonna  be  watching  the  ceiling?"  And  the  elder  Vapochek  guffawed,
waving the boy away with his cigar. "Go on, go have your fun! Just gimme a ride in it,
you hear?"
 
 
The comely young lady stared  as  the  aircar  drifted  out  of  its  stall.  At  the  wheel,
Reggie noticed her attention and grinned, but pretended not to see her—so he was a
bit crestfallen when she only sighed, shook her head, and walked on  by  below  him.
"Snooty broad," he growled.
"I do not recognize that command, master," the dashboard answered.
"I wasn't talking to you, bolt-brain!… Probably just jealous."
"Yes, master," the dashboard answered.
"How would you know?" Reggie snarled. "Just get over to Shirley's place—and don't
spare the horses!"
"This vehicle is not powered by animals' muscles."
"Okay,  the  horsepower,  then!  Just  get!"  And  Reggie  leaned  back  in  the  plush
embrace of the seat, muttering, "Snooty machine."
The aircar rose fifty feet, then hovered, hesitating.
"What's the hold-up?" Reggie snarled. "Get going!"
"There is an  omnibus  approaching  on  an  intersect  course  at  one  thousand  feet,
master."
"So dodge it, then! Oh, hell! Give me that wheel!" Reggie leaned forward,  slapping
the toggle to "manual," and tromped on the accelerator. The aircar shot upward, so fast
as to give him the distinct feeling that he'd left his stomach on the pavement. Reggie
grinned, reveling in the sensation.
"Intersect impending!" the computer blared, but Reggie just grinned wider, staring
up at the looming bus. He'd wait just a second or two longer, then swerve aside at the
last minute and give those yerkels on the bus something to cuss about…
The aircar jarred to a halt so suddenly that his dental implants almost uprooted. The
bus snored by  a good hundred feet overhead, its  passengers  totally  oblivious  to  his
existence.
Reggie let loose a stream of profanity intermixed with an occasional word that bore
some meaning. By sorting syllables, the computer pieced together an approximation of
"What did you do that for?"
"We  were on an intersect course with  the  omnibus,"  the  computer  explained.  "In
three seconds more, we would have impacted in a midair  collision,  which  would  not
have been beneficial to your health."
"The hell with my health! I would've slid by with meters to spare! You just ruined the
move of the century!"
The computer was silent, then explained, "I had no knowledge of your intentions."

"You don't need to know my intentions! If  I  damn  well  choose  to  commit  suicide,
that's my damn business, not yours!"
"I am programmed for  accordance  with  all  civil  and  criminal  laws,"  the  computer
answered. "I cannot behave in breach of them."
"You're not behaving—I am! What about your programming to obey me?"
"Such programming must nonetheless avoid conflict with law."
"Let me worry about the law! If I slap the override, it's my problem, not yours!"
"The law will not allow…"
"The law won't sell you for scrap metal if  you disobey!"  Reggie howled. "But I will!
Now you  get  your  gears  over  to  Shirley's  place!  And  don't  you  ever  override  my
override again!"
The computer was silent, registering  the command as a change in its program. It
was a change that created internal conflict, though, and the computer assigned part of
its  capacity  to  trying  to  resolve  the  apparent  contradiction.  (It  assumed,  as  it  was
programmed to, that such a contradiction must be only apparent, not real.)
Reggie settled back into the cushions of  the  contoured  couch  that  covered  three
sides  of  the  car,  grumbling,  "Dumb  machine…  Hey!"  He  glared  at  the  dashboard.
"Let's have a martini, here!"
The panel at his elbow slid open. Reggie's glower lightened as he took out a frosty
glass of clear fluid with an olive nestled amid ice  cubes. "Got one thing right in your
programming, anyway," he muttered.
The computer wisely didn't answer. Instead, it consulted the city map in its memory,
compared it with the address Reggie had given when he had climbed in, corrected for
pronunciation, homonyms, and spelling, and turned sixty-eight degrees clockwise as it
accelerated so smoothly that Reggie snarled, "Can't you move this bucket any faster?"
 
 
The valet opened the door and ushered  Reggie  in.  "Miss  Delder  will  be  with  you
presently, sir."
"Fine, fine. Y' got a martini here?"
It materialized so quickly  that Reggie  found  himself  wondering  if  the  valet  was  a
robot. Unfortunately, as he took his first sip, Shirley swirled into the room in a flurry of
taffeta. "How prompt you are, Reggie! Come, let's be off! I'm positively famished."
Reggie just barely managed to slap the glass back into the valet's hand as he flew
out the door. She could at least have taken long enough for me to finish the drink!
Then it occurred to him that Shirley might have had that notion in mind. That boded
ill—her being ready when he arrived. Was she sending him a message?
No, she was freezing in her tracks, eyes huge, gasping, "Oh, Reggie! You didn't tell
me!"
She was staring straight at the Heatrash, of course. Reggie allowed himself a grin.
"Only fifty M."

"I want one!" Shirley reached out to caress the door panel, and Reggie felt a stab of
jealousy. "How about you get in?" he suggested.
"I'd love to!"
The door slid back, and a resonant voice murmured, "Mademoiselle is welcome."
Shirley lifted her head, eyes glowing. "Well!  Whoever programmed this  one knew
how to treat a lady!"
"It's an FCC robot," Reggie said, offhandedly.
"That  new  Faithful  Cybernetic  Companion  series?"  Sudden  wariness  in  Shirley's
eyes. "They're programmed for extreme personal loyalty, aren't they?"
"Well… yeah…"
"We are also programmed with the most profound respect for all human beings," the
robot assured her, "unless there is a direct, physical  attack endangering our owners.
Will you enter, mademoiselle?"
"Well… if you put it that way…" Shirley stepped in.
Reggie followed—quickly, just in case she or the robot developed ideas—and  the
door rolled shut.
Shirley nestled into the cashmere cushions. "I always did like being a sybarite."
"Hey, that's great!" Reggie slid closer.
"On the other hand, there are limits." Shirley edged away from him. "When are we
going to start?"
"We are already airborne, Mademoiselle" the computer informed her.
Shirley stared. "I didn't even feel the lift!"
"Sissy car," Reggie muttered.
"We are programmed for smooth operation."
"So'm I," Reggie said, inching over.
Shirley inched too, till she was leaning back against the side. "You really  provide
comfort, car."
"Just give me a chance," Reggie offered, sliding over farther.
"Even a bar!" Shirley rose and spun over Reggie's lap to the door side, to exam the
autobar panel. "There're no pressure patches!"
"I am programmed for oral input, mademoiselle."
"Wonderful!" Shirley settled back again. "Chablis, if you don't mind."
"I'll take a martini," Reggie sighed. It looked as though that was all he was going to
get, for the time being.
 
 
"Don't you think you might wait for the food to catch up to the alcohol?"
"What'sh to worry? I haven't had all that many," Reggie said breezily.

Shirley held her breath till the breeze had passed; it had rather high octane.
"Would monsieur care to order?"
Reggie glowered up at the waiter. Probably learned his  accent  from  watching old
movies. "Yeah, uh—juh prefer-ray un verr dough fresh."
"Bon,  monsieur,"  the  waiter  said,  straight-faced,  ignoring  the  glass  of  ice  water
sitting in front of Reggie and the pinching of Shirley's lips. "And for the entree?"
"Yeah, uh—boof burganyone." He looked up at Shirley. "You were talking about the
chicken?"
Shirley nodded, not trusting herself to speak.
"Blanks duh capon cordone blue."
Shirley winced.
"Bon, monsieur." The waiter jotted the order with a flourish and took their menus.
"And, uh—make the boof well done, would you?"
"Well done, monsieur." The waiter made an ostentatious note on his pad. "Will there
be anything else?"
"Nah, that's fine."
The waiter inclined his head and turned away.
"Did I  hear  it  right?"  Shirley  demanded.  "Did  you  actually  tell  him  to  make  your
boeuf bourguignon well done?"
"Yeah, sure." Reggie frowned. "I don't like it bloody."
"Sh!" Shirley  glanced frantically  at  the  neighboring  tables,  but  apparently  no  one
there was British—or else they were well bred. Then she leaned forward to hiss, "What
do you think boeuf bourguignon is—steak?''
"Well, sure. I mean, steak is beef—so…"
"Beef is steak. Sure." Shirley nodded, resigned. "Flawless logic, Plato."
"Hey!" Reggie frowned. "I ain't no mouse's dog! Come on, Shirl."
"Shirley," she snapped.
Reggie sighed, leaning back in his chair as he began to realize that the evening was
not going well. He wondered why she was such a stickler about using her whole name.
The girls back in college had been that way, too—or at least, at his last college, the big
one his pop had bought him into after the business started, really paying off.  Back at
Sparta C.C.  the girls had been the all-right kind, but these big college  skirts  were  a
bunch of snobs.
Like Shirl. Shirley.
"So what do you want to do after dinner? Take in a movie?"
She brightened. "Wonderful idea—I always love those old flat-screen shows."
Reggie winced; that hadn't been what he'd had in mind.
"Bergman's Seventh Seal is playing at the Cinema Classiqe."
The closest Reggie had ever come to Bergman was a film course he had taken in

junior college; he had passed it by  getting enthusiastic Rathskellar descriptions  from
students who had seen the assigned movies. "Hey, maybe live theater would be more
like it. I could get tickets to a nudie show at one of those off-off-off-Broadway places."
Shirley managed to keep the shudder down to her shoulders. "Why don't we just go
to a cabaret?"
"Yeah!" Reggie said, with a lascivious grin.
"Not that kind! I know where there's a nice soft-jazz group playing."
Reggie sighed. "Okay, baby, it's your party."
"I'm fully grown, Reggie."
"Boy, are you ever!… Oh. Uh, sorry…"
"Your soup, sir."
Reggie looked up to see the waiter smiling benevolently. He looked down at a cup of
soup that had materialized in front  of  him,  then  looked  back  up,  but  the  waiter  had
already whisked himself away.
Shirley sighed and took up her soup spoon.
Reggie frowned at the array before him, then picked up a teaspoon. "Never did like
them round bowls. Hard to get in the mouth, you know?"
Shirley managed a smile.
 
 
"Reggie, don't you think you've had enough?"
"Nah. This group didn't start sounding good till after the second one." Reggie eyed
the all-female jazz group, wishing that their strapless gowns didn't defy gravity quite so
successfully. "How come they're keeping 'em opaque?"
"Those dresses are made of real cloth, Reggie—not polarized plastic."
Reggie shook his head, irritated.  " 'S too bad. If  y'  got it,  y'  oughta  show  it."  His
groggy glance strayed back to Shirley.
"Don't even think about it!"
"Well, maybe the floor show…"
"I don't think I want to wait for it." Shirley  stood up with sudden decision.  "Reggie,
I'm getting sleepy. Let's go."
"Huh? Oh, yeah! Sure!" Reggie brightened.
"Just sleepy," Shirley said firmly.
"Awright, awright," Reggie grumbled, bumping the table as he lurched to his feet. He
frowned down at the spot of alcohol spreading over his shirt front. "Well… it'll dry."
Shirley frowned at the upset glass and the rivulet of gin coursing  toward the table
edge. She picked up a napkin, tossed it on the spill, and turned away.
Then she turned back,  fumbling in her handbag. Reggie had bumbled out  without
leaving a tip.

 
 
Reggie grinned, and the car swooped down. Shirley shrieked, and he smirked with
satisfaction. Look down her nose at him, would she? Well, she'd find out how great he
really was! He might not be much at the dinner table, but he was something else when
he got physical. When she saw how great he was behind the wheel, she'd realize how
nuclear he must be in bed.
"Look out! You're going to hit that building!"
"Nah. Six to spare, easy."
The  aircar  swerved  aside,  missing  the  eighty-third  story  of  the  Empire  State
Building by two inches, not six.
"Not sleepy any more, are you?" Reggie gloated.
"No, but I'm getting a headache you wouldn't  believe!  Reggie,  please  put  the  car
back on computer pilot!"
"That old lady?" Reggie made a rude noise. "You can't stay on comp if you wanna
have fun!"
"If I wanted a variable-grav ride, I'd go to Coney Island," Shirley moaned.
"Aw, come on." Reggie nosed down and went into a power dive. "Driving's fun."
Shirley screeched and clawed the upholstery, rigid as an icicle.
"Oh, all right!" Reggie leveled off, pouting.
"Thank Heaven!" Shirley went half-limp. "Reggie, please put me down! Or find  me
an airsick bag, fast!"
"Hey, no! The upholstery's brand new!"
"I'm not going to have much choice about it," Shirley groaned.
"Oh,  all  right,  all  right!"  Disgusted,  Reggie  slowed  the  car  and  started  a  sedate
descent. Shirley went the other half limp, breathing in slow, steady gasps. "I… never…
want to go… through something like that… again!"
"No chance you will, the way this date is going," Reggie muttered to himself as he
watched a police car swoop by overhead. "Wonder what's the matter with him?"
"Oh,  just  after  a  drunk  driver,  probably."  Shirley  took  a  deep  breath  and  sat  up
straight as the car gently grounded. "Are we down yet?"
"We are in contact with the earth's surface," the computer assured her, "or, at least,
the pavement over it."
"Good." Shirley lurched up, grabbing the manual door handle and hauling it back.
"Hey! Whatcha doing?" Reggie protested.
"I," Shirley answered, "am getting out."
 
 
"Silly  dumb  broad."  Reggie  huddled  in  the  corner  of  the  seat,  glowering  at  the

instrument  display  across  from  him,  sipping  another  martini.  The  instrument  cluster
was beginning to seem kind of removed, but that was okay—the alcohol was beginning
to lift him from the funk the evening had put him in. "What does she know, anyway?"
"She has had a liberal arts education," the computer replied. "Oh, shut up!" Reggie
growled. "Who  asked you, anyway?" The  computer  weighed  the  command  to  "Shut
up,"  decided  from  the  context  that  it  was  an  order  to  be  silent,  weighed  the  order
against the direct question that followed it,  decided from the context that the question
had been rhetorical, and wisely decided to remain silent.
"Doesn't know what a real man is like,"  Reggie grumbled. "All she knows is those
knitting little preppies." He scowled at the memory of what one of those preppies had
done to him during a wrestling match, and what another one had done when Reggie
took a swing at him. "Cheaters, every one of 'em."
The computer reviewed its data bank of irrational  human behavior, concluded that
its  owner  needed  to  talk  in  order  to  relieve  emotional  stress,  and  would  therefore
appreciate leading questions. "They are deficient in a sense of fair play?"
"Boy, you can say that again! Always sneering at you, making fun of you by asking
questions  about  things  you  don't  know  nothing  about!  'What  did  you  think  of  that
concert last night, Reggie?' 'How'd you like that new drama the Players did,  Reggie?'
Then talking down to me, only asking me about the league standings and all! Here, give
me another drink!"
The autobar door slid open, and Reggie yanked the glass out, spilling as much as
he sipped. "Gack! Don't fill 'em so full next time, huh?"
The computer registered the directive in its manual of drinks. "As you wish, sir."
" 'Azh I wish, azh I wish!' When did you do anything I wished?" Reggie snarled.
"I have endeavored in all ways to please…"
"Oh, yeah? Then why'd you preach law at me, huh?"
"I cannot…"
"Always tryin' a takeover when I wanna drive," Reggie growled. "Here, gimme those
controls! Let's see some real drivin',  here!"  He lurched  forward  into  the  control  seat
and slapped the manual switch. " 'N' doncha dare override me!"
The  stress  level  within  the  computer's  program  increased  as  it  forecast  Reggie's
probable action. "Sir, I compute that the alcohol level in your blood is…"
"Don't preach, I said! Here we go!"
With a quarter of its capacity,  the computer reviewed the commands Reggie  had
given, failed to find one that specifically banned preaching, then checked the definition
of preaching  and concluded that it had not performed that particular  action.  Another
quarter of its capacity monitored Reggie's swerves and swoops, but the remaining half
sought to resolve the conflict  between its basic  programming and Reggie's command
not to override his manual controls. It extrapolated the results of his wild driving within
the  context  of  the  skyscrapers  surrounding  them  and  the  extreme  heaviness  of  the
nighttime  pleasure  district  traffic,  and  came  to  an  alarming  conclusion.  "Sir!  If  you
continue in this course, you will eventually collide with a building or another vehicle!"
"Oh, shut up and enjoy the ride," Reggie snarled. "You're as bad as she was."

The computer saw another aircar zooming toward them, filling its receptors' field of
view, calculated the vectors of the two vehicles, and concluded that a collision would
occur  within  5.634  seconds  (it  rounded  off  the  repeating  decimal).  It  would  have
warned Reggie, but he had just commanded it to "Shut up." It would have taken control
and avoided the  collision,  but  Reggie  had  expressly  forbidden  it  to  override  manual
control. That created a conflict between two different aspects of its program—the one
that demanded it keep its owner safe, and the one that insisted it obey.  Of course,  it
could disobey to save its owner from major injury—but was such an action warranted?
It had to consider  the matter. After  all,  it  had  5.634  seconds  (5.173  now).  But  to  a
computer, five seconds is a world of time, so it could afford to ponder.
A human being might have asked, "All right, so what can they do to me?" But that
wasn't an important question for an FCC robot brain—it assumed that any damage to
itself was  inconsequential;  it  could  always  be  repaired,  and  it  had  no  pain  circuits.
What was consequential was whether or not there would be any damage to its owner
and, secondarily, whether or not there would be any damage to the passengers of the
other aircar.  Of tertiary  importance was whether there would  be  any  damage  to  the
other aircar itself. The robot concluded that, if it stayed on the intersect course,
 
A) There would be damage to its owner;
B) There would be damage to the owner(s) of the other aircar; and
C) There would be damage to the other aircar itself.
 
Also,  as  a  byproduct,  there  would  be  damage  to  the  computer's  aircar,  too.
Obviously, therefore, it should take evasive action—it should swerve to miss the other
aircar. But its owner had ordered it not to override his override.
The whole problem would be academic if the owner were planning to turn the aircar
aside at the last moment; it might be bad practice, but that wasn't for  the computer to
decide. So the robot said, "You are on an intersect course with another aircraft.  Do
you wish to swerve…"
"Oh, shut up."
The  computer  silenced  itself,  reconsidered  the  situation,  and  concluded  that  it
should, at least, override the command to "Shut up."
"Do you plan to turn aside before you collide with the other aircar?"
"Of course," Reggie snorted. "What do you think I am, an idiot?"
"No," the robot answered, quite truthfully. It was aware that Reggie's intelligence fell
within normal IQ parameters, so  that  he  could  not  technically  be  categorized  as  an
"idiot."
The collision would occur in 2.98 seconds. The robot noted that the oncoming aircar
had begun to turn aside, but computed that it could not by itself veer away enough to
avoid the impact. Reggie's aircar  would have to  swerve,  too.  But,  since  Reggie  had
stated his intention to swerve aside at the last moment, and had further  forbidden the
robot to override him When he had taken manual control, it could do nothing.
But it knew Reggie's reaction time when he was sober, and could subtract a loss of
reaction time proportional to the amount of alcohol he had ingested. It concluded that

his body couldn't execute his brain's commands in less than 1.23 seconds, and that if
there  was  no  sign  of  swerving  by  that  time,  it  should  take  control.  Accordingly,  it
counted down the nanoseconds, waiting.
At 1.34 seconds, Reggie shouted, "Now!"
At .09 seconds, the aircar started to turn.
At .08 seconds, the computer noted that Reggie had not turned sharply enough, and
computed that there would be at least a partial collision. So it finally overrode Reggie's
manual control—but only to the extent of increasing the thrust in the direction in which
he had turned the wheel, by boosting it drastically.
The aircar roared aside at the last split of the second, shooting just beyond the point
of impact…
Almost.
"Almost" is a large brass gong, surrounding you, filling all of space and time with an
enduring,  sonorous  tone.  "Almost"  is  the  sum  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  two  bodies,
impacting  along  nearly  parallel  vectors.  "Almost"  is  a  body  slamming  into  shock
webbing, and two other bodies slamming into shock webbing. "Almost" is the grating
crash of an aircar against a plasticrete surface, the crunch as it rebounds off a lower
surface,  and the sickening,  accelerating whine of a disconnected turbine,  no  longer
fully engaged with its anti-gravity unit, but increasing  its power as much as it can to
soften  the  crash,  soften  it  almost  enough  to  prevent  major  damage.  "Almost"  is  a
groggy  driver  scared  sober,  shaking  his  head,  staring  about  him  wild-eyed,  heart
racing in panic, gasping, "Wha… wha' happen… wha…"
The other aircar  lurched  by  overhead,  saved  from  collision  with  the  stone  of  the
building by  the nanosecond reflexes of its computer. It settled  to  the  ground  nearby
with  considerable  cosmetic  damage,  none  of  it  major.  The  passenger  leaped  out,
dashing over to Reggie's aircar and yanked the door open, crying, "Are  you all right,
man? Are you all right?"
Reggie blinked, turned an owlish stare on the other man, and suddenly realized that
he  might  be  in  some  way  to  blame.  So  he  scowled,  summoned  his  last  vestige  of
belligerence, and snarled, "Who taught you how to drive?"
Then he passed out.
 
 
"And thou?" Cordelia asked, eyes wide with the realization of tragedy.  "Didst thou,
too, lose awareness?"
"I did not," Fess replied. "I am, after all, a robot, and will not lose awareness unless I
sustain sufficient damage to incapacitate me."
"Yet thou wast damaged by the accident," Gregory inferred.
"I  was,"  Fess  agreed.  "Before  the  collision,  all  my  circuits  had  been  in  perfect
operating condition—but afterward,  I  was  removed  from  the  wreckage,  subjected  to
tests, and found to have a severely weakened capacitor."
" 'Tis that which doth cause thy seizures, is't not?" Geoffrey asked, wide-eyed.
"It  is,"  Fess  confirmed.  "That  collision  was  the  last  decision  in  which  I  was

successfully able to consider a multiplicity of factors  under a severe time limit. Since
then, any such situation overloads the weakened capacitor and causes it to discharge.
Realizing this, the robot technician built in a circuit breaker and an absorbing pad that
allows the component to discharge in isolation."
Magnus  frowned.  "An  they  had  not,  it  would  have  burned  out  others  of  thy
components, would it not?"
"It would have," Fess agreed. "Fortunately, they anticipated the situation, and there
has been no further damage."
"And what of the harm to the aircar?" Gregory asked.
"It was total," Fess answered. "I had delayed taking action too long."
"Thou hadst little choice," Magnus said, with disdain.
"On the contrary, my makers decided that I had had a great deal of latitude, but had
not been able to comprehend that,  within  the  context  of  the  situation,  I  should  have
ignored my owner's order not to override manual control. Such a discrimination circuit
was built into all later FCC robots."
"That did not aid thee greatly," said Geoffrey.
"Certes, they did have a sufficiency of cold blood!" Cordelia shuddered. "I  wonder
that they did not break and bury thee, sin that they were so heartless."
"Well they might have," Fess agreed, "the more so since  they determined that the
cost  of  repairing  me  would  be  too  great,  for  they  could  not  simply  replace  the
capacitor,  but  would  have  had  to  replace  the  whole  molecular  circuit  with
micromanipulators, and a high probability of totally destroying my central processing
unit. Certainly the operation would have cost far  more than anything my owner could
have gained by selling me."
"Then what did he do," asked Geoffrey, frowning, "sin that 'twas his fault entire?"
"There surely must have been some fault of mine, Geoffrey."
"Wherein?" the boy challenged. "Thou hast but now said that later robots had the
discrimination thou didst lack, to enable thee to prevent it!"
"Thou  dost  speak  without  logic,  Fess,"  Gregory  agreed.  "Still,  I  can  see  'tis  in
accord with the program thou hast told us of."
Geoffrey looked up, nettled. "How canst thou know that, wart?"
But Magnus waved him to silence,  eyes on Fess. "Then what  did  thine  owner  do
with thee?"
"He never wished to see me again," Fess sighed.
"Aye," said Cordelia, "sin that 'twas thou hadst witnessed his embarrassment."
" 'Witnessed' is accurate,"  Fess acknowledged. "My  trip  log  was  transcribed  and
read out  in  open  court  to  convict  him  of  drunken  driving,  as  a  result  of  which,  his
license was suspended."
" 'License'?" Geoffrey stared. "Dost thou mean he could not drive without leave?"
"It  is  not  allowed,"  Fess  agreed.  "There  is  too  much  chance  of  a  driver  injuring
others."

"Witness the tale he hath but now told us," Magnus said scornfully. "Canst thou not
hang one thought to another?"
Geoffrey reddened, but before he could say anything, Cordelia said, "He could not
drive, then?"
"He could not," Fess confirmed,  "and  therefore  had  no  need  of  a  private  aircar.
Accordingly, he sold what was left of it—my self and circuits—to the highest bidder."
"And who was that?"
"A  salvage  company,"  Fess  sighed,  "which  specialized  in  supplying  replacement
components at the lowest possible cost."
"Thou must needs have been a great find for them," Cordelia said quickly.
"It is good of you to seek to spare my feelings, Cordelia—but please be mindful that
I have none."
The girl looked skeptical, but held her peace.
"I was junk," Fess said baldly, "and was treated as such. Certainly the matter should
not occasion shame for me, when it is five hundred years in the past! Still, Cordelia is
right—I was a great find for a salvage company, a most excellent piece of junk."
"Yet  wast  thou  not  distressed  to  find  thyself  sold  for  scrap?"  Geoffrey  blurted.
Cordelia glared daggers at him, but Fess answered, "I cannot honestly say that I was,
especially since  it  freed  me  from  Reggie.  The  degree  of  reluctance  his  commands
produced within my circuits,  by  opposing two separate aspects of my program, was
quite disagreeable."
"But thou wast devalued, thou wast debased!"
"There is some degree of accuracy in that statement," Fess admitted. "Still, looking
back on the incident from five hundred years'  perspective, I  cannot help but feel that
gaining my freedom from Reggie was cheap at the price."
Chapter 3
« ^ »
Magnus was being noble; he wasn't even asking. But Gwen could see the pinched look
about his face, and took pity on him.
Geoffrey, however, was not yet old enough to be self-denying. "Mama, I'm hungry!"
"I am sure that thou art," Gwen said grimly; the effect of the boy's impatience was
not improved by  comparison with Magnus's self-control.  "But peace, my  lad—there's
an inn not far from here."
And so there was—just around a bend in the road. It was a pleasant-enough-looking
place, a  big  two-story  frame  structure  with  mullioned  windows  and  a  thatched  roof.
From a flagpole over the door hung a hank of greenery, bobbing in the breeze.
"The bush is green," Gwen noted.

"New ale." Rod smiled. "This may be a better lunch than I thought."
But Cordelia was staring at the animal tethered in front of the door.  "Oh! The poor
lamb!"
"Hast no eyes, sister?" Geoffrey scoffed. " 'Tis not a lamb, but an ass!"
"No more than thou art," Cordelia retorted. "Yet 'tis a very lamb of a donkey! Doth
not thy heart go out to him?"
"Thou hast no need to  answer."  Gwen  caught  Geoffrey  with  his  mouth  open.  He
closed it and glowered up at her.
"Thou hast it aright, my lass," Gwen said. "The beast is woefully treated."
And indeed it was—its coat was rough and dull, with patches of mange here and
there, and its ribs showed through its hide. It stretched its neck to crop what little grass
grew within reach of its hitching post.
"How vile must his master be," Magnus said indignantly,
"to take his ease in the cool of an inn, and leave his beast not so much as a mound
of hay!"
"He is also badly overworked," Fess noted.
The comment was an understatement—the poor little donkey was hitched to a cart
dangerously overloaded with barrels of various sizes.
"Such conduct towards a poor draft animal is inexcusable!" Fess stated.
Gregory  looked  up  at  him  in  surprise.  "  'Tis  not  like  thee,  Fess,  to  so  judge  a
human."
"He's sensitive on the subject of beasts of burden, son," Rod explained.
"What kind of man could be so calloused as to mistreat his  donkey  thus?"  Gwen
wondered.
"Assuredly,"  said  Geoffrey,  "a  proper  villain—a  fat,  lazy,  slovenly  boor,  a  very
brute!"
But the man who came out of the inn was neither fat nor slovenly. He was of middle
height, and only a little on the plump side. He wore clean hose and jerkin, and carried
his cap in his hand till he was outside the inn,  chatting with the landlord,  a  pleasant
smile on his face.
"Why, he doth seem almost kind!" Cordelia said, shocked.
But  the  appearance  of  kindness  disappeared  the  moment  the  man  came  to  the
hitching post. He untied the tether and yanked the beast's head up away from the poor
strands of dry  grass with a curse,  then climbed into the cart  and unlimbered a long,
cruel whip as he yanked the donkey's head around.
"He must not!" Cordelia protested, but the driver was already plying the lash—and
not just cracking it over the donkey's back, but cutting the poor beast's flanks.
"Why, the villain!" Cordelia cried, and her broomstick leaped from her hand to shoot
off toward the cart.
But  Rod  had  noticed  something  she  hadn't  seen,  and  clapped  a  hand  on  her
shoulder. "Pull that broomstick back, daughter, or you may interfere with the course of

justice."
"That cannot be so," Cordelia objected, but the broomstick slowed to a hover.
"Yes, it can. Look over there, at the edge of the meadow!"
Cordelia looked, and gasped.
"Rod," Fess said, "surely that is the same… beeeasstt…" He began to tremble.
"Hold yourself together, Rust Inhibitor—no need to have a seizure over it.  I'm sure
there's  a  perfectly  unreasonable  explanation.  But  yes,  that  donkey  underneath  the
trees does look exactly like our friend between the traces, there."
"He hath gained, at least, a deserved reward," Gregory said, "for he doth crop rich,
sweet grass with relish."
Magnus  frowned.  "Yet  how  can  the  two  be  so  exactly  the  same?  Hath  someone
crafted a new beast of witch moss?"
"And wherefore?" Geoffrey demanded.
"I don't think it's witch moss," Rod said slowly. "In  fact,  I'm rather curious.  Doesn't
something about that duplicate donkey strike you as a little—odd?"
"Now that you mention it," Fess mused, "the donkey's behavior is a bit too abject."
"That's what I thought." Rod nodded. "He's overacting."
"Who, Papa?"
"Wait and see." Gwen said it softly, but her smile threatened to break into a grin.
The donkey heaved against the traces, managed to get the huge cart lumbering into
motion,  hauled  it  out  of  the  inn  yard  and  onto  the  road—and  calmly  proceeded  to
trudge off the track. The driver cursed at it and gave the reins  a savage tug, but the
donkey didn't even seem to notice. The man cracked the whip so deeply into its flank
that the gouge filled with crimson—but the donkey only trotted the faster,  out into the
middle of a field. The driver went frantic.  He flayed the poor beast with the whiplash,
cursing like a fiend, and hauled on the reins so hard that one broke.
"What manner of donkey is that?" Geoffrey  stared. "Never could a poor breast so
withstand the pull of the bit!"
"Mayhap he hath it in his teeth," Magnus suggested.
"Or maybe he made his mouth as hard as rock." Rod couldn't help grinning.
The donkey bent its course away from the broken rein, trudging around in a circle.
The driver howled in rage, beating and beating with the whip, but the donkey only went
faster, around and around, until the driver began to feel the pull of centripetal force and
felt the first  stab of fear.  He dropped the whip  and  turned  to  leap  off  the  cart—and
jolted back into his seat.
"He is stuck to the bench!" Geoffrey howled.
"Husband," said Gwen, "there is more to this than shape-shifting."
"Oh, I agree—and I think we both know what it is."
The whip sprang out of the grass with a snap, turned, and cracked its lash over the
driver's head. He looked up in horror  and let out a low moan.  The  lash  swept  back,
cracked, and struck like a snake, tearing the man's shirt and welting his back.

Rod turned to Cordelia with a frown. "I told you to wait!"
"But I did, Papa! That was not my doing!"
Rod stared at her.
Then he whirled back to catch the next act.
The donkey was galloping now, far  faster than  any  Rod  had  ever  seen—and  the
cart was skidding, the inner wheel lifting off the ground, then rocking back, then lifting
again. The driver held on for dear life, howling with fright as the whip cracked over his
head and the cart rocked under his feet.
"It's going," Rod said. "It's…"
With a crash  and a rumble, the cart  went  over  on  its  side,  and  the  barrels  went
tumbling. The largest two split open, and red wine drenched the meadow. The driver
landed ten yards away, flat on his back. A small barrel slammed into his belly.
"Oh, the poor man!" Cordelia cried. "Papa, ought we not aid him?"
"Wherefore, sister?" Magnus asked. "Hath he more pain than he gave his donkey?"
"Thou didst but now call him 'villain,' " Geoffrey reminded.
"That was when he had no need—and now he doth! Oh!"
"Peace, my daughter." Gwen laid a hand on her shoulder. "Let it work. I  misdoubt
me an he'll mistreat another beast whiles he doth live."
"Yet will he?"
"He will certainly live," Fess assured her, craning his neck to watch. "I can magnify
visual images, Cordelia, and I am replaying the tumble in slow motion. So far as I can
see, there is little probability of any serious damage to the man."
"Praise Heaven for that!"
"I don't think Heaven had anything to do with this little farce," Rod said slowly.
Sure enough, the driver had already managed to roll over, and was scrambling to
get  his  feet  under  him—but  the  donkey  squared  off,  turning  tail,  lined  up  its  rear
hooves, and  caught  him  just  as  he  managed  to  get  his  bottom  off  the  ground.  The
driver went sprawling again, face in the dirt.
"Oh,  well  aimed!"  Geoffrey  tried  to  hide  a  smile.  "Is't  wrong  to  laugh  at  his
discomfiture, Papa?"
"I don't really think so," Rod said slowly, "considering that he's only getting a taste of
what he gave his donkey. And, of course, I have reason to suspect he's not going to
sustain any real injury—no more than a bruise or two."
"How canst thou be certain?" Cordelia demanded.
But the driver had managed to clamber back up now, somehow without the donkey
giving him the benefit of hindsight again, and was running back to the inn in a panic,
crying,, "Witchcraft! Foul sorcery! Some witch hath enchanted my donkey!"
"Mama," Cordelia said, " 'tis not good for us that he should so defame witchfolk!"
"Be not troubled, my daughter. I am sure that any who hear this tale will know quite
well 'twas not the work of a witch."

Cordelia frowned. "But how… ?"
The donkey gave its erstwhile master a snort of contempt, broke the shafts with two
more well-placed kicks, and trotted off toward the woods.
"Papa, stop him!" Cordelia cried. "I must know who hath wrought this deed, or I'll die
of curiosity!"
"I don't doubt it," Rod said, grinning, "and I must admit that I'd like to have my own
suspicions confirmed." He gave a low, warbling whistle that slid through three keys.
The donkey's head snapped up, pivoting around  toward  Rod.  The  warlock  smiled
and  stepped  out  into  plain  sight,  and  the  donkey  changed  its  course,  trotting  back
toward them.
"I think we'd better step off the road," Rod explained. "The folk in the inn are apt to
be coming out for a look any minute now."
"Indeed," Gwen agreed, and led the way into a small grove just off the meadow.
The donkey followed, and came trotting up in front of them. It stomped to a halt with
a haughty toss of its head.
"All right, so you're noble." Rod smiled. "But tell me, do you really think that driver
deserved that?"
"All that, and more," the donkey brayed.
The children's jaws dropped, and Fess started to tremble.
"Easy,  Logic  Looper."  Rod  rested  his  hand  on  the  reset  switch.  "You  knew  this
donkey wasn't all it appeared to be."
"I… shall accustom myself to the notion," Fess answered.
Gwen wasn't having much luck hiding her smile. "Dost thou bethink thyself so good
a fellow, then?"
"Certes,  I  do."  The  donkey  actually  grinned'—and  everything  around  the  grin
seemed to blur and fade into an amorphous mass—then it reformed,  and Puck stood
there before them. "In truth, I do think I am a Robin Goodfellow."
The three younger children  nearly fainted from sheer surprise,  and even  Magnus
had eyes like coins. But Rod and Gwen only smiled, nodding, amused. "Was this just a
spur-of-the-moment thing?" Rod asked. "Or did you actually think it through before you
did it, for once?"
" 'For once,' forsooth!" the elf cried. "I'll have thee know I  have watched this villain
these seven months, and if e'er a man deserved to suffer for his deeds, 'twas he! 'Tis a
bully entire, though too much a coward to attempt the beating of a mortal man! E'en a
horse he would beware, and fear to strike! Therefore doth he bespeak you as pleasant
as a dove, the whiles in his heart he doth wish to rend thee limb from limb. Nay, at last
I did weary of his maltreatment of his poor beast, and bethought me to give him a draft
of his own potion!"
" 'Tis not like thee, Puck, to be so cruel," Cordelia protested.
The  elf  grinned  with  a  carnivore's  smile.  "Though  knowest  only  one  face  of  me,
child, an thou canst speak so. Yet there was no true cruelty in this, for I did but make
the man appear a fool, and that not even before his fellows. If  he is  wise,  and  doth
profit where he can, he will not henceforth be so certain as to whom he can, or cannot,

smite with impunity."
Cordelia  appeared  to  be  somewhat  reassured,  though  not  greatly.  "Yet  he  was
mightily affrighted, and sore hurt…"
"Had he worse than he hath given his beast?"
"Well… nay…"
"I cannot say thou hast done ill in this case, Robin," Gwen said, still smiling.
"This case, pooh! I am a man of many mischiefs, yet rarely of true hurt!"
Rod noted the 'rarely,' and decided it was time to change the subject.
Apparently, so did Puck.  "Yet  enough  of  this  villain—he's  not  worth  more  words!
How dost thou came to be nearby, to witness his coming to justice?"
"We," Rod said grandly, "are going on vacation."
"Oh, aye, and the sky is beneath our feet while the earth's overhead! Naetheless, 'tis
a worthy goal. Whither wander you?"
"To our new castle, Puck,"  Cordelia said, eyes shining again.  "Oh!  Will  it  not  be
grand?"
"Why, I cannot tell," the elf answered, "unless thou dost tell me what castle it is."
"It's called Castle Foxcourt," Rod said.
Puck stared.
"I take it you know something about the place," Rod said slowly.
"I do not know," the elf hedged, "for I've only heard tell of it."
"But what you've heard, isn't good?"
"That might be a way to speak of it," Puck agreed.
"Nay, tell us," Gwen said, frowning.
Puck sighed. "I know little, mistress, and guess less—but from what I have heard of
it, this Castle Foxcourt is of ill repute."
"Dost say 'tis haunted?" Geoffrey asked, his eyes kindling.
"Not unless I'm asked—yet since I am, I must own 'tis that which I've heard of it. Yet
there are ghosts, and ghosts. I would not fear  to have thee near the shade of a man
who was good in his lifetime."
Magnus frowned, cocking his head to one side. "From that, I take it the ghost who
doth haunt this castle was not of the good sort, the whiles he did live."
"Not from what I hear," the elf said, his face grim. "Yet as I say, I do not truly know
—even whiles the man endured, I had no business in his realm, and never chanced to
meet him. Yet he bore his title with ill fame."
"Thou didst hear of him whiles he still did live?" Magnus frowned. "He hath not been
so long a ghost, then."
"Nay, only a couple of hundreds of years."
"Thou didst know a man who…" Gregory's voice petered out as his eyes lost focus.
"Nay, thou art spoken of as the oldest of all Old Things, art thou not?" But he looked a

little dizzied by the implications.
Puck tactfully ignored the reference to his age. "I shall travel with thee, good folk."
"We might ever take pleasure in thy company, Puck." Gwen said, dimpling. "Yet if
'tis for cause that thou dost fear for us, I thank thee, but bid thee stay. No mere spirit
can long discomfort this family, no matter how evil it was when alive."
"Be not so certain," Puck said, still looking uncomfortable. "Yet I'll own I've business
of His Majesty's to attend." They all knew that the "Majesty" in question was not King
Taun, but only Rod knew that the dwarf referred to the children's grandfather. "Yet an
thou hast need of me, whistle, and I'll be by thee in an instant."
"Thanks," Rod said. "Hope we don't need to, though."
"Most dearly do I  also! Yet an thou hast need of more knowledge than I  do  own,
thou hast but to ask of the elves who dwell hard by the castle. They'll know the truth of
its tale, I doubt not."
Rod nodded. "Thanks for the tip. That, we definitely will do."
"Nay, surely we must come to know our neighbors," Gwen agreed.
"There are few enough of those, I wot," Puck said with a grimace. "Rumor doth say
that any who can, have fled its environs."
 
 
They had to wait for all the laughing and joking to die down in the inn,  and for  the
limping driver to make his exit, red-faced, before they could order; but when the food
came, it was good, and filling. With his stomach full, Rod declared that, since he was
on vacation, he was going to honor it by  attempting to nap, and any child who made
enough  noise  to  disturb  him  was  likely  to  gain  empirical  evidence  of  the  moon's
composition.
It was a good excuse, at least, for  going  off  under  the  shade  of  a  tree  fifty  feet
away,  and  lying  down  with  his  head  in  his  wife's  lap.  From  the  constant  murmur
emanating  from  the  two  of  them,  the  children  doubted  that  their  father  was  really
sleeping or even trying to, but they bore it stoically.
"Is he not a bit aged to playing Corin to Mama's shepherdess?" Geoffrey grumbled.
"Oh,  let  them  be,"  Cordelia  said,  with  a  sentimental  smile.  "Their  love  is  our
assurance, when all's said and done. Bide, whiles they make it the stronger."
"Cordelia speaks wisely," Fess agreed. "They did not wed to speak of nothing but
housekeeping and children, after all."
"There is, of course, no loftier topic," Geoffrey assured him.
Cordelia gave him her best glare. "Thou art unseemly, brother."
"Mayhap—yet I am, at least, only what I do seem."
"I wonder." Cordelia turned moody.
"You  are  still  troubled  by  Puck's  cruelty  to  the  driver,  are  you  not?"  Fess  said
gently.
'Nay—I  do  not  doubt  the  rightness  of  it,  nor  the  man's  well-being,"  Cordelia

answered. " 'Tis the look of the man that doth bother me, Fess."
"Wherefore?"  Geoffrey  asked, amazed. "He  was  well  favored,  for  all  that  I  could
see."
"Aye, only a man such as any thou mightest meet upon the road," Magnus agreed.
"But dost thou not see, 'tis therein lies my grievance!" Cordelia said. " 'Tis even as
Geoffrey did say—he was not fat, nor slovenly, nor had he the look of a brute! Yet he
was one, beneath his seemly guise!"
"Not all do wear their villainy openly, sister," Gregory reminded her.
"Oh, be still, nubbin! 'Tis even that which doth trouble me!"
"Ah," Fess said. "You have begun  to  fear  that  all  people  are  truly  only  bullies  at
heart, have you not?"
Cordelia nodded, her eyes downcast.
"Take comfort,"  the robot  advised  her.  "Though  they  may  be  beasts  within,  most
people do learn how to control their baser instincts—or,  at least, to channel  them  in
ways that are not harmful to others."
"But are they the less vile therefore?" she burst out. "They are still brutes within!"
"There is good  at  your  cores  as  well  as  evil,"  Fess  assured  her.  "Indeed,  many
people have so strong an instinct for helping others that it quite overshadows their urge
to browbeat those about them."
"How canst thou say so!" Geoffrey  said indignantly, "when thy first  experience  of
mankind was with so base a knave?"
"That is true," Fess agreed, "yet he was in contact with other human beings, and I
had some indication of redemptive qualities in them."
Cordelia frowned up at him. "Did thy second owner confirm those hints of virtue?"
They  heard  a  sixty-cycle  buzz,  Fess's  equivalent  of  a  contemptuous  snort.  "He
confirmed the opinion I had gained from Reggie, children, and demonstrated nadirs in
human nature I had not thought possible, the worst of which was treachery. Reggie, at
least, was not treacherous, and had some slight interest in others. My second owner,
though, was of a mean and grasping nature, which is, I suppose, only natural."
Geoffrey frowned up. "How is that?"
"Why, anyone who would purchase a defective component simply to gain a bargain
price, must necessarily be miserly—and he bought me to be the guidance computer
for his burro-boat."
Geoffrey frowned. "What is a burro-boat?"
" 'Was,'  Geoffrey,  for  they are no longer manufactured,  which  is  something  of  a
blessing. They were small, heavily shielded craft designed for excavating and hauling,
but certainly not for beauty."
Magnus smiled, amused. "Yet thy second owner cared  little for  grace,  and greatly
for gain?"
"He did, though I suppose the attitude came naturally to one of his occupation.  He
was a miner in Sol's asteroid belt, and lived constantly with danger, but with little else;
only  a  solitary  individual  would  choose  such  a  life,  and  might  well  become  bitter

accordingly. He was interested only in his own self-aggrandizement—or his attempts at
such; he never succeeded notably."
"Was he poor, then?"
"He subsisted," Fess answered. "By towing metal-rich asteroids into Ceres station,
he gained enough to buy the necessities, which are notably expensive at so remote a
location from the planet where your species evolved. He was interested in other human
beings only as sources of his own gratification—and if  they did not contribute to that
gratification, he preferred to reject them completely."
"Thou dost not mean he hated good folk!"
"That is perhaps an overstatement," Fess said, "yet not quite so far off the mark as
it might be."
"But folk cannot live without other folk!"
"On the contrary, they can.  They will be emotionally starved, of course—but such
people frequently are emotionally crippled to begin with."
Cordelia shuddered. "How couldst thou think any good of mortal folk with such as
that to form thine opinion?"
"Because I was constantly exposed to good people, Cordelia—or to news of them,
at least."
Magnus frowned. "How couldst thou be?"
"Because most of the Belt folk were lonely, and wished company. They sought it the
only way they could—by radio and video communication with others. I, of course, had
to  be  ever  vigilant,  listening  to  the  constant  stream  of  chatter,  in  case  some  event
should  occur  that  would  affect  my  owner—and  as  a  result,  I  came  to  learn  of  all
manner of people—some bad, some good, some quite evil, some very good. I learned
of events, both important and insignificant.  I  think I  remember best the time when an
asteroid's  dome  failed—a  force  field  that  enclosed  the  atmosphere  the  people
breathed."
Cordelia stared, shocked. "How could they have lived?"
"They did not—they died, with the exception of a technician  and a tourist, both of
whom happened to be in space suits at the time, and a little girl,  who survived under
rather unique circumstances."
"Oh, that must have wrung the heart of thee!"
"I have no 'heart,' as you call it,  Cordelia—but I  did learn  a  great  deal  about  the
abilities of people to sacrifice for one another, as I tracked her through the remainder
of her childhood."
"Tell us of her then!" Gregory cried.
"Oh, 'tis all weepy lass's stuff!" Geoffrey objected.
"Not entirely, Geoffrey, for there was a villain involved, and a bit of fighting."
The boy's eyes glittered. "Tell!"
"Willingly,  for  it  is  part  of  your  heritage.  The  hero  of  the  tale  is  a  quite  unlikely
specimen, for he was a reformed criminal."
"Indeed! Who was he?"

"He came to be called 'Whitey the Wino' after he reformed, and he earned his living
by making up songs and singing them in taverns…"
 
 
Whitey struck a last chord from his keyboard and lifted his hands high, grinning at
the burst of applause from the customers. "Thank you, thank you." His amplified voice
boomed out through the cabaret—at least, they called it that. "Glad you liked it." Yeah,
and the shape you're  in,  you'd like  anything right now. But you don't get cheers by
insulting your audience, nor return engagements either,  so he kept the smile on and
waited till the applause slackened, then said, "I'm going to take a little rest now, but I'll
be back real soon. You take one too, okay?" Then he waved and turned away, with
cheers and laughter behind him. Yeah, take one—or two, or three.  Then you'll  think
whatever I do is great.
He shouldn't be so bitter, of course—they were paying his livelihood. But fifty-three,
and he was still singing in glorified taverns on backwater moons!
Patience,  he  told  himself.  After  all,  there  had  been  that  record  producer  on
vacation, who'd heard him and signed him before he sobered up. But he'd come back
the next day with a studio booked, and Whitey had cut the wafer, and it had sold—with
a low rating, yes, but a low rating of a hundred billion people on fifty-some odd planets
is still twenty million, and Whitey got six per cent. It kept him alive, even under a dome
on an asteroid or a lifeless moon, and paid his passage to the next planet. He never
had trouble finding a cabaret who was willing to pay him now, so its patrons could hear
him chant his songs. Then that critic had gone into rhapsodies about his verses being
poems from the folk tradition, and a professor or two had agreed with him (anything for
another article in print, Whitey supposed) and there had been another burst of sales,
so here he was back in the Solar System, even if it was only on Triton, to cut another
wafer. He hoped the professor wouldn't be too disappointed when he found out Whitey
had a college degree.
All right,  so  a few million  people are willing  to keep you alive so  they  can  hear
your verses. Does that mean you're good?
He tried to throw off  the mood—it meant he was good enough,  he  thought  as  he
stepped into the glorified closet that the cabaret laughingly called a "green room." Well,
at least it had someplace for the entertainers to relax between sets—more than a lot of
clubs had.
He  looked  around,  frowning.  Where  was  that  wine  Hilda  had  promised  him?
Promised to have it waiting, too.
Ah, there she came, diving through the door,  sailing in Triton's low gravity, out of
breath. "Sorry, Whitey. There was a hold-up."
"Don't give them anything—it's a water pistol." Whitey reached out and plucked the
glass from her as she braked against the other chair. "What was his name?"
"Terran Post Express." Hilda took an  envelope  from  her  bodice  and  handed  it  to
him. "For Mr. Tod Tambourin."
Whitey winced at the sound of his real name. "Official, huh?"
"I'll say. Who knew you were here?"

"My producer." Whitey grinned, stroking the letter lasciviously as he eyed her.
"Don't give me that—if you meant it, you'd be trying to pet me, not the letter. What is
it?"
"Probably money." Whitey slit the envelope.
She could almost hear his face hit the ground. "Who… who is it?"
"Lawyers," he told her. "My son's."
 
 
Not  that  he  had  ever  known  the  boy  that  well,  Whitey  reflected,  as  he  webbed
himself into the seat on the passenger liner. Hard to get to know your son when you're
hardly  ever  home.  And  Henrietta  hadn't  wanted  him  to  be,  after  she  realized  her
mistake—at least, that's what  she  had  called  it  when  she  had  figured  out  he  wasn't
going to settle down and become a nice safe asteroid miner, like a sensible man. She
didn't approve of the way he made his living, either—selling exotic pharmaceuticals at
an amazing discount, on planets where they were highly taxed. Totally illegal, and his
first  big regret—but she'd been  plenty  willing  to  take  the  money  he'd  sent  back,  oh
yes—until that horrible trip when he'd landed on a tariff-free planet, and couldn't even
make  enough  profit  to  ship  out,  and  had  found  out,  the  hard  way,  what  his
stock-in-trade could do to his clients.
So no more drugs, for him or his customers—only wine, and beer at the most. He
hadn't needed to smuggle any more, anyway—he had enough invested, he could live
on the interest. Or his wife and boy could, while he eked out a living wandering from
bar to bar, singing for shekels. The accommodations weren't too great, but other than
that,  it  wasn't  so  different.  He'd  missed  his  son's  early  years  though,  and  was
beginning to think of going back to Ceres and getting to know him. Henrietta couldn't
be all that bad.
Then he'd had the letter from the lawyer, and decided maybe she could. He'd had to
live on his singing after that, because the court had given Henrietta all the stocks and
bonds, and the kid.  Whitey  didn't have  a  leg  to  stand  on—so  he'd  missed  the  lad's
middle years,  and teen years,  too, because Henrietta had taken the  money  and  the
boy and emigrated to Falstaff, where Whitey couldn't follow—he didn't have the money
for a ticket any more.
Not that he was about to try. In fact, he was ashamed for even thinking about it.
Of course, there was the chance that the kid might have wanted to meet him, when
he grew up—so Whitey  had written him a letter, when he found out that the kid had
come  back  to  Ceres.  But  the  boy  sent  him  a  pointed  note,  one,  and  very
pointed—"Stay  out  of  my  life."  Not  much  arguing  with  that—and  not  much  of  a
surprise,  considering  all the things Henrietta had  told  him  about  his  father,  some  of
which were actually true. So Whitey had lived with his second big regret, and gone on
singing.
Ceres! Why did the kid have to go back there?
Because it was where he'd spent his boyhood, of course—nice to know it must have
been halfway happy.
So  Whitey  had  subscribed  to  Ceres  News  Service,  and  kept  track  of  the  main

events in the boy's life—his marriage, his daughter's birth, his family's plunging into the
new commuter  colony  on  that  large  asteroid  called  Homestead,  with  the  brand  new
idea in domes—overlapping force-field generators that completely englobed the rock.
And the dome had collapsed, and the boy and his wife were dead.
But the baby was alive.
The baby was alive, and her father hadn't left a will, and her mother's parents had
followed Henrietta's lead and opted for cold sleep while their assets increased—
And Whitey was next of kin.
He touched the letter in his breast pocket, not needing to open it, still able to see the
print when he closed his eyes.  Next  of  kin,  so  little  Lona  was  his  responsibility,  his
second chance  to  raise  a  child.  He  watched  Triton  dwindling  astern  with  Neptune's
huge orb behind it, and felt a strange excitement welling up under the sorrow, vowing
that, this time, he wasn't going to make a mess of it, no matter how tough it got.
 
 
It got tough.
It got really tough really fast, because it was a hospital the lawyer took him to, not an
orphanage  or  a  foster  home—a  hospital,  and  she  was  sitting  in  the  dayroom,  a
beautiful,  blonde,  blue-eyed,  six-year-old  little  girl,  watching  a  3DT  program.  Just
watching.
Not talking, not fidgeting, not throwing spitballs—nothing.
"Lona, this is your grandfather," Dr. Ross said.
She looked  up  without  the  slightest  sign  of  recognition—of  course.  They'd  never
met, she probably hadn't even known about him. "Are you my mommy's daddy?"
Whitey's  smile  slipped.  Hadn't  she  met  the  other  grandfather,  either?  Before  he
chilled out, of course. "No, I'm the other one."
"My daddy's daddy?"
"Yes."
"What was he like?"
 
 
The doctor explained it to him, after he had recovered, in her office. "It was a huge
trauma, and she didn't have any defenses against it—after  all, she's only six. It's not
surprising that she has repressed all memory of it—and any memory that had anything
to do with it, too."
"No surprise at all." He forced a smile. "She didn't have that much to remember yet."
Dr. Ross nodded. "We'll have to be very careful, very patient in working around the
amnesia. She'll have to learn everything, all over  again—but  you  have  to  tread  very
lightly.  Don't  mention  Homestead,  or  her  parents,  or  anything  about  her  past  for  a
while. There's no way of knowing what will trigger a memory painful enough to set her
back."

Whitey nodded. "And she'll have to have psychiatric care?"
"Yes, that's vital."
"I see… Do you take private patients, Doctor?"
"Yes, a few," Dr. Ross said instantly, "and I can make room for Lona."
 
 
So he had to settle down, after all—find an apartment to buy, arrange the financing,
have the furniture cast and delivered. Then, finally, he was able to lead her out of the
hospital and out into the corridor,  her little hand in his,  already trusting, on  her  way
home.
She was very good.
Too good—Whitey found himself wishing for a little naughtiness. But she was totally
obedient, did exactly what she was told—
And not one thing more.
When he didn't have something for her to do, she just sat watching the 3DT, hands
in her  lap,  back  straight  (as  he  had  commanded,  hoping  to  get  a  rise  out  of  her).
Everything he taught her, she learned on the first try, then did whenever he told her to
do it. She made her bed every morning, washed her dishes, studied her alphabet—
Like a robot.
"She could simply be naturally good," Dr. Ross said carefully. "Some children are."
"Some  children  may  be,  but  it's  not  natural.  Come  on,  Doctor—just  a  little
disobedience? A little backtalk? Why not?"
"Guilt," the doctor said slowly.
Whitey stared. "What could she have to feel guilty about?"
"The explosion," the doctor sighed. "Children seem to  feel  that  if  something  goes
wrong, it must be their fault, must be the result of something they did."
Whitey frowned. "I can see that making her sad, all right—but absolutely perfectly
behaved? And why would that keep her from dreaming?"
"Everyone dreams, Mr. Tambourin."
"Whitey."  he squeezed his eyes shut; his real name had  unpleasant  associations
with his past. "Just 'Whitey.' "
" 'Whitey,' " the doctor said reluctantly. "And we know Lona dreams—that's why I
gave her the REM test."
"Then how come she says she doesn't?"
"She doesn't remember. She's repressing that, too."
"But they're happening now! And the accident was months ago!"
"Yes," the doctor said, musing, "but she may feel that it's wrong to dream."
"In Heaven's name, why?"
"She  may  have  been  angry  at  her  parents,"  Dr.  Ross  explained.  "Children

frequently are, any time they're told No or punished. They want to strike back at their
parents, want to hurt them, tell them to drop dead—and, if  she'd gone to bed in that
frame of mind…"
"She might have dreamed she was killing them?"
"Something like that. Then she woke up, and found they really were dead—so she
repressed the traumatic event, and repressed all  memory  of  her  parents,  since  that
reminded her of her guilt."
"Isn't this a little farfetched?"
"Very," the doctor admitted. "It's just conjecture, Mr… Whitey."
He sighed. "Mr. Whitey" would do. "We don't have enough information for anything
more than a guess, do we?"
"Not yet, no."
"Okay, let's say you're right, Doctor. What do we do about it?"
"Prove to her that wishes don't make things happen, Mr.— Whitey."
Whitey suddenly turned thoughtful. "I suppose that is how it looks to her.  But why
would that make her so scrupulously obedient?"
"Because if you're naughty," the doctor murmured, "horrible things happen."
"And if you've been that naughty…"
"You want to be punished," the doctor finished for him. "Yes."
"Well." Whitey  stood up, with a smile. "She shouldn't have to  do  it  all  by  herself,
should she?"
 
 
So he punished her.  Tirelessly, relentlessly, ruthlessly, no matter how it made  his
heart ache. Made her scrub the floor. Do the dishes. Dust the furniture.  All by  hand,
too.
She should have protested that the robot could do it.
She didn't.
He made her comb her own hair, and watched with a beady eye to make sure every
tangle was out, trying to ignore the ache in his chest—watched the tears rolling down
her cheeks as she pulled and yanked, but never a whimper.
And no games. No playing—not that she did, anyway. No 3DT programs.
He made her do everything. She out-cleaned Cinderella, out-shined the Man in the
Moon, and moved in on the labors of  Hercules.  She  was  starting  in  on  the  Aegean
Stables when she finally exploded. "I wish you'd get spaced, Gran'pa!"
Then she froze, shocked, appalled" at herself—but she'd said it.
"No," Whitey said, with his meanest grin, "I won't."
Then he had to deliver on it,  of  course.  If  anything  happened  to  him  now,  she'd
probably never come out of it.  He got mighty tired of wearing the space suit, day in
and day out, but after a week, she saw nothing had happened to him, and began to

relax. And, when lightning failed to strike, she began to become a bit more irritable.
"Gran'pa, you're a meanie!"
"I know. But you have to clean your room anyway, Lona."
"Gran'pa, you're horrible!"
"Scrub the floor anyway, Lona."
"Gran'pa, I wish you knew what it feels like!"
"Finish combing your hair, Lona."
It was the hair that finally  did it.  One night, she yanked at a particularly  bad snarl
and cried, "Ouch!" And the tears rolled.
"Poor little girl," Whitey said, fairly oozing sympathy. "But crying won't get you out
of it."
Her face reddened with real, genuine anger. "Gran'pa, drop dead!"
 
 
"But I didn't," Whitey explained.
"Yes, and I'm awful glad! But can't you stop wearing that space suit now, Gran'pa?"
"Sorry, child."
"But the kids next door are making fun of you!"
"Calling names doesn't hurt me."
He could see her registering that, but she went on. "But you look so silly!"
He shook his head. "Sorry. Can't do it."
"Yes you can! All you have to do is take it off!"
"No, I can't," he said, "because if anything happened to me, you'd think it was your
fault."
"No, I won't! That's silly! You're not going to get hurt just because I  said to!" Then
she stopped, eyes wide, hearing her own words.
"That's a very important thing to realize, Lona," Dr. Ross was carefully sitting upwind
of Whitey, and as far away as she could.
"Then Gran'pa can take off the suit now?"
"Yes, but not here, please."
"Do  you  really  realize  that  just  wishing  won't  make  something  happen?"  Whitey
demanded.
And he was appalled that Lona was silent.
"Why do you think it does, Lona?" the doctor said kindly.
" 'Cause they said so on the 3DT," Lona mumbled.
Whitey took a deep breath, and the doctor leaned back in her chair. "But those are
just stories, Lona—fairy tales."

"No it's not! It was about Mr. Edison!"
Whitey stared.
"Oh, yes, the genius inventor," the doctor said slowly. "But he didn't just 'wish,' and
see his invention appear all of a sudden, did he?"
"No." Lona looked at the floor.
"How did he make his wishes real, Lona?"
"He worked at 'em," the little girl answered. "He worked awful hard,  and stayed up
nights working a lot, until he'd built a new invention."
"Yes," the doctor said softly, "and later in his life, he drew pictures of new machines
he'd thought of, and gave them to other men to make. But it all took work, Lona—work
with people's hands, not just their minds."
She nodded.
"What wish do you want to make real, Lona?"
"For no one to ever be hurt again from a dome collapsing!" she said instantly.
Now it was the doctor who took the deep breath, though Whitey joined her.  "That's
very difficult," Dr. Ross warned.
"I don't care! I want to do it anyway!"
"Look,  child,"  Whitey  said,  "this  isn't  just  pushing  your  body,  like  scrubbing  the
kitchen  floor.  This  means  learning  mathematics,  and  physics,  and  computer
programming, and engineering—grindingly hard work."
"I can do it, Gran'pa!"
"I know you can," Whitey said softly, "but not overnight—or next week, or even next
year."
"You mean I can't do it?"
"No, you can," Dr. Ross said quickly.  "I'm sure you have the intelligence, and we
know you have the industry.  But it does take a long time, Lona—years and years.  It
takes high school, and college, and maybe even graduate studies. You won't be able to
invent your fail-safe dome till you're in your twenties or thirties."
"I don't care how long it takes! I'm gonna to do it anyway!"
And Whitey and the doctor could both breathe easily again, finally. At least, Whitey
thought, we're safe from suicide.
 
 
First, of course, she had to find out why the dome on Homestead had blown. It was
touchy, but Dr. Ross had said she was ready  for  it.  Still, she trembled when Whitey
managed  to  get  her  the  printout  from  the  asteroid's  systems  computer.  But  the
trembling stopped when she looked at it. "What's all this mean, Gran'pa?"
"I don't know, child.  I  never learned enough about computers to  be  able  to  make
sense of it."
"Can't you hire somebody to tell you?"

Whitey  shook  his  head.  "I  don't  have  that  much  money—and  everybody  in  the
Asteroid Belt is too busy trying to earn enough to stay alive."
She stared. "You mean nobody cared?"
"Oh, they cared, all right. There was an investigation, and I read the report—but all
it said, really,  was that there had been  a  horrible  accident,  and  the  dome  field  had
collapsed."
"They didn't say how or why?"
Whitey shook his head. "Not that I  could tell. Of course,  I  don't understand all the
technical stuff."
"Can't you learn it?"
"I could," Whitey said slowly, "if I didn't have to worry about earning a living."
"Well,  then,  I'll  learn  it!"  Lona  said,  with  determination,  and  turned  back  to  the
computer screen.
And she did. But before she could begin to learn programming, she had to learn a
little about how computers work—and that meant  she  had  to  learn  math,  and  a  little
physics. But when she came to microcircuits,  she had to learn enough chemistry  to
understand  silicon—and  that  meant  more  physics,  and  more  physics  meant  more
math.  Then  she  began  to  become  interested  in  mathematics  for  its  own  sake,  and
Whitey pointed out that she had to learn enough history to understand the way people
were thinking when  they  invented  programming,  and  history  turned  out  to  be  pretty
interesting, too.
Meanwhile, of course,  Whitey  was filling her head with  bedtime  stories  about  the
Norse gods, and the fall of Troy, and the travels of Don Quixote.
"Isn't there any more, Gran'pa?"
"Well, yes, child, but there isn't time to tell it all."
So, of course, she had to start reading the books, to find out what Gran'pa had left
out—and that was more fun than 3DT. Not that she watched it that much, there wasn't
time. Oh, Gran'pa insisted that she take a few hours every afternoon to play with the
other children, and now she was so full of life that she made friends in no time.
And that, of course, was probably why the Board of Education came knocking on
the door.
Whitey  wasn't about to let her be locked into six hours a day listening to material
she'd already learned, of course. Not that he would have dreamed of claiming he knew
better than the education professionals—for normal children.  But Lona was a special
case, and even they would have had to admit that.
If he had bothered arguing. But there were four school districts in Ceres City, and a
dozen more on the asteroids nearby, all close enough to scoot over on a rocket sled
and  visit  her  friends  every  afternoon,  and  Dr.  Ross  once  a  month,  and  whatever
cabaret Whitey was singing at in the evening. Not that she had much contact with any
of what went on in the clubs, of course—she brought her notebook computer along.
So Whitey started travelling again, living the lifestyle he preferred,  even though he
wasn't travelling very far. He developed it into a system—move into town a month after
the first semester began, and by the time the School Board realized he was there, he

was already packing up to move on. Then three months there, and the school year was
almost over, so there was no point in starting—and, of course,  by  the  time  the  next
school year was beginning, he'd already put his apartment on the market and gone to
contract on a new one in another town-asteroid.
And Lona learned. And learned. And learned.
By  the  time  she  was  ten,  she  knew  enough  to  be  able  to  piece-together  the
sequence  of  events  from  the  printout.  Not  that  she  needed  the  hard  copy,  of
course—she was able to access  it by  herself as she explained it to Whitey  in a flat,
controlled, emotionless voice.
Only  one  force-field  generator  had  blown.  Only  one,  but  all  the  force-domes
interlocked—so when one went, it disrupted its six neighbors' fields badly enough so
that all the air poured out of them into its sector—and gushed out into space in a swirl
of  snowflakes.  Their  generators  all  tried  to  strengthen  their  domes,  and  the  whole
system overloaded, fields weakening to the point where Terran sea level air  pressure
could rip through them, gusting in the first and only wind Homestead had ever known,
howling  around  the  eaves  of  all  the  houses  the  settlers  had  built  in  their  cocksure
confidence  in  their  dome,  around  the  eaves  and  down  the  streets  and  on  into  the
fieldless sector, then out into space, leaving only vacuum behind.
And bodies.
And,  in  one  house,  a  little  girl  whose  silly,  overprotective  daddy  had  insisted  on
making his house airtight, even though everybody knew it wasn't necessary,  because
the dome enveloped the whole asteroid in a force field that could never be punctured
by any meteor—a silly daddy and a silly mommy who had put their little girl  to  bed,
then gone outside to hold hands and look at the stars.
Whitey  held  his  face  immobile,  his  heart  swelling  up  with  pride  in  his  son,  but
squeezing in with pity for the little girl.
The little girl who had waked up to find everybody else dead, and no one nearby to
tell her it wasn't her fault.
The little girl who sat looking at the computer screen with eighty-year-old eyes in a
ten-year-old face,  a little girl  whose foolish grandfather could only stand  beside  her,
wishing there were something he could do, and asking,
"But what made that first generator blow?"
"I don't know," Lona answered, "but I'm going to find out. And when I do, I'm going
to make sure that it never, ever happens again."
But she didn't shed a single tear.
Whitey wished that she would.
So  they  hired  a  burro-boat  and  went  out  to  Homestead.  It  wasn't  hard  to  find  a
pressure suit in her size—children weren't all that rare  in the Asteroid  Belt.  Not  any
more; not since the domes had been pronounced safe and fail-safe.
The ordinary domes, that is—the standard ones.
"Anybody who'd take a kid to live in an experiment has all the moral sensibility of a
cuckoo," Whitey muttered—but it made him uneasy. Would his son have been a little
less cocksure if Whitey had stayed with him?

"What did you say, Gran'pa?"
"Oh, nothing, Lona. Come on, let's go look." He fastened his helmet and checked
her seals; she checked his. Then they stepped into the miniscule airlock.
"An hour and ten, standard," the pilot told him. "Any more than that, and I'm pushing
an energy crisis."
"Back in forty-five," Whitey assured him, and sealed the inner hatch.
Bastard could wait, he thought—a burro-boat could run for  a week or more on a
block of ice. Of course, the reason old Herman had taken the charter was because he
was down to frost, or so he said—but Whitey had to admit it was better to play safe.
Still, he doubted the prospector was that low.
The  patch  turned  green,  and  Whitey  pushed  it.  The  hatch  swung  open,  and  he
reached out to clip  his safety line to a ring  bolt. Then he climbed out, moving slowly
and smoothly in the negligible gravity, then turned back to take Lona's line, clip it to a
ring bolt, and help her out.
She came out easily; free fall was nothing new to her (Whitey had made sure she
took gymnastic lessons). But she was pale, her eyes huge. He felt a stab of guilt  at
having brought her back to the scene  of  the  calamity,  but  steeled  himself  to  it—the
doctor  had  said  it  was  okay,  hadn't  she?  Still,  he  watched  the  child  very  carefully.
"Over here, Lona— Herman did a very good job. It's only fifty yards away."
She nodded, looking all about her, face haunted, as she groped for his hand.
And  no  wonder,  Whitey  thought,  looking  around  him  at  the  empty  houses  and
storage buildings. They were  near  a  park  with  playground  equipment,  swing  chains
dangling from a central mast, pathetic in their loneliness. There was only an occasional
broken window (windows on an asteroid! The gall, the audacity, the sheer overweening
pride of these pioneers!). That was all, no other damage. Oh, here and there, the odd
tile had broken loose from a roof, but only a few—when the wind had come, it hadn't
had much force. It was vacuum that had killed this place, not hurricane.
It was a grim town, dead and forlorn,  with memories of families and laughter  and
tears—a ghost town in space.
"Are there any—bodies?" Lona swallowed, hard.
"No—the disaster  squad  took  them  all  away  for  burial."  No  need  to  add  that  the
crypt was under the skin of the asteroid itself. "If it seems you've been here before, it's
nothing to worry about. You have been."
"I know," she said, her voice flat in his helmet speakers, "but it's really creepy. It all
looks the same, and it makes me feel like I'm little again—but it's all so different."
Yes,  without  life.  Whitey  reminded  himself  that  the  doctor  had  said  this  would
strengthen her immensely, would banish any lingering ghosts of guilt, that there  was
almost no chance of another breakdown, she was a very strong little girl  inside now.
"Of  course,  we  can't  ever  be  completely  sure,  Mr.  Whitey.  The  human  brain  is
inconceivably complex."
"Is that the generator?" Lona stared at the hemisphere of metal honeycomb before
them, in a fenced-off section of the park.
"No, just its antenna," Whitey answered. "The generator's underground."

Lona stared up at him. "Then how could it blow up?"
"We don't know it blew up," Whitey reminded her. "Come on, let's look."
He  found  the  trapdoor  set  into  the  rock  beside  the  antenna,  punched  in  the
combination. It had been a real job getting that set of numbers—they were classified
material of the highest order, vital to public safety (never mind the fact that the people
they were supposed to guard had died four years before). But finally, with a letter from
the doctor testifying how important the expedition was for  the child's mental health, a
few bribes, and a flawless train of logic, the relevant bureaucrat had reluctantly agreed
to let him have the combination. It was reassuring, in its way, giving you the feeling that
the living were protected as well as the dead.
Whitey  swung  the  lock  handle  and  hauled  the  trapdoor  open.  They  went  down
carefully, him first, flashlight probing the darkness around him. "Careful not to foul my
line."
"I won't, Gran'pa." But she wasn't being sassy about it—that worried him.
Then he saw the generator.
He stopped stock still, just standing there, staring.
"Gran'pa," she said, "it's…"
"In perfect condition." Whitey nodded. "At least, it looks that way. Let's just check,
child."
Then he brought out the toolkit, opened the access panels one by one, and took out
the circuit checker. "What do I do with this thing?"
"Red lead to contact A,  Gran'pa—there." Lona pointed. "And blue lead  to  contact
D."
"I'm glad one of us knows what I'm doing…"
But  Lona  was  frowning  at  the  meter,  frowning  and  taking  out  her  keypad.  She
punched in the data displayed on the circuit and said, "Red lead to contact B, Granpa,
and blue lead to contact H."
So  it  went,  Whitey  placing  the  probes  where  she  told  him,  she  frowning  at  the
readout and punching data into her keypad. He began to think she wasn't really aware
of him any more, was just using him as a sort of voice-activated servomechanism.
Well, at least it was some sign of life.
Finally, she straightened up with a sigh and said, "That's all. We've checked every
circuit. There's nothing more here for me."
Whitey fastened the access panels back in place, listening to her words echo inside
his head in secret, sad satisfaction. But he kept his face  solemn, a little exasperated,
and  glanced  at  the  time  display  built  into  his  faceplate.  "Not  a  minute  too  soon;  I
promised Herman forty-five minutes, and it's been fifty. Come on, child,  let's go—and
counterclockwise, please—let's not get our tails snarled."
"Hm? Oh sure, Gran'pa." and she followed him out, frowning, deep in thought.
Whitey fastened the trapdoor back in place and took her hand, turning back toward
the burro-boat. "Learn anything?"
"Uh-huh." She nodded. "It's in perfect working order."

"What?" Whitey jerked to a stop, staring down at her.
"It  is,  Gran'pa."  She  sounded  a  little  bit  afraid,  as  though  she  might  have  done
something wrong. "We could power it up, and it could put out a dome."
Whitey kept a firm hold on Lona's hand, but whether it was for  her stability or his,
he couldn't have said. His mind, at least, was in a whirl. "How could that generator have
failed if it was in perfect working order?"
"Somebody turned it off."
He looked down at Lona, startled.
She looked up at him out of wide, grave eyes. "Somebody had to have turned it off,
Gran'pa. It's the only way."
"But  it  took  me  a  full  week,  a  letter  testifying  need,  and  a  dozen  forms  to  five
different  offices,  to  get  the  combination  for  that  lock—and  that's  when  it  wasn't
operating! How could anybody even have gotten to it?"
"I don't know," Lona said, "but somebody did."
Whitey  froze  as a thought  hit  him.  "Child,"  he  said  slowly,  "I  didn't  see  a  power
switch in there."
Lona stopped dead with one foot in the air.  Then,  carefully,  she  put  it  down  and
nodded. "You're right, Gran'pa. There wasn't any."
"Well, if there's no switch, who could turn it off?"
"The computer," she said.
"But that means somebody programmed it to turn off the field!"
She was quiet for a moment, then asked, "Couldn't it have developed a glitch?"
"Chances are obscenely low, child! But who could have reached the computer?"
"Gotta find out," she mumbled, and turned away toward the boat.
Whitey came out of his stupefaction and hurried after her. Abstracted as she was,
she was apt to bump into a sharp piece  of junk and tear her suit—so he was in the
perfect position when he saw the drilling laser on the boat's bow turn toward them.
He hurled himself at her in a long, flat dive  that  caught  her  hips  right  across  his
shoulder and carried her into cover behind a house as the laser bolt spattered molten
rock  where  she'd  been  standing.  She  cried  out,  of  course,  and  Whitey  snapped,
"Quiet!"  His  brain  revved  into  high  gear,  picking  illusion  as  their  only  defense  and
pegging  the  manner  of  it  instantly.  "Now  get  in  there,  and  lie  absolutely  still!"  he
snapped, cradling  her in one arm and holding the other forefinger  up in front of  his
faceplate. Helmet or not, she recognized the "Sh!"  sign and squeezed her  lips  shut,
eyes wide, stiff as a fashion doll.
The stiffness didn't help any, but he managed to dodge around a corner,  weave a
right-angled "S" around three houses, find a broken window that he could reach in and
unlock, then opened the casement and pushed Lona through. She grabbed the nearest
table  and  crouched  under  it,  wide-eyed.  Whitey  pointed  downward,  hoping  she
understood that he wanted her to go down into the cellar,  and very much aware that
whoever had fired on them must be listening to their radio frequency. Then he turned
away, dodging and weaving as far  from  his  granddaughter  as  he  could,  eyeing  the
black sky with trepidation, knowing the burro-boat must be aloft and hunting.

And it was. Fire spat down out of sun-glare—right into the first  house he'd hidden
behind.  He  felt  a  glow  of  satisfaction—the  would-be  murderer  had  blasted  the  spot
where  Whitey  had  said  he  was  hiding  Lona.  Because  the  gunman  had  been
eavesdropping  on  their  suit  frequency,  of  course,  and  thought  Whitey  had  stuffed
Lona into hiding at that first house.
Only you can't "blast" something with a drilling laser—the beam is too narrow, and
the power's too low. Constant, but low—and the blast was still walking down out of the
sky, stabbing the house again, and again, and again.
How  long  can  he  keep  that  up?  Whitey  wondered,  and  the  idea  blossomed.
Because a laser used a lot more power than the bursts of acceleration needed in the
Belt, and maybe Herman had been telling the truth, maybe he really was that low on
fuel.
But he had to keep that idiot in the boat firing.  He'd be done with that house very
soon—and he'd figure Whitey wasn't in it.
Hatred seared through Whitey, hatred at any man who could try to burn up a child
like that. He put his feet against the nearest wall and shoved off, darting from house to
house, looking for something, anything, to keep the man shooting.
And cover—to keep the murderer from shooting him.
A  blank  wall  loomed  in  front  of  him—a  warehouse.  The  door  was  open,  of
course—why lock  anything,  when  you  know  all  your  neighbors?  He  ducked  in  and
breathed a sigh of relief, then pushed himself over to a window on the long side, and
looked out at the square with the park at its far end.
The boat was there, right enough, hovering fifty  feet up, high enough  to  see  any
movement, low enough to be within range—and not firing.
But if it was in range to shoot at them, it was in range to be shot. Whitey toggled his
helmet lamp and cast about frantically, looking for a weapon, some kind of weapon, or
at least something that would make a big explosion of light…
And there they were, racked against the side wall, right next to the door he'd come
in by, twenty rifles, plugged in to recharge. Whitey hopped over to them, blessing the
Belter's inherited sense of caution—the Asteroid Belt detachment of Marines had kept
the peace well for the last fifty years, but there were still old-timers around who could
tell hair-raising stories of the pirates and claim-jumpers who had riddled the asteroids
almost from the day they were opened to prospecting, and had even made a fair bid to
establish their own tyranny.  The pirates were gone,  but  it  had  become  traditional  to
keep a rifle handy.
Very handy. Whitey unplugged one, blessing his luck and hoping the current  was
still  running.  No  reason  why  it  shouldn't  be—the  planetoid  had  been  powered  by  a
fission  generator,  which  was  good  for  fifty  years.  No  reason  to  have  shut  it  down,
either, with fissionables so plentiful out here. He picked out a rivet on the far wall for a
target, set the rifle on low power, sighted, and squeezed.
The bolt of energy spattered a circle of molten metal, just above and to the left of the
target.
Whitey's heart sang as he corrected the sights and fired  again. This time the rivet
disappeared, and he leaped back to the window, setting the rifle to full power, aiming at
the burro-boat, breathing out, and squeezing the firing patch.

A flower of fire lit the boat's bow.
It  was  turning  toward  him  even  as  Whitey  was  squeezing  off  his  second  shot.
Whoever the pilot was, he recognized a real weapon when he saw its bolt, and knew
he had to put it out  of  action  fast.  The  boat  shot  toward  the  warehouse  as  the  drill
bored down, punching through the warehouse roof.
But  Whitey  was  already  out  the  door  and  crouching  behind  the  next  house.  He
popped up above the roof, aimed, fired, and ducked down, then arrowed away behind
the next house, then popped up to fire again just as the drill pierced the last roof  he'd
fired  from.  He  torpedoed  away  again,  but  around  a  corner,  because  two  points
determine a straight line, and two events determine a trend, if you're the kind to jump to
conclusions.
The assassin was, and the beam hit the  third  house  in  the  row.  But  Whitey  was
firing  from two houses south, then  from  the  house  west,  then  two  houses  west.  His
blood pounded in his ears, his heart thrilled to the hunt, even though he kept expecting
to pop up and see ruby fire all around him.
But he didn't—the assassin never knew where he'd be next. Not surprising—Whitey
didn't, either.
Then, finally, the beam grew dim.
That was it—one shot dim, then only a feeble glow from the drill, then nothing. The
burro-boat floated in the night, not a light showing, not a flicker of a rocket.
Whitey waited, holding his breath. Finally, he had to breathe, but the boat still hadn't
moved. Slowly, he started back to the warehouse, keeping an eye on the burro-boat,
but there wasn't the least sign of life,  or of movement. Whitey  grinned,  picturing  the
man inside raging, stabbing pressure patches in blind panic, not even able to get back
to the asteroid and the hidden scooter he surely had ridden out from Ceres, not able to
shoot, to transmit, to move.
Out of juice. Completely.
Whitey  ducked  in  through  the  door  and  began  to  search  the  warehouse  more
thoroughly. If there were rifles, maybe there was a radio.
There was,  and  it  was  plugged  in  to  recharge,  too.  Whitey  turned  it  on,  set  the
frequency to the emergency mark, toggled his helmet's loudspeaker, and bent down to
put it next to the microphone grille. "Emergency! Calling Marine Patrol, Sector 6…"
The only sour note, he reflected, was that the assassin couldn't hear his call.
 
 
The Marines were there in an hour—after all, Ceres was a commute, not a day trip.
Not  that  the  murderer  was  going  anywhere,  of  course.  But  it  was  time  enough  for
Whitey to go back and collect a very thoroughly frightened Lona, a little girl  who was
sobbing with fear  and  dread  of  the  haunted  place  where  she  crouched  alone,  then
crying her eyes out with relief.  Whitey  had soothed her and comforted her and had
her looking brave, by the time the Marine ship loomed over them—space suits or not, a
hug is a hug.
"His name is Cornelius Hanash," the Marine captain said, closing the  door  to  his
office and coming around to sit down by the desk.

Whitey stared. "Millionaire Hanash? The one who built the Ceres Center? The one
who  has  all  the  filthy  rich  tourists  paying  him  through  the  nose  to  lie  back  in  their
loungers and watch the asteroids fly by overhead? That Cornelius Hanash?"
"The same," the captain answered, "and the records show he was thinking of setting
up a branch on Homestead, had even bought a major hunk of bare rock there. But he
ran low on cash, and got behind on his payments."
"But how did—how did squashing Homestead…" Lona broke off,  trying  to swallow
her tears.
"Insurance," the captain explained. "He had that hunk of real estate insured for the
full value of the hotel he 'planned' to build there. When the dome blew, Farland's had to
pay—and it was enough to pay off his debts on the Ceres operation."
"But how did he know we were…" Whitey stopped, frowning. "I didn't exactly make
it a secret that we were going out to Homestead, did I?"
"No, and even I heard the gossip  that  some  nut  was  trying  to  get  into  the  blown
generator on the asteroid. Hanash was bound to hear it,  with all the  connections  he
has in Sector Hall—and he knew what you'd find."
"Death," Lona whispered. "Death for a hundred thousand people—and Mommy and
Daddy."
Then the tears broke. Finally. And Whitey held her and comforted her,  and waited
for the storm to pass, glad that she could finally grieve, could finally put the past where
it belonged.
 
 
Cordelia wiped her eyes, blew her nose, and tucked her hanky away with a sniffle.
"Oh, she was a brave lass!"
"She was indeed—and, although she did not live happily ever after, most of her life
was delightful. The rest was only exciting."
"If 'twas as exciting as her childhood, she did ne'er grow bored," Magnus opined.
"He was a brave man, this Whitey." Geoffrey's eyes glowed. "Valiant."
"I cannot help but agree—though I must say he never sought danger. Still, he had a
way of attracting it."
"Oh,  praise  Heaven  thou  didst  hear  of  such  as  they!"  Gregory  breathed.  "Even
through all thy years with the miner, though couldst know folk could be good!"
"Aye,  what of that miner?" Geoffrey  frowned. "How didst thou come to be free  of
him?"
"By death, wood-pate!" Magnus aimed a slap at his brother's head. "How else could
one be free of such a louse?"
Geoffrey blocked the blow easily and slapped back to score  as  he  said,  "I  could
think of an hundred ways, with a club at the beginning, and poison at the end."
"Geoffrey!  I  trust you jest!" Fess said, shocked. "No, in point of fact,  I  was freed
from him as a result of his own moral turpitude."
"Turp… what?" Gregory asked.

"Turpitude,  Gregory—doing  wrong  without  compunction.  He  exhibited  this  quality
when he received a distress signal from a group of castaways and sought to pass them
by, since he perceived no likelihood of immediate gain or pleasure from them."
"The dastard!" Cordelia gasped. "Had he no respect for humankind, then?"
"None,"  Fess  confirmed.  "He  would  cheerfully  have  left  them  to  die,  and  never
thought twice of it."
"Yet thou wouldst not permit it?"
"I  could  not.  My  program  dictates  that  human  life  is  of  greater  importance  than
human convenience—and saving lives was more important than my owner's whim. So I
turned the ship aside and picked them up, containing  them  within  the  airlock.  Once
they were aboard. I persuaded my owner to permit them to come into the ship itself.''
" 'Persuaded'!" Geoffrey cried triumphantly. "Thou didst not disobey!"
"I did disobey my owner, by rescuing the fugitives—but he sought to break the law."
"And thou didst obey the law!"
"I did," Fess agreed.
"Was there no other time when thou didst disobey?"
"There was," Fess admitted, "for I soon perceived that the castaways had excellent
qualities of mutual assistance and support; but  my  owner  had  received  a  broadcast
identifying  them  as  fugitives  from  governmental  forces,  and  offering  a  reward  for
information  leading  to  their  capture.  Since  the  fugitives  had  not  contributed  to  his
gratification, he attempted to use them as coin to buy it."
"As coin?" Geoffrey frowned. "How can one use people to buy with?"
"There  is  slavery,"  Fess  answered,  "and  I  am  certain  that  the  only  reason  my
second owner did not descend to such depths, is that he lacked the opportunity. But
he  was  not  averse  to  attempting  to  collect  bounty  on  fugitives  when  the  chance
presented  itself.  Accordingly,  he  ordered  me  to  transmit  a  signal  to  Ceres  Station,
notifying the authorities of the fugitives' presence—and I refused to do so."
"Thou didst most thoroughly disobey, both thine owner and the law!"
"Not  quite,"  Fess  demurred,  "for  I  had  reason  to  believe  that  the  authorities  in
question were themselves violating the law."
Geoffrey looked exasperated. If Fess said he "had reason to believe," then he had
almost complete proof.
"My owner activated a manual transmitter, though, and sent the signal."
Cordelia frowned. "Was that not exceedingly dangerous?"
"Aye,"  Geoffrey  agreed, "and from what thou hast said, he hath not the sound of
being a bold man—for would he not have valued his own welfare above all else?"
"He  did,"  Fess  confirmed.  "The  fugitives  in  question,  though,  were  scarcely
dangerous.  They  were  not  criminals,  but  simply  people  who  had  expressed  a
disagreement of opinion with the party that was attempting to overthrow the government
of  the  time.  Since  they  were  not  dangerous  in  themselves,  the  miner  showed  no
hesitation in betraying them to the assassins employed by that party."
"The coward! The poltroon!" Geoffrey cried. "Had he no fellow-feeling in him at all?"

"I suspect not. Certainly,  he was not averse to attempting to collect bounty on the
fugitives when the chance presented itself. Yet he did not know that he would gain a
considerably greater amount than I was worth from the gentleman who purchased me
from him."
Geoffrey frowned. "Dost thou say these 'fugitives' did buy thee from him?"
"Their leader did, yes."
Cordelia  frowned,  too.  "Yet  wherefore  did  the  wealthy  gentleman  purchase  thee
from the miner?"
"Because he and his friends  needed me  and  the  burro-boat  to  carry  them  away
from the assassins the miner had summoned."
"How did he know the miner had called them up?"
"I took the liberty of informing them."
"Fess!" Geoffrey stared at him, scandalized. "Thou didst betray thine owner!"
"I did," Fess said, without the slightest hesitation. "I have explained my reservations
about the miner's character, children—but in only an hour's time, I had come greatly to
respect the fugitives, and had realized that they were struggling to preserve liberty for
all people. My program holds such liberty to be fundamental, equal in importance to my
loyalty to my owner."
Geoffrey frowned. "That hath an odd sound, in light of what thou hast told us of thy
program aforetime."
"It does seem anomalous," Fess admitted, "to the point that I  suspect  some  error
was made in my program, and only in mine. Nonetheless, this was the only instance in
which  such  a  conflict  arose.  Revealing  the  miner's  report  to  the  fugitives  was
consequently in accord with my program."
"Thou hadst learned  summat  more  of  human  folk  than  when  thou  didst  guide  an
aircar, hadst thou not?"
"Considerably more, and had come to realize as I have said, that there are qualities
of goodness and badness in people."
Gregory looked up, puzzled. "Yet thou art but a robot, or so thou wouldst have us
believe. How canst thou know good from bad?"
"Be  mindful  of  my  programming,  children.  To  me,  anything  is  'good'  if  it  is
conducive to human life, liberty, or happiness, and anything is 'bad' if  it is inimical  to
that life or happiness, or threatens liberty."
"Yet strong drink would thereby be 'good,' " Geoffrey said.
"I spoke of happiness, Geoffrey, not pleasure."
Geoffrey shook his head. "I ken not the difference."
"Nor did my second owner. But even acknowledging the difficulties of his situation, I
could not condone his behavior.''
" 'Tis a wonder he did not scrap thee!"
"He  did  not  have  the  opportunity;  for  the  chief  of  the  fugitives  secured  his  own
safety, and that of his friends, by the simple expedient of abandoning the miner on a
small  asteroid,  with  a  sufficiency  of  food,  water,  and  shelter—and  a  beacon  to

summon assistance."
"Why, how cruel!"
"Not really; there was no doubt of a rescue well before the miner's supplies ran out."
Geoffrey frowned. "Then why abandon him in so unlikely a place. Why not take him
to a town?"
"Because, if they had taken him to Ceres, the authorities would have arrested them.
But if  they marooned him, it would take several days for  the rescue to arrive,  which
guaranteed their being able to vacate the vicinity safely."
"Wherefore did they not slay him out of hand?" Geoffrey demanded.
"Geoffrey!" Cordelia protested.
But Fess admitted, "There was some sentiment in favor of such an action—but the
fugitives' leader suggested the more humane alternative."
"Only 'suggested?' " Geoffrey questioned. "Had he no authority, then?"
"I do not know," Fess mused, "for the issue never arose. None of them contradicted
him, when he spoke of action."
"Thou  dost  mean  they  did  not  think  to  disobey."  Geoffrey  scowled.  "Is  this
admirable?"
"It is," said Fess, "when the commands are right."
"But thou dost tell me naught!" Geoffrey cried. "Am I to disobey, or not?"
"The issue is unclear, Fess," Gregory agreed.
"You must decide for yourselves, children, and decide each case as it arises,  not
seek to abdicate your power of decision by imposing an inflexible rule."
"Then give us a rule that is flexible," Magnus suggested.
"Your parents have already done so."
The children looked at each other, puzzled.
"Doth he toy with us?" Geoffrey asked.
"Nay," said Gregory, "for 'tis not in his nature."
"His nature is to be loyal to his owner," Magnus said, "and that owner is Papa."
Cordelia turned to stare at the back of Fess's head, beginning to feel angry.  "Hast
thou sold us, then?"
"I have not," Fess answered, "and if you consider, you will find it so. If you seek to
know  whether  or  not  to  obey,  I  can  only  tell  you  the  answer  I  have  gained  by
experience: 'Obey, but be true to your programming.' "
Geoffrey  frowned.  "What  use  is  that  to  a  flesh-and-blood  person?  What
programming have we, to be true to?"
"You will have to discover that for  yourself,  Geoffrey;"  Fess answered.  "That  is  a
part of what adolescence is for."
The children stared at him, trying to decide whether or not to be outraged.
Then Magnus smiled. "Yet thou didst not know this when thou didst first awake, didst

thou?"
"I did not have subroutines for resolving conflicts between my program and the daily
problems  I  encountered,  no.  But  my  program  does  allow  for  development  of  such
subroutines."
"And thou didst form these subroutines by contemplation of the events of which thou
hast but now told us, didst thou not?"
"That is an accurate statement, yes."
"Then thou didst have an adolescence!" Cordelia crowed.
"A  period  equivalent  to  human  adolescence,  yes.  I  am  glad  it  pleases  you  to
discover that, Cordelia."
"Oh,  we  ever  seek  to  learn  from  they  who  have  gone  o'er  the  road  before  us,"
Magnus said airily.  "From whom didst thou learn to  resolve  such  conflicts  as  these,
Fess?"
The robot was silent a moment, then said slowly, "I worked out my subroutines from
principles contained in my basic program, Magnus. However, I  did incorporate  some
concepts  from  one  human  being,  who  professed  ideas  that  formed  perfect  loops,
comparing  present  events  to  past  events,  enabling  one  to  discern  similarities  and
contrasts, and thereby judge the appropriate action to be taken."
"And that person was?"
"The leader of the fugitives."
"Thy third owner?" Magnus stared. "How came he to have so great an impact  on
thee?"
"Principally by the brilliance of his mind, Magnus—though he would have disclaimed
such a statement. And the effects of his ideas were no doubt enhanced by  his being
the first of my owners to be a good human being."
"I can credit that, from what thou hast said."  Magnus frowned. "Who  was he, this
chief fugitive, this paragon?"
"His name was Tod Tambourin, and he was scarcely a paragon, though certainly, at
heart, a very good man."
"Tod Tambourin!" Cordelia stared, aghast. "Dost thou mean this 'Whitey  the Wino'
of whom thou hast but now told us? He who aided his granddaughter out of the agony
of her parents' death?"
"The same," Fess confirmed.
Gregory frowned. "Yet how doth he come to  be  the  namesake  of  that  other  'Tod
Tambourin' thou hast taught us of, in our schoolroom?"
"By the easiest of means—he was not the namesake, but the same man."
Geoffrey's  mouth  dropped  open,  flabbergasted.  "That  Tod  Tambourin?  That
weakling man of pen and ink? Him whom thou dost say was the greatest poet of the
Terran sphere?"
"That is not merely my opinion, children, but the consensus of Terran critics—and
he was scarcely a weakling."
"Yet  'tis  he  whose  verses  thou  hast  made  us  con  by  heart,"  Geoffrey  objected,

"whether we would or no."
"Wast thou so reluctant, then?" Magnus jibed.
Geoffrey frowned. "Not with 'The Rebels and the Admiral,' nay, nor with his 'Foc'sle
Ballads.' Yet for his 'Decline and Fall of Liberty,' I've little use."
"Nor I," Cordelia agreed, "yet I shall ever treasure his 'Young Wife's Rejoicing' and
'The Dandy's Courtship.' "
"Thou wouldst," Geoffrey scoffed.
"Every person who has read his verses has a favorite, children," Fess said quickly,
forestalling mayhem, "though they frequently know not who wrote them. Yes, my third
owner was Tod Tambourin. He gave me as a wedding present to his granddaughter,
Lona, and I have served her family ever since."
Magnus  stared  at  Fess.  "Thou  dost  not  mean  that  we  are  of  the  blood  of  Tod
Tambourin!"
"You should not  be  so  surprised,"  Fess  chided.  "Have  you  not  found  that,  when
your heart is light, you cannot keep from singing?"
The children looked at one another in amazement.
"But enough now, your parents call."
"More, Fess. More of Tod Tambourin!" Cordelia pleaded. But the great horse shook
his head, and led them toward Rod and Gwen, who waited under the shading tree.
Chapter 4
« ^ »
They came up the long, winding road to the castle just as the sun slipped below the
horizon—and, though they had traveled east from their home, the road had wound its
way around and around up the mountain, so that, as they looked up at the castle, the
sunset  was  behind  it—a  blood-red  sunset,  making  the  castle  appear  black  and
ominous, brooding above them.
Cordelia shivered. "It doth watch us, Papa."
"Just an illusion, dear." Rod squeezed her against him—to hide his own shiver. "It's
the angle of view. A pile of stones can't watch—it has no eyes to see with."
"Yet it doth, Papa." Magnus's voice broke on the word, somewhat spoiling the effect
of his tone—but he ignored it, frowning up at the castle with a scowl as dark as its own.
"There is summat held there within those stones, that doth mark our approach."
This  time  Rod  let  go  of  Cordelia  to  hide  his  shiver.  There  might  indeed  be  a
presence in the castle—on a planet  where  virtually  everyone  was  a  potential  esper,
you  couldn't  rule  out  anything.  He  glanced  at  Geoffrey,  and  even  his  hardening
warrior-child  was frowning, drawn-in and truculent, glaring at the  castle  as  though  it
were an attacker—and Gregory was wide-eyed and pale.

Rod turned to Gwen. "Do you feel it, too?"
Gwen  nodded,  gaze  fixed  on  the  castle.  "There  is  a  sense  of  old  misery  there,
milord—some ancestral curse that must needs be lifted."
"Well, then, a family like ours is the one to lift it!"  Rod squared his shoulders and
strode ahead. "Come on, troops. How long has it been since we've found a villain who
could stand up to us?"
He should have heard a cheer at his back, but he didn't. He risked a quick peek and
found they were all following him, with, a sense of determination that he found more
unnerving than reluctance would have been.
"Are you sure this is wise, Rod?" Fess's voice said behind his ear.
Rod noticed that the robot hadn't used human thought-frequency,  which meant the
rest of the family probably hadn't heard. He muttered back,  "Of course not, Old Iron.
Has that ever stopped me before?"
 
 
The sky had darkened to dusk by the time they came up to the moat and saw just
how dilapidated the castle was. A roof  had fallen in,  and some crenels were missing
from the towers. Frost and thaw had prised several other blocks  out  of  the  northern
wall, leaving a four-foot  notch high at its top. As  they  watched,  bats  shot  out  of  the
northern tower and darted away into the night. Rod wondered just how much more of a
ruin it would seem by  day.  Slowly,  he  said,  "I  don't  think  I  want  to  spend  the  night
there."
But, "Nay," Gwen said, "we must."
Rod turned to stare at her. "Spend the night in there? The time when unquiet spirits
are most apt to roam? When we've all felt some wrongness there?"
"Aye,  and  therefore  must  we  stand  against  it,"  she  answered,  eyes  hard  with
determination, "or let the evil that it holds endure to befoul the domain that hath been
given into our care."
Well,  there  was  no  way  around  that,  Rod  had  to  admit—they  had  accepted  the
estate that had been split off from Di  Medici's lands, which meant they had assumed
the responsibility for the welfare of its people. Not that they had asked for it, mind you,
or wanted it—but they hadn't refused it, either. If Tuan and Catharine needed to have
them take care of this parcel of land and people, why then, it was their duty to do so,
as loyal liegefolk—unless they had a damn good reason not to.
Which they hadn't. "I notice the Di Medici haven't bothered de-ghosting it, no matter
how long it's been in the family…"
"Thou hast said it; 'tis haunted." Gregory's eyes were huge.
Geoffrey gave him a contemptuous glance. "Is't such news, sin that the Puck hath
told us so, and we all have felt some eldritch presence there?"
"Nay," little brother answered, "but once 'tis said, there's no unsaying it."
Geoffrey frowned, irritated, and was about to comment, but Rod stopped him with a
hand on his shoulder. "It's labeling, son. It's a way of confronting our fear…"
"I have no fear!"

"Then you're braver than I am. And once we've put a name to that fear, we can't just
walk away and pretend it never existed."
Geoffrey still frowned, but he quieted.
"And if  the  Di  Medici  have  failed  in  their  duty,  what  of  it?"  Gwen  demanded.  "It
nonetheless falls to us."
"True," Rod admitted.
"Then the sooner we deal with it, the better."
"Oh, I wouldn't go that far. I'd just as soon make my first confrontation by daylight,
thank you."
Gwen turned to confront him. "Delay will not make it cease, milord."
"No, but it'll make me feel a little better about it."
Gwen  tossed  her  head  impatiently.  "Art  thou  so  worn  with  travel,  then,  that  thou
canst not stand to battle?"
"Now that you mention it—yes.  Or rather,  I  could if  I  had  to—but  no  general  will
make his troops fight when they're tired, if he can help it. I've got an even better reason
than that though."
"Which is?"
"I'm scared."
"Thou, craven?" Geoffrey bleated. "Thou canst not speak truth!"
"I  do."  Rod  turned  away,  picked  up  a  fallen  branch,  and  began  to  sweep  out  a
campsite. "And I intend to have full sunlight before I walk into that stone pile."
Geoffrey stared at him, thunderstruck, then whirled to Gwen. "Mama! Assuredly our
father hath not become a coward!"
Gwen squeezed his shoulder and shook her head, but her eyes were on Rod.
Geoffrey stared, unbelieving, then whirled away to Fess. "It cannot be true! Thou,
who hast known him longer than any, who hast watched o'er him from his cradle—tell
me! Hath my father ever admitted to fear?"
"Frequently  and  regularly,  Geoffrey,  as  he  should.  Only  a  fool  will  deny  being
afraid. The wise man will admit his fear, at least to himself, then triumph over it."
That brought the future hero  to  a  frowning  halt.  "There  is  an  air  of  sense  to  thy
words…"
"He who denies his fear, even to himself, lies," Fess assured him, "and fear denied
may leap out at the crucial moment, to disable you in battle."
Magnus listened closely.
"So never hesitate to admit being afraid, Geoffrey," Fess went on, "but do not let it
keep you from action."
"Yet he doth! Even now, he doth!"
"True, and that is atypical  for  him," the robot agreed. "You might wish to ask him
why—especially when he does it so blithely."
Geoffrey stared at him, then whirled to his father. "Thou dost lie!"

Magnus turned, too, though more slowly.
"I do not," Rod said evenly. "I am most definitely afraid of that castle."
Geoffrey lifted his chin. "Yet not so afeard that thou wilt not encamp in the shadow
of its walls."
"You've noticed."
Geoffrey  winced.  "Be  not  so  cruel  to  me,  I  pray!  Tell  me  wherefore  thou  dost
hesitate."
Rod just gazed at him. Geoffrey twitched, but held firm.
Softly, Magnus said, "Hast thou the right to hear it, brother, when thou hast lost faith
in him?"
Geoffrey seemed to loosen a little. "I  did not. Not truly,  I  did  not—I  but  craved  a
reason to keep belief.''
Rod still gazed.
Finally, Geoffrey bowed his head. "Thy pardon, sir, that I did doubt thee."
"Why, of course," Rod said. "Question me all you wish, son, though you may not
like the answer—but don't doubt me, please. I don't deserve it."
"Nay, thou dost not," Gwen said, musing. "Yet thou couldst have been more open,
husband."
"I could, if I could have put words to it—but it took a few minutes to figure out what
was bothering me. And really, it's simply this—I don't like surprises."
"Aye!" Geoffrey cried, relieved. " 'Tis even as thou hast ever said—to march ahead
unknowing is most dire folly!"
Rod nodded. "Took me a few minutes  to  figure  that  out,  though,  since  it  isn't  an
army we're facing. That's why I told you I was scared. Emotions are there for reasons,
and when I can't figure out exactly what I'm scared about, it's wisest to stand back—if I
can."
"And in this, thou canst." Gwen nodded. "There is wisdom in this, husband. Nay, let
us bide without for  the night, and learn what we may on the morrow." She turned to
Cordelia, who had been watching very intently the whole time, taking copious mental
notes. "Come, daughter. Let us prepare for the meal, and the night."
"You heard her, boys," Rod called, "pitch camp."
 
 
The light of a campfire under a tripod and cauldron, and the smell of stew, cheered
their  spirits  considerably.  Firelight  flickered  on  their  faces,  Fess,  and,  across  from
him, the family tent, which had grown steadily over the  years  until  it  had  become  a
pavilion.
"How shall we begin to discover knowledge of this castle, Papa?" Magnus asked.
"Well, your mother and I already know a little, son."
Gwen nodded. " 'Tis not so far  from Runnymede that folk there would have heard
naught in all these years."

"Then what thou dost know is but gossip," Gregory objected.
Gwen nodded again. "And 'tis thereby faulted—yet there's oft a kernel of truth in a
rumor."
"And what doth Rumor say?" Cordelia demanded.
"First,"  Rod answered, "we know that  the  name  of  the  castle  is  Foxcourt.  That,  I
think, we can take as fact, because that's what King Tuan called it when he enfoeffed
me with it."
"Doth 'enfoeffed' mean aught like to 'encumbered,' Papa?"
Rod nearly choked on his stew. He wiped his mouth and his eyes and said, "Only in
this case, Delia. Usually, it just means that the King is letting the knight live there and
have the income from it. It's like gaining title to a piece of land, in reward for service to
the Crown."
"Yet 'tis still the Crown's?" Magnus asked.
"In theory, yes—but for all intents and purposes, it belongs to the knight who's been
given seizin of it, and to his heirs."
"What doth 'given seizin' mean?" Geoffrey asked.
" 'Enfoeffed.' "
"Oh." Geoffrey frowned, puzzled.
"There are many  words  in  our  language  that  have  meanings  so  similar  as  to  be
nearly  the  same,"  Gwen  explained,  "though  there  are  different  occasions  for  their
employment. Tis why its use doth become art."
"And defeats those who would treat it as a science," Rod agreed. "However, we are
seized of this castle and the ten miles surrounding it, which is our fief, whether we like
it or not—so, if there are some maleficent spooks disputing its ownership, we'd better
take care of them for once and for all."
"And that doth begin with its name?"
Rod shrugged. "It's a starting place. If we can find  out why it was named that, we
may have a start at finding out what the haunting spirit is."
"The castle's name doth sound as thou 'twas famed for its hunting."
"Aye," Gwen agreed, "the more so as 'twas the hold of a noble family."
"But they also bore the name Foxcourt," Rod objected. "They'd have had to take the
name of the castle for their own, if hunting was really its source."
" 'Tis common enough, is't not?" Magnus asked. "The Earl Marshall is fully Robert
Artos, Lord Marshall—yet though his family's name is 'Artos,' all do speak of him as
'Marshall.' "
"True enough, but it's been known to happen the other way just as often. 'Tudor' is
our neighbor Earl's family name, but he gave it to his demesne."
"Then the family of barons who dwelt here took their name from the castle?"
"They were counts, not barons—and yes, that's my guess. But it might have worked
the other way around."
Cordelia gazed up at the walls, dark against the dusky sky. "How long did they dwell

here?"
"Three  centuries,  which  means  the  castle's  been  empty  for  two  hundred  years.
Tuan  says  the  family  died  out  then,  and  Di  Medici  left  the  building  to  rot  while  he
administered the county through knights and reeves."
Gwen frowned. " 'Tis unlike what we know of that family, to let a castle stand when it
could be invested against them."
"And just  as  unlike  our  erstwhile  Duke  Di  Medici  to  let  a  useable  strongpoint  go
unused, when it could be tightening his hold over his peasants." Rod nodded. "You're
right—something doesn't fit."
"Canst thou tell why?" Gregory asked.
Rod shook his head. "That's all the information King Tuan gave us."
"Where shall we gain more?"
"Where do we always go?" Rod turned to Gwen. "Do we have some extra stew?"
Gwen nodded. "Nearly as much as we've eaten."
"Then let's have company over for dinner. After all, Puck recommended we consult
the local authorities." Rod turned to the surrounding trees, calling, "Ye elves  of  hills,
brooks, standing lakes, and groves! Care to take potluck? 'Tis the Lord Warlock  who
calls, and we'd love some company! Also some information…"
Cordelia's  eyes  shone,  and  she  started  to  say  something,  but  Gwen  pressed  a
finger across her lips, and she subsided. Gregory watched, eyes huge, and Geoffrey
fidgeted, but managed to stay quiet. Magnus tried to look bored, but failed.
Leaves stirred, then a head the size of Rod's fist poked out. "Art truly he?"
"I am, and these are my wife and children. We're all honorary elves."
"Is't  as  honorary  as  all  that?"  The  elf  missed  Rod's  glare,  because  he  turned  to
Gwen  as  he  scrambled  to  his  feet  and  bowed.  He  wore  hose  and  a  jerkin  of
brown—bark,  Rod  guessed—and  was  almost  as  brown  as  his  clothing.  "We  are
honored that thou hast come, Lady Gwendylon. I am hight Buckthorn."
Rod breathed a sigh of relief; for a moment, he'd thought the manikin was going to
start talking about Gwen's parentage.
The boys were staring at Rod, scandalized at the lack of respect accorded him, but
Rod just held up a palm and watched.
Gwen smiled and inclined her head graciously.  "Nay, 'tis thou dost honor me, Old
One."
"Nay, for thou art wise and good. Hast thou come, then, to heal this festering sore
on our mountain?"
Gwen darted a quick glance at Rod, then turned back to the elf. "We must, for this
manor is given into our stewardship. Canst thou tell us aught of its past?"
"Aye, and most gladly!"
"Then do, I prithee. Yet first, call up such of thy fellows as may wish it, to partake of
our supper."
"Aye,  and right happily."  Buckthorn turned back to the forest and made a  sort  of

falling whistle, like the call of a night bird.  It was answered by  half a dozen like him,
four in hose but two in skirts, who came out of the underbrush with shy and hesitant
steps,  to  line  up  in  a  half-circle  by  Buckthorn.  "These,"  he  said,  "are  my
companions—Hazelberry and Rose, first."
The elf-wives curtsied. Hazelberry was slender and brown as the wood of her name,
with a bright green leaf-cloth dress.  Rose  was  plump  and  red-cheeked,  with  a  rosy
complexion and dusky pink skirt and bodice.
"These are their husbands, Bight and Burl."  Buckthorn  gestured  toward  the  men.
Two of them stepped forward to bow. Burl was short, scarcely more than a foot high,
but almost six inches broad, with bulging muscles. Bight was tall and wiry.
"And these are the bachelors of this mountain, Loon and Gorn." Loon was slender,
with a dreamer's eyes, and Gorn was so plump that Rod wondered if  he moonlighted
as a subordinate Claus.
"Thou art welcome to our fire, as I hope we are to thy mountain." Gwen inclined her
head gravely, carefully not mentioning the matter of official  ownership. "Wilt  thou join
us in meat?"
"Aye, and right gladly," said Gorn. All seven of them came forward and settled down
cross-legged in a circle near the pot.
The juvenile Gallowglasses tracked them with huge eyes.  Rod felt a thrill of  pride.
His children had seen elves before, but they never seemed to tire of them.
Gwen ladled a bowl full of stew and set it down in their center, then set a half-loaf of
bread beside it, and another bowl of milk. The elves set to with gusto.
"We are told the family of this keep were the Counts Foxcourt," Gwen began. "Did
they take their name from the manor?"
"Nay, they gave it theirs," Burl answered.
Gwen exchanged a look of surprise  with Rod, then turned back.  "What manner of
folk were they?"
"Oh, bad folk, lady!" Hazelberry answered. "Horrid indeed, from the second Count
to  the  last.  There  do  be  tales  of  the  cruelties  wrought  upon  their  peasants,  of  the
heaviness of the taxes levied, and of their delight in the floggings when folk had not the
wherewithal to pay."
"And tales more foul than that," Bight said darkly, "which I will forebear to speak of,
with younglings present."
"Oh, do not let us dissuade thee," Magnus urged.
"No, do," Rod contradicted with a glare at his son. "I think we can guess."
"Aye, guess worse deeds than they did," Geoffrey grumbled.
"That, I  misdoubt me," Buckthorn answered.  "Think  whatever  ill  thou  canst  of  the
Foxcourts, and 'tis like to be true."
"So bad as that?" Cordelia's eyes were huge.
"So  bad,"  the  elf  confirmed.  "But  finally  came  a  Count  who  was  so  evil  that  he
flouted  even  his  duty  to  his  family,  and  would  not  wed,  though  he  did  force  his
attentions on every woman who came his way."

" 'Force his attentions?' " Gregory looked up at his father.
"Later, son—in about ten years. So he had no legitimate son to inherit the title?"
"He did not."
"Were there no cousins who could take it up?" Gwen asked.
"Aye,  there were two cadet branches of the  line,"  Gorn  answered,  "yet  both  had
removed  to  other  dukedoms,  and  pledged  their  swords  to  county  lords,  thereby
retaining knighthood; and both cast off the decadence of their sires."
" 'Twas not all of a moment, look you,"  Bight added. "The first  knight, we are told,
did keep faith with his lord, serve bravely in battle, and deal fairly  with his peasants,
though harshly. Their sons did leave off  swilling of ale and despoiling of women, and
the grandsons were as good as any knight, and better."
Buckthorn nodded, munching. "They had even become beloved by  their serfs  and
tenants."
"Very  impressive."  Rod  nodded.  "So  what  happened  after  they  took  over  the
estate?"
"Naught, for they did not," Buckthorn said.
Rod let out a long whistle. "That bad? Two families turned down the chance  for  a
noble title and estates, just because of the castle's reputation?"
Bight nodded somberly.
"What kind of closet skeletons could make a family refuse a title?"
"Any, an they walked." Magnus scowled. "Is not a haunting reason enough to deny
inheritance?"
"No, not really.  I  know of quite a few families  that  cohabited  very  companionably
with ghosts,  or  at  least  ignored  them—the  family  manor  house  was  so  important  to
them that they were willing to share it with a few of their ancestors who were a  little
reluctant to move out. In fact, there was a time when the nouveau riche began to try to
buy family ghosts to go with their fabricated coats of arms. I understand a real rage for
that kind of thing hit my home, ah, 'land,' really hard,  about four  hundred years  ago.
One of my ancestors even pioneered a new fad in holograms."
Magnus glanced up at Fess, but the robot carefully ignored him.
"So family ghosts, just by themselves, wouldn't account for having turned down the
title," Rod finished.
"Unless 'twas a truly vile haunting," Gwen demurred.
Rod  nodded.  "There  had  to  be  something  especially  rotten  about  the  last  Count
Foxcourt, or his household."
"I assure thee, there was," Hazelberry said. "Name a vice or debauchery,  and he
did practice it."
"Yeah, but that wouldn't…" Rod's voice trailed off  as he remembered some of the
tales he'd heard about sadists. "No, strike that. I can think of some sins that would give
the castle such an aura of evil that no one would want it, even with a title."
"Most truly," Rose agreed.

"And no one would want to take up the name." Rod frowned. "We  were wondering
about that part. I  mean, 'Foxcourt' isn't your  garden  variety  kind  of  nomer,  after  all.
Was the manor known for its good hunting?"
"Nay," said Buckthorn. "There was some hunting, though no better than most—and
the knights generally did course after boar, not fox."
"Or peasants," Burl added darkly.
Cordelia shuddered, Gregory blanched, and Magnus and Geoffrey grew somber.
Rod tried to bypass the reference. "Can't have been the source of the name, then."
"Nay," Buckthorn  agreed.  "Word  hath  come  down  from  the  first  elves  who  dwelt
here, that the name of this family was first spelled in a fashion far more elaborate."
"Aye, and spoken with a haughty accent," Bight seconded, "wherefore both we, and
the peasants, were the more ready to bring it down to earth and pronounce it simply as
'Foxcourt.' "
All  the  elves  nodded,  and  Rose  added,  "By  the  third  generation,  the  family  had
taken our spelling of it, and by the fifth, all had forgotten any other."
"Hm." Rod frowned. "Makes it tough to find the original."
"Thou canst not," Buckthorn assured him. " 'Tis lost for all time."
Behind Rod's ear, Fess's voice said, "That is a challenge."
Rod agreed. The original spelling of the name had to be recorded somewhere in the
Lord Chancellor's books—antique tax records, or maybe even the original deed to the
property. It probably had nothing to do with the haunting, but Rod resolved to find it.
 
 
The guests had departed, filled with stew and  emptied  of  gossip—after  all,  they'd
been waiting two hundred years  to tell it—and Gwen had decreed bedtime. Rod had
mentioned to Fess that keeping a watch might be a good idea, and the Steel Sentry
had taken up his post, right next to the children.
Which made him handy for bedtime stories, especially since  the children  were so
keyed up that sleeping was the least possible activity for them. Quarreling ranked high
on their list, though, with fighting right behind it, so Fess was watching for  more than
ghosts.
Not that they were out of line yet, of course. They were just barely bedding down.
" 'Tis a foul and brooding pile," Geoffrey gloated. "Nay, who doth know what deeds
of glory a valiant man might achieve within it?"
"Naught, an he doth run at the sight of a spectre," Magnus answered.
"Thou dost not say I would run!"
"Thou hast it; I did not. For myself, I know I shall stand fast."
"Aye, transfixed in horror!"
"Boys, boys,"  Fess reproved. "You are both brave and bold, as you  have  proved
many times."

"Yet I am not." Gregory's eyes were wide, and his blanket was drawn up to his chin.
"Thou wilt not allow a spectre to approach, wilt thou, Fess?"
"Pooh!" Magnus said quickly. "Thou hast as much courage as any man, when the
fight's upon us."
"Well—mayhap when 'tis come." Gregory relaxed a little, reddening with pleasure.
"Yet 'til then, I do wallow in horror.''
"I, for one, think 'tis grand." Cordelia snuggled down into her blankets. "Ghost or no,
'twill be thrilling to live in a castle. Will it not, Fess?"
"I cannot truly say so," Fess answered slowly.
"Wherefore?" Cordelia frowned. "What canst thou foresee disliking in it?"
"I look not to the future, Cordelia, but to the past."
"Thou hast lived in a castle?" Cordelia sat bolt-upright.
"Down," Gwen's voice called softly, and the girl flopped back down with a flounce.
"I  helped  build  one,  Cordelia,"  Fess  answered,  "and  I  dwelt  in  it  while  we  were
building it, and after it was completed."
"Who was 'we?' " Geoffrey rolled over on his stomach and propped his chin  in his
hands.
"The first d'Armands, Geoffrey—your ancestor Dar, and his wife Lona."
"Dar?" Cordelia frowned. "Him of whom we  have  heard,  as  Dar  Mandra?  Papa's
ancestor who was pursued by his enemies?"
"The same—though, since he and Lona had gone into hiding, he amalgamated his
two names and inserted an apostrophe, then trimmed the end to make it  'd'Armand.'
Yet he kept his surname, though he reversed the phonemes when naming his son."
"Dar d'Armand?" Magnus frowned. " 'Tis not greatly euphonious."
"No, but it was practical."
"He was thy fourth owner, was he not?" Gregory chimed in.
"It was Lona who was officially  my owner, Gregory,  though in practice,  they both
were, the more so since I was Dar's only companion for long stretches of time."
"His only companion?" Cordelia frowned. "Were they not wed?"
"They were, but they were also a manufacturing concern. There was little else to do
on Maxima—the asteroid they chose to live on—but they chose it because it offered
that opportunity for making a living…"
Chapter 5
« ^ »
"DAMN! It doesn't work!" Dar sat back and glared at the chipped enamel on the robot's
claws. "What happened, X-HB-9?"

"I did just as you said, sir," the little robot answered. In size and shape, it resembled
nothing so much as a canister  vacuum cleaner—but one  with  jointed  arms  extruded
from the top.
"All I said was to go into the kitchen and take the breakfast tray out of the autochef!"
"I did, sir, but my clamps encountered a solid vertical instead of a vacant space."
"They sure did." Dar had heard the clang all the way to the bedroom. Not that he'd
been sleeping, of course; after all, it was 1:00 p.m.—Terran Standard Time; if  they'd
gone by local Maxima time, they would have had a noon and a midnight four  times a
day, and sometimes five. Maxima was big,  as asteroids go, almost a kilometer and a
half in diameter, but it was still miniscule on the planetary scale.
So why was a robot delivering breakfast in bed? Purely a trial run, with an imitation
breakfast. Food was too scarce to waste on a simulation.
And if this was a trial, X-HB-9 was doomed. Dar frowned. "But I  don't understand.
All you had to do was wait until the door was open. Fess!"
"Yes, Dar?" A humanoid robot stepped into the room. His head was a stainless steel
sphere  with  binocular  lenses,  an  audio  pickup,  and  a  loudspeaker,  positioned  in  a
rough semblance of a human face. His body was a flattened tube, big enough to have
some  storage  capacity  for  tools  and  spare  components;  his  arms  and  legs  were
sections of pipe with universal joints. His gait was a bit awkward, like that of a gangly
adolescent.
"What did you see in the kitchen?"
"X-HB-9 came up to the autochef, waited for  its chime, then reached up to crash
into the door. The enamel on the autochef is chipped, too."
Dar  sighed.  "One  more  fix-up  for  me  to  get  to.  Damn!  This  whole  shelter's  put
together with chewing gum and baling wire!"
"It is still more salubrious than a PEST prison, Dar—especially when you consider
that no one is torturing you to reveal psionic powers that you do not have."
"Yeah, but it doesn't work! Why didn't the autochef open its door?"
"Because X-HB-9 has no provision for cueing it to do so."
Dar lifted his head slowly, eyes widening. "Of course! Why didn't I think of that?"
Fess  tactfully  forbore  to  comment;  from  contextual  analysis,  it  could  tell  Dar's
question was rhetorical.
"I was so chirpy about getting the take-out-the-tray part of the program right, that I
forgot to program X-HB-9 to open the door!" Dar slapped his forehead with the heel of
his hand. "All these details that I keep overlooking. Where the hell is Lona, anyway?"
Fess was unexpectedly silent.
"No, no!" Dar said quickly. "The PEST immigration authorities might trace the radio
signal. Don't try to contact her."
"I am merely attempting an extrapolation of her activities, based  on  past  records,
Dar."
"Back when you used to take her there, you mean." It still rankled that  Lona  had
only  started  leaving  Fess  with  Dar  after  she  had  made  herself  a  new  guidance

computer that did even better piloting than Fess had.
"After all, he's just a general purpose robot," she had explained. "GAP is built to do
guidance  and  piloting  only—of  course  he's  better  at  it!  And  I  really  do  need  a
specialist. PEST has tightened security  around Terra again,  and  it  takes  some  very
careful astrogating to slip through their net."
"No argument." Dar held up a hand. "The important thing about sending you away,
is to get you back. Just seems kind of poor of you to dump good old Fess just because
you've got a new one."
"Oh, he won't mind. He really won't, Dar—he's a machine": You keep forgetting that.
Computers are just machines; they don't really think, and they don't have feelings."
"I know, I know! It's just that… well… I wouldn't have expected it of you, that's all."
"But you shouldn't care." Lona swayed a little closer. "Or do you identify  with him,
darling? You shouldn't, you know."
"Yeah. After all, I never get to go to Terra with you, at all."
"But you did—vicariously.  As long as I  was taking Fess with me. And now you're
feeling rejected. Is that it?"
"What can I  feel, when you keep going off  and leaving me? I  know, I  know,  you
don't have any choice—but you don't have to be so damned happy about it."
"Poor  darling."  The  sway  turned  into  a  snuggle.  "I  know  you  feel  left  out—but
honestly, it wouldn't make sense to put us both into danger of being arrested, and I'm
the one who has the contacts."
"You didn't, the first time you went."
"No, I had one—Lari Plandor."
Dar  felt  a  stab  of  jealousy.  "Yes,  just  a  close  friend  left  over  from  your  college
days."
"And  that's  all  he  ever  was,  too.  Mind  you,  I'm  not  saying  he  didn't  want  to  be
more—but I didn't."
"Yeah, I know. And you didn't want to be cruel,  so you stayed friendly.  Aloof, but
friendly."
"Yes, and it came in handy when we decided to start up our own business. A friend
in the purchasing department of Amalgamated Automatons was just what we needed."
"Still do, I suppose," Dar sighed. "And are you still aloof to him?"
"Well, I  can't be, now, can I? When I'm trying  to get him to place an order  for  a
thousand new components. I mean, I have to be a little warmer."
"Just so long as you don't get him fired up." But Dar felt his stomach sinking;  how
could any man not get fired up when he looked at Lona?
"I can't control what he feels."
The hell she couldn't. "Let me amend that—'just so long as you don't get interested
in him.' "
"Silly! Do you really think I could feel amorous with anybody but you?"
Do  lady  kangaroos  have  pockets?  Dar  carefully  noted  that  she  had  avoided  the

direct answer. "What've I got that he hasn't got?"
"Me," Lona answered. "All my clients have are my order forms. After all, I don't feel
toward them the way I feel toward you."
"Oh? And how do you feel toward me?"
"I'm in love with you," she murmured as her lips met his, and her body curved into
his.
Dar shook his head with a sigh—it had been a wonderful way to say "good-bye." He
couldn't understand his luck—her clients had status, wealth, influence,  sophistication,
looks—but, true to her word, he had her.
On the  other  hand,  two  hours  later,  she'd  been  space-borne  again,  heading  for
Terra—and  he'd  stayed  here  to  watch  the  factory,  with  her  discarded  robot.  It  still
rankled.
But  not  too  much—it  had  been  very  lonely  whenever  she  had  taken  off  for  the
fleshpots of Terra, and Fess was good company.
Fleshpots—the thought sent a shiver through Dar. What was she up to, down there
in Sin City? Which, as far as he was concerned,  meant the whole planet. What was
she up to, and how many times had she been unfaithful to him?
Not that it mattered. Or at least, he knew it wouldn't when he saw her again, live and
vibrant, before him. She always came home with stars in her eyes and contracts in her
hands. So who was he to criticize?
"Her husband, that's who," he muttered.
"Not officially," Fess corrected.
"Does it matter?"
"Certainly. Your current status is only that of business partners."
"Yeah, business partners who've been living together for seven years!"
"Still, that is only a matter of convenience and mutual pleasure," Fess said primly.
"Neither of you is legally bound to the other."
"Well, fine. You talk about the legalities, but I have to live with the actualities."
"You are free to leave, Dar."
"Yeah, and she keeps all the patents." But Dar knew that was only the smallest part
of it.
"You have become so skilled an engineer that you could earn a living anywhere in
inhabited space, Dar."
"Yeah, but she  wouldn't  be  there."  Fess  wouldn't  say  it,  but  Dar  knew  he  had  a
problem  with  his  self-image.  It  resembled  nothing  so  much  as  a  large,  multicolored
lollipop. "Come on. If I'm such a hotshot engineer, I gotta be able to figure out how to
make a simple little housecleaner deliver breakfast, don't I?"
"Yes, Dar. After that we can move on to the really interesting program—enabling it
to wash windows."
Dar  thought  of  the  chipped  enamel  and  shuddered.  He  glanced  at  the  skylight.
"Well, we've got time—a good two hours till the next sunrise.  Come on, X-HB-9." He

headed for the shop.
 
 
They finished the next (successful) test just as the first  ray  of sunrise fingered  the
skylight dome. Dar looked up at it, swallowed his toast (well, it had been time for tea),
and said, "Go stand in the corner, X-HB-9."
"Yes, sir."  The little canister  turned, rolled over  to  the  corner,  plugged  itself  in  to
recharge, and went immobile.
"I'll meet you at the airlock," Dar called. He took a last swallow of tea, wiped the cup,
dropped it into the dishwasher, and headed for his pressure suit.
He suited up, checked his seals, stepped into the airlock,  and  floated.  The  hatch
closed automatically behind him, but he had to grab a handhold with his right while he
spun the locking wheel with his left, or he would have gone spinning away in the other
direction.  As the air  hissed back into its  storage  tank,  he  allowed  himself  a  glow  of
self-satisfaction;  he'd  been  wise  to  insist  on  not  having  artificial  gravity  under  the
airlock,  so that he could get used to weightlessness before  he  stepped  out  onto  the
surface. Dar's enduring nightmare was a breakdown in the gravity plates.
On  the  other  hand,  he  wouldn't  have  to  worry  about  falling.  No,  strike  that—in
weightlessness, he was always  falling. He just didn't have to worry  about the sudden
stop at the end. Of course, he was good at landing—he tripped a lot, and had learned
how to hit safely, if not softly—but he didn't like it much.
Fess was waiting for him just outside the airlock,  one more sharp-angled piece  of
rock  in  a  surreal  landscape  of  glaring  light  and  total  shadow.  "Visual  inspection,
please," Dar requested.
"No leaks in evidence," the robot answered as Dar turned slowly, changing hands
on the grab-handle next to the hatch. "All seals appear intact.  Good manners are not
necessary when dealing with a robot, Dar."
"Yeah, but if I neglect them, I'll get out of the habit of using them, and I'll start being
rude to people. Can't afford that, Fess—I need every friend  I've got, especially when
there  are  only  two  hundred  fifty-six  of  us  on  Maxima.  Come  on,  let's  see  how  the
cutter's been doing the last three hours." He clipped his safety lead to the guide wire
and pushed off toward the north side.
The  robot  rock-cutter  had  produced  another  forty  blocks  during  the  three-hour
night.
"Well, production's up to  standard."  Dar  looked  back  over  the  cutter's  trail.  "Just
wish we could afford another one."
"That  would  be  desirable,  Dar,  but  it  would  push  the  limits  of  our  power  output.
Slagging requires  sixty percent of our reactor's  capacity,  and the crane  and factory
require the rest."
"So we could buy a bigger power plant." Dar glanced at the cable running from the
crane off  to the reactor,  dug into the foot of an outcrop a  hundred  meters  from  the
house. "Then we wouldn't have to depend on the solar-cell screens for the household."
"You should be able to afford one in the not too distant future, Dar."

"How far is 'not too distant'?" Dar growled.
"Only four years now," Lona had answered. "Our ship will come in, Dar. You'll see."
"Yeah, but will it be a tug or a freighter?"
"A freighter." Lona raised a hand as though she were being sworn in.  "Cross my
heart."
"Okay." Dar reached for her.
"Not yet, naughty." Lona slapped his hand away. "I have work to do first.''
"I take a lot of doing," Dar suggested.
"Braggart. Next thing I know, you'll tell me you do a lot of taking."
"Well, as a matter of fact…"
"Don't try." She pressed a finger over his lips. "Any teacher who really does his job,
doesn't qualify as a taker."
"I stopped teaching six years ago."
"Only because the sheriff was after you. You'd open school here, if there were any
children."
"That's a vile canard; there are fourteen children."
"Yes, but the oldest is only four."
"Well, I specialized in adult education, anyway. Is it my fault nobody here has less
than a B.S.? Except me…"
"A B.A. will do quite well, thank you. Especially since you've learned enough about
engineering to qualify for the other bachelor's anyway."
"Yeah, but I was only interested in the bachelor girl."
"So I was a great motivational device." Lona shrugged impatiently. "You're the one
who did the learning."
"Yeah, but you did the teaching."
"Me and a small library. You've even learned enough not to be afraid of the reactor."
"Oh, I wouldn't say that." Dar turned to look out the port at the outcrop where he had
just finished burying the power plant. "Intellectually, I know no radiation can get out of
that plasma bottle—but emotionally, I still want it as far away from me as I can get it."
"Well, you're only human." Lona came up behind him, slipped her arms under his,
and began to trace geometrical figures on his chest.
"Of course, five hundred meters wouldn't do any good if  it blew. We'd  still be right
inside the fireball."
Her hands stilled. "You know it can't blow up, though."
"Yeah, my mind knows it, but my stomach doesn't."
"If anything did go wrong enough to make the plasma bottle collapse, there wouldn't
be anything to hold the hydrogen in, so the fusion reaction would stop."
"I know, I know. I just don't like the feeling of living next door to a hydrogen bomb,
even if it is in a bottle. I keep thinking about what happened when they broke the seal

and let the genie out."
"Well, this is one genie that isn't going anywhere, and in the meantime, it's going to
make all your wishes come true."
"Is that why we need a bigger genie?"
"Of course. That's the only way this one can fulfill your more extravagant hopes—by
calling in his big brother.'' Her hands began moving again.
Dar held still, trying to let the sensation wash through every inch  of himself. "What
do you think you're doing—rubbing the lamp?"
"All right, so I have designs on you. I  told you I  have to leave for  Terra tomorrow,
didn't I?"
"Yeah, but you promised to make today worthwhile."
"Then carpe diem."
"I  thought  I'd  done  enough  carping."  Dar  turned  around,  reaching  out.  "And  the
moment is not what I wanted to seize."
She  had,  though.  He  could  have  sworn  she  had—she'd  led  him  on  into  a  place
where time slowed down, and he could have sworn the climactic moment lasted for an
hour. He blew out a long breath and gave his head a shake, remembering.
"May I remind you of the project at hand, Dar?"
"Huh?" He looked up to see Fess's rod-and-canister body silhouetted against stark,
jagged rocks, and wrenched himself back into reality and the present. "Just letting my
mind wander for a minute."
"I am concerned for your safety while you are operating the crane, Dar."
"Don't worry, I'll turn on the radio."
"There is no real reason for  you to assist. I  am  perfectly  capable  of  building  the
wall."
"Yeah, but if I do, too, it'll take half the time."
"You are needed to supervise the factory."
"So what's to see? I checked the automatons just before tea break, Fess. They were
in fine shape, as always, and the alarm will sound if anything goes wrong."
"Quality control…"
"I'll  check  the  monitor  at  triple-speed  and  run  the  other  checks  in  the  morning.
Come on—time to throw stones." Dar pushed gently against the rock and glided to the
crane, unhitched his safety line while he held onto its grab-handle, hitched onto it, and
climbed in.
"You do not yet live in a glass house, Dar," Fess's voice said in his earphones.
"Then I'd better toss rocks while I can. And the house is glass, on the outside, after
we get done slagging it. Or at least obsidian—and if  it's not, it's too close to tell." He
powered  up  the  crane,  checked  its  water  level,  turned  up  the  hold-down  jets,  and
retracted the anchor. Then he dipped the arm, lifted a block of stone in its tongs, and
turned to trundle over to the wall of the house.
Fess was there before him, fitting a block onto the top of the wall, interlocking it into

the corner beside it. He stepped back. "Clear, Dar."
"Going in." Dar eased the crane forward and lowered his block into place. Nothing
another robot couldn't have done, of course—but one more brain  in the crane  meant
one less  they  could  sell  to  a  company  on  Terra.  It  was  cheaper  for  Dar  to  do  the
guiding himself, boring as it might be.
As he trundled away, Fess came up with his next block—and so it went, the two of
them taking turns for an hour and a half, as the wall grew higher and higher.
Eventually, Fess said, "Midday, Dar."
"Gotcha." Dar threw the crane into neutral and glanced back at the cutter.  "Timed
out just right; it's only three blocks ahead of us. Okay, faithful worker—let's slag."
"I shall assume a discreet distance, Dar."
"Please  do."  Dar  turned  the  crane  to  face  away  from  the  wall,  turned  his  seat
around, and took hold of the torch's controls.
"Good thing we've got a decent water supply on this asteroid." He pressed the on
patch for the big laser.
"I  believe  that  was  one  of  the  factors  in  the  founders'  selection  of  Maxima  as  a
dwelling place, Dar."
"Yeah. It wasn't for aesthetic factors, that's for sure."
"That statement is debatable, Dar.  I  find  great satisfaction in contemplation of  the
mathematical interrelationships of the landforms in our vicinity."
"I'd like to say it's the kind of vista only a robot could love—but I know that some of
our  more  eminent  members  think  this  stark,  harshly  lit  landscape  is  the  epitome  of
beauty."
"It is not your aesthetic ideal, though, Dar."
"No." A brief  vision of Lona flashed before  his  mind's  eye.  "My  notion  of  beauty
runs more to curves than to planes." He felt a surge of frustration-charged  irritation,
knew it for what it was, and tried to quell it. "Come on, let's spit."
All the meters were in the green—at least, he knew it was green, though it looked
more like charcoal gray, between the glaring sunlight and the filter in his faceplate. He
thumbed  the  pressure  point  at  the  top  of  the  handle,  and  a  bolt  of  coherent  light
stabbed out at the wall, searing the shadows and darkening his faceplate. He yelled for
the sheer joy of it and moved the beam slowly back and forth over the rocks  he'd just
been stacking, watching the cold  rock  glow  red,  then  begin  to  flow.  He  panned  the
beam over to the next area,  and the stone congealed as the beam left it,  glowing an
angry ruby, darkening as it cooled.
Off to his right, Fess's laser seared the adjacent wall.
They kept it up until sunset forced  them to stop, darkness  hiding  their  target;  the
laser beam lit only the stone it was currently melting.
Dar  shut  down  his  systems  and  climbed  down  from  the  crane,  feeling  stiff  but
satisfied, recognizing  the  sublimation  involved,  but  happy  about  it  anyway.  He  went
toward the new wall.
"Please be careful, Dar," Fess reminded him.

"Don't worry, I'm not stupid enough to touch it." In fact, Dar stopped a good five feet
away from the wall. Without air,  there was no possibility of the heat reaching  out  to
him—but he was planet-born, and inbred caution held him back. He could admire his
handiwork,  though,  by  the  light  of  his  headlamp—the  first  section  had  cooled  into
darkness  now.  It  was  a  great  effect—a  towering  wall  of  wax  left  too  near  the  fire,
melted into drips  and runnels. He stepped back,  then remembered what tripping and
falling might do to a pressure suit and turned away, stalking off fifty meters before he
turned back to take in the whole of the shelter he and Fess were building.
"It is good to take pride in your handiwork, Dar."
"Thanks." Dar grinned. "Though I wasn't about to squelch the feeling, Fess—I'm not
that much of a Puritan."
Fess didn't respond.
"Besides, it's not my design—though I can't see why Lona wants another room for
the factory. We can just barely sell the dozen brains we make in a month, as it is." Dar
cocked his head to the side. "But I think I'm beginning to see the effect she's trying for,
now."
He was silent long enough so that Fess prompted him: "And that effect is?"
"A castle." Dar turned away. "Not that she doesn't deserve it—but she also doesn't
have to let everybody know."
 
 
The call light on the console was blinking as Dar stepped in  from  the  airlock.  He
pulled his suit open just enough to tilt back the helmet as he stepped over to punch for
playback. The comm screen lit up with the face  of Maxima's Director  of Imports. He
knew Myrtle was plain, as women go, but she looked very attractive at the moment. Dar
remembered his vision of Lona, and realized how much too long she'd been away.
"Shipment  coming  in,  Dar,"  Myrtle's  face  said.  "A  miner's  trying  to  make  a  few
kwahers  on  his  way  back  out  from  Ceres.  He's  bringing  in  the  usual  mixed
bag—silicon, metals, and replacement parts. If you're interested, he'll be opening shop
about 1600. 'Bye, now." She favored him with her favorite sheep's eyes just before the
screen went dark.
"She'll never stop," Dar sighed. "I swear that woman has given me the best leers of
her life."
"No doubt because she is certain it is safe to do so," Fess assured him. "Will  you
go, Dar?"
"Are  you  kidding?  We've  only  got  a  month's  supply  of  pure  silicon  left!  And  the
aluminum and gold are getting low, too." Dar stripped off his suit in a hurry and hung it
on its peg in passing, heading for the shower.
"You could buy a smelter," Fess reminded him, "and buy raw minerals much more
cheaply, from the local miners."
His answer was a blast of water-noise—Dar preferred the sensation of spray to the
admittedly quicker supersonic vibration that shook dirt  loose; and why not use water,
when it was only going to be  purified  and  fed  into  the  fusion  reactor,  anyway?  His
voice  rose  above  the  burble.  "Don't  trust  'em,  Fess.  The  big  one  on  Ceres  does  a

better job than any home bottle could do—and I can buy an awful lot of pure minerals
for what a smelter would cost."
Besides, with his own furnace, he wouldn't have as many occasions to go into town
and see other people.
 
 
Dar headed out a half-hour later, cleansed, depilated, and anointed, with a hot meal
in his belly and Lona's shopping list in his pocket. He knew well enough what they were
low on, of course, but she always hit a few things he wouldn't have thought of. He had
to admit she was more experienced at shopping.
Of course,  it could also be  that  she  knew  more  about  building  and  programming
computers.
"No question there," he said, holding up a hand and closing his eyes.  "I  defer  to
your superior wisdom." It was galling to have to admit it, but he did.  "I  scarcely  know
how to grow rock candy, let alone a molecular circuit."
"But there's nothing to it," she'd said. "You see, this little sawtoothed line means a
resistor, and the number over it tells you how many ohms it has to be."
Dar frowned and peered over her shoulder.
"The paper," she reminded him.
"I am looking at the paper."
"But  I  want  you  to  concentrate,  too."  Lona  pushed  her  chair  aside  so  that  the
schematic was between them. "And these parallel lines show a capacitor."
"But how do I tell how many ohms the resistor is? The real one, I mean, not the one
in the drawing."
"It's printed on the side of the box."
"Yeah, but we're talking about me being able to make sure the robots are using the
right ones. What if  the wrong number gets stamped  on  the  side?  Or  if  it's  the  right
number, but a stray resistor is in there with the wrong number of ohms?"
"Hm." Her brow knit (she had a very pretty  frown,  Dar  thought).  "That  is  a  good
point, my love. So that's why Mama taught me how to read the color code."
"Color code?"
"Yes. You see how each of these rings painted on the resistor has a different color?
Well, each color is equivalent to a number…"
And  so  it  had  gone—electronics,  chemistry,  particle  physics,  with  Lona  always
impatient, always trying to breeze past and hit only the points absolutely necessary for
the job, and Dar always doggedly pulling her back to the part she'd skipped, knowing
that  if  he  didn't  keep  asking  "Why?"  it  wouldn't  be  very  long  before  he  wouldn't
understand what she was talking about.
When you're trying to learn, it helps being a teacher.
She'd taught him enough to be able to supervise the factory,  which meant that he
knew how to do every job himself, if he had to—but he still didn't know enough to plan a
job, and certainly couldn't have designed anything more complicated than an autobar.

He was studying whenever he could, of course—and she'd been delighted, when she
had come home from that third trip to Terra and had found the hard copy sitting out on
his desk…
"Dar! You've been studying!"
"Huh?" Dar had looked around in panic. "I won't do it again! I promise!"
"No, do!" Lona bent over to look more closely, and Dar bad a dizzy spell. "It's about
wave propagation!"
Dar  glanced  at  his  desk,  irritated;  waves  were  the  last  thing  he'd  wanted  to
propagate, just then. "Well, sure. I promised you I'd  learn enough to run the factory,
remember?"
"But I already taught you enough for that. This is above and beyond the call—and
it's all on your own! Oh, you wonderful man!" And she turned to him, hauling his face
up to hers for a kiss that was so deep and dazzling that he began to think maybe he
was pretty wonderful, after all.
When she let him up for air, he gasped, "You keep that up, and I'll have to study all
the time."
She did it again, then propped him up before he could slide to the floor.  "All right,
I'm keeping it up—and you! So start studying. Even when I'm around. Why didn't you
before?"
"Uh…" Dar bit his lip. "Well, uh… I kinda thought you might feel like I was, uh…"
"Poaching on my territory?" She shook her head (her hair bounced so prettily when
she did that!), eyes shining up at him. "Knowledge is free, sweetheart—or at least, the
price is limited to how much studying you're willing to do to gain it. And the more you
know, the prouder I am to be with you."  Then she'd co-opted his lips again, to show
just what form her pride took.
Well, she was body-proud, Dar reflected—and had a perfect right to be. She'd sure
given him reason to keep  his  nose  in  the  books  when  she  was  gone.  He'd  learned
calculus and was beginning on some of the more esoteric  branches of mathematics,
and was almost up to date on wave mechanics—but that still left an awful lot he didn't
know: circuitry, information theory, particle physics…  "I  wonder if  I'll ever be able to
learn it faster than the scientists are developing the knowledge," he wondered aloud.
"That is possible, Dar."  Fess lay in the cargo  hold, his computer plugged into the
car's controls. "The rate of new discoveries is slowing down, on Terra. There are as
many articles published as ever, but they are increasingly  derivative. The number of
original concepts published and tested declines every year."
Dar frowned.  "Odd,  that.  I'd  heard  the  universities  were  graduating  more  Ph.D.s
than ever."
"True, Dar, but they no longer require truly original work for their dissertations. Nor
will  they—bureaucracy  tends  toward  stability,  and  truly  new  ideas  can  upset  that
stability."
"Well, the Proletarian Eclectic State of Terra is bureaucratic." Dar frowned. "But its
most  prominent  characteristic  is  that  it's  one  of  the  tightest  totalitarian  governments
ever  seen.  I  thought  dictatorships  wanted  research,  to  give  them  new  and  better
weapons."

"Only if there is an enemy who threatens the dictator's rule, Dar—and PEST has no
rivals  for  the  government  of  the  Terran  Sphere,  at  the  moment.  Such  weapons
research as is done, is only a seeking after new applications of existing principles.  A
dictatorship does not encourage the discovery of new ideas."
"I can understand their  viewpoint;  I'm  a  little  reluctant  to  try  coming  up  with  new
ideas, myself."
"That is only because you know enough to know how little you know."
"In  which  case,  I'll  probably  never  outgrow  it.  Still,  I'll  be  glad  when  I've  learned
enough to understand why Lona tells me to do something a certain way. It'd be nice to
know what I'm doing, instead of just following her directions blindly."
"That  will  boost  your  self-esteem,  Dar,  perhaps  to  the  point  of  developing  the
occasional idea or two, yourself."
Dar shuddered. "Please! I  want to court  Lona, not disaster. I'm not  about  to  start
trying to do things my own way for a long time, yet."
"I think you have Lona on a bit of a pedestal, Dar."
"No, I'm only awed by her knowledge. Well,  maybe by  her business instincts,  too.
All of her instincts, in fact…"
He stifled the thought. Later, boy, he told himself sternly. When she comes  home.
Let's keep to the business at hand here.
Unfortunate turn of phrase.
"Your attention is drifting again, Dar."
"That's,  why  I've  got  a  robot  pilot."  But  Dar  reluctantly  hauled  his  mind  back  to
business. "In  the meantime, if  I  don't follow Lona's instructions to the  letter,  our  little
five-robot factory will break down or start producing defective computers."
"True, Dar, and you will start losing sales."
Dar nodded. "No sales means no  money—and  on  Maxima,  no  money  means  no
food."
"That statement is true in any civilized society, Dar."
"True. But on an asteroid, 'no money' also means no water after we finish  mining
the ice on our own homestead—and there're only two pockets left, scarcely ten years'
supply. And no water means no oxygen to breathe, and no hydrogen for fusion, which
means no electricity."
"True—and, though our airproofing is very good, there is always a slight loss from
day to day."
"Yes, and 'No money' also means no nitrogen or trace  gases for  the atmosphere,
and no replacement parts for  the life-support machinery.  'No money, no life,'  as  the
Chinese say."
"I do not think Maxima is in any economic danger, though, Dar."
"Not as a whole, no." Dar gazed at the Ngoyas' house, off in the distance. It was a
French chateau that could have rivaled Versailles. In fact, it was a copy of Versailles,
on a smaller scale (but not much smaller). "The Ngoyas don't seem  to  be  doing  too
badly. Of course, their factory is almost as big as their house, now." He could see its

skylights poking above the ground behind the mansion. (That was the nice thing about
ice  pockets—when  you  mined  them  out,  you  had  great  underground  chambers  for
automated machinery). "Their sales have to be over a million therms a year.''
"One million three hundred sixty-eight thousand, Dar. It is a matter of public record."
"Which  means  our  income  is,  too."  Dar  winced.  "No  wonder  they're  being
patronizing toward us."
"I still believe that to be primarily  a matter of your  perception,  Dar.  An analysis of
speech patterns and facial  expressions  does  not  reveal  any  such  attitude  in  any  of
your neighbors but the Laurentians, the Mulhearns, and the Bolwheels."
"Those are definitely  the worst of them, yes.''  Dar watched a small mountain of  a
house  come  into  view.  "There's  the  Mulhearns'  palace,  now."  It  was  Buckingham
Palace, in fact—the Maximans were not shy in their pretensions. "Remind me to try to
stay away from them."
"If you insist, Dar, though they are relatively harmless."
"Which  means they won't harm me, if  I  don't come near them. Oh, don't worry,  I
won't insult them. They are human, after all."
"You must not sneer at your neighbors, Dar, if you plan to co-exist with them."
"Come on, Fess! You know I get along okay with most of 'em. I just don't particularly
have a yen to build a palace in a vacuum, that's all."
"But you would, if you could surround it with atmosphere and a grassy park?"
"Well, maybe." Dar frowned. "There must be some way to enclose those mansions.
Maybe if we built underground…"
Fess made a buzzing noise, the robotic equivalent of clearing his throat.
Dar looked up sharply, startled. "Was I drifting again?"
"Yes, Dar, and such speculation is to be encouraged—but within the context of the
present discussion, I would like to point out that you are not entirely out of sympathy
with the pretensions of your technocratic fellows.''
"Well, maybe a little." Dar frowned. "But then, I'm only skilled labor so far."
"Yes, and you have not yet begun your own dynasty."
The simple thought of offspring made Dar's head whirl.
 
 
"Town" was a cluster  of  one-story  basalt  buildings  in  three  concentric  circles;  at
their hub was a spaceport. The structures  were  almost  all  shops—ship  repair,  retail
import/export, and recreation.  There  was  even  a  small  hotel  mixed  in  with  the  three
bars,  but  it  was  only  for  genuine  lodging.  The  good  citizens  of  Maxima  were  all
engineers, scientists, programmers, and other high-tech workers; none of the women
had the time, or the need, to be prostitutes. They had  also  been  very  successful  in
keeping professionals from moving in; the last entrepreneur who had tried it had been
chained to a desk with a computer  terminal  which  was  hooked  to  an  autochef.  The
'chef wouldn't supply food unless the prisoner took, and passed, a computerized exam.
She dug in her heels and maintained the pride of her calling—but after three days

of nothing but water, she caved in and learned how to study. A "C" in a basic algebra
lesson won her a bowl of chili  and a glass of milk. Thus fortified,  she plowed ahead
through  history,  algebra,  plane  geometry,  basic  chemistry,  and  a  survey  of  Terran
literature,  working  her  way  up  to  pot  roast  and  stringbeans.  By  the  end  of  three
months,  she  had  saddle  sores  and  a  high  school  diploma,  at  which  point  she  was
released from durance vile and packed aboard the next Ceres-bound burro-boat. She
spread the word, and Maxima rarely  had trouble with women in her line again.  She,
however, had come back five years later and applied for a job. She turned out to have
a talent for organization and was currently coordinating the import-export trade.
"You know," Dar said, as he watched the blocks of the town grow,  "these  people
haven't done all that badly, in some ways."
"Their  concern  for  their  offspring  has  moved  them  to  altruism,"  Fess  agreed.  "I
would ask you to bear that in mind when you talk to them."
"Oh,  I'll  be  nice,"  Dar  growled.  In  actuality,  he  could  hardly  wait.  Living  human
beings… !
Fess slowed the car, banking it around to point it toward the largest building in town,
and Dar tensed,  not  wanting  to  say  anything—in  fact,  definitely  not  wanting  to  say
anything, to give Fess one less datum to process. He was ready, though. Sometimes it
happened, sometimes it didn't.
The comm screen crackled into life. "Dar, if you're coming, you'd better…"
The screen went black, and the instrument panel went dead. The car dropped like a
rock.
Dar slapped the manual override, and the instrument panel glowed to life again. He
brought the car down in front of the port, as the commscreen showed Myrtle finishing
saying, "… stuff will be gone," and faded from sight.
Dar cut the power, sighed, and  lifted  the  floor  plate  that  gave  him  access  to  the
prone robot. He pushed the circuit breaker at the base of Fess's "brain," and waited.
"Wwhhhaddtt… DDddaarrrr… whhhhadddttt…"
"You  had  a  seizure,"  Dar  explained  gently.  "You  were  coping  just  fine  with  the
landing,  but  Myrtle  came  on  the  air  to  tell  me  to  hurry  up,  and  the  extra  item  of
processing overloaded your weak capacitor.''
"AAAiiii… ammmm… verrry…"
"Nothing  to  be  sorry  about,  mon  vieux,"  Dar  said  quickly.  "Just  keep  practicing
your meditation exercises, eh? Concentration does it!  Lona assured us that's how to
control it."
"Iii… willl… attemmptt…it."
"Good. Have a good rest, now." Dar climbed out of the car, making a mental note to
try to figure out some way to accelerate Fess's recoveries. He chained his car  to the
pylon alongside a score of other cars,  all of them newer and fancier.  Not that he, or
any of his neighbors, doubted anyone's honesty—but with the gravity so low, the cars
might easily drift away. He turned to survey the row of pylons that curved around the
great dome of the meeting hall. It was a very gay display, all colors of the rainbow, with
sweeping  fins  and  airscoops  and  baroque  ornamentation—all  of  it  perfectly
nonfunctional, of course; how much good could airscoops be in vacuum?

They  could  look  nice.  And  they  did.  And  by  looking  nice,  they  proclaimed  their
owner's wealth and, consequently, status.
The hell with that. It looked pretty. Beauty was its own excuse for being. Dar turned,
clipped his safety to the guy wire, and hauled himself into the hall.
He came  through  the  airlock,  opening  his  faceplate,  splitting  his  seal,  tilting  his
helmet back—and a ham of a hand caught him between  the  shoulder  blades.  "Hey,
Dar boy! Great t' see ya! How ya been?"
Dar recovered and caught the offending hand with a grin.  "Hello, Estivan.  What's
germane?"
"Not  much."  Estivan  squeezed  back.  "In  fact,  from  what  I  hear,  the  miner  only
brought in silicon, steel, gold, and some plastic."
"No germanium at all, huh?"
"Yeah, but who uses it any more? So what's been happening at Maison d'Armand,
huh?"
"She's not back yet. But as soon as she is, we'll declare party."
"I'll  look  forward  to  it.  Hey,  Carolita!"  Estivan  waved  his  daughter  over.  Carolita
looked up from a box of crystals she was fingering, saw Dar,  and broke into a smile.
"Hi, Dar!" She came over to catch his hand in a warm clasp. "Getting lonely yet?"
"Fess doesn't let me go out alone, Carol,"  Dar answered, grinning.  "Shopping  for
ornaments, or raw materials?"
Carol shrugged. "Depends on how pretty they are. Need any help on your organic
chem?"
"No, but I wish I did."
"Gallant, very gallant—though untrue. Be off with you, though—I know you want to
look over the merchandise. You might take a look at the minerals, too."
"Yeah, I gotta at least pretend I'm doing business. Drink after the auction?"
"Suits. Go get ready to be an adversary, now."
Dar turned away, warmed by camaraderie, but also relieved. Carol was right—she
wasn't exactly pretty. Not quite ugly, but who was he to talk?
Lona's husband. Whether it was official or not, all the neighbor women knew it, and
respected  her  claim—which  made  it  easier  for  Dar,  since  he  could  enjoy  their
friendship without worrying about avoiding overtures.
He  threaded  through  the  throng,  exchanging  handshakes  and  shop  talk,  and
occasional hugs with the ladies, when he couldn't avoid it.
"Dar-ling!" Bridget threw her arms around his neck and leaned down to plant a kiss
on his cheek. "What have you been doing with yourself all these weeks?"
"Working, eating, and sleeping, Bridget."  Dar pecked at her cheek, reflecting  that
the daughter of the Mulhearns, at least, didn't patronize him.
No, she was very forthrightly the take-charge type.  "You call that a kiss? Here, let
me show you how…"
"Oh, come on! I get so tired of lessons!"

"You  ought  to  consider  a  change  of  curriculum."  Bridget  let  her  eyelids  droop,
producing the effect of an amorous dugong.
"Yeah, but what if  my prof  caught  me  studying  from  someone  else's  notes?  You
wouldn't want me to get expelled, would you?"
The reference  to Lona, oblique though it  was,  reminded  Bridget  of  her  manners.
She edged away, still smiling—but idling down from flirt to friend. "Of course not; she's
got a mean left hook. How about a bite? A snack, I  mean," Bridget actually blushed.
"My lord! Once you start this kind of thing, it's hard to stop, isn't it?"
"So I'm told. Just think clean, Bridget."
"Yeah, but what happens if I hear dirty?" They sailed into the restaurant area,  and
she sat as Dar tucked her chair in, then took the one next to her—better a wolf who'd
been muzzled, then one who'd just been let out of her cage. "May I order for you?"
"No, thanks—I can enter a code for  myself." Bridget pressed in the sequence for
coffee and local Danish, then sat back to sip. "How is your factory running?"
And they were off into shoptalk, safe and chummy—which was just as well because,
regardless of how Bridget didn't look, Dar's hormones had given him a rush when she
had. Weeks of celibate living had their  effect—though  the  sight  of  the  ladies  of  the
community helped quell it. They ranged in appearance from plain to ugly, with only the
occasional woman who was mildly pretty. Dar wondered why Maxima attracted so few
beauties. Maybe the stunning ones preferred to stay on Terra, where the standard of
living was higher,  and the morals were lower? Of course,  Lona  hadn't—but  she  had
spent half her life in space, hopping from planet to planet with her grandfather, before
she'd ever heard of Maxima; and even she took off for Terra every chance she could
get, leaving him at the mercy of his neighbors' wives and daughters.
Nothing  but  wives  and  daughters,  of  course—the  young  men  who  had  come  to
Maxima to build robots and fortunes still outnumbered the women 2.36 to 1. Any single
woman  who  showed  up  to  join  the  colony  was  married  within  a  year,  plain  or  not,
usually after a hectic  courtship that resembled a bidding war. Of course,  there were
one or two who chose to stay single, like Myrtle—but they were very few. Looks or no
looks, Maxima was a marriage mart.
Of course, Dar had to admit he was biased. To him, any woman would look plain,
compared to Lona.
He found himself wondering if the other husbands could possibly feel the same way
about their wives.
 
 
"Two therms!"
"Two and five kwahers!"
"Two  and  ten!"  Msimangu  turned  to  glare  at  Dar.  "Blast  you,  d'Armand!  You're
running the price up!"
"No, I'm buying it! Two and twelve!"
"Two  and  twelve?"  the  miner  cried.  "Do  I  hear  two  and  fifteen?"  He  glanced  at
Msimangu.

"Not from me." The white-haired black man turned away in disgust. "I'm not that low.
I'll wait for the next shipment."
"Two  and  fourteen?"  the  miner  called.  "Two  and  thirteen.  I  have  two  and  twelve;
who'll give me two and thirteen?"
There were several mutters, but no one called out.
"Going once! Going twice! Sold!" The miner whacked the gavel on the board. "Three
kilograms of silicon to the young man in the pin-striped coverall, at two therms, twelve
kwahers per!"
Msimangu shouldered through the crowd to shake a finger  under Dar's nose. "Do
not bid against me again, young d'Armand! I can ruin you!"
Dar lifted his chin—he had to; the old black man was six inches taller than he—and
gave back glare for  glare. "Would you dock us a fair  chance  to  get  started,  Omar?
We're not thick in the wallet; we have to pick up small lots when we can."
"Perhaps, but the gold is not small!"
"No, but it's vital."
"Then deal in retail! If a beginner like you seeks to buy gold wholesale, he will break
 himself!"
"One hundred fifteen kilograms of fine gold!" the miner called. "What am I bid?"
A storm of calls answered him. He sorted them out,  the  price  leapfrogging.  "Five
thousand therms… six thousand… eight thousand… ten…"
"Twelve thousand therms!" Msimangu called out. "Twelve thousand therms per kilo!"
"Thirteen!" Laurentian answered, and "Fourteen!" Mulhearn called from across the
room. "Fifteen!" Ngoya called. "Sixteen!" Bolwheel shouted.
"Seventeen!" Msimangu bellowed. "Seventeen therms per kilo!"
The small bidders had dropped out; now the plutocrats were getting down to serious
competition.  It  was  exciting  in  its  way,  but  watching  his  neighbors  fight  made  Dar
nervous.  He  edged  away  toward  the  rim  of  the  crowd,  pulling  out  Lona's  list  and
checking through it. All the items were crossed off,  except for  the silicon;  he drew a
line through that and turned away, tucking the list back for future reference. He patted
the pocket where the trio of rubies lay. He really shouldn't have spent the money, but
Lona  would  love  them,  if  he  could  cut,  polish,  and  mount  them  properly.  Besides,
they'd be worth ten times the amount he'd paid, back on Terra.
"Twenty-two and nine going once—twenty-two and nine going twice—SOLD! To the
tall black gent with the white hair!"
Msimangu  whooped  victory,  and  his  fellow  millionaires  turned  away,  reviling  his
ancestry and personal habits. Msimangu ignored them, laughing as he turned away,
shouldering  through  his  congratulating  fellows.  "I  won  the  big  one,  at  least!  Come,
come drink with me!"
A few accepted,  though most withdrew to take  their  turns  at  the  retail  booth.  Still
laughing, Msimangu caught up with Dar at the door to the restaurant. "Come drink with
us, young d'Armand! Let us rejoice, let us make a celebration!"
Dar looked up with a slow smile. "Don't mind if I do, Omar."

"Fine, fine! Then come with us!" And Msimangu plunged into the public bar.
Dar sat down at table with a half-dozen solid citizens. He noticed that Mulhearn and
Bolwheel had joined the crew, and was amazed once again that people who could rage
and revile one another in the bidding, could relax and talk together without the slightest
rancor only five minutes later. Everyone seemed to understand that business might be
business, but friendship was more important.
Much more important, out here where the shrunken sun blazed in eternal night, and
your own survival depended on your neighbors'. They couldn't afford feuds on Maxima;
they  all  had  a  constant,  common  enemy—the  ever-present  void.  Sitting  down  for  a
drink  wasn't  just  a  celebration—it  was  a  declaration  of  apology  and  forgiveness,  a
healing of wounds, and an unspoken pledge of mutual support.
He felt honored to be included, though it had become part of the pattern. From the
first, he'd been invited to join in every gathering that happened. If  they needed each
other here, it made them all the more willing to accept the newcomer into the fold. Dar
wondered if  they  would  be  so  open  in  a  hundred  years,  when  (if!)  the  colony  was
firmly established and thriving.
"We will grow," Bolwheel maintained. He was a red-haired, jowly man of middle age,
who looked fat but wasn't. "We grow already."
Neils Woltham nodded. "We all tend to have large families, somehow."
"That is half the reason we are here." Msimangu punched up another tankard. "For
the room to have families."
David  Mulhearn,  pale  and  red-haired  but  graying,  nodded.  "All  is  rationed,  on
Terra—food, land, houses, what you will. Rationed, or so dear that it might as well be."
"I wouldn't call the prices low here," Jory Kimish said. He was almost as young as
Dar, and newly come from Earth. "You blokes seem to have put in a good deal of time
and labor. Can't rate that too low, you know."
"We  do  not,"  Msimangu  assured  him.  "But  even  if  you  compute  the  cost  of  our
houses so, young man, you will find them much less expensive than their equivalents
on Terra."
"True," Bolwheel said, "but this isn't exactly the choicest location, you know."
"And what is wrong with it?" Msimangu rounded on him. "You can have as  much
land as you can fence, here!"
"Aye,  but  naught  will  grow  on't,"  Mulhearn  pointed  out.  "Yet  I  cannot  fault  the
neighborhood—for  nowhere  else  have  I  found  neighbors  of  my  own  mindset  and
code."
"Nor I," Msimangu agreed, "nor I. I could not ask for more congenial company."
"When we get it," Dar pointed out. "Of course, it's worth waiting for."
"Surely there's no dearth of folk who wish to join us," Mulhearn pointed out.
Bolwheel answered with a knowing smile. "Where else can they find a reputation for
their  product,  David?  Only  fifty  years,  and  already  our  computers  and  robots  are
known as the best in Terran space!"
"Of course,  it helps that Terran space has been reduced a bit  by  the  DDT,"  Dar
pointed out. .

"Only officially, young d'Armand. None seek to bar us from trading with other PEST
planets—and the outermost of those, trade with the frontier. No, our robots are known
wherever men use automatons."
"Well, surely it's your reputation that I came to join,"  Jory  Kimish said, "though I'd
stay for the company alone. But why is the Maximan product so much the best? You'd
think Terra would have it all!"
"All  but  the  brains,"  Bolwheel  answered.  "For  don't  you  see,  the  brightest  of  the
computerfolk  saw  the  collapse  of  the  DDT  coming,  and  came  out  here  early.  The
second brightest stayed till the civil war, then escaped to avoid being shot by the storm
troopers, or by the loyalists; and the third brightest waited till PEST had taken all the
planet, then escaped just before PEST banned emigration."
Msimangu nodded. "First, second, third—most of the best came to us."
"Nay, not all, though," Mulhearn cautioned. "There are brains on Terra still, and not
all of them were made on Maxima."
"True," Msimangu agreed, "though they lose steadily of what's left, by  deportation.
And some of those come here."
Dar stared. "You mean PEST is deliberately trying to get rid of its bright ones?"
"Only those who show some sign of making trouble, young d'Armand—which means
only half of the brightest."
"And the other half?"
"They work their way into government,  join  the  LORDS  party,  and  start  the  long,
savage climb," Bolwheel assured him.
Dar frowned. "So they can't design a decent robot?"
"Decent, yes.  But if  it's more than 'decent,'  they  are  marked  as  dangerous;  they
might take their bosses' jobs. No, a smart young man on Terra will be sure to hide his
mind."
Dar shuddered. "No wonder they come to Maxima! Who would want to work in that
kind of environment?"
"Not me," Kimish assured him, "so I  made just enough trouble to be deported, but
not enough for them to care where." He leaned back with a sigh. "Can you know how
intoxicating  the  spirit  of  freedom  is,  here?  Where  your  neighbors  challenge  you  to
dream  up  some  idea  nobody  ever  thought  of  before?  Where  they  make  you  feel
ashamed, if you don't come up with anything new?"
"Yes." Dar had a few memories of PEST's Terra, himself. "It makes all the toil and
loneliness worthwhile."
He caught looks of sympathy, quickly veiled; their wives stayed home to keep them
company.
Quick change of topic needed, and Bolwheel supplied it. "I think perhaps that is why
PEST leaves us alone, and does not seek to impose its rules here."
Kimish frowned. "I was wondering about that. One squadron of destroyers, and we'd
be slaves."
"But they need us, they need us," Msimangu assured him. "They need someone,

away from Terra, to invent better computers for them, for they must have machines to
do the work, if  they are to give the people the leisure they have promised. And they
dare not have such innovation being developed on any of their  planets—it  could  set
people to thinking, and questioning their orders."
A rumbling chorus of agreement went around the table, men nodding their heads in
concurrence, and Dar nodded along with the rest of them, even though, privately, he
thought it might also have something to do with PEST thinking Maxima was too small to
be worth swatting. Realistically, he knew that the  asteroid  would  die  if  its  customers
stopped buying,  which meant the Terran government could destroy them  any  time  it
wanted to. And if PEST's bureaucrats could destroy the Maximans, surely they could
also control them, easily and totally, as much as they wished—or so they thought, so
they reasoned.
They were wrong, of course. They could kill Maxima, they could conquer it—but if
they  didn't  conquer,  they  couldn't  control.  As  long  as  they  left  the  asteroid  free,
Maximans could do whatever they wished.
But Maxima wasn't about to let PEST know that. Sure,  it might be fun to send the
Terran  bureaucrats  a  list  of  all  the  things  Maximans  did,  that  were  forbidden  on
Terra—but it would also be very foolish. A bureaucrat defines himself by the amount of
power he has; PEST's logical response would be conquest.
Which  in itself was pretty silly,  when all they would have  to  do  would  be  to  send
back a list of all the things Terrans could do, that Maximans couldn't—mostly hedonistic
pastimes. The younger Maximans would start eating their hearts out.
Or  maybe  not.  Dar's  neighbors  were  a  pretty  unworldly  bunch,  if  you  excluded
making money and building grandiose houses.
Houses they were definitely  big on, though. "I  passed your  estate on the  way  in,
young d'Armand," Msimangu was saying, "I saw your home. I confess I thought it the
height of ugliness last year, but now I begin to see its form emerge. It will be beautiful,
when it is done."
"Why, thank you," Dar said, frankly floored by the compliment. In fact,  he was so
pleased that he forgot to mention who had designed it.
 
 
The factory was running just fine. Dar wandered up one aisle and down the other,
feeling increasingly useless as he went along. He couldn't even dump the waste bins
any more—since Lona had started leaving Fess home, Dar had assigned him that little
chore. After all, he couldn't have the poor robot sitting around with nothing to do.
It was hard to believe these machines were of the same genus as Fess. Technically,
they were robots, though with nowhere near the capacity of a general purpose model
such as Fess. They were operated by much smaller computers, specialized for a very
limited number of tasks. Dar hesitated to call them "robots" at all—they were really just
automated machine tools. Robots were originally  supposed to be artificial  people, but
these machines couldn't mimic human thought patterns in the slightest way.
And they certainly didn't look human. The first was only a set of rollers that rotated a
synthetic crystal a millimeter at a time, then lowered onto it a hemispherical cover that
was  filled  with  golden  contacts.  The  central  computer  tested  each  circuit  within  the

crystal  through  those  contacts,  checking  continuity,  resistance,  power  input  versus
output, and a host of other electronic characteristics. After fifteen  minutes, the rollers
tilted the crystal out onto the padded belt that carried  it to the next robot—or into the
garbage can, if it had failed any of its tests.
The next robot was very similar, except that it connected microscopic  filaments to
each contact point.
Then came a robot that looked like an octopus, with fifteen  arms sprouting from a
central globe that held its computer. Its job  was  assembling  fifteen  crystals  into  one
globular cluster joined by  filaments,  then  immersing  it  in  a  chemical  bath.  After  two
hours, enough silicon had adhered to the filaments so that the robot could withdraw its
arms and start assembling another cluster, while the first rested in its bath for a week,
slowly growing together into a single giant crystal.
Meanwhile, another robot—a single bench that grabbed, folded, and held metal and
plastic while a steel arm welded joints—was casting and assembling the housings for
the completed machines. Then came the assembly line—a final robot which took the
finished giant crystals out of their baths and fastened them inside the housings, then
connected the contacts to the terminals for  the mechanical attachments  that  actually
did the work.
All of it faster than he could do. All of  it  better  than  he  could  do.  And  most  of  it
much, much smaller than he could see.
Dar surveyed the area, feeling totally useless.
"You really should take a finished robot out for testing, Dar."
"Yeah, I know—but I've done two already today, and there's plenty of time to check
the other three."
"Still, it must be done, or you will have a dozen untested robots at week's end."
"I know, I  know—but there doesn't seem to be much  point  to  it.  You  know  they'll
work perfectly."
"I  do  not,  Dar.  True,  if  the  individual  crystal  circuits  are  sound,  the  finished
computer will be fine…"
"Of course, because the central computer tests each stage of the work as it's being
done." There were contacts embedded in the  "holder"  on  each  bench,  and  in  each
arm, allowing testing while production was in process.
"But you may find a mechanical flaw, Dar."
"Yeah, sure. Last week I found a pinhole in a suction funnel, and the week before
that, there was a hum in a lifting fan. Never in the computers, of course."
He watched the process, shaking his head with dissatisfaction.
"What displeases you, Dar?"
"Huh?  Oh.  I  keep  forgetting  you're  programmed  for  gestures,  too.  Nothing,
Fess—or  nothing  that  should,  anyway.  We  make  dam  good  household  robots—but
blast it, all we make is household robots!"
"True, Dar, but, as you say, you make them very well—and you always manage to
offer an automaton that will do more than your competition's product."
"Well, that's true. We started out with a little canister  that could dust, and speak a

few  simple  responses  such  as  'Yes,  ma'am,'  'No,  sir,'  'Good  morning,'  and  'Please
move…' "
"Which every other company's could also do, of course."
"Yeah, but we figured out a way for ours to scrub floors and polish furniture, too."
"Then you added the abilities to pick  up, clear  a table, load a dishwasher, one by
one—and always a year or two before the other companies."
"Yeah, because they wait till we come out with it, then buy one of ours and copy the
new feature—but that always takes six months at least, while we make another hundred
thousand  in  sales.  Which  reminds  me,  we'd  better  finish  debugging  that
breakfast-delivery program, or we'll lose our edge."
"I would not be terribly concerned, Dar. You can still add many features before you
will have perfected the ideal household helper."
"What do you mean?" Dar frowned.
"Why,  your  robots  cannot  yet  replace  a  closure  seam  in  a  garment,  or  light  a
fire—or fight one, for that matter."
"Oh. Right. And they don't do windows." But Dar was gazing off  into space. "Let's
see, now…"
"You will find ways to accomplish them all," Fess assured him.
"True, true. And there are other improvements I'm itchy to get to."
"Such as?"
"Well, they could be a lot smaller, for one thing.""
"I do not know, Dar—there is a lower limit on size, for  accomplishing mechanical
tasks."
"Oh, not the robots themselves, Fess—we've got those as low as they can go, and
still be practical.  Anything less, and the householder will be tripping over them every
time he turns around. No, I meant the computers. They're still bigger than my fist."
"I  fail  to  see  how  they  could  be  smaller,  Dar.  You  are  already  working  with  the
smallest crystal lattice that can carry an adequate number of differences  in electrical
potentials."
"Are  we?"  Dar's  tone  sharpened.  "A  crystal  has  a  regular  shape  because  its
molecule  has,  Fess.  Why  can't  the  differences  in  electrical  potential  that  made  a
crystal lattice function as a circuit, be made to operate with only a single molecule?"
Fess  was  slow  in  answering,  which  meant  his  computer,  which  worked  in
nanoseconds, had  analyzed  the  problem  thoroughly,  and  made  a  preliminary  try  at
resolving it. "In theory, there would be no reason for it not to, Dar—but the complexity
of the circuitry would be limited by the number of electrons available."
"All  right,  so  it  might  take  a  dozen  molecules,  or  maybe  even  a  single  giant
molecule—but you're still talking about something microscopic, or just barely visible."
"Are you seriously intending to research the possibility?"
"Not without telling Lona—and I don't know enough physics yet, to know if it's worth
investigating.  I  mean,  okay,  it  might  turn  out  to  be  possible,  but  not  marketable,
especially if it wound up using giant molecules. After all, who wants a computer made

of U-235 in his living room?"
"The mass would not be critical, Dar."
"No, but the customer would. Call it atavism, call it superstition, but the stuff has a
bad reputation."
"Even if it were, why would you wish to do it? The current generation of computers
is certainly small enough for all practical purposes."
"Not all—I can think of a few applications where microbrains would come in handy.
Especially in the line I want to get into."
"Which is?"
"Industrial robots." Dar rubbed his knuckles against his palm. "We  need to branch
out, Fess. There's just so far we can go with household robots, and right now, the real
money is in industry.  If  we could offer  smaller, more compact computers, that would
cut  down  on  size  and  give  flexibility  a  big  boost.  Factory  managers  are  always
complaining about having to replace all their robots with new models, every time they
retool. If we could figure out how to grow a single molecule circuit, we could sell them
new brains for more generalized robots."
"An excellent idea," Fess said slowly. "You must tell Lona."
Dar felt a surge of irritation,  but reminded himself that Fess was, after all,  Lona's
robot. "No. I just don't know enough yet."
Which made him feel even more useless.
He turned away, closing the factory hatch behind him, and went into his den. "I'm
going to brood—uh, study, for a while, Fess."
"I shall not disturb you,  Dar."  But  he  would  wait  for  Dar's  call.  That  went  without
saying.
The lights came on, and Dar sat down at his computer with a sigh of relief. Here, at
least, he had something to do, and the illusion that it might actually be of some use,
even  though  that  was  highly  unlikely.  Of  course,  he  was  only  experimenting  with
computer simulations of radio sound waves and FTL drives, not with the real thing—but
he might hit on a workable idea.
It didn't make sense, after all—if ships could  travel  faster  than  light,  why  couldn't
radio?  If  you  could  make  a  whole  spaceship  isomorphic  with  a  seven-dimensional
surface, why couldn't you do the same with an electromagnetic wave?
Because it wasn't an object, of course.  In fact,  it wasn't matter; it was an  energy
pattern.  But  patterns  were  patterns,  and  three-dimensional  patterns  could  be  made
isomorphic with seven-dimensional equivalents.
Except that energy didn't seem to exist in seven dimensions. Which was nonsense,
of  course—the  mathematicians  just  hadn't  started  thinking  about  it,  so  Dar  couldn't
read their conclusions.
But at least he'd found the right question to ask. That, he felt, was real progress. Of
course, he didn't know enough math to look for the answer—but that could be rectified.
He stared at the simulation, rotating it to gain the illusion of movement, and,  from  it,
inspiration and motivation.
It worked; he was motivated. He cleared the screen and loaded the first  chapter of

the text on topology. He'd already made it through Page 2…
He was halfway through Page 3 when the sensor chimed.
Dar was out of his seat and over to the screen before the sound had died. The call
signal could only ring if it was triggered by a coded radio signal—and only Lona knew
the code. She was coming home! Dar located her blip, referred it to the center of the
screen,  then  punched  into  viewphone  mode  and  entered  her  code—and  there  she
was, or at least her face,  in beautiful living color,  complexion flawless, every  feature
perfect, saying, "Roger, ground control. Will burn for entry at 24:32:16."
"Roger," said a tinny (male) voice. "Over and out."
Dar felt a stab of jealousy. Had she perfected her makeup for him—or for Louie at
Ground Control?
But she was reaching out to punch him up on her screencall signal. Her face lit up,
and his heartburn quenched as he realized she'd seen him.
"Welcome, wanderer!"
"Hi, handsome." Her eyelids drooped. "Slay the fatted calf and warm the sheets."
"Both are roasting, and so am I. When should I pour the martinis?"
"An hour, sweetling." She winced. "Don't groan so loudly—my amp can't take it."
"Neither can I. Tell me something to be happy about."
"That it's only an hour. Just think how long it would be if we were civilized enough to
have a spaceport and customs."
"I'd nuke 'em both! If our neighbors couldn't trust us…"
"Who could they trust? So I'm landing on our own pad, dear, and docking in…" she
glanced aside, at her chronometer, "… sixty-four minutes and 20."
A chime sounded, out of range. Lona glanced at it, then back at Dar. "Entry burn in
two. Love, darling." Her screen blanked.
Dar could have screamed at it. Instead, he took her parting line as a promise and
headed for the shower.
Of course, he had just showered, shaved, and changed a few hours before, for his
trip into town—but what the hell, he could do it again. Anything to pass the time!
He  did,  and  he  still  had  half  an  hour  left  to  chew  his  nails.  He  manfully
refrained—she only liked controlled scratching. Instead, he drew two martinis from the
autobar and set them  next  to  the  big  quartz  port,  then  sat  down  to  watch  her  land.
Thirty seconds later, he got up and started pacing—but still kept his eyes locked on the
sky.
She had certainly  timed her entrance right.  (She always did,  of course.)  The sky
was filled with stars, but Sol was about to rise,  and its glare dimmed the lesser suns,
leaving a field strewn with glory,  but not backed by  powder. Nearby asteroids  arced
across the field, making his heart lurch—but finally, one of them started growing more
than it slid, and he knew Lona was coming in.
The meteor waxed brighter and brighter until it showed as a little disc that grew and
grew until it assumed the shape of a small rocket ship, fifty meters long, arching lower
as it brightened, then blossoming into roseate fire  that swelled up  about  it,  hiding  it,

consuming  it,  a  fireball  that  swung  lower  more  and  more  slowly—and  touched  the
ground. The fire died, and the little rocket ship emerged, balanced on landing grapples.
Dar  hit  pressure  patches  and  turned  a  wheel,  and  the  house's  boarding  ramp
snaked out across the graded rockfield to nudge, very gently, against the side of the
ship.  Then  it  rose  up  on  jacks  of  its  own,  like  a  blind,  questing  cobra,  found  the
electromagnetic ring around the airlock, and clung.
It was a convenience, for people. Expensive—too expensive, just for the privilege of
coming  in  without  a  faceplate,  so  Dar  didn't  pressurize  it.  But  cargo  needed
atmosphere, sometimes, and for trade, they could afford it.
He couldn't see her coming, though. That was the disadvantage.
Then the red light died over the airlock,  and he knew she was in.  The yellow light
started pulsing, and kept on, for what seemed an eternity—but finally, the green lit.
Dar stepped up five feet from the hatch, a martini clutched in  each  hand,  breath
held in his lungs.
Then the hatch swung open, and she was there, lumpy as porridge  in  her  space
suit, but her helmet under her arm, face glowing, lips parted…
They never did get to those martinis. What good is the gin when the ice has melted?
 
 
Two hours  later,  Lona  sat  across  from  him  in  one  of  the  latest  Terran  fashions,
which didn't manage to obscure her splendor, especially when she was lit by  candles
(right  under  the  air-exchange  vent).  She  was  finishing  her  bouillabaisse  and  a
fascinating account of her odyssey through the best shops on Terra ("Well,  I  have to
look my best when I'm talking to purchasing agents, don't I?"). Dar smiled at her out of
a pleasant haze, compounded of one part gin  to  five  parts  Lona.  She  didn't  miss  a
syllable as X-HB-9 cleared their bowls, but she did stop to stare as the little robot set
places of almost-genuine steak in front of them. "Dar! What have you done!"
Well, Dar, would have preferred to have the accusation refer  to less licit  activities,
but  he'd  take  praise  where  he  could  get  it.  He  gave  back  a  foolish  grin.  "Aw.  You
noticed."
"Noticed! You wonderful man! You figured out how to cram that whole program into
such a limited brain!"
"Only applying what you taught me, dear."
"Well! Such excellent application deserves reward." Her eye gleamed as she turned
back to him.
"If you're going to deliver on that promise, you'd better keep your strength up."
Lona took a bite. "Done to a turn!" She didn't say which one. "Is  X-HB-9 ready  to
manufacture?"
"Needs a little more  field-testing  to  be  certain—but,  yes,  I'm  pretty  sure  it  is.  It'll
bring you breakfast in bed tomorrow."
"Oh, goody! Just what we need for the triple contract I've lined up!"
Dar dropped his fork. "Triple… contract?"

"Uh-huh."  Lona  nodded,  hair  swaying.  "I  talked  Amalgamated  into  renewing  our
contract without the exclusivity clause."
"How did you manage… NO! Cancel that! I don't want to know!''
"Poor dear." Lona reached past the candles to pat his hand. "But there's nothing to
be jealous about. I didn't do anything unethical, let alone immoral."
Yes, but that didn't say what she had implied. Also, Dar kind of wondered about her
ranking.
"Simple threats," Lona explained. "I  told them we were thinking about opening our
own dirtside sales office."
Dar's jaw dropped. Lona merrily took another bite, and he shoved his mandible back
up to his maxillary. "Boy; you really don't lack for chutzpah, do you?"
"Why not? We probably will open a dealership on Terra, in twenty years or so."
"Actually, I was thinking about all the Maximan families getting together and opening
a cooperative distributing corporation—but I  think  we  need  more  leverage  first.  You
know, get Terra totally dependent  on  our  product,  so  they  can't  threaten  to  take  us
over. Otherwise, we might suffer a sudden horrible decline in creativity… Uh… What's
the matter?"
"And you tell me I've got nerve," she gasped. "Good thing you don't live on Terra,
Dar—you'd wind up running PEST."
Dar felt a surge of irritation. "I only want to run them out of town."
"I  know,"  she  sighed.  "You  never  did  have  much  respect  for  good  old  healthy
self-interest. Maybe I do have a function around here, after all."
"Maybe!" Dar squawked. "I'm just the errand boy!"
Lona  stared  into  his  eyes  for  a  long  moment,  then  reached  out  to  pat  his  hand
again. "Please keep thinking that way, dear. It works wonderfully for me."
Dar was pretty sure he was  supposed  to  feel  complimented.  Anyway,  he  glowed
inside, just on general principles. "So how much is this triple deal going to bring?"
"Well, over the next three years, and with a guarantee to each company to bring out
a new model, on a four-month rotation plan… just about five hundred thousand each."
Dar could feel his eyes bulge. "A million and a half?"
Lona nodded, looking immensely pleased with herself.
Dar sat back, sucking in a long breath. "Yes. Well, I can see that might make a little
research and development desirable, yes."
"But that's the good  part  about  it."  Lona  winked.  "You've  already  done  the  tough
part. With a robot who serves breakfast in bed, it's just a short step to one who can
load the dishwasher."
Dar  developed  a  sudden  faraway  look  in  his  eyes.  "With  extendable  arms,  that
shouldn't be too tough—and once you've got the telescoping arms, it could vacuum the
cobwebs in the corners, and wash the walls."
"And if it can wash the walls, it can paint them!"
"Yeah." Dar grinned.  "No more having to rent a painter-robot  from  the  homecare

store. I see the point. We have half the improvements figured out already. No wonder
you wanted me to add another workroom before we finished  mining  out  another  ice
cavity."
"Well,  yes."  Lona  looked  down,  toying  with  her  wineglass.  "Actually,  Dar,  I  was
going to ask you if you could add on the northwest circular room. It isn't very large…"
"The one right next to our bedrooms on the plans?" Dar frowned. "Sure. What kind
of product are you planning to develop in it?"
Lona actually blushed and lowered her eyes. "A product that would be very small at
first. But it would grow. Fifteen years or so, but it would grow."
Dar stared.
Then he stood up and came around to take her hand. "Darling—are you telling me
we can finally start a baby?"
She nodded, smiling up at him—and he was amazed to see her eyes fill with tears.
"Yes," she whispered, just before her mouth was pre-empted.
 
 
An hour later, their breathing slowed  down  enough  for  Lona  to  heave  a  satisfied
sigh, and for Dar to breathe into her ear, "Will you marry me now?"
"Uh-huh." Lona turned to him, nodding brightly. "I do think children should have that
much security, at least."
"Security?" Dar pursed his lips and asked, carefully, "Does this mean you might be
planning to stay home for a couple of years?"
Lona nodded, eyes huge and face solemn. "At least two years before I go kiting off
to Terra again, Dar. I promise."
 
 
Cordelia sighed, misty-eyed. "I do so love happy endings."
"Yet was it truly?" Geoffrey said, frowning up at Fess. "Did she keep her promise,
Fess?"
"Regrettably, she did not," the robot answered. "In  practice,  she could not—there
was need for her to attend business meetings and speak with prospective clients."
Magnus asked, "Wherefore could her husband not have done so for her?"
"He was quite willing," Fess sighed, "but he lacked the gift for it, perhaps due to his
earlier career as a teacher—he was obsessed with the need to tell the precise  truth.
He just was not as good at business as she was."
"Nor as good at aught else, from what thou sayest." Magnus added.
"Thus  it  seemed  to  himself,  too.  He  died  feeling  that  his  life  had  been  full  and
enjoyable, but insignificant."
"Papa  hath  said  that  all  folk  must  find  and  know  their  limitations,"  Gregory  said,
"then seek to transcend them."

"It  was  Dar  Mandra  who  first  enunciated  that  aphorism,  Gregory;  it  has  been
passed down from generation to generation of your  family.  But the operative word is
seek. The attempt will surely result in better work than  you  would  otherwise  do,  and
may result in greater accomplishments—but may still fall short of your goal."
Gregory's eyes lost focus as he tried to digest that statement, but Geoffrey was still
frowning. "Did the founder of our house, then, accomplish nothing with his life?"
"That depends on your definition of the term 'accomplish.' With his wife, he built a
major  company  within  the  Maxima  conglomerate,  raised  three  children  to  become
excellent citizens, and formed an enduring marriage that gained substance as it aged."
"Yet he did not create anything in his own right, nor invent or discover it."
"Only in that he had not found the answer to the question he had formulated, and
did not  realize  that  no  answer  may  be  an  indicator  of  the  correct  answer.  His  son
Limner, though, took that question and likewise tried to answer it:  'Why  can physical
objects  be  mapped  into  seven-dimensional  space,  when  electromagnetic  waves
cannot?' He, too, failed to discover its solution, just as Dar had—but took the lack of an
answer as an indicator."
Gregory asked, "What did Limner think it did indicate?"
"That perhaps electromagnetic waves could be mapped into seven dimensions; they
only  needed  a  different  technique.  Just  as  electromagnetic  radiation  was  its  own
medium, the transmitter had to be its own isomorpher.''
Magnus  looked  up.  "Yet  'twas  Dar's  thoughts,  and  the  question  they  led  to,  that
enabled Limner to discover that principle."
"That is so, yes."
"Then," Magnus demanded, "how can he be said to have failed?"
"He had not, of course—yet he felt that he had."
Geoffrey  squeezed  his  eyes  shut  and  gave  his  head  a  shake.  "A  moment,  I
prithee—thou dost say he succeeded in some measure, but knew it not?"
"Precisely. Dar's feelings of failure were due to a fundamental misunderstanding of
his own nature—he was not an engineer, like Lona, but a research scientist.''
"Oh, the poor ancestor!" Tears brimmed Cordelia's eyes.  "To die feeling so, when
'twas not true!"
"Oh, do not pity  him, Cordelia. He recognized his true  success  as  a  husband,  a
father,  and  a  stalwart  member  of  the  community.  In  his  old  age,  he  counted
accomplishments  in  scholarship  and  commerce  to  be  relatively  inconsequential,  as
indeed they were."
Gregory  stared,  scandalized.  "Why!  How  canst  thou  say  the  discovery  of  new
knowledge is of no consequence!"
"Only relatively, Gregory, only relatively. For Dar's measure of worth was in adding
to the happiness of other people—and in  that,  he  had  succeeded  enormously.  Now
hush, children. It is time to sleep. Tomorrow, we will begin to solve the mystery of the
castle."

Chapter 6
« ^ »
The rain came down, and it hit with thunder. Rod jolted awake wide-eyed, lurching  up
on  one  elbow  to  stare  at  the  ceiling.  The  only  light  was  the  soft  glow  of  the
will-o'-the-wisp Gwen had lit on Fess's saddle before they settled down. Rain roared on
the tent.
"How long has it been going on, Fess?" Rod murmured.
"It began only ten minutes ago, Rod."
Then  the  whole  tent-top  turned  bright  with  lightning,  barely  gone  before  thunder
bellowed. Rod turned and looked down at his youngest, and sure enough, the little boy
lay rigid, eyes wide, scared witless by the thunder but too proud to cry out.
"You know there's nothing to be scared of, don't you?" Rod said conversationally.
"Aye, Papa." Gregory relaxed a little. "The lightning will not hurt us, nor will a tree fall
on us—we pitched our tent far from the branches."
"And lightning bolts are much more likely to strike a higher object, such as a tree or
the castle. Yes." But Rod reached out a hand anyway, and Gregory's fingers  seized
on his like a little vise.
"Oh! 'Tis glorious," Cordelia breathed.
The whole tent flashed bright again as thunder slammed down at them. It  showed
Magnus and Geoffrey halfway to the door. Darkness struck, and Rod could just barely
hear Geoffrey say, "I do so love a storm!"
"  'Tis  grand,"  Magnus  agreed.  The  gloom  lightened,  and  the  sound  of  the  rain
became even louder.
" 'Ware the rain." Gwen was sitting up beside Rod, facing  the door.  "Doth it come
toward thee?"
"No, Mama, 'tis at the tent's back."  Lightning flared with a thunder blast,  and  Rod
saw  the  boys  hunkered  belly-down  with  their  chins  on  their  fists,  gazing  out,  and
Cordelia wriggling up between them.
" 'Tis right atop us," Gregory murmured. "There is no delay 'twixt lightning flash and
thunder."
Rod smiled; ever the scientist! Well, if it let the boy share his siblings' pleasure, what
harm? "Don't you want to look at it, too?"
Gregory looked up at him, then smiled. "Aye!"  He turned and  crawled  toward  the
door.
Rod  caught  Gwen's  hand  and  squeezed  a  little.  She  returned  the  pressure  and
murmured, "Why should they have the sight to themselves, my lord?"
"Hey,  the  family  .ought  to  stay  together,  right?"  Rod  rolled  up  to  his  hands  and

knees. "After you, dear."
"What, durst I trust thee so?"
"Sure, the kids are awake. But let's go side by side, if you doubt me."
Gwen giggled and they rubbed elbows as they came to their feet and stepped over
to  join  their  offsprings.  Lightning  blazed  as  they  came  to  the  doorway,  thunder
crashing down around their heads. Rod looked up in time to catch the last sight of the
tower tops in silhouette—and stiffened.
"Hist!" Geoffrey cried.
They all fell totally silent, ears straining.
" 'Twas not the last boom of the thunder alone," Magnus said.
"I hear a lass wailing," Cordelia answered.
Rod started to say what he'd heard, then bit his tongue and stared up at the unseen
tower with narrowed eyes. Gwen's hand tightened on his arm.
Gregory said it for him. "I do hear a man's laughter."
"Aye, and 'tis as wicked and foul a laugh as ever I've heard," Magnus agreed.
"I, too, hear it, my lord," Gwen murmured.
"He's gloating," Rod said softly. "I don't know what about…"
"The maid?" Cordelia guessed. "Doth he rejoice at having made her weep?"
"I mislike this castle," Magnus said, his voice hard.
Thunder tore at the stones, bleached white by the lightning.
When it quieted, Gregory asked, "Ought we go home, then?"
"Nay." Magnus said it even faster than Rod. "Whatever is here,  we must face  and
banish it."
Thunder blasted them again, the next lightning flash following so  hard  on  the  first
that it seemed one long, unbroken instant of light with only a flicker  between. Then it
died, and the afterimage danced before Rod's eye,  confirming  what he'd thought  he
had seen.
As the thunder faded, Cordelia gasped, "Was it a lass?"
"Mayhap."  Geoffrey's  voice  hardened.  "Whatsoe'er  'twas,  it  was  long-haired  and
cloaked."
"Yet why did it plummet head-first toward the ground?" Gregory wondered.
"Because it was pushed, brother," Geoffrey answered.
"Or did it throw itself down?" Cordelia wondered.
"Whate'er 'twas, it was the fruit of wickedness," Magnus answered.
Rod could hear the anger in his voice, and said quickly, "Was, Magnus. Remember
the was. Whatever happened there, however cruel or vicious, it was done two hundred
years ago, not tonight."
"But how evil must it have been," Cordelia cried, "that the spirit must live through it
again, and again and again, for two hundred years!"

"Then 'tis time it was finished." Magnus's voice was grim, with a determination Rod
had never heard in it before. "Whatever lies within that stone pile, 'tis a fell, foul evil,
and we must not let it stand."
Rod frowned down at his boy. He was right, of course—but where had this sudden
determination come from? Magnus had never  heard  anything  about  Castle  Foxcourt
but its name, before tonight. He wondered further  about it as the family settled down
once again, but decided to say nothing to Gwen—yet.
 
 
"Wherefore doth it not now appear so grim, Papa?" Cordelia looked up at the walls
of the castle, golden now in the morning light.
"Because it's dawn, dear, and everything looks better by the light of the day.''
"Then too, the rain hath washed it clean," Gwen explained, "as it doth with all. The
sky is cleaner above, and mine heart doth sing within me to behold it."
"But we still have to get into the castle." Rod frowned up at the drawbridge. "There's
the little problem of getting that slab of wood down."
"We must turn the windlass, Papa," Magnus said brightly. "Shall I?"
Rod turned to him. "What—do you think you can make it move without even having
seen it?"
"Oh, aye, and next shalt thou bid a mountain come to thee!" Geoffrey jibed.
"Aye, sin that I know where it should be."
"Thou canst not truly, Magnus!" Cordelia stated.
Gregory didn't say anything; he just gazed up at Magnus wide-eyed. After all, if Big
Brother said he could do it…
"Mayhap  he  can,"  Gwen  suggested,  "though  even  if  he  cannot,  'twill  be  good
practice for him."
"Yeah, you need  to  stretch  if  you  want  to  grow."  Rod  nodded  slowly.  "Okay,  go
ahead. It would save a bit of time."
Magnus frowned up at the drawbridge, his eyes losing focus.  Gwen  watched  him
carefully.
Rod  glanced  from  Magnus  to  the  castle,  half-expecting  the  old  planks  to  come
rattling down. Just as a caution, he waved the other children back. They went, but with
poor grace.
Magnus  relaxed  and  shook  his  head  in  chagrin.  "  'Tis  no  use—there  is  no
response."
Gregory looked disappointed. Geoffrey's eye lit with vindictiveness, and both he and
Cordelia  started  to  say  something,  but  Rod  caught  their  eyes,  and  they  stopped
openmouthed.
"Still,  'twas  good  for  thee  to  attempt  it."  Gwen  stared  at  the  castle.  "  'Tis  odd,
though."
"So we do it the old-fashioned way." Rod replied.

"I shall!!"
"No, I am best at…"
" 'Tis my turn…"
"No!" Rod barked.
The kids fell silent, staring at him with truculence—but also with apprehension. He
saw, and forced a smile. "I appreciate your willingness, kids, but there might be a bit of
danger there—you know, rotten beams and falling rocks. I'm pleading seniority on this
one—just me and Magnus."
"Wherefore doth Magnus go!"
"Magnus, thou dost cheat!"
"Wherefore not Mama?"
"Because," Rod said, "someone has to take care of you three."
"Fess can mind us!"
"Fess cannot stop you from following," Gwen pointed out. "Wouldst thou promise me
not to go within?"
"Nay!"
"Then I bide here." Gwen gave Rod a sunny smile. "Go quickly, husband."
"With all dispatch. Let's go, son." Rod gazed up at the castle, but this time, he didn't
really see it. His attention was on the unseen world, as he thought of pushing against
the ground, away—and, slowly, drifted up to the arrow-slit at the top of the gatehouse.
"Thou didst promise  all  dispatch,"  Magnus  reminded  him,  hovering  in  midair  and
leaning against the narrow window.
"All right, so I'm a slow old man," Rod grumbled, "just because I didn't have the good
fortune to grow up using psi powers, the way you did.  Come on, inside."  He  turned
sideways and drifted in. It took a little shoving, though.
"Thou art hardly come," Magnus said, sliding in effortlessly.
Rod slapped his belt. "That's muscle, boy,  not  flab."  He  looked  around,  frowning.
"Not so bad."
It wasn't. There was a slab fallen from the roof,  and the  morning  sunlight  coming
through it and the arrow-slits, showed them a round room  of  old,  mellow  stone.  The
corners were filled with antique spiderwebs, and a broken table and bench stood near
one wall. Except for that, the room was empty, with a few shards of crockery  on the
floor.
"Not anywhere nearly as bad as… What's the matter?"
Magnus's  eyes  had  lost  focus;  he  was  turning  slowly  about  the  room,  his  face
drawn. "I do hear voices, Papa."
"Voices?" Rod tensed. "What are they saying?"
"Naught… too distant… only some feel of loud talk, and soldiers' oaths…"
"Well,  it's  the  gatehouse;  there  would  have  been  soldiers  here,  so  it's  easy  to
ascribe it to them." Rod carefully  ignored the chill oozing down his spine.  "Probably

just the wind playing a trick with the acoustics, son, like a whispering gallery."
"Dost thou truly think so?"
Rod didn't, so he said, "What bothers me is what I don't hear—or see."
That caught Magnus's attention. "And what is that?"
"Birds." Rod pointed up toward the rafters. "There's a dozen nesting places in this
room, but not a single one is used—not even a trace that there ever was a nest."
Magnus looked around, nodding slowly.
"Come on, let's find that winch."  Rod turned away toward the doorway. "High time
we got your brothers and sister in here." And Gwen. Most especially Gwen.
 
 
The porter's room was empty, except for  some more crumbled furniture.  Shafts of
sunlight pierced its darkness, from a row of slits along one wall.
"Well,  that's  why  you  couldn't  turn  the  windlass."  Rod  looked  around  him  as  he
stepped in. "No windlass."
"Aye… I thought at a thing that was not…" But Magnus had his abstracted air again.
"Yet how did they make the drawbridge raise or lower?"
"Counterweights, probably. Let's go find the gateway." Rod led the way across the
room, out into the passageway, and looked around. Light filled it,  from the courtyard
archway. "There!" He strode over to the great portal, closed now by  the drawbridge,
and pointed to a huge iron ball attached to a chain that ran up into darkness. "But there
had to be an operating line, somewhere…"
"Yon."  Magnus  pointed.  Rod  followed  his  direction  and  saw,  centered  above  the
gate, a huge pulley with a strip of something that might once have been rope hanging
from it and looping over to the side, into a hole in the wall.
"Into the porter's room." Rod nodded. "Makes sense. Come on." He ducked back
into the chamber they'd just come from and looked up at the front wall. The rope came
through the hole, sure enough, and draped into a pulley like the one over the gateway.
Only about four feet of it hung down, though, and on the floor under it was a mound of
toadstools.
"Well, so much for the operating line. But how…" Rod broke off, frowning. "Wait a
minute. The drawbridge goes higher than that pulley."
"Aye.  'Tis for  the  portcullis."  Magnus  stepped  back  out  into  the  passageway  and
pointed.
Just below the central pulley was the top of the iron gate. Rod's gaze traveled over
to the corner and traced the chain attached to it, following it down to the huge iron ball
that rested on the ground. "Frozen open, fortunately. But then how did they work the
drawbridge?"
"Yon." Magnus pointed up into the gloom.
Squinting, Rod could barely make out huge links that traversed overhead to run over
great, rusty sprocket wheels in the back wall.
"Very sharp, son." Rod nodded. "Very good observation."

"It is not."
"Oh?" Rod peered at him, with a stab of apprehension. "This is definitely  not your
standard drawbridge. How're you figuring out what to look for?''
"I am not. I hear them."
"Them?" The stab twisted. "Who?"
"A  murmur,  a  babble  of  voices—but  among  them  is  one  telling  another  how  to
manage these devices.
Rod stared at him for a moment, not that Magnus was watching. Then he linked his
mind to his son's. The rest of the room darkened even more about him.
"Dost thou hear?"
Rod shook his head. "Just a babble, like a distant crowd."
"Yet 'tis there."
"Oh, yeah, it's there all right. Where it's coming from, is another matter." Rod turned
away. "Come on, let's figure out how to get that drawbridge down. I think we need your
mother in here."
Magnus led him out through the archway and into the courtyard.
It seemed spacious after the porter's room and the tunnel, but Rod  knew  it  could
only be a hundred feet across.  The keep bulged out  into  it,  like  a  hugely  fat  tower.
There  were  a  lot  of  dead  leaves  and  broken  branches,  of  course,  and  mounds  of
humus in the corners, with weeds sprouting luxuriantly.
But not a single bird. Nor, now that Rod noticed it, a butterfly.
He  wrenched  his  mind  back  to  business,  to  suppress  a  shiver.  "Where's  this
counterweight?"
"We have stepped over it." Magnus pointed behind him. Rod looked down, and saw
a metal slab set in the stone; he'd thought it was a threshold to the archway.  But now
that he looked, he could see it was rust, not just brown stone, and that rings rose from
its corners, rings that were fastened to huge links whose chains stretched up on the
wall to disappear, over huge sprocket wheels, into the stone above the archway.
Now. Rod shivered.
Magnus was pointing up. " 'Tis so well balanced that the drawbridge doth need but a
strong pull to let it down."
"Yeah—but the iron slab goes up then, and everybody coming in or going out has
to ride under it."
"True." Magnus frowned, in an abstracted sort of way. "Wherefore  did  the  Count
not use iron balls again, and keep the gateway clear?"
"Nice question." And Rod had an answer, which was anything but nice. Not that he
was about  to  say  it,  of  course—and  he  decided,  then  and  there,  that  Magnus  was
never going to touch that bar.
A caroling cry echoed above them.
Rod's head snapped up.
There,  atop  the  gatehouse,  perched  his  two  younger  sons,  with  his  wife  and

daughter gliding down in lazy spirals on their broomsticks. He couldn't help noticing, all
over again, that Cordelia had a full-sized broomstick now, not just a hearth broom, and
wasn't much shorter than her mother any more.
Gwen pulled up beside Rod and hopped  off.  "Thou  wert  so  long  about  it  that  we
grew impatient." But he saw the concern in her eyes. "What kept thee?"
"Trying to figure out the drawbridge system." Rod noticed his two boys drifting down
like autumn leaves. He shuddered, and hoped the simile wasn't apt.
"Is't so rare?" Gwen asked.
" 'Tis odd, at the least," Magnus answered.
Gwen turned to him, and her eyes widened. "How is't with thee, my son?"
"Well enough…"
"Is it truly?" Gwen set her broomstick against a wall and reached up to press a hand
against Magnus's forehead. She stared off  into space for  a few seconds, then  said,
"Step to the wall, and touch the stones."
A crease  appeared  between  Magnus's  eyebrows,  but  he  did  as  she  bade.  Rod
"listened"  to  Gwen's  mind,  eavesdropping  on  the  eavesdropper,  as  Magnus's  hand
touched rock.
A babel of urgent voices filled his ear, some conjecturing whether or not there would
be a battle, some discussing how exciting it all was. Beyond them were the voices of
soldiers  bawling  orders,  and  under  it,  surfacing  and  submerging,  the  sinister  laugh
they had heard in the midst of the thunderstorm.
"Away," Gwen snapped, and Magnus slowly took his hand from the wall, then turned
to his mother with a troubled gaze. "Thou hast heard it?"
"Aye. 'Twas some peasant folk come into the castle for  fear  of a siege—and 'twas
hundreds of years agone."
"He is a past-reader!" Gregory's eyes were huge.
"Magnus always gets to do things first!" Geoffrey grumped.
" 'Tis not fair!" Cordelia complained.
" 'Tis as like to be a burden as a joy," Gwen assured them, and turned to Magnus
again. "Thou hast a form of  clear  sight,  my  son.  I've  heard  it  spoken  of,  yet  never
known a one who had it.  Thou canst read the  thoughts  embedded  in  the  stones,  or
wood or metal, by the anguish or joy of those who dwelt near them."
"A psychometricist!" Rod's eyes were wide.
Magnus turned  to  Gwen,  trying  to  focus  on  her  face.  "Yet  wherefore  have  I  not
noted this aforetime?"
"For that thou hast ever been in places thronged with living folk, whose thoughts did
obscure any that came from stones."
"Sure it might not be part of the boy turning into a young man?" Rod asked.
"Mama did speak of strong feelings," Gregory pointed out. "Mayhap such thoughts
stay not in stones, with lesser feelings."
Gwen nodded. "There is some truth to that—and I  bethink me that this castle has

seen many who were overwrought."
"And not pleasantly." Rod scowled. "Try not to touch anything, okay, son?"
"I will endeavor…"
"Then I'll give you some help." Rod turned to face the gatehouse. "We  still have to
get that drawbridge down, unless we're going to expect Fess to wait outside the whole
time."
"Aye…" Magnus turned, his frown deepening, seeming to come into clearer focus.
"Gregory, help me. Just think of holding that chain up, when the time comes. Gwen,
if you and the other kids would take the right-hand chain…  ? Good. Now, everybody
think hot at it."  He glared at the bottom link, concentrating on it while the rest of  his
surroundings grew fuzzy.  The link began to glow, first  red,  then  orange,  on  through
yellow into white, until finally the metal flowed. "Now," Rod grated, and the chain lifted a
foot. Rod sighed and relaxed, watching the metal darken back down the spectrum as it
cooled.  He  turned  to  look  at  the  rest  of  his  family,  but  their  chain  was  just  now
yellowing.  Rod  glanced  back  at  his  own,  saw  it  was  ruby  again,  and  told  Gregory,
"Okay, put it down now." The chain lowered to swing clinking against the wall, and Rod
turned to add his bit to the right-hand chain.  The metal flowed, the chain  rose—and,
with a low and rising  growl of breaking rust, the huge old  sprocket  wheels  began  to
turn. The growl rose to a grown, underscored by a furious clanking as the drawbridge
fell away at the end of the tunnel, faster and faster, till its tip slimmed into the far bank
of the moat. Hooves clattered on the wood.
"Careful, there!" Rod called, alarmed. "Those boards might be rotten!"
"The unsound ones fell to powder when the drawbridge dropped,  Rod,  and  I  can
pick my way well enough around the holes." Then the clattering changed to thunder as
Fess's hooves echoed in the tunnel, and the great black horse came trotting in.
The children cheered. Gwen glanced at Magnus, saw his face alight, and relaxed a
little.
"Why is destruction the only thing I do better than the rest of you?" Rod grumbled.
" 'Tis for  cause that thou hast come to  it  lately,  husband,  not  grown  to  it,"  Gwen
assured him breezily.
Gregory was staring at the huge bar buried in the stone. "We  could have lifted it,
Papa…"
"This was faster."
"Yet now we cannot draw the bridge up again."
"I know." Rod grinned. "Works out nicely that way, doesn't it?"
 
 
They spent the morning exploring the rest  of  the  castle,  and  found  a  lot  of  dead
leaves and branches blown in through the windows over the years. They also found a
fair quantity of antique furniture, some of it still intact.
But not a single bird. Not even a rat or a mouse, for that matter.
"And never a one, through all these years." Cordelia looked up at the rafters. "How

could that be, Papa?"
Rod shrugged. "They felt unwanted, dear."
"What was it that wanted them not?"
Rod avoided the question. "But look at the bright side—at least we won't have to set
out traps. Or endanger a cat, either."
"Nay, Papa." Geoffrey corrected. " ' Tis the cat would endanger the rats."
"Not  some  of  the  rats  I've  seen—but  there  aren't  any  here.  One  advantage  to
ghosts, anyway."  Rod had a  brief,  dizzying  vision  of  an  advertising  sign:  "Rid  your
house  of  those  troublesome  pests!  Hire  a  haunt!"  With,  of  course,  a  picture  of  a
comical ghost shouting "Boo!" at a rat and a cockroach who were neck-and-neck in a
dead heat away from the spook. Rod found himself wondering what to name the ghost?
Buster? He shook his head and came back to the here and now.
"And  none  have  dwelt  here  for  two  hundred  years."  Gregory  gazed  about  him,
wide-eyed.
"Not a living soul," Rod agreed. Strangely, there were no signs of squatters having
moved in, or even having spent the night. On the other hand, that would've been hard to
do, with the drawbridge up—which raised the question of why it was still up. Rod had a
mental picture of the last servants to leave, heaving hard on the lip of the bridge,  and
watching it rise  slowly, riding  up on its counterweight. Either that, or the last servant
had decided not to leave. Rod shuddered at that thought, and hoped he never met the
person.
It was a pretty basic castle—just a keep with a curtain  wall, diamond-shaped in its
ground plan, with watchtowers at north and south, the keep itself serving to guard the
western point, and the gatehouse at the east. There were only three floors to the keep,
the first being all one huge, open room fifty  feet in diameter, and the second divided
into several rooms, presumably family quarters. The third was piled with small catapults
and moldering crossbows and rusty bolts—the upstairs armory, for aerial defenses.
"Enough!" Gwen clapped her hands. "If we are to dwell here, no matter how short a
while, we must needs make the keep fit for dwelling. Magnus and Gregory, sweep and
dust! Cordelia and Geoffrey, hurl trash out into the moat!"
Geoffrey whooped and set to it;  heaps of leaves  began  to  swirl  out  the  windows.
Cordelia glowered at a broken, old table, and it rose off the floor, cracked leg dangling,
and drifted toward the window.
Magnus frowned. "Wherefore do they pitch while we sweep, Mama?"
"For that thy sister's the best at making things fly," Gwen answered, "and Gregory's
well suited to kiting along the ceiling and beams."
"Yet Geoffrey and I…"
"Are chosen for these tasks, for reasons thou knowest well." Gwen said, with steel
beneath her voice; then her manner softened. "I promise thee, thou'lt trade tasks when
we go to another floor. Aid me in this, my son."
Magnus grinned. "As thou wilt have it, Mama. Wilt thou lend me thy broomstick?"
And away he went, sweeping up a storm; Rod wondered about the whirlwinds in it.
He sighed  with  relief,  and  blessed  his  eldest—trying  to  put  a  broom  in  Geoffrey's

hands  was  asking  for  a  major  confrontation,  unless  you  went  after  him  with  a
quarterstaff. Even then, the broomstick would probably beat the quarterstaff, and there
wouldn't be much work done.
All  went  well  for  a  good  fifteen  minutes;  then  Geoffrey  remembered  to  grumble.
"Wherefore must we clean?"
"Wouldst thou truly wish to dwell in so stale a mess?" Cordelia asked, with scorn.
Geoffrey started to answer, but Magnus cut him off. "Do not ask, sister—thou dost
not truly wish to hear his answer."
Geoffrey  flushed  an  angry  red,  but  before  he  could  blast,  Gregory  burbled
cheerfully. "Mayhap 'twill help to banish the ghosts."
That gave Geoffrey pause. He cocked his head to the side, frowning.
"Real ghosts!" Gregory went on, his eyes shining. "I had thought they were but old
wives' tales!"
"On Gramarye, old wives' tales can turn real, Gregory," Fess reminded.
Gregory nodded. " 'Tis a point. Are they true ghosts, or only some  aspect  of  psi
we've not met before?"
"So much conversation surely cannot increase productivity."
"Oh, thou art but a killjoy, Fess!" Cordelia scoffed. "How can we help but speak of
so wondrous a thing as our very own haunted castle?"
"It is difficult,  I  know," the robot commiserated. "Still, you have been instructed to
accomplish a task, and so much chatter inhibits your work."
"Then  give  us  summat  to  quiet  us,"  Gregory  suggested.  "Tell  us  more  of  our
ancestors."
Fess was silent a moment; after thirty years of Rod's squelching him every time he
tried  to  discourse  on  family  history,  it  was  a  little  difficult  adjusting  to  the  idea  that
somebody was interested again. Slowly, he said, "Gladly, children—but you had many
ancestors. Of which would you like to hear?"
"That minor issue of which thou didst forbear  to speak, yester  eventide,"  Magnus
said, too casually. "Papa did mention an ancestor who did seek to find a family ghost.''
Fess sighed. "You would remember that."
"Wouldst thou not also, under such circumstances as these?"
"I fear I would," Fess sighed, "yet I would prefer to gloss over it."
"Then speak of our ancestor who finished building the Castle Gallowglass!"
"D'Armand, Cordelia," Fess reminded.
"Aye,  ninny!"  Magnus jibed. "Canst  thou  not  remember  that  Papa  took  the  name
'Gallowglass' when he came to Gramarye?"
"Oh, forever!"  Cordelia  said  crossly.  "What  matter  if  I  slip  in  its  usage  now  and
again?"
"Great matter, if thou dost ever seek to discover thine ancestral home!"
"And which of us shall ever wish to leave Gramarye?" Geoffrey  scoffed.  "Cordelia
hath right, for once."

"Once!"  Cordelia  squawked.  Geoffrey  grinned  wickedly  in  answer.  Magnus  was
silent.
"Well  enough,  then."  Cordelia  turned  away  and  tipped  her  nose  up,  scorning
Geoffrey. "Tell us of the ancestor who did finish Castle d'Armand."
"Which?" Fess almost seemed hopeful. "It was finished several times."
"Several?" Magnus frowned. "How long dist thou dwell therein, Fess?"
"From A.D. 3050, Magnus, till your father left home in 3542," Fess answered.
"Four  centuries?"  Gregory  gasped.  Geoffrey  glanced  at  him  in  annoyance;  he
wasn't good with figures.
"Four,"  Fess confirmed,  "which is most of  the  time  that  has  elapsed  since  I  was
activated."
"But was it not a delight?" Cordelia demanded.
"On occasion, yes," Fess admitted, "but it just as often was not. It depended on my
owner of the time."
"Thou didst esteem Lona highly," Cordelia said, "for  thou didst build her castle for
her."
"True, but I would have done so for any other owner who so commanded—and did,
since that was only the first time Chateau d'Armand was finished. It was quite modest
by Maximan standards, you see."
Geoffrey frowned. "I misdoubt me an her descendants could abide that."
"They had difficulty," Fess admitted. "In  fact,  her son and grandson each built an
addition, but one that was dictated by her original plan, thereby finishing  the castle a
second  and  third  time.  Nonetheless,  their  neighbors'  houses  were  far  more  grand.
They were good souls, though, and envy did not bother them greatly."
"Not so their wives," Cordelia demurred.
"You have guessed accurately, Cordelia." Fess sounded surprised. "Yes, the wives
found it quite difficult to accept such relatively modest quarters, the more so because
they were themselves younger daughters of grander lords."
"Lords?" Magnus lifted his head, frowning. "I wot me an thou didst speak of factors
and crafters. Whence came nobility?"
"By mail, Magnus, from the heralds of Europe. Maxima was, after all, a sovereign
world, with its own government…"
"But thou hast said Maxima had no government."
"Not  really,  though  I  can  understand  how  my  remarks  could  have  seemed  to
indicate that. Nonetheless, the Maximans did have some mutual means of coordinating
logistics and resolving disputes, and they had annual meetings of the leaders of all the
Houses."
Magnus nodded. "And if that assembly did declare the head of a household noble,
who could contradict it?"
"Precisely. The Earl Mulhearn was the first  to receive a patent of nobility,  and the
others followed in a rush.  Your own ancestor, Theodore d'Armand, changed his first
name to 'Ruthven' and applied to the Assembly for status as a duke."

Magnus whistled. "He saw no vantage in modesty, did he?"
"No indeed. In fact, Ruthven saw no point in anything that was not his own idea…"
"Tell us of him," Cordelia begged.
"Nay!" Magnus turned to her with a scowl. "I  claim primacy.  I  wish to hear of the
ancestor who sought a family ghost!"
"Thy chance  hath passed." Cordelia  turned  on  him.  "You  know  Mama  and  Papa
have told us…"
She broke off at the very credible imitation of a throat-clearing, and turned to Fess
with  a  frown.  Before  either  of  them  could  say  anything,  the  robot  told  them,  "The
distinction does not exist; it was Ruthven who wanted a spectre."
"Then we must hear of him!" Cordelia settled herself for a long listen.
"If it is absolutely necessary…"
"Why dost thou hesitate?" Magnus frowned, puzzled. "What harm is there in telling
us of him?"
"Ought we not to know of all our ancestors?" Cordelia demanded.
"There are some aspects of family history  that  should  perhaps  wait  until  you  are
more mature."
"Oh, pooh," Cordelia retorted, and Magnus concurred.  "An we are  old  enough  to
have  witnessed  lords  who  have  broke  faith  with  their  king  and  rebelled,  we  are  old
enough to know the truth of our own family."
"There is some merit in that, I suppose…"
"What fun is there in hearing only good of our ancestors?" Cordelia demanded.
"She speaketh truly," Magnus averred. "Wouldst thou have us believe our forebears
were wax figures?"
"Oh, they were all quite human, Magnus. It is only that in some cases…"
"Some were more human than others?"
"You might say so, yes."
"Yet accuracy is of the greatest import," Gregory pointed out."
"Aye!" Cordelia leaped on it. "Is not the truth thy prime criterion?"
"No, frankly, Cordelia—in my program, loyalty to my owners is primary."
"Thy  current  owner  will  not  mind  thy  speaking  the  truth  of  thy  former  owners,"
Magnus pointed out.
"There is some validity to that," Fess said reluctantly. He was remembering how Rod
had taken him to task when he  had  poked  around  in  the  family  library  and  learned
some of the facts about those ancestors that Fess hadn't told him.
"And there is the matter of loyalty to thy future owner," Magnus added.
"Which will be yourself, since you are the eldest."
Magnus blithely ignored Geoffrey's glare. "Thus, thy present owner careth not, and
thy future owner doth desire thee to tell. Ought thou not to speak?"

Fess capitulated. "Very  well, children.  But remember, if  you find  your  relationship
with the subject of this tale distasteful, that you required me to tell it.
"We shall not reproach thee," Cordelia assured him.
 
 
"But an archway at the base of a tower cannot stand, Ruthven.''
" 'Milord,' Fess," Ruthven said sternly. "I am noble now."
"But the Assembly…"
"The Assembly will no doubt grant my request at its next meeting. After all, it raised
Joshua Otis to Marquis, only last week; it surely can have no reason not to bestow a
like title upon me."
Silently,  Fess  sighed  and  carefully  did  not  point  out  that  the  Assembly  had  no
particular reason to grant Ruthven's request, either. If the factory business department
had  not  been  automated,  d'Armand  Limited  would  have  gone  bankrupt  from  sheer
neglect.
Not  that  the  House  of  d'Armand  would  have  fallen.  Quite  the  opposite,  in  fact.
Ruthven seemed to spend all his time building.
"Of course the tower will stand."
"How, milord?"
Ruthven waved the question away. "A minor detail. See to it, Fess."
The  robot  sighed  within  and  focused  its  lenses  on  the  blueprints.  Perhaps  a
judicious use of gravity generators… On a low-gravity asteroid, there was no concern
about the tower falling down… But if  there was too little of it,  it might  fall  apart  from
centripedal force.
 
 
"How dare they!" Ruthven stormed, jamming his helmet at Fess. "How can they have
the effrontery to be so insolent!" He yanked at the seals of his pressure suit so hard
that the fabric ripped. He saw the gaping rent, and cursed all the more loudly.
"Ruthven,  please!"  His  wife  came  running  with  apprehensive  glances.  "The
children…"
"They had damned well better be at lessons in their nursery, madame, or I shall bid
Fess cane them!" Ruthven yanked his arms out of the pressure suit, relying on Fess to
catch the sleeves in time, and pulled his feet out of the legs as he stepped forward.
"The degraded peasants!"
"Ruthven!" his wife gasped. "Your own children?"
"Not the children, you goose! The Assembly!"
"What… Oh!" Matilda's eyes widened. "Did they refuse your patent of nobility?"
"No—much worse! They raised me to the rank of…" Ruthven's voice sank to a hiss.
"… Viscount!"
"Viscount! Oh, how dare they! One cannot be lower, and still be a peer!"

"Precisely."  Ruthven  threw  himself  into  a  lounger  and  pushed  the  "medium
massage" button. "I shall be revenged upon them! I shall humiliate them! How, I do not
know—but the time will come, will come for each of them!"
"At least," Fess offered, "you are now legally a lord."
"But  only  barely  a  lord,  you  officious  ingrate!"  Ruthven  shouted.  "How  dare  you
address me as 'you'? Do you not know a more respectful form of address?"
"But… my program indicates no flaw in etiquette…"
"Then it shall!" the new Viscount thundered. "You shall learn, sirrah,  you  shall  be
educated! I shall buy the module today!"
 
 
Castle Gallowglass rose far above its humble beginnings in a maze of towers joined
in vaulting arches,  a fairytale  concoction  of metallic traceries  and  onion  domes  and
gargoyles.
It was a mess.
It  was  a  hodgepodge  of  periods  and  styles  of  architecture,  all  jumbled  together
without  rationale  or  critical  standard.  Somewhere  beneath  the  festoons  of  rococo
plasticrete, the original,  classic  simplicity  of Lona's tranquil palace  gathered  in  upon
itself—but the casual passerby would never know it was there. What he would see was
the most disgusting example of nouveau riche lack of taste Fess had ever seen—and
after a hundred fifty years of contemplating the handiwork of the Maximans, that was
saying quite a bit.
Not that he could say it,  of  course—not  about  his  owner's  masterpiece.  His  new
programming had seen to that.
"How could they possibly have denied me!"
"I'm sorry, milord, I'm sorry." Fess's judgment circuits produced massive reluctance
at the sound of his own words. "The College of Heralds of Europe says that another
family's been using that coat of arms of three lions quartered with fleur-de-lis, for many
generations."
"Then they may forfeit the device! How much do they want for it?"
Inwardly, Fess shriveled, but his vocoder said, "Oh, no, sorry, milord boss! Coats of
arms simply can't be bought!"
"Don't say 'can't' to me!" Ruthven raged. "They have no right to  that  device,  I  tell
you—because I want it!"
"Well, certainly, milord boss, but that doesn't mean there is any way we can get it."
"There must  be a way! Confound it,  find a way to gain a coat of arms!" Ruthven
stalked away toward the bar.
Fess sighed and rolled off toward the library to plug himself into the data banks. He
knew very well that no family would be willing to give up its coat of arms, and that the
College of Heralds would not honor such a transaction even if  it could be made. The
answer, of course, lay in designing a device that Ruthven would accept, and that was
not already in use.

 
 
"A wonderful design." Ruthven beamed at the drawing. "It says so much."
"Yes, milord boss." Fess knew quite well that the device said only what the viewer
read into it. It was nothing but the silhouette of a man with girded loins, a cloak, and a
staff  in  his  hand,  standing  with  one  foot  atop  some  nameless  geological  formation,
facing toward the left, but with his back mostly toward the viewer. Nonetheless, it was
silver on a field of blue, so he knew Ruthven would like it.
"A masterpiece! Am I not a genius?"
"Yes sir, boss milord. No, boss mi—uh, yes, milord!"
"Architecture, fine letters, now design—there are no limits to my talents! Surely the
College of Heralds cannot deny me now!"
"No  sir,  boss  milord."  That,  Fess  could  say  with  conviction—because  he  had
examined the records  of the  College  thoroughly,  then  sent  off  the  sketch  by  fax  as
soon as it was finished. He hadn't shown it to Ruthven until the College had sent back
preliminary approval.
"None  must  deny  me  anything."  Ruthven  patted  his  stomach,  which  had  grown
steadily with the years and was approaching critical mass. "There is none like me!"
The phrase struck an echo in Fess's memory banks—several of them, in fact.
 
 
"But, boss milord!" Fess protested. "How am I going to do that?"
"Order one from Terra, of course." Ruthven waved away the problem.
"Order one, milord sir? A family ghost?"
"There is a catalog, I presume."
"But you can't buy a thing that doesn't exist!"
"Of course ghosts exist. Every noble family on Terra has  one."  Ruthven  gestured
carelessly with sausage fingers. "An ancestral ghost for my castle, Fess. At least one.
Don't ask me for particulars, though. I know nothing about them."
That, at least, was true. Sometimes Fess could have sworn that Ruthven had gone to
great pains to know nothing—and when he did accidentally pick up some information,
he did the best he could to forget it. His way of making sure he had a clean mind, no
doubt.
But the ghost of one of Ruthven's ancestors? Would he want one, really? Fess was
tempted, and if  he could have brought back Lona's ghost, he  would  have.  He  would
have loved to see her haul Ruthven over the coals fifty times, for what he had done to
her palace—and when she had finished,  she would have bullied what was left of him
into restoring some vestige of order to his household. Or maybe the ghost of Dar, who
would  have  taken  one  look  around,  bellowed  in  outrage,  taken  Ruthven  apart,  then
remembered his vocation as a teacher and put the aging playboy back together and
tried to explain the basics of good taste to him.
Or, best of all, the ghost of Tod Tambourin—alias Whitey the Wino.

Now, wait. The ghost of Whitey… That had possibilities…
 
 
A  shriek  split  the  night,  and  the  Countess  Freiliport  came  barreling  out  of  the
bedroom. Fess heaved a 16-Farad sigh, stretched alloyed arms (the more conducive
to the mood because Ruthven had given him a new, and very skeletal, body) to catch
her, and began soothing. "There, now, Milady, it's gone. Nothing to be afraid  of,  no
spooks out here,  only your  good old faithful Fess the  butler,  here  to  make  sure  the
nasty thing can't get at you…"
"Oh! It is you!" The Countess collapsed against Fess's ribcage, sobbing. The sobs
choked off as she saw the ribs and went rigid.
He had to head off  the  scream.  "That's  just  my  new  body,  Milady.  The  Viscount
thought it would go better with the decor. It's really still good old Fess inside here. Was
he as bad as all that?"
"Who? The ghost? Oh!" The Countess went limp. "He was horrible! First only those
spectral footsteps, coming closer and closer, and no answer when I called out 'Who's
there?'—no answer at all, mind you, until that horrid moan broke out right by  my ear,
and that glowing cloud appeared, towering over the foot of my bed!"
"Only a glowing cloud?"
"No, no! Only at first. It gathered in on itself slowly, till it had assumed the form of a
perfectly horrid old man, skinny as a rail, moaning so dolefully that my heart went out
to him—until he saw me!"
"Saw you? What then?"
"Why,  he… he winked at me! And began to  come  toward  me,  reaching  out  and
grinning that lascivious leer… Oh! I was never so frightened in my life!"
That, Fess could believe. The hologram of Whitey had been assembled from clips of
him in the role of a vampire in a 3DT epic he had directed, and in which he had also
starred.
"I am so sorry you have had such a fright, Milady. If you wish, I shall summon your
chauffeur…"
"Oh, my  heavens,  no!"  The  Countess  turned  to  blow  into  her  handkerchief,  then
tucked it back into her bosom with a sniffle, straightening and turning back toward the
room. "It was wonderful. I wouldn't have missed this night for the world." She stepped
firmly  toward the bedroom, then faltered and looked back over her shoulder. "I  don't
suppose he might come back—the ghost, I mean?"
"I'm afraid not, Milady," Fess sympathized. "Only one visitation per guest per night,
you know."
"Ah. Well, I was afraid of such a thing." The Countess sighed and went back toward
the bedroom. "I really must discuss the issue with your master, Fess. So paltry of him,
to limit his hauntings in that fashion."
The door closed behind her, and Fess resigned himself to refereeing  another bout
in the morning. It was a compliment, really, but Ruthven just could not abide anything
remotely  resembling  criticism.  He  was  sure  to  bristle,  and  was  likely  to  anger  the

Countess, jeopardizing a family friendship that went back a century and a half.
 
 
"If  thou  wert  human,  Fess,  thou  wouldst  have  been  tempted  to  refrain  from
interfering. Ruthven would have had no more than he deserved!"
"True, children—but I am a robot, and was capable of pouring unlimited oil on the
waters."
"E'en so, thou shouldst not have." Geoffrey folded his arms and lifted his chin. "He
had not commanded thee to intervene, had he?"
"No, children, but when Lona died, she asked me to look after her descendants for
her."
Geoffrey heaved a sigh, deflating, but Cordelia had a merry glint in her eye.
"I  am  sorry  that  you  have  received  a  somewhat  unflattering  portrait  of  your
ancestors from me," Fess said gently.
"Unflattering,  indeed!  In  Father's  book  of  the  family  history,  Ruthven  appears  a
noble  and  generous  character,  renowned  for  his  building  and  beautifying.  Why  is
there no mention of his failings in that chapter?"
"Why, because Ruthven wrote it. And he did increase  the glory  of his family,  in a
way."
"In some way, mayhap." Magnus grinned wickedly. "But by  this time, had not the
other folk of Maxima gained summat of a sense aesthetic?"
"They  had,  Magnus,"  Fess  sighed.  "All  applied  for  patents  of  nobility,  and  all
received them—and most felt obliged to find some civic duty to do, as well as to gain
some cultural refinement."
Magnus was puzzled. "Dost mean all who dwelt on Maxima were noble?"
"According to themselves, yes—and almost all of them are now worthy of the term."
"Yet even in Ruthven's time, they did know a monstrosity when they saw one?"
"I fear they did," Fess sighed, "and yes,  they did look with contempt on Ruthven's
'masterpiece.' The ghost of Whitey redeemed him in their eyes, though."
"For that it brought to their minds the illustrious founder of our House?"
"No, because it was such great fun. Word of the apparition spread, of course, and
within a fortnight, everyone wished to be invited to stay the night at Castle d'Armand."
"And therefore did need to treat gently with Ruthven and his wife."
"Quite so, Cordelia, at least to their faces."
"And  each  guest  wished  to  stay  in  the  'haunted'  room,  I  warrant,"  Magnus  said,
grinning again.
"Yes,  and  there  was  considerable  fussing  when  they  found  someone  else  was
already there, fussing which descended upon the head of the majordomo."
"Thyself, of course."
"Correct, Gregory. Yet since it assured Ruthven that most of them would come back

for another weekend, it worked to the benefit of himself and Matilda."
"And thou didst need to stand watch o'er the bedroom door o' nights?"
"I fear so. Everyone who stayed there wished to be frightened, so of course they all
were, and it fell to me to calm them."
"And to intervene 'twixt them and Ruthven in the morning?"
"Generally, yes."
"But  that  could  not  last."  Cordelia  protested.  "Soon  or  late,  everyone  on  Maxima
must needs have stayed in the haunted chamber."
"Aye," Geoffrey agreed. "There are not so many people on but one asteroid, after
all."
"True, quite true—and I  was never so relieved  as  when  the  Viscount  tired  of  the
hologram, and I could deactivate it."
"Did not their children wish it to stay?"
"No;  they  quite  resented  it,  for  their  schoolmates  had  teased  them  about  it
unmercifully…"
"Jealousy, no doubt," Geoffrey muttered.
"Thou shouldst know, brother."
"…  AND  about  the  mansion,"  Fess  concluded,  overriding  Geoffrey's  response.
"When they grew, they made sure to gain a thorough grasp of all the arts, including
the study of aesthetics, and were much less concerned with social pretensions."
"Dost thou mean they became noble?"
"Well,  they  had  certainly  furthered  the  process.  In  fact,  they  eventually  gained
enough taste to see the amusing side of the holographic display,  and would now and
again ask to have the 'ghost' once more turned on for a while, then turned off again."
"Would we could so deal with the spectre within this castle," Gregory sighed.
"It would be pleasant, yes—though I suspect that these ghosts may be considerably
harder to eradicate. And you must remember that there may be an element of actual
danger involved."
"Dost thou truly think so?" Geoffrey perked up noticeably.
"I do. When your father first came to Gramarye, he was nearly frightened to death
by  the  ghosts  in  Castle  Loguire,  until  I  pointed  out  to  him  that  the  cause  was  a
subsonic harmonic of their moans, not their actual presence."
Magnus turned somber. "I misdoubt me an these ghosts will be a part with them."
"Aye, for those were nice ghosts," said Gregory, "as Father hath told it."
"Fair or foul, we shall vanquish them," Geoffrey said proudly. "The villain's not made
that can stand against us, an we stand together.''
"Remember that, please, Geoffrey—it  may become an important principle  in  your
lives."
"And now?" Gregory asked.
"Most especially now. Please be very careful,  children,  to be sure  you  are  never

alone, in Castle Foxcourt. Now back to work!  I  feel  my  storytelling  has  slowed  your
cleaning."
Chapter 7
« ^ »
Rod kept a weather eye cocked  on his children  the whole time, but all he could see
was that the four of them were working industriously. "Gwen, there's something wrong."
"How so, my husband?"
"They're  all  working  in  the  same  room,  without  bickering.  What's  more,  they're
keeping their noses to the grindstone, without having to be nagged."
"Oh." Gwen dimpled. " 'Tis not so amazing as that. Hast thou not heard what Fess
doth tell them?"
"Yeah, but that just makes it worse! When I was a kid, I went crazy when he tried to
give me a lecture on top of my having to do chores!"
"Thy children  are  not  thyself,"  Gwen  said,  but  her  tone  was  gentle,  sympathetic.
"And, too, these tales of thine homeland are like visions of a magical kingdom to them."
Rod frowned. "I  suppose that makes sense. If  people  in  a  high-tech  environment
used to read fairy tales for escape, then…"
"Even so," Gwen agreed. "In any event, husband, I pray thee, do not question our
good fortune."
"Or our good horse. Well,  so  long  as  there's  nothing  to  worry  about."  And  there
wasn't,  so  Rod  was  obviously  going  to  have  to  find  something  else  to  serve  the
purpose. He turned away, going back to sweeping the trash out from the corners, and
gradually working his way further  and further  into the available  shadows,  closer  and
closer  to  the  archway  to  the  stairs.  He  carefully  hadn't  mentioned  the  downstairs
armory. If it wasn't on the ground floor,  it was in the cellar—and Rod didn't want the
kids going anywhere near a real, authentic dungeon. Especially Magnus.
So he waited until Gwen had gathered them in the courtyard again, and was setting
out leftovers—then quietly slipped away to explore.
He was only halfway to the cellar door when he heard hooves on the floor behind
him. His heart jumped into his throat, and he spun  about,  then  relaxed  with  a  gusty
sigh. "You nearly gave me heart failure!"
"I would just as soon you did not explore the dungeon alone, Rod," Fess told him.
"I was trying to sneak off unnoticed."
"It is my duty to notice you, Rod. I promised your father."
"Yeah,  but  he  also  told  you  to  take  orders  from  me,  from  then  on."  Rod  turned
away, heading back toward the huge oaken doors that closed the spiral stair from the
Great Hall.

"I have obeyed all your orders, Rod."
"Yes,  but  not  always  their  intent.  Though  I  have  to  admit  I'm  glad  of  your
company—as long as the kids don't tumble to it, and follow us."
"Gwen had them well occupied."
"Yes; that's the advantage of the appetites of youth." Rod heaved at a door,  and it
fell off its hinges. In several pieces. He stared down at its remains, then said, "Remind
me to have that replaced."
"Yes, Rod."
"Immediately."
"To be sure."
They started down the curving stairway, and ran out of daylight pretty quickly. "It is
not safe to proceed further, Rod."
"Yeah, I  noticed."  Rod held  up  a  dead  branch.  "I  salvaged  something  out  of  the
detritus the wind blew in."
"Foresighted of you. Would you care for a spark?"
"Naw. It'd take too long." Rod glared at the end of the stick. After a minute, it burst
into flames.
"You have learned well."
"Just practice." Rod held up the torch. "Let's see what's down here."
They came out into a narrow corridor—and Rod stopped dead. "Fess—there's evil
here!"
"I am sure much wickedness was done here, yes."
"I mean now! I've never felt such malice!"
"I sense nothing, Rod."
Rod  looked  up  slowly  at  the  robot.  "Nothing  at  all?  Listen  on  human
thought-frequencies."
Fess stood still a moment, then said, "Nothing, Rod."
Rod nodded slowly. "Then it's completely psionic."
"It  would  seem  to  be  more  intense  than  poor  lighting  and  restrictive  architecture
could account for. Shall we leave?"
"Not until I'm sure what's here." Rod stepped ahead down the hall. "But I  think we'll
keep the kids out. I'll remind them what dungeons were for.''
"They  were  for  storing  foodstuffs,  Rod,  and  other  supplies  the  castle  needed,
especially those of military nature."
"It  wasn't  just  potatoes  they  stowed  down  here,  Fess."  Rod  steeled  himself,  then
thrust his torch through one of the open doorways and stepped in.
"What do you see?"
"Damp stone walls." Rod frowned. "And a  dirt  floor,  with  several  circular  mounds
about two feet across. And one open pit, the same size, with the dirt piled beside it."

"What is in the pit?"
"Apples. Or  their  mummies,  anyway."  Rod  stepped  back  into  the  hall.  "I  give  in.
They did keep stores down here."
"Shall we forego the rest of the exploration, then?"
"Not until I've seen the whole thing. Come on."
There were six open doorways, one holding bundles of dust that might once have
been arrows, another holding casks, and so on.
The the pool of torchlight showed doors.
Rod stopped, then stepped ahead with determination, but with his heart in his throat.
The  doors  had  iron  gratings  in  them,  about  a  foot  square.  Rod  thrust  his  torch
through, but saw only empty shackles. He pulled the branch back out with a sigh  of
relief.
"Empty, Rod?"
"Yes, thank Heaven. Come on."
The  final  two  doors  showed  dim  light  filtering  down.  "Must  be  at  the  side  of  the
keep."  In  spite  of  the  light,  the  feeling  of  evil  intensified.  Rod  peered  through  the
left-hand grating. His jaw hardened.
"What do you see?" Fess asked.
"I can recognize a few items," Rod answered. "There's a rack, and I'm pretty sure
the coffin thing is an Iron Maiden."
"The torture chamber."
"Off-limits, especially for Magnus." Rod turned away. "Come on, let's go back."
"But you haven't investigated the last chamber, Rod."
"And I'm not going to, either—at least, not until after lunch. I'm pretty sure what I'm
going to find there."
"What is that, Rod?"
"Let's  just  say  that,  if  you're  going  to  have  a  torture  chamber  for  extracting
information, you're going to keep the raw material close at hand—and apples aren't the
only things that leave mummies."
 
 
After lunch, they went back to cleaning. Gwen and the kids set to work on the Great
Hall, and Rod took  the  basement.  He  was  right  about  the  remaining  cell—and  even
though it was two hundred years old, he handled what he found there with pity  as he
rolled it in their oldest blanket and set it on Fess's saddle for its last trip. He dug a deep
hole far down the slope from the castle, and lowered the blanket down. As he started to
throw the dirt back in, Fess said, "He was probably a Christian, Rod."
"She, I think."
"What evidence have you?" The robot sounded puzzled. "There is no clothing left,
after all these years."

"Not even a scrap—but if that was a man, he had the broadest pelvis I've ever seen
on a male. And as to his religion, you're probably right, and I'll ask Father Boquilva to
come along on our next trip and say the funeral service."
"I wish you would say a few words now, Rod."
Rod looked up at the horse-head with a frown. "Odd of  you  to  be  so  sentimental
about someone you never knew."
"Humor me," the horse suggested.
Well, if  there was one thing Fess was never  without,  it  was  a  reason.  Rod  didn't
ask—he just took the advice, and recited  as much of the Twenty-Third Psalm  as  he
could remember, added a few snatches from Ecclesiastes, and ended with a verse of
the Dies Irae. Finally, he asked eternal rest and light everlasting for  the soul that had
inhabited the pitiful remains, and started shoveling.
On the way back, he asked, "Any particular reason why you wanted that?"
"Yes, Rod—to aid the spirit's rest."
Rod frowned. "You don't believe the ghost would come walking back in the middle of
the night, do you?"
"I would not," Fess said slowly, "declare anything impossible, on Gramarye."
 
 
Rod tramped back in across the drawbridge, carefully avoiding the missing planks,
crossed the courtyard, and went into the keep.
He had a pleasant surprise. He could scarcely believe it was the same room. There
wasn't a speck of trash anywhere to be seen, and Gregory was just finishing  dusting
the last of the cobwebs out of the corners, high in the air, floating up near the ceiling.
Their  bedrolls  were  spread  over  mounds  of  pine  boughs,  and  Cordelia  was  laying
bowls and spoons around the edge of a picnic cloth. Magnus, Geoffrey, and Gregory
were unloading bundles of  logs  and  sticks  next  to  the  fireplace,  where  their  mother
stood  over  the  great  hearth,  face  lit  by  the  flames  of  a  small  fire  as  she  tasted
something in a pot that hung from a crane. She twitched her nose, unsatisfied, put the
cover back on, and pushed the cauldron back over the flames.
"Amazing! How did you manage this in only two hours?" Then  Rod  answered  his
own question. "No, of course—what's wrong with me? This is the kind of situation that
does justify using magic, doesn't it?"
"Oh, nay,  Papa!" Gregory said, eyes wide. "Such spirits  as do slumber here,  we
have no wish to wake, an we can avoid it."
"Then how did you manage it?"
"With  good, hard work," Gwen answered, with  some  asperity,  "though  I  will  own,
'twas somewhat faster to think at the trash, and make it fly  itself out the window. Yet
there was still a deal of sweeping and  hauling  to  do,  and  thy  children  have  labored
mightily."
"As their mother has, I'm sure." Rod came and sat down by the fire. "You're going
to make me feel as though I haven't done my share."
Gwen shuddered. "Nay. I think the chore thou hast done, was one none of us would

have wished—though I think I should have stood by thee the while."
"It wasn't fit for you to see," Rod answered, "and Fess was company enough."
"Aye."  Cordelia looked up. "He hath great experience of  the  surprises  in  castles,
hath he not?"
"Not in the sense you mean, Cordelia," Fess answered. "However, as supervisor of
the construction robots that built each stage of Castle d'Armand—I became somewhat
conversant with the making and mending of castles."
"As  well  thou  shouldst  be,  in  light  of  all  that  Count  Ruthven  made  thee  do!  Yet
wherefore was he so churlish in his manner?"
Fess was silent. Rod had to explain, "It's called inbreeding,  Cordelia—and since  it
could be construed as an insult to the family, Fess won't say anything about it."
"Not e'en an I ask him the question direct?"
"No—he'll just refer you to me. Count yourself  referred,"  Rod turned to Fess. "Tell
them what inbreeding is, would you?"
Fess  rasped  a  sigh  of  white  noise.  "It  occurs  when  people  who  are  too  closely
related, have children, Cordelia."
"Thou dost speak of the law which saith first cousins may not wed?"
"Yes, and that second cousins should not. Oh, do not mistake me—when  such  a
marriage occasionally occurs, it will not always result in great harm. But if first cousins
marry first cousins for three or four generations, problems are likely to occur."
Cordelia asked. "Of what manner of problems dost thou speak?"
"Anything you can think of, Cordelia." Out of the corner of his eye, Rod was aware
of Gregory listening, wide-eyed. "Birth defects of all sorts. Some of them don't show up
until later in life, though—anything from a person being born without a limb, or with a
weak heart, to having low ability to heal. One such boy was perfectly  normal in every
way—until he broke his legs, and they never healed properly, and wouldn't grow along
with the rest of him."
"How horrible!"
"But the problems we're thinking of in your  ancestor's case,  were problems of the
mind."
Cordelia lifted her head as understanding came. She turned to Fess with a beatific
smile. "Such as behaving like a churl?"
"Well, that, too," Fell admitted, "though in Ruthven's case,  I  fear  another aspect of
inbreeding may have become obvious."
"He's  talking  about  a  drop  in  intelligence,"  Rod  explained.  "Not  always,  mind
you—but even now and then is bad enough."
Magnus spoke up. "Dost mean we are heir to all these ills?"
"Oh, you kids are safe, thanks to your mother."
"Aye, for that I married thee."
"Well, true, there was some inbreeding on your side, too," Rod said, with a glance
at  his  collection  of  espers,  "but  you  had  the  good  sense  to  marry  me.  I  mean,

someone from outside the gene pool."
"Thou hadst first said it best."
"Well,  thanks.  Of  course,  you  had  a  bit  bigger  pool;  there  were  a  few  hundred
thousand of you. But the good citizens of Maxima all stem from thirty-two-thousand-odd
ancestors, and have been cheerfully marrying each other for five hundred years."
"Then all must have some aspect of this inbreeding," Cordelia inferred.
"Yes, even if it only shows up as occasional ugliness—or not so occasional, in the
case of a good many of my—" Rod coughed into his fist, "—female compatriots."
"Yet surely this was not true of all the d'Armands!"
"Fortunately, it only became fully evident in Ruthven's case," Fess agreed. "Both his
sons, as I have told you, reacted to his excesses by  becoming much more reserved,
and  cultivating  their  artistic  sensibilities—though,  I  must  admit,  neither  was
extraordinarily high in mental capacity."
"Not really necessary." Rod shook his head. "What counts is the goodness of the
person.  We  don't  all  have  to  be  geniuses."  He  noticed  Gregory's  eyes  suddenly
glazing, and knew his words were sinking in where they were needed the most.
"And their children?" Cordelia prompted.
"They were noble in every sense of the word, Cordelia,"  said Fess, "and most  of
your  ancestors  have  deserved  the  honorific.  Some  were  frighteningly  bright,  some
were amazingly simple, and most were more intelligent than they needed to be. Your
grandfather was a most excellent gentleman, a truly good human being, intelligent and
sensitive, in addition to being highly responsible, and caring  deeply for  his wife  and
children. It was an honor to serve him."
"Was he truly such a paragon?" Geoffrey seemed surprised.
"He was indeed."
"Why then, 'tis no wonder that our father is so princely  a man." Magnus turned to
Rod with a glint in his eye. "Or was it simply that thou wast reared in a castle?"
"I wasn't."
The children stared in surprise.
Then Gregory coughed and said, "We  had thought thou wast reared in the Castle
d'Armand, of which we have spoken."
Rod shook his head, smiling. "Not so, kids. Your grandfather was the second son of
the current Count—and I'm his second son."
"The Count's eldest son inherited the title," Fess explained, "and the castle with it."
"They were Viscounts, though."  Gregory  corrected,  "Thou  didst  say  so  explicitly,
Fess."
"Yes, Gregory, but the third Lord d'Armand so far surpassed his grandfather that he
was able to be of major service to Maxima, in its relations with Terra, and was therefore
created Count. Your grandfather could thus be given the rank of Viscount, and a third
of the family estates."
"Then where didst thou grow, Papa?" Cordelia asked.

"We  grew  up  in  the  Grange,  dear—just  a  big  house,  but  roomy  enough  for  my
parents, my brother, and my sister. And, of course, for me."
"Your  father  somewhat  understates  the  issue,"  Fess  advised  the  children.  "The
house had twenty-two rooms, and most of them were quite large."
"Still, 'twas not a castle." Cordelia was severely disappointed.
"Oh,  it  was  adequate."  Rod  leaned  back,  stretching.  "More  than  adequate,  in
fact—but only because Grandpa was living with us."
"Thy father?" Magnus stared. "Was he not the Viscount?"
"No, my grandfather," Rod amplified.
"Then he was the Count himself." Geoffrey was confused. "Wherefore did he live in
the lesser house?"
"He, ah, found it more congenial," Rod explained.
"Your  father  understates  again,"  Fess  assured  the  children.  "Inbreeding  and
recessive genes caught up with my old master in his seventy-third year…"
"Also  the  realization  that  he  was  never  going  to  get  away  from  Maxima,"  Rod
reminded. "He finally admitted that to himself.''
"That is mere conjecture, Rod, bordering on slander," Fess stated.
"It's conjecture based on all the advice he gave me, mostly to leave home as soon
as I grew up."
"He did seem to regret  his  youthful  decision  to  stay  and  take  care  of  the  family
business," Fess admitted, "though that was also his responsibility. He was, after all, the
heir."
"And how did these regrets affect him?" Magnus asked.
"He became—somewhat foolish," Fess answered.
Geoffrey cocked his head to the side. "Thou dost mean he went mad."
"Most would say that," Fess agreed. "Certainly,  from his conversation, he was no
longer fully aware of the real world, and had escaped into a fantasy realm of his own
devising. He spoke of knights and fair maidens, of wizards and dragons. He believed
himself to be chronicler of a royal court in a fantastic land."
"He was lots of fun to be with, though," Rod said quickly.
"Unless he decided that you were a monster of some sort," Fess demurred.
Rod shrugged. "Even there, he had very good judgement. After all, the Duchess of
Malcasa was an old dragon."
"What did he do to her?" Geoffrey asked, eyes wide.
"Oh, nothing. Never hurt a soul, mostly because Fess was always there. That's why
his successor gave us Fess, along with the Grange."
"There was also some mention of being 'outmoded' and some claim, on the part of
his wife, that the only antiques that graced a house were furniture," Fess said darkly.
"Which applied as much to Grandpa as it did to you," Rod said quickly, "and I think
you've disproved the 'outmoded' part a few hundred times since then. Starting as soon

as  the  two  of  you  moved  in,  in  fact—you  became  very  good  at  calming  Grandpa
down."
"I merely accorded him the respect that was due him, Rod."
"Yeah, and couched everything in the terms he was using." Rod turned back to the
children. "Me, I thought it was a fun game. What was I—six? So if he said a bush was
an ogre, I was ready to play along."
"Thou didst take pleasure in his company, then?"
"Oh, yes," Rod said softly. "Always."
"What was this fantastic land he did see?"
"The kingdom of Granclarte," Rod sighed, gazing off  into the years  of a childhood
made magical by a childish old man. "I used to sit and listen to him for hours."
"Well, for half-hours," Fess amended, "though in a child's time-sense, the tales must
have seemed longer."
"Longer?  They  never  ended!"  Rod  turned  back  to  the  children.  "He  wrote  some
excellent stories in the process. They became instant best-sellers, after he died."
"After?" Cordelia asked. "Wherefore not whiles he lived?"
"He would not publish them," Fess explained. "He was quite insistent on the point. It
was perfectly compatible with his delusion, I assure you. He was writing for the glory of
the Courts of Granclarte, not for his own aggrandizement.
"Mad as a hatter," Rod sighed, "but a wonderful old man." He gazed off into space,
into the years of his childhood. "I used to sit on the floor in his study, listening to him
tell me about the wonderful adventures of the knight Beaubras and his  quest  for  the
Rainbow Crystal.  Of course,  the voicewriter was picking  up his every word.  When  I
grew up, I found out that, after the Nanny-bot took me off to tuck me in, he'd sit up and
edit it all. But it was wonderful to hear."
"What was the Rainbow Crystal?" Gregory demanded.
"In  the  story,  it  was  sort  of  a  master-key,"  Rod  explained.  "It  could  tie  all  the
different  sorts  of  magic  together,  uniting  them  to  confound  the  evil  sorcerer
Maumains."
He smiled down at them. "Of course, in the real world, it was the big prism that hung
in the middle of my mother's chandelier—but I liked it better his way."
"Aye," Cordelia breathed. "When may we read his books?"
"As  soon  as  I  can  find  a  copy,  dear.  Unfortunately,  I  left  them  all  about  thirty
light-years back."
Fess said nothing, but Gregory eyed him speculatively.
"Oh, why did he not endure till we could meet him!" Cordelia cried.
"I'm sure he wanted to," Rod sighed, "but he had a prior  engagement. I  hope  he
found Granclarte as he ascended. The Count was good enough to let us stay on in the
Grange  after  he  died,  though—it  was  wrenching  enough  to  be  suddenly  without
Grandpa. Even made it  pretty  clear  that  my  older  brother  Richard  would  inherit  the
place when Dad passes on, in his turn."
Magnus frowned. "And what wilt thou inherit?"

"Nothing." Rod smiled sadly. "There's nothing left over. All the houses are taken by
my cousins, and all the family land, too—if you can call bare rock 'land.' Oh, there'll be
a bit of money from my father—a goodly bit; he contributed quite a few designs to the
family business, and invested the proceeds well and wisely, so he has made quite a
sum on his own. But that's all."
"You did have an option, Rod," Fess reminded. "You could have taken a position in
d'Armand Automatons, Ltd., and doubtless done quite well."
"Yeah, but a poor relation is a poor relation, no matter how cleverly it's disguised."
Rod made a face. "Besides, Maxima was… boring."
"Oh, truly?" Magnus perked up. "In what way was it boring?"
Rod glanced at Fess out of the corner of his eye. Magnus caught it, and turned to
the robot. "Wilt thou not tell me, Fess?"
"We have spoken of this before,"  Fess said, somewhat severely. "I  will not betray
your father's confidences."
Rod did a rapid  mental balancing act.  He  and  Fess  had  managed  to  distract  the
children,  quite  successfully,  from  their  current,  rather  grim,  surroundings.  He
compared  the  advantages  of  continuing  that  distraction,  with  the  disadvantages  of
letting their minds return to the haunted castle around them, and made his decision.
"Oh, go ahead and tell them!" He leaned back. "After all, there's nothing in my past that
I'm really ashamed of. A bit embarrassed, maybe, but not really ashamed."
"As you will have it, Rod," Fess sighed, and Rod sat back to listen as the tale grew
more and more lurid, and his ears grew more and more red.
Chapter 8
« ^ »
"Look, Fess, just call me 'Rod' when we're alone. I know you can do it!"
"I  cannot,  sir  master  boss."  Fess  was  looking  better  these  days—he  had  gone
through two body changes and an overhaul. He fairly  gleamed with a metallic shine,
and his arms and legs were much fuller than the pipestems he had worn when he first
came to Maxima. They had to be—they were the storage places for  his  spares  and
tools, now. His torso had been enlarged enough to hold his computer/brain,  and  his
"head" had consequently been reduced to a much more anthropoid size and form. He
was  virtually  a  metal  android  now,  albeit  a  somewhat  barrel-chested  one.  "I  cannot
change my terms of address," he explained, "unless my owner issues the command."
"And Dad won't do it,  because he has too much respect for  his.  ancestors."  Rod
shook  his  head  and  went  back  to  sorting  through  his  revolving  closet.  "One  more
reason why I need to get off this provincial backwater of a planetoid.''
"I cannot understand your preoccupation with leaving, young master."
"Yeah, well, if I could have gone to college on Terra, as Cousin Rupert did, maybe I
wouldn't be quite so antsy. But when you have to stay here on Maxima and let college

come to you, via comm screen, and the only place you've ever visited is Ceres, you
start developing a huge hankering to see some of what you're learning all about."
"Such feelings are consistent with my knowledge of the juvenile male of the species,
Rod. But if you wish to leave home, why not ask your father's permission?"
"Oh, come on, Fess. If  he could afford  to send me to  Terra  and  put  me  through
college, he would have!"
"The support I had in mind was moral, not financial."
"He wouldn't give it, Fess. He'd think I was crazy, to go jaunting off into nowhere on
a tramp freighter. He'd also be panicked out of his mind with worry."
"I think you may underestimate your father, boss master sahib."
"Are  you  kidding?  It'd  be  one  thing  if  it  had  never  crossed  his  mind  to  get  off
Maxima when he was young—but it's entirely another, knowing that he actively decided
against it!"
"You cannot know what your  father's  thoughts  were  when  he  was  young,  master
boss raj."
"Fess, you remember how Grandpa used to tell me, every few weeks, that as soon
as I was old enough, I should leave Maxima?"
"You did take into account that your grandfather was no longer of sound mind, did
you not, young effendi?"
"Yeah, and now I know what drove him around the bend! Every time he told me to
go, he reminded me that he'd given that same advice to Dad."
"Surely he had always had too great a sense of responsibility  to  act  so  selfishly,
young master batyushka."
"Would it have done him so much harm, as long as he was home before Grandpa
went off the tracks? Especially since he's spent the rest of his life just hanging around
on this back patch of the estate, taking care  of Grandpa and us, and waiting, just in
case something happened to both Uncle Despard and Cousin Rupert—which it never
has."
"May it never!" But your father's self-sacrifice should be a shining example to you,
young master baas!"
"Oh, absolutely blinding—and I'm going to make damn sure it doesn't happen to me!
That  freighter  from  Mars  is  in,  and  the  captain  says  they  can  use  another  hand.
They're slipping orbit at midnight, outbound for Triton—and I'm going to be with them!
Make sure my bag gets to the spaceport by 2300, Fess."
"As you wish, very young master," Fess sighed. ''Meanwhile, there is still a matter of
tonight's ball. If you are not there, questions will be asked."
"Don't I know it, though! Why do you think I'm going? Besides, if  I'm out at a ball,
nobody will expect me till way after midnight… Ah, there!" Out of the closet, Rod pulled
a set of frills  with buttonholes. He slipped  it  on  over  his  singlet.  "Yuck!  I  like  formal
shirts, but they're way overdone this year!"
"They lend you a look of elegance, young master boss."
"Elegance have long trunks, Fess—and that's what I need to carry these things in. I

just wish I could get out of going to this one last ball."
The robot emitted the burst of white noise that was its equivalent of a sigh. "You may
counteract the boredom by reminding yourself that it will be the last one you need ever
attend, Rod. Still, some of the young ladies have truly wonderful hearts…"
"And truly deplorable looks, with faces  like  mashed  potatoes.  Well,  no,  I'm  being
unfair. Strike the 'mashed.' "
"But surely their figures excite your interest."
"Who  would  know,  under  all  the  drapery  they  have  to  wear  to  these  things?
Probably just as well, too." Rod shuddered. "Not to mention their minds. I  mean, the
inbreeding here is really beginning to show."
The robot forbore mentioning that Rod himself might be something of an example. It
wasn't really true, and besides, it would have been a cheap shot. "I  must urge you to
retain  your  politeness,  young  master  sahib.  There  is  no  reason  to  visit  your  own
torments on the young ladies."
"Yeah, you're right," Rod sighed. "It's not their fault that they're unattractive, or that
I'm a misfit who can't settle down and have a good time raising  a family and holding
down a job, a maverick who needs adventure! Excitement! Independence!" His  eyes
sparkled  and  gleamed.  "That's  the  life  for  me—out  on  my  own!  Bound  to  no  one!
Rugged individualism! Untrammeled! Self-reliant!" He sighed with a happy smile, then
gave his head a shake and turned to let the robot push studs into his shirt.  "Pack my
bag for me, will you, Fess?"
 
 
The ball was every bit as boring as Rod expected it to be. Not that he disliked the
starched  collar  or  the  swallow-tailed  coat;  he  always  got  a  kick  out  of  being  in
costume—it made him stand a little taller, and put a spring in his step. He felt like a
character out of a nineteenth-century play in his white tie and tails.
And it wasn't the atmosphere of the ball, either. Rod had a bent for the fantastic, had
had  it  for  all  of  his  twenty-one  years,  and  had  never  quite  outgrown  his  childhood
games  of  "Let's  Pretend."  In  fact,  he  was  doing  very  well  in  the  Maxima  Amateur
Theater Society and the Light Opera Association of Maxima. No, in terms of stepping
into character, he was right at home.
And it wasn't  even  that  the  dances  were  too  sedate—Rod  enjoyed  the  waltz  and
even the minuet; they went along with the acting. No, it was the company—the simple
fact  that  there  was  no  one  else  there  who  was  interesting  to  talk  to,  and  certainly
nobody female who was good-looking.
"Oh, I love your costume!" Lady Matilda Bolwheel chirped.
"I'm glad you do," Rod murmured. She damned well had better like it,  since  every
man in the place was wearing a variation on it. "And your dress is very fetching."  He
gallantly forbore to mention what it would fetch.
"Why,  thank  you."  She  turned  coyly  half-away,  letting  her  eyelashes  droop,
reminding Rod of a 3DT clip of a cow his tutor had shown him when he was ten.
But she was  obviously  angling  for  him  to  ask  her  for  a  dance,  and  there  wasn't
much else to do. With a mental sigh, he braced himself and said, "Shall we dance?"

She blossomed into radiance. "Why, I'd be delighted!"
And off they went, in a stately whirl of crinoline and swallow-tails.
When the dance was over, though, Matilda kept  firm  hold  of  Rod's  arm,  with  the
clear  intention  of  monopolizing  him  for  the  evening.  "Oh,  do  let's  go  into  dinner
together, Rodney!"
"Uh, well, I've been on a diet lately…"
"Ah, there you are,  Rodney!" Lady Mulhearn, his hostess, came sailing up  like  a
square-rigged galleon. "How naughty of you to hide with Matilda, when you know we
must have you circulate! You do know Lady Jenine, don't you?"
The  question  was  purely  rhetorical;  everybody  knew  everybody  else  on  Maxima;
there were only three hundred thousand of them, and only a  few  thousand  in  Rod's
generation. "Hi, milady." Rod bowed, thankful that the issue  of  Matilda  had  been,  at
least temporarily, squelched.
"My pleasure, sir."  Jenine dropped a curtsy.  She had the golden complexion  that
comes from the mingling of all Terra's races,  as had most of the people on Maxima.
Rod  himself  was  considerably  paler  than  the  norm,  but  he  tanned  well.  He  was  a
throwback  in  other  ways,  too.  "There's  a  new  dance  out,"  he  ventured.  "Have  you
heard of the gavotte?"
"Oh, I just love it! Shall we prance?"
The line would have been a hopeful sign, if Rod hadn't heard it before in the same
3DT historical that had brought back the gavotte. He turned to make his apologies to
Matilda,  but  Lady  Mulhearn  was  already  doing  it  for  him.  "You  mustn't  be  selfish,
Tildy… No, do go away, Rodney, there's a good boy… After all, when there are so few
eligible bachelors, young ladies must learn to share."
The pout was beginning as Rod led Jenine out to gallop.
"And to think this all came from a 3DT epic!"  Jenine burbled as she  bobbed  and
weaved. "Didn't you just love Hamlish Hofernung as Louis XV?"
"He lived up to his nickname, that's for sure." Inwardly, Rod sighed. He was in for a
good ten minutes of discussion of nothing but the latest tank stars and their exploits. It
wasn't that epics  were the only thing Jenine  was  interested  in—it  was  just  that  they
were  the  only  topic  she  knew  anything  about.  At  least  she  had  a  modicum  of  wit,
though—or witty lines, provided she'd heard them from an actor.
Dinner surpassed the proverbial bore crashing;  it  didn't  even  leave  any  splinters.
Rod had learned how to smile on cue at a very young age; he and  his  brother  had
practiced  making  faces  in  the  mirror,  so  he  was  admirably  suited  to  being  a  good
conversationalist. He had perfected the trick  of mental activity on two levels, thinking
about something interesting with his forebrain  while his  speech  and  hearing  centers
were routed together on automatic, ears picking up cues that his mouth responded to
by delivering up the appropriate noncommittal responses. "Is that so?"
"You don't mean it!"
"You don't say…" There were even places for "Uh-huh," and "Yes," and "I  thought
so myself." But never, of course,  for  "No," or "I  don't agree";  those might take some
explanation, and actually involve saying something.
Officially, he had taken Lady Heloise into dinner; she was plain as a prairie, but she

at least had a brain,  and could comment on the day's news,  if  nothing  else.  But  by
some  strange  fluke,  he  had  Lady  Morwenna  on  his  other  side,  and  Lady  Laetitia
across the table. The result was a matter of trying to respond to three conversations at
once, since none of the girls was willing to wait for either of the others to stop talking
before she directed another comment at Rod. He actually had to pay attention to what
they were saying, which ruined all the fun—not that it was in any great shape to begin
with. Why they couldn't aim their ramblings at their own dinner companions, Rod didn't
know—though it might have had something to do with the gentlemen in question being
half again as old as themselves. But they had much better prospects than Rod; after
all, some money is better than none, isn't it?
Which  led  to  the  inescapable  conclusion  that  Rod  wasn't  the  kind  of  man  these
young ladies intended to marry  (or  that their mamas intended for  them),  but  that  he
was the kind they wanted to dance and flirt with.
Why me? It certainly couldn't have been his looks.
Maybe  his  conversation.  In  a  desperate  attempt  to  divert  attention  away  from
himself, he pointed his nose at Marquis Msimangu, Lady  Laetitia's  escort.  "I  hear  a
rumor that you've designed a new robot, milord."
"Why, yes, actually." Hugo came alive with surprise that anybody should be talking
to him. "Still full of bugs, of course, but looks as though the damned thing may actually
work."
Rod paused a fraction  of a second, to let one  of  the  young  ladies  ask  the  polite
follow-up, but they were all looking as though the lemon in their tea was getting to them.
"What kind is it?"
"Oh, a household 'bot. It'll do all the usual—you know, cook, clean, dust, pick up…"
Rod frowned. "Usual, yes. What's the new part?"
"Oh, it makes toast. For those who like  their  grilled  bread  truly  fresh—it  has  two
slots in its chest, and makes the toast right there, by your bed."
"A startling innovation," Rod murmured, picturing himself sitting up in bed and being
hit in the eye by two slices of toast. "Really wakes you up in the morning."
Lady Morwenna ostentatiously turned aside and straightened in "surprise."
"Oh! Lady Michelle is talking about that new card  game from Terra!"  She turned a
dazzling smile back toward Rod. "You know, the one you can play without a calculator
to hand?"
Rod still couldn't understand why people needed special calculators for  bridge and
canasta—but then, he had never taken card  games seriously enough  to  try  to  keep
track of which cards had been played. "Really? How's it work?"
"Oh, the object of the game is to match cards by number," Lady Laetitia spoke up,
oblivious to Morwenna's start and glare—it had been her topic!  And she took it back.
"Yes, you ask the player to your left, 'Have you any eights?' or some such, and if they
have, they must give them to you."
"Intricate," Rod murmured. "What if they don't have any?"
"Why, then they say, 'Go fish!' and you search through the extras."
"It's a great deal of fun," Lady Heloise said, delighted to find  something she could

talk about. "Frees you from trying to think about the cards, and lets you pay attention
to the play."
"Like a drama where the characters are very simple?"
"Oh,  you've  seen  the  new  Notty  Alent  romance!"  Laetitia  gushed.  "Isn't  she  just
splendid as Lady Carstairs!"
"And  that  wonderfully  decrepit  house  she's  brought  into,  as  governess!"  said
Morwenna. "What a  comedown  for  the  poor  thing—a  lady  born,  and  finding  all  the
money gone when her father dies." A tear glistened at the corner  of her eye.  All the
other ladies were silent, too, contemplating  the  awful  spectacle  of  actually  having  to
earn their own livings.
Rod cleared his throat, aware that reality should never intrude at a ball. "Your gown
is striking, Laetitia." In fact, it almost struck out. "I don't believe I've ever seen that cut
before."
"Why,  thank  you!"  Laetitia  flushed  with  pleasure,  and  Morwenna  cooed,  "She
reached Monsieur Valdez first!"
"Really, Titia, you were quite precipitate," Heloise scolded. "I swear you scarcely let
the poor man step off the boarding ramp before you were on him!"
"  'She  who  hesitates  is  lost,'  "  Laetitia  quoted,  looking  immensely  pleased  with
herself.
"Mine  will  be  done  for  Thursday's  ball,  though,  so  don't  think  you'll  keep  the
advantage, Tish."
Laetitia sat back with a pinfeather smile. "A genuine original by an authentic Terran
couturier."
Well,  that  explained  it.  Rod  had  heard  about  the  new  arrival,  and  had  been  so
surprised that a Terran designer would actually choose to come to Maxima, that he had
asked Fess for  a  brief  on  the  man.  The  robot  had  run  through  the  last  six  months'
news, and given him the not-so-startling information that  Monsieur  Valdez  was  more
widely known by his Terran trade name of Monsieur Iberien. That put the whole thing in
perspective. Rod remembered, from his weekly newsfeeds, that Monsieur Iberien  had
struck out on his own only two years ago, after ten years' apprenticeship in the House
of  Lachenoir.  He  had  obtained  backers,  launched  his  first  fall  line,  garnered
unanimous  critical  censure,  obtained  absolutely  no  orders  except  one  from  a
costermonger who wanted something special for his wife, and had gone spectacularly
bankrupt. "I understand he has a novel theory as to what constitutes art."
"Yes,  it  does  seem  singular."  Sir  Gilman,  on  Morwenna's  other  side,  frowned.
"Something about the feeling you get, you know, when you look into a can of worms."
The ladies paled and Rod said quickly, "Well, that was only an example. He says art
consists  entirely  in  arousing  strong  emotional  responses,  and  the  nature  of  the
response doesn't matter."
"I certainly receive a great emotional response from looking at your dress, Laetitia,"
Morwenna  purred.  Laetitia  flushed  angrily,  but  Rod  said,  "Yes,  it's  called  envy."
Actually,  he  sympathized  with  Morwenna.  The  dress  had  only  a  touch  of  Monsieur
Iberien's  theory  left  in  it—the  emotion  it  tried  to  arouse  was  surprise,  by  use  of
fluorescent colors and patterns of dots running counter to the stripes, and it certainly

enhanced  Laetitia's  appearance,  by  distracting  attention  from  her  face.  Rod
speculated that Monsieur Iberien might do very well here, after all, as long as he could
restrain his artistic impulses and try to give the ladies what would help them. Apparently
he  had  really  let  himself  go,  on  Terra,  and  no  woman  was  terribly  interested  that
season in wearing a dress full of fishbait.  His fall collection had become a matter of
passing the hat in November; the other designers had pooled their resources and paid
him to leave Terra, before he brought the whole fashion industry  crashing  down. He
had been able to settle his debts, but had arrived on Maxima almost destitute.
Not for  long, though. The ladies of Maxima wouldn't really care  what  their  clothes
looked like, as long as they were made by a genuine Terran designer—and his spirits
might revive enough to start giving expression to his notion of art again. Rod decided
that, no matter what happened to him aboard that freighter,  he was not coming back
for the next season.
 
 
The clock chimed 2300, and Rod, with a start, realized that Fess would be arriving
at the spaceport with Rod's duffel bag. He gritted his teeth, forced  a smile, and kept
dancing, and the "Minute Waltz" seemed to last an hour. But it finally ended; he bowed
to his partner. "Forgive me, milady, but I must attend to an urgent matter."
"Certainly not so urgent as all that!"
"Didn't you hear how they were playing? I'm sorry, but I really have to step out for a
moment." He turned away, hurrying.
He almost made it to the door before an elbow-glove hooked out to snag him, with a
hand  inside  it.  The  hand  tightened,  and  Rod's  eyes  bulged;  she'd  hit  a  pressure
point—accidentally, surely. He turned, forced a sickly grin. "It's been a wonderful ball,
Lady Mulhearn."
"Oh,  but  it's  scarcely  begun!"  Lady  Mulhearn  turned  back  toward  the  ballroom,
keeping a firm hold on his arm. "Surely  you can't leave yet.  Your dear mother would
think my soiree a crashing bore, if you were home before three."
"I wouldn't think of it! I'll find a quiet bistro."
"Excellent!  I  have  one  in  the  Florida  room.  Or  perhaps  you  wish  to  join  the
gentlemen at cards."
Somehow, Rod wasn't in the mood for five-card draw. "Really, milady—I have to be
in before midnight."
"Posh and poppycock!  Your parents would be ashamed  of  you,  if  you  didn't  last
past one!"
"But I  have a headache. Absolutely splitting, I  tell you.  It's a  sinus  vacuum!  It's  a
migraine! It's…"
"Stuff and nonsense!" Lady Mulhearn turned to the nearest robot. "An analgesic for
the young gentleman, Fadey!"
The robot pressed a button at its waist; two pills fell into its hand. It held them out to
Rod  as  it  popped  open  its  chestplate  and  pressed  a  button.  Water  gushed,  then
stopped, and it took out a foaming glass.

Rod gulped the pills and reached for the water. He almost spat it out; it wasn't water,
it was a potion. "Lady Mulhearn, please…"
"You'll be right as rain in two shakes." To emphasize the point," Milady shook him.
"Now, a mild card game in dim lighting, and you'll feel fine."
"But I have to run home! My cactus plant needs me!"
"What for?"
"I forgot to water it before I left…"
"No matter; you can call your robot and have him do it. Fadey!"
The robot snapped off  its hand and held it out. The thumb held an earphone;  the
forefinger had a mike.
Rod waved away the handset,  feeling  a  surge  of  panic  at  the  reminder  of  Fess.
"Lady Mulhearn, my deepest apologies, but I really must  leave now! Any longer, and
it'll be too late!"
"Too late?" the lady demanded. "Too late for what?"
"To find my glass slipper!" Rod cried,  twisting his arm free  and all but running for
the door.
He gained the  hatchway  and  stepped  into  his  car  with  relief.  Out  with  ignominy,
maybe—but out!
 
 
He saw the freighter's lander alone, still joined to the terminal by the boarding tunnel.
Well,  not  quite  alone—just  inside  the  clear  plastic  of  the  tunnel  stood  a  solitary,
gleaming figure, a duffel bag slung over its shoulder.
"Good old Fess! Faithful to the end!" Rod brought  the  car  in  right  beside  the  old
family robot, pressed the button that matched position  and  sealed  lock  to  lock,  then
jumped to the hatch and pressed the pressure plate. The ramp checked for  pressure
and opened, and Rod leaped out. "Thanks,  Fess!"  He  caught  the  duffel  bag  off  the
robot's shoulder.
"Lander  for  freighter  Murray  Rain  will  lift  off  in  five,"  the  nearest  loudspeaker
announced in a brazen voice.
Five  what?  Rod  wondered,  then  noticed  what  Fess  held  on  his  other  arm.  He
dropped the duffel,  ripped off  his  coat  and  tossed  it  to  Fess,  followed  by  his  frilled
front. He grabbed the loose broadcloth shirt off  Fess's  other  arm,  tugged  it  on,  and
reached for the jacket—then froze,  as he realized who was standing in the shadows
just behind Fess.
The Viscount stepped forward into the light with a gentle smile. "You could at least
have told me, son."
"Who did?" Rod snapped out of his trance with a glare at Fess.
"I must fulfill my duty to my master, Rod," the robot said, with a tone of apology.
"Yes, he really must; that's how he's made," the Viscount said. "Don't blame  him,
son; his prime loyalty is to me; he doesn't have any choice  but to do as his program
dictates, and he knew I'd want to know you were leaving."

"Fess, I can never trust you again!"
"Oh, of course you can, son—when you're his owner. Then, he'll be as fanatically
loyal to you as he now is to me."
Rod tossed his head impatiently. "That's thirty  years  away, at  least,  Dad,  and  it's
Dick who will inherit… Wait a minute. You said when I'm his owner!"
"As you will be, from this moment. Fess,  I  hereby  give  and  bequeath  you  to  my
younger son, Rodney. Serve him as you have served me—and, from this day forth,
obey no commands but his."
"But Dad, I can't take him along! I'm spacing!"
"Every crewman is allowed baggage, son, and you have only one small pack. I think
you'll find  that Fess masses no more than your  allowed luggage. And he can fit  into
whatever kind of storage space they give you."
"I hate to ask him to fold up like that, but… Wait a minute! You're talking about him
going with me on that freighter!"
"That is what I had in mind, yes. I know I have to let you go your  own way—but I
can at least make sure you're as well protected as possible."
"You're letting me go? You're not going to try to make me go back?"
"Make you go back? Son, you don't know how many times I've wished I'd jumped a
freighter when I was your age! Oh, I'll miss you,  and I'll miss you sorely—but I  want
you to go, while you're still young and still can! Godspeed!"
"And Godspeed to you, too, Dad." Rod threw his arms around his father in a bear
hug. After a second, the older man returned it.
The lander hooted, and Rod stepped back, alarmed to see tears in his father's eyes.
"Go with God, son—and God go with you. May the wind be ever at your back, and
may you find your heart's desire."
"Thanks, Dad," Rod husked. "And may yours find you. Stay well."
"I'm lifting," the lander squawked. "Through the hatch now or never, kid."
And, suddenly, Rod found he didn't want to go, after all—but his father turned him
around, and walked with him, quick-step, toward the airlock. "Now, don't forget where
your handkerchief is, and don't forget to write—and don't forget Fess."
"I won't, Dad—or you. Ever." Rod turned back to wave, but the hatch was closing,
cutting off his view of his father, and of Maxima.
Fess stepped back beside him as the hatch closed. "You are my master now, boss
Rod sahib. Command, and I will obey."
Rod stood very still, the reality of the situation coming home to him.
Then he turned, slowly, with a spreading grin. "Well,  just for  openers—stop calling
me 'boss.' "
 
 
"And thou never hast since?" Cordelia asked.

"No, Cordelia, though I did call him 'milord' unless he specifically ordered me to do
otherwise."
"It's not really legitimate," Rod growled, "or it wasn't, until Tuan ennobled me here."
"But it did remind you of your  heritage, Rod, and  of  the  conduct  becoming  your
station."
Gregory frowned. "Yet thou dost not call him 'lord' now."
"No, Gregory. When we landed on Gramarye, your  father gave his usual order  to
call him only by his name as long as we remained here—and as you can see, we have
not yet left."
"Nor shalt thou." Gwen came over to latch on to Rod's arm.
"Not while you're here," Rod answered with a grin.
The children relaxed, almost imperceptibly, and Cordelia asked, "Hast thou enjoyed
having Papa for a master, Fess?"
"Cordelia," the robot answered, "it has been a blast."
Chapter 9
« ^ »
All was quiet, except for  the distant calls of night-birds  wafting through  the  windows.
There  wasn't  even  the  rustle  of  a  mouse  searching  for  crumbs.  Moonlight  crept  in
through a tall slit window, drifted across the floor, and was gone.
It was only a slight sound, but it grew quickly to a wail that tore at the heartstrings.
The  Gallowglasses  shot  bolt-upright,  staring  about  them.  Rod  reached  out  and
caught Gregory to him; Gwen hugged Cordelia. Rod clasped Geoffrey's shoulder, felt a
slight quivering.
Then he saw Magnus.
The boy sat still, every muscle taut, staring at the apparition.
She was beautiful, even now, with her hair  disheveled and her face  contorted with
terror.  She  was  pale  as  moonlight  on  snow,  her  garments  a  cloud  about  her.  "A
rescue,"  she  moaned,  "a  rescue,  I  beg  of  thee!  A  rescue,  good  souls,  from  this
monster who hath chained me here. I prithee…"
Suddenly, her gaze leaped up to fix on something above their heads, and her fists
came up to her lips as she began to wail again, voice rising to a scream that seemed
to pierce their temples. Then she leaped, shot toward them…
And was gone.
Bitter  cold  chilled  them,  then  faded.  The  last  echo  of  the  scream  rang  into
nothingness.
In  the  silence,  Rod  heard  Cordelia  sobbing,  and  white-hot  anger  flared  in  him,
against the thing that could so terrify his child.

But what thing was it? He looked behind him, but only darkness was there.
Light  was  the  one  weapon  against  it.  He  pressed  Gregory  into  Gwen's  arm  and
turned to blow on the coals, laying kindling on them until flame licked up. He put on a
heavier stick, glared at it to give the fire a boost, laid a log on, and turned back to his
family.
They seemed to thaw in the warmth of the fire, but not much.
" 'Tis well now, daughter—'tis well," Gwen murmured. "What e'er 'twas, it is gone."
Cordelia gasped, bringing her sobs under control.
But Rod saw Magnus still tense, eyes gazing off  into darkness. Rod concentrated,
listening, and could hear distant, mocking laughter echoing into stillness far away.
Magnus relaxed a trifle, and his eyes came back into focus. " 'Tis gone, as much as
'twill ever be."
"Oh, I don't know." Rod's eyes narrowed. "I think we might be able to make it a little
more permanent than that."
Magnus stared at him, shocked. "We are no priests, to exorcise spirits!"
"No, we're fighting wizards. Expert espers, where I come from—and every form of
magic we've encountered on this planet has been psionic,  in  some  way  or  another.
Why should ghosts be different?"
Magnus's stare held; he almost whispered, "Dost mean we can lay this spectre to
rest?"
Rod shrugged. "It's worth investigating."
"Then we must! Whatsoe'er we can do, we shall! The lady is in peril dire—e'en now,
past her death, she doth bide in terror! Howsoe'er we can aid her, 'tis vital!"
The other children  stared at him, startled, and  Gwen  seemed  very  thoughtful;  but
Rod only nodded, flint-faced.  "Let's learn what we can,  then. First  we  need  to  know
who she was, and what happened to her."
"Who she is, Papa!"
"Was," Rod grated. "She's dead, son, no matter whether or not you can see her!
She died two hundred years ago!"
Magnus stared at him, but Rod held his stony gaze, and the boy finally  relaxed a
little. "Was," he agreed. "Yet she is still in torment. How shall we learn?"
"As to that, you're the only research tool we've got," Rod said, "but the rest of us are
going along; no splitting this family at night in this castle!"
"Never!" Cordelia shuddered.
"What! Wouldst thou search now, husband?"
"But we must, Mama!" Magnus cried. " 'Tis only at night they are so strong! By day,
we might learn no more than we already know!"
Gwen stared at him, surprised.
"Were you thinking of drifting back to sleep?" Rod asked.
Gwen  shuddered.  "Nay,  I  think  I  shall  not  slumber  now  till  dawn  bringeth  light!

Wherefore  should we not wander these  halls?  We  have  conned  them  already—and
can we see worse than we have?"
"It's possible," Rod allowed, "so let's keep our  torch  with  us."  He  turned  to  pull  a
branch out of the fire.  "You remember that ball-of-light spell you used when  we  first
met?"
"Aye, husband." Gwen smiled ruefully. " 'Twas due to ghosts' work then, too, was't
not?"
"Yeah." Rod nodded. "I think I'm beginning to understand how that happened now.
Well, lead on, stone-reader."
Magnus stepped away in front of them, frowning, then reached out to touch the wall.
He stood still a few seconds, then drifted toward the stairway, fingertips brushing rock.
The other children followed. Behind them, Fess clopped into movement.
Rod hung back to  murmur  in  Gwen's  ear.  "Any  question  as  to  the  nature  of  the
malady, Doctor?"
"Not  a  doubt  of  it,"  Gwen  answered  softly.  "She  is  a  beauteous  lass,  though  a
spectre, and he is in love, as any young man might be."
"Yes." Rod nodded. "I'm relieved, really."
"I, too. I feared he might be so distraught that he'd try to join her."
"Kinda my thought, too." Rod gave her a sardonic  smile. "Fortunately, he's young
enough to still be sufficiently scared of girls so that he's more apt to sublimate than to
woo. Well, let's follow where love leads, dear."
"Have we not always?" she murmured, but he'd slipped behind her, and didn't hear.
 
 
The stairway hadn't seemed nearly so long by daylight. But they toiled up, following
the curve as they went. Fess's hooves rang loudly in the stairwell. Rod turned to him,
glaring. "You don't have to make that much noise, you know."
"True, Rod, but I do not think you would truly wish me to move silently behind you,
on such an occasion."
"A point," Rod admitted. "The more noise, the fewer spooks. But can I hear myself
think?"
"Do you truly wish to?"
At the top, Magnus stepped away from the wall, frowning and looking about him.
"Lost the scent?" Rod asked.
"Nay, yet 'tis quite faint. And I bethink me there's more to her tale than she herself."
Rod nodded. "True. There's also the thing she's afraid of."
"Let us seek through all." Magnus stepped over to the nearest doorway, pushed the
door open wide, and stepped in, reaching out to touch the wall.
Cordelia  had  managed  to  slip  back  to  her  parents.  Now  she  whispered  into  her
mother's ear. "What hath him so beset?"

Gwen smiled at her, amused. "Why, lass, what dost thou think?"
"That he's besotted," Cordelia said promptly. "Is  it thus boys behave, when they're
lovestruck?"
"Aye, till they finally come nigh the lass. Then pursuit halts awhile."
Cordelia smiled. "Let us hope this light-o'-love doth not give encouragement."
"Any lass must, if the lad's not to flee," Gwen said. She stopped in the middle of the
chamber to look around. It was perhaps twelve feet square, walls bare stone except for
a tapestry hanging on one wall. The room held  a  bed,  a  small  table,  a  stool,  and  a
chest.
"Standard  medieval  furnishings."  Rod  reached  out  to  the  tapestry,  then  thought
better of it. "Do you suppose this thing would crumble if I touched it?"
"I would not chance it," Gwen answered.
"A knight dwelt here." Magnus's voice was a sigh, a breeze. "A knight, and his lady
wife. They were goodly, and content with one another—though toward the end of their
tenure the knight was oft upset by the Count's son."
"Upset?" Rod said. "Why?"
Magnus  shook  his  head.  "All  manner  of  wrongdoing—and  the  knight  was  on  his
guard to prevent such malfeasance."
"Had they no children?" Cordelia asked.
"Aye, and they were oft in this chamber, though they slept elsewhere."
"Elsewhere"  turned  out  to  be  the  room  next  door,  and  there  was  a  similar  suite
across the hall for another knight and family. Magnus stayed in it only long enough to
ascertain its nature, not even touching the walls, then came out.
"So the married knights took it in shifts,  to attend on their lord."  Rod looked about
the chamber, musing. "How many did you say were in here in a year?"
"Four, to each suite—each to a season."
"And all were on edge, toward the end, because of the Count's son." Rod nodded.
"We'll  probably  find  a  dormitory  for  the  bachelors,  outside  the  keep.  What  kind  of
people lived here after the heir became Count?"
"The single knights thou hast spoke of,  though they but slept here.  There is small
trace  of  their  presence,  and  that  only  for  their  more—earthly  pleasures."  Magnus's
face  hardened.  "Most  of  their  wenches  were  willing,  yet  I  do  sense  summat  of
women's fear and pain."
Cordelia began to look angry.
"I'm beginning to see why the place was abandoned." Rod turned away, face dark.
"What else is on this floor?"
They went out, and turned into the next chamber. Their  torch  was  burning  down;
Rod plucked a  mummified  stick  from  a  wall  sconce  and  lit  it.  It  burned  brightly  but
quickly.
The room held only a single bed, a washstand, and a chest.
"A gentle-lady dwelt here." Magnus's voice seemed to come from a distance. "She

did wait upon the Countess till she was wed; then another took her place, till she in turn
wed"
"Probably several of these rooms; usually more than one lady-in-waiting at a time."
Magnus  nodded.  "The  last  dwelt  in  some  apprehension,  for  the  Count's  son  had
grown to young manhood, and had an eye for the lasses. He had no scruples as to his
manner of attaining their favors—though he feared his father's wrath."
"Did this damsel leave the castle free of him?" Cordelia asked, eyes thoughtful.
Magnus nodded. "She wed, and went—and none dwelt here after."
"Wherefore?"
"I know not." Magnus turned to the door, moving like a sleepwalker. "Let us seek."
He drifted on down the hallway, fingertips brushing the wall, and turned into the next
chamber.
But it was exactly like the one before;  the memories were of different  women, but
held  no  new  information.  So  it  was  with  the  third,  and  the  fourth—though  the  last
lady-in-waiting of that chamber had been  importuned  by  the  heir,  who  had  become
quite unpleasant when she refused. She had managed to break away; the young man
had pursued her,  but had been brought up short by  one of his father's knights, who
had rebuked him soundly and reported the incident to the Count, who personally took a
horsewhip to his son. Nonetheless, the lady asked permission to return to her parents,
and the Countess granted her request.
Cordelia  frowned.  "I  begin  to  have  some  notion  of  the  cause  of  this  spectre's
misery."
"I, too." Gwen wasn't smiling.
"No more rooms on this floor." Rod stood at the end of the hall, glowering around at
the doorways and the slit-window in the end wall. "Back to the stairs, folks."
Gregory  went  first,  being  the  lightest,  followed  by  Geoffrey,  then  Magnus.  They
were going up in order of ascending weight, with the levitators first.  "Just in case the
masonry isn't what it once  was,"  Rod  explained.  But  he  insisted  on  bringing  up  the
rear.
At the top of the stair, a small chamber opened on either side of the hallway, very
much like the ones below. Magnus stepped into the one on his left, concentrating and
touching the stones. " 'Twas another lady-in-waiting dwelt here—the Countess kept two
near her in the night. This damsel…"
He broke off,  for  the air  was thickening in the corner,  beyond the torch's pool  of
light.
The Gallowglasses held their breaths, their eyes wide.
The keening started before the form had become clear; Gregory clapped his hands
over his ears. Then she drifted there before them, the same young lady they had seen
in the great hall below, wailing in fear and terror.
"Damsel, what affrights thee?" Magnus cried, stepping forward and reaching out.
Rod thrust out an arm, blocking him.
"Thou dost!" the girl wailed. "Go, get thee hence! Leave me in peace!"

Rod started to talk, but Magnus beat him to it.  "I  cannot, for  thy pain is mine, and
when thou dost feel agony, a blade doth twist in mine heart! Nay, speak! Tell me why
thine unquiet spirit still doth walk, and I will set it aright!"
A glimmer  of  hope  glowed  in  the  darkness  that  was  her  eyes,  but  she  moaned,
"Thou canst not, for I did not roam these halls till thou didst come to wake me! 'Tis thou,
and thou alone! But for thee, I'd not have walked!"
Magnus's head snapped up, and he fell back a pace, staggered—but Gwen stepped
forward and asked, very calmly, "Canst thou truly say thou hast lain quietly?"
The girl's face contorted, and her hands came up to her cheeks as she wailed once
again, a wail that soared up and up until it rang in their  ears,  then  twisted  and  was
gone, and the room lay empty about them.
 
 
They straggled back to the Great Hall, a very glum and silent crew, with glances out
of  the  corners  of  their  eyes  at  their  brother,  whose  face  was  thunderous.  Gwen
stepped up to the hearth, stirred up the coals, tossed on a handful of kindling and blew
it alight, then put on larger sticks and a log.
Then she turned back to her son.
"Be not heartsick, my lad. We know ghosts have walked this castle for two hundred
years. 'Tis not thou who hast brought her unending misery."
"But how can she speak of my waking her!" Magnus burst out.
"Thou art a stone-reader," Gwen answered, "and a thought-speaker, and a crafter.
The traces of her unquiet spirit may have kindled thy mind into bringing her forth from
the stones.''
Magnus looked up, appalled—and Rod lifted his head with dawning understanding.
"Yet why she?"  the  boy  burst  out.  "Why  she  alone?  Why  she,  and  none  of  the
others who dwelt 'midst these rough stones?"
"For that 'twas only she did live through agony so sharp as to leave traces so strong
they could be conjured forth.  Where  others have left only  some  lingering  touch  that
thou canst read, her feelings were so deep as to bring her once more before us."
"Call it hallucination," Rod said softly,  "but you're  also a projective—and once you
could see her, anyone near you could, too; you put the picture into their minds."
"But I know the craft of that, Papa, and 'tis not a thing to be done unawares! It doth
take intensity of thought, and some strength!"
"You did it when you were a baby,"  Rod said evenly. "We  had to keep you away
from witch-moss, because anything you were thinking about, took form."
"Yet there is no witch-moss here!"
Rod  shrugged.  "You  can't  be  sure  of  that.  And  even  if  it  isn't,  your  mind  is
thoroughly capable of projecting a hallucination into other people's thoughts."
"I have never done so before!"
"You've  never  encountered  a  stimulus  this  strong  before,  either."  Rod  forbore  to
mention that most of the strength might have come from Magnus's feelings toward the

ghost-girl, but he exchanged glances with Gwen, and she nodded. First love  can  do
wonders.
Magnus's face crumpled. "Then 'tis I am to blame for her misery?"
"No!" Rod said, full-force. "The misery was caused by someone else, and I have a
sneaking suspicion he's lurking about, just panting to be hallucinated, too—so try not to
hate him too hard; it might help him."
"Yet she would have slumbered, had I not come within!"
"I have a notion she has waked a few times in the past," Rod said evenly. "I  doubt
that you're the first psychometricist to come in here in the last two hundred years. You
remember how boys like to prove their courage by  spending  the  night  in  a  haunted
house? And who would be most likely to do that? I have a notion that any time you hear
about  a  haunting  anywhere  in  Gramarye,  you've  had  a  latent  psychometricist  who
doesn't know what he is."
Magnus's gaze was fastened on Rod; the boy was drinking in the words, hungry to
believe.
"Besides," Rod said, feeling uncomfortable, "if  you hadn't triggered her walking,  I
probably would have."
"Thou?" Magnus  stared,  then  whirled  to  his  mother.  Gwen  nodded,  gaze  fast  on
him. "Thy father hath waked ghosts aforetime, son." She turned to Rod, and couldn't
help a smile. " 'Twas not long after we met."
Rod couldn't stop the smile, either. "No, it wasn't, was it?"
He turned back to his son. "I did something rather stupid: I  went for  a stroll in the
haunted section of Castle Loguire—alone."
"Wherefore wouldst thou have committed such folly?" Cordelia's eyes were huge.
"Because I  didn't  believe  in  ghosts.  But  I  saw  them,  all  right—and  I  was  scared
hollow, till Fess figured  out their trick.  And mind you,  I  wasn't the first  to see ghosts
there—that part of the castle had so strong a reputation that nobody lived there  any
more. And the same is probably true here—I have a notion that this isn't the first time
this  spectre  has  waked,  though  she  may  not  remember  the  others  as  more  than  a
dream.  I'd  bet  that  psychometricists  are  more  common  here  than  she  led  you  to
believe."
A bit of color  was coming back to Magnus's face  now. "Yet her cries  of anguish,
and the wicked laughter we all heard last night, whiles the storm did rage…"
"When we weren't even inside yet. Right." Rod nodded. "Either you have a lot more
range than we thought, or the  ghosts  linger  once  they're  roused.  Of  course,  all  the
electricity in the atmosphere might have had something to do with it."
Magnus paled again. "Dost think they may talk to one another when we living are not
by them?"
"Interesting thought," Rod agreed, "but a pretty useless  one,  for  our  purposes.  If
they do, how can we tell, since we're not here to hear it? If a tree falls in the forest, but
there's no one near to hear the noise, did it make any sound?"
The junior Gallowglasses exchanged glances, which could have meant that it was a
good question that would require thought, or that Papa was being silly again.

"No matter how she hath been raised." Magnus banished the question with a wave
of his hand, and Rod's heart leaped; if the kid could put it behind him, he'd been lifted
past it. "Wherefore would she wish me to go, rather than asking mine aid, as she did
before?"
"I don't think it was your help she was asking for."  Rod  rubbed  the  bridge  of  his
nose. "More likely reliving a scene from the days of her life."
"And as to bidding thee go," Gwen answered, "she may have wished  to  hide  her
shame from the world."
"What shame?"
Gwen spread her hands. " 'Tis hidden yet.  Naetheless, when a damsel hath been
hurted deeply, she will oft wish to be alone until her wound hath healed."
"Definitely," Rod agreed, "and that's not exclusive to women. It can take a long time
for a man to heal, too."
Magnus frowned. "Dost thou speak from conjecture, or from knowledge?"
"Doesn't matter," Rod  said,  "since  the  important  question  is  really  not  how  we've
waked her, but how we can help her to find rest again."
Magnus's gaze drifted. "Aye—that is the nubbin…"
"Then," said Gregory, "we must first learn why she is unhappy."
"Back to where we left off." Rod smiled. "So tomorrow, we'll search the castle and
grounds and see if we can find any more clues. But I don't think we can do too much
more tonight." He lifted a hand to stifle Magnus's protest. "You're tired, son, and not at
your most perceptive any more—and if any of the rest of us have this particular  gift,
we don't have it as strongly as you. We need to get what rest we can. Come on, back
to  bed."  And  he  stepped  over  to  lie  down  on  his  pallet.  Gwen  smiled  gently  at  the
children, then went to join her husband.
Reluctantly the children followed suit, and lay still in the firelight.
"Mayhap," Cordelia offered, "we ought not to meddle in this affair at all."
"Nay, we must!" Magnus protested loudly.
"Softly, softly, son," Gwen called. "I do not think we can worsen matters for the lass,
Cordelia, and we well might help. Yet her affairs  aside, there's some small matter of
our own interest."
Geoffrey looked up. "Why, how is that?"
"I do not mean to dwell in a house where ghosts do wander in the dead of night, to
disturb our sleep," Gwen said, with finality.
"An  excellent  point,"  Rod  agreed.  "You're  right  in  this,  Cordelia—that  if  it  didn't
affect us, we should probably mind our own business."
"Nay, even then, we ought to seek to alleviate the poor damsel's  suffering,  out  of
simple humanity!" Cordelia cried.
"Thought you were the one who was saying we should back out. Well,  since  we're
all agreed, we'll consider ways and means—and let's sleep on it,  shall we?" He rolled
up a little more tightly.
Slowly, Magnus lay tense but quiet again.

The hall was still, and a branch popped in the fire.
Cordelia tossed and turned, unable to sleep, even when the low, even breathing of
her mother and brothers, and her father's snoring,  told her that  she  alone  remained
awake.
The  thought  was  frightening.  There  was  a  small  sound,  somewhere  in  the  great
room, and she lifted her head to peer around, eyes wide, heart hammering.
She saw only the forms of her sleeping family, and the dark silhouette of the great
black horse, standing watch over them. Its eyes glistened in the firelight, ever vigilant.
Cordelia felt relief;  she wasn't  completely  alone  in  her  wakefulness.  Very  quietly,
she  slipped  out  of  bed  and  came  over  to  the  robot.  Fess  lifted  his  head  at  her
approach. "Lie still, Cordelia. Sleep will come."
"I have need of talk." She twined her fingers in his mane.
"Your charms avail you nothing, Cordelia—I am made of metal."
"I shall try the mettle of a man, when I am grown." She managed a small smile at her
own feeble jest. "Speak to me, that I may sleep."
"Am I so boring a companion as that? No, do not answer. Tell me what you would
have me speak of.''
She said nothing, only set to work making a plait in his mane.
"Of  love,  of  course,"  Fess  answered,  with  a  sigh.  "You  are,  after  all,  a  young
maiden."
"Aye. Wouldst thou, mayhap, recall Papa's manner when he first was moonstruck?
Was he as Magnus is, this night?"
"Cordelia!"  Fess  reproved,  in  his  softest  tone.  "I  have  told  you  before  that  your
father's experiences are entirely confidential, and that it is for him alone to breach that
confidentiality, not I."
"Oh, thou didst not even know when the Archer did smite him!"
"How  should  I,  when  I  am  only  a  thing  of  iron,  with  no  feelings?  How  might  I
recognize romantic love?"
"Thou dost know it by its signs."
"Signs  that  can  be  hidden,  with  self-control.  I  will  tell  you  only  this:  that  when
humans do suppress such evidence of love's coming, they cease to know clearly when
they are in love."
Cordelia looked up, frowning. "Why, how couldst thou know such a thing?"
"I have studied humankind for five centuries, Cordelia. Go, now, and let your fancy
play with the notion."
She smiled, taken with the idea. "Why, that I shall. I knew thou wouldst know cures
for  wakefulness,  good  Fess."  And  she  turned  away,  going  back  to  roll  up  in  her
blanket.
Of course,  Fess did recognize  the signs of infatuation,  and  remembered  that  the
young Rod d'Armand had been worried because it had never happened  to  him.  But
Fess had seen the reason clearly, when he looked at the belles of Maxima—so he had
not  been  surprised  with  the  quickness  of  love's  striking,  once  Rod  left  home.  He

remembered, with the clarity that only comes from permanent changes in the electrical
patterns of molecules. It had been a time when Rod's joy and pain had been so clear to
see that Fess was, for once, quite glad he had no emotions of his own. Rod's had been
bad enough. Oh, yes, he remembered…
Chapter 10
« ^ »
The lander jarred with a thud and a clash. Rod waited, excitement beginning to well up
under his sadness at leaving home. The wall-patch next to the hatch glowed green. Rod
opened it and stepped through into his new life.
The welcoming committee was a stocky man in a uniform too tight around the waist
and  a  three-day  beard  on  his  jowls.  "A  rich  boy!"  he  groaned.  "With  a  private
robot—preserve us! And shall I roll out a red carpet for you, me lord?"
"Not a lord," Rod said automatically.
"Well, ya  know  that  much,  at  least,"  the  man  grunted.  "But  ya  need  a  bit  more,
swabbie. When ya walked through that hatch, ya  became the lowest of the low, boy.
And close it behind ya!"
Rod turned, sure that he had. Yes, the hatch was dogged.
The jowly man pushed  past  him  to  check,  and  gave  a  reluctant  growl.  "Well,  it's
good enough."
Rod knew it was a lot better than "good enough." People who grow up on asteroids
become very used to hatches—by the time they're eight. But all he said was, "Thank
you, sir."
The man's eyes narrowed. "Ya got that part right, too." He looked distinctly unhappy
about it.  "Well,  'sir'  it is,  to anyone ya  see. I'm Albie Weiser,  Second Officer  of  the
good ship Murray Rain, and you have the lowest rating aboard. Anything you see, you
'sir,'  because there's  no  one  aboard  who's  lower  than  you—and  ya  salute  a  senior
officer!"
Rod snapped to what he hoped was "attention" and touched his forehead.
"No, no!" Weiser seemed relieved as he reached out to boost Rod's arm and crank
his wrist. "Elbow up, so your arm's parallel to the deck,  and turn yer  hand out t' face
me!"
Rod clenched his jaw to keep from saying "ouch."
"Right enough, then," the officer  growled. "Now, come on and see this  berth  y've
signed  on  for."  He  pushed  off  against  a  wall  and  glided  down  the  passageway,
glancing back just once—to make sure his new charge was following, Rod supposed.
He looked very disappointed, and Rod's spirits sank. Was he really doing that badly?
He swallowed hard and plucked up his courage,  resolving to become the best recruit
Weiser had ever seen.
Fess followed, drifting silently in null-G. A bit less naive than Rod, he realized that

Weiser  had  been  hoping  the  young  man  would  prove  horribly  clumsy  in  free-fall.
Apparently the second officer hadn't realized that growing up on an asteroid, however
large and however well provided with artificial gravity in dwelling areas, would still afford
a young man a great number of low-G situations, and free-fall sports.
He was also aware that being faultless, when people were actively seeking faults to
belittle you for, could prove dangerous.
They  filed  down  a  metal  passageway,  over  the  foot-high  sill  of  a  hatch,  down  a
clanging ladder, and down a darker passageway. Rod's spirits sank with the altitude.
Then the hallway opened out into a large chamber filled with vague lumpen shapes,
walls divided into metal boxes. Pipes festooned the ceilings,  and the floor humped up
into ridges here and there.
Weiser  turned and pointed to a rectangular  outline  in  the  corner,  about  eighteen
inches wide and three feet high.  "There's  yer  locker.  And  there—"  He  pointed  to  a
larger rectangle inscribed on the wall, "—is yer berth."
Rod  stared  at  it  in  dismay,  and  the  mate  sneered,  "What  did  ya  expect  for  an
engine wiper on a freighter—a stateroom with a private bath?"
"Oh, no, no! It's just that, uh, I don't know what I'm supposed to do."
"Stow  your  duffel,  swabbie,  and  report  to  the  engineer!"  He  looked  at  Fess  with
disgust and grunted, "Private robots, yet! Where're ya going to store that, laddie?" He
gave Fess a slap.
"Hey, careful! He's an antique!"
"Oh, is he, now? And maybe I should dust yer china fer ya, too!" The mate swatted
at  Fess,  and  the  robot  stepped  aside  easily—a  twentieth  of  a  second  was  a  quick
punch for a human, but a long time for  a computer. "Stand still when I'm swinging at
ya!" the mate roared, and slammed another punch at the robot.
"Sir," Fess said as he dodged, "I have done nothing to merit your…"
"Hold on, now! That's my robot!" Rod leaped in, grabbing at the mate's arm. Weiser
turned to aim a punch at him, and Fess darted forward to interpose himself between
Rod  and  the  mate's  fist.  Then  he  tried  to  dodge  Weiser's  kick,  protesting,  "I  have
done…" and went stiff as a board. The mate's kick caught him in the hip joint and sent
him crashing against the wall.
Rod saw red. "You bastard! You made him have a seizure! And then when he was
defenseless, you…" He couldn't finish; he leaped at the mate, swinging…
Swinging completely around in a circle and crashing into the wall. As he slid toward
the bottom, a calloused hand grabbed him by the jumpsuit and yanked him upright. The
jowly face  loomed over him, mouth curved in a grin  and vindictive satisfaction in the
eyes. "The first thing ya must learn, swabbie, is to never talk back to a senior officer!"
The calloused hand shot out, clenching into a shotput fist, and crashed into Rod's jaw.
Rod was only dizzy for a few seconds; then he was struggling up to his hands and
knees and lurching over to grope at the base of Fess's skull for the circuit breaker. He
pushed, and the robot sat up slowly. "Whatddd… didddd AAAeee…"
"You were defeated in a gallant attempt to save me," Rod rasped. "Sorry  I  got you
into this."

"Thhhuh ffaullltt iz awwl…"
"All Weiser's," Rod grunted. "That bastard was doing everything he could to pick  a
fight. Help me up, will you?"
Slowly, the robot climbed to its feet, then reached down. A hard hand grasped Rod's
arm, helping him up. "How… how long were we out?"
"I have been unnn-ckon-shus form… no morrrre than… threeee minutes."
Rod gave his head a shake, blinked, and managed to see that Weiser wasn't there.
"He didn't have to do that…"
"He would have con-tin-ued to be off-offensive until he managed to… pro-voke you
into attac-king, mas-ter. He was seeking to… e-sta-blish his au-tho-ri-ty."
Rod's mouth tightened. "Are you telling me I shouldn't have reacted, no matter what
he did?"
"Short  of  attack  with  lethal  intentions,  no.  I  certainly  was  not  damaged;  I  am
considerably more durable than that."
Rod remembered childhood tales about accidents when Fess had been building the
castle. "All right, so I shouldn't have worried."
"But I  am delighted by  your  wish to defend one you regard as  a  friend,  boss—it
shows that my moral teachings have taken firm  hold. Nonetheless, please  remember
that it is I who am supposed to be loyal to you, not the reverse."
''Point noted,'' Rod grumbled. "People don't help robots.''
"Of course, my own loyalty is reinforced by such firm evidence of your own."
"But you would have suffered a major breakdown if I'd been really hurt. Yeah, yeah,
I know."
"Well… I did note that you seemed to have forgotten your boxing, boss."
"I don't know what that guy was using, but it sure wasn't boxing." Rod pushed his jaw
back into place and blinked at the pain. "Whew! And you'd better not  call  me  'boss'
around here; I'm beginning to see that it could bother my fellow crewmen."
"How shall I address you, then?"
"How about 'Rod'?" Rod said sourly.
"If you insist," Fess sighed.
"I do. After all, I've learned my first lesson—that the universe is a nasty place. Let's
see if I can't make my way in it anyway, shall we?"
"One human is not the universe, Rod."
"So I've got a negative attitude. I can hardly wait to meet my chief."
"According to Mr. Weiser's instructions, you must 'stow your duffel' first."
"Oh, yeah." Rod frowned, turning to the little locker. "How do I  get it open, do you
suppose?" He started running his fingers along the outline, pressing as he went. The
left  edge  gave  under  pressure,  so  Rod  pushed  harder.  The  panel  rotated  outward,
revealing small shelves on its other side, and a compartment three feet deep.
Rod stared, appalled. "There's no way you'll ever fit in there!"

"I can if it is necessary, Rod."
"Yeah, well, let's try and get by without it first, shall we?" Rod tossed his bag in and
pushed the panel shut. "You just stand in the corner here and do your best to turn into
a statue. Okay?"
"Certainly,  Rod."  Fess  stepped  into  the  corner  and  became  just  what  Rod  had
ordered—a modernistic sculpture of a human being.
"You gonna be okay if the ship changes direction?"
"The floor is an iron  alloy, Rod, and I  have electromagnets in my feet. We  found
them quite useful, during Maxima's construction  phase.  And  I  notice  ringbolts  within
reach, if the change in velocity is really strong."
"Well, okay, then…"
"Report for duty, please, Rod."
"Oh, all right. Now, let me see—where's my boss?"
Rod wandered away into the cubistic environment of the engine room. Fess boosted
the gain on his microphones, to make sure he would be able to hear Rod if  he was
needed.
 
 
The light was dim but adequate, and all from ahead. Rod followed it, around shapes
that he assumed had something to do with powering the engines. Then he  began  to
hear the cursing. That made it easier—he simply followed the sound.
Whoever it was had a really remarkable vocabulary. Rod made mental notes of the
more exotic terms, planning to ask for their definitions, after he got to know their author
a little better. He rounded a large metal housing and saw somebody in a dirty,  baggy
coverall, hair tied back in a club, laboring over a machine with a wrench.
What  was  he  supposed  to  do?  Obviously,  the  guy  thought  he  was  alone.  Rod
swallowed, screwed his courage to the molly-bolt, and  stepped  forward,  stiffening  to
attention and saluting. "Recruit Rod d'Armand reporting for duty, sir!"
His new boss whirled, almost dropping the wrench, saw him, then relaxed. "Hellfire,
boy, don't do that! I  thought I  was  alone  down  here."  The  engineer  laid  the  wrench
aside and stood, face coming into the brighter light of an overheard —and Rod caught
his breath. The hair wasn't really clubbed, it was caught in a net, and the face  under
the  grease  smudges  was  oval  and  smooth,  with  delicate  features.  "You're  the  new
swabbie,  right?"  The  voice  was  a  lovely  alto,  the  eyes  were  large,  green,  and
long-lashed, and Rod was in love.
"Uh-h-h-h—yes,  ma'am.  I'm  your  new  engine-wiper.  Where's  the  engine  I'm
supposed to wipe?"
"Over there." The engineer pointed to a bulging wall in the dimness at the end of the
room. "Doesn't need any wiping, though. If it does, we're all in trouble. We just call you
that 'cause it came down to us from ocean ships." She turned back, peering up at him.
"Don't know anything about engines, huh?"
"Uh, no, ma'am. I want to learn, though!"

She  groaned.  "Defend  me  from  the  eager  student!  Why  can't  they  send  me
someone who knows what he's doing?" She held up a hand to forestall the answer. "I
know, I  know—if she's learned that  much,  she's  working  on  a  better  ship  than  this.
Well, swabbie, I'm Gracie Muldoon."
"Rod d'Armand, ma'a—sir!"
"Better." Muldoon nodded. "And don't you forget it, swabbie."
"No, sir. Can I help?"
"Let's see." Muldoon pointed to the huge wheel she'd been working on, half-bared
by  an  opened  housing.  It  rippled  with  blades  that  looked  uncomfortably  like  knives.
"That's the backup turbine—and the threads on the last bolt are stripped, courtesy  of
the dirtside mechanic who overhauled it before I was hired; I'd  never allow anyone to
work on my engines without my watching."
Rod noticed the possessive attitude, though he doubted she owned the ship. He also
noticed the correct grammar. Also the way her head tilted, and how fine her eyebrows
were, though they didn't seem to be plucked… he hauled his mind back to the rotor.
"How come it was the last bolt?"
" 'Cause when I found out it was stuck, I took off the other ones first."
"Oh." Rod felt his face heat up. "And when you try to turn the nut, the whole wheel
spins?"
Muldoon nodded, watching him. "Not spins, really—it's pretty massive. But it doesn't
stay put, either." She pointed to the wrench. "Give it a try."
Rod picked up the wrench and heaved at the nut. Sure enough, the wheel moved,
but the nut didn't rotate. He nodded. "Any way to brace the wheel?"
"Yes,  now  that  you're  here."  She  knelt  beside  him,  and  his  head  filled  with  her
aroma—female  with  a  trace  of  perspiration.  "Hand  me  the  wrench,  and  take  the
Stillson… No, the big one."
Rod picked up the four-foot monkey wrench that lay beside her.
"Now, this is the brake lever." Muldoon hauled down on a stick to her right. "Watch
the hub."
Rod saw a huge double cam rotate, pushing the edges of the hub out.
"But watch what happens when I lock it down." Muldoon made something click, and
the stick stayed put—but the cam immediately snapped back ninety degrees, and the
inner cylinder shrank.
"Another goodie, courtesy  of that dirtside grease monkey who  never  should  have
come down out of the trees," Muldoon explained, "and that's why I was cursing."
Rod nodded, frowning at the huge nut in the center  of  the  cam.  "And  I  hold  this
still?"
"Yeah, after I put the brake on again."  Muldoon released the stick,  then pushed it
down once more. Rod waited till the cam had stopped turning, then locked his wrench
on and held fast. "What's the nut for?" he grunted.
"Taking the cam off—so  push clockwise." Muldoon picked up her wrench, fitted it
on the bolt, and heaved. The nut groaned, then began to move. Rod leaned all his mass

on the wrench and pushed. Nonetheless, he felt himself beginning to move, and let go
with one hand to grab the edge of the housing.
"Smart," Muldoon grated, and her wrench began to move more easily.  Then it was
going around and around quickly and smoothly, and the nut clattered off onto the floor.
"Success!" Muldoon crowed. "You can let up now, swabbie."
Rod let go of the housing and laid the wrench carefully aside. He was surprised to
find he was panting.
"Good work." Muldoon stood up and  came  around  to  face  the  rotor.  "Step  back,
now—these blades are sharp." Carefully, she lifted the rotor off its axle.
Rod scurried  back out of  the  way,  watching,  amazed  that  a  woman  smaller  than
himself could handle a rotor bigger than herself.
She carried  the  wheel  over  to  a  workbench,  mounted  it  on  a  hub,  and  locked  it
steady. "Just one blade to replace. Know how to cut threads, swabbie?"
"Uh—yes, sir."
"Good. Do."  Muldoon tossed her head at a huge rack  of  tools  on  the  wall.  "Take
your time and do it right."
"Yes, sir." Rod got busy.
He was done before she was, but not by much. She took off her mask, racked the
welder, and said, "Now. Let's see if you can put it all back together."
Rod swallowed and came over to unlock the rotor and take it off  the mount. "Yes,
sir."
Muldoon  leaned  back  against  the  workbench,  arms  folded,  watching  while  he
worked. Occasionally, she made an approving noise. When he had all the pieces back
in place, he turned to her and said, "Ready for inspection, before I lock them in, sir."
"Good idea. Glad I didn't have to recommend it." Muldoon came over and examined
the fastenings. She nodded slowly. "Nice job—and a nice surprise. I thought you said
you didn't know anything about engines."
"I don't. But I did learn a little basic mechanics."
"Why, rich boy?"
Rod sighed. "Everybody sort of  assumed  I'd  go  into  the  family  business,  when  I
grew  up—so  my  father  insisted  I  learn  how  to  do  everything  needed  in  the  robot
factory."
Muldoon  frowned.  "I  thought  you  technocrats  had  robots  do  everything  from
sweeping up to machining and growing circuits."
Rod shrugged. "Robots do the actual labor, sure. But people have to make sure they
do it right."
Muldoon  nodded  slowly.  "Smart  again.  Your  old  man  has  a  good  head  on  his
shoulders."
Rod felt a flush of purely illogical pleasure, and pride in his father. For the first time,
he was glad Dad had put him through all that boring training.
Then something clicked, and he began to wonder if  maybe Dad hadn't figured  the

boredom might give Rod an extra reason to want to leave Maxima.
An  unworthy  thought,  surely.  Pater  had  only  been  trying  to  train  Rod  to  be  a
responsible citizen, and a worthy member of the House d'Armand.
Surely.
As he finished tightening the housing bolts, Rod asked, "What's this turbine do?"
Muldoon grinned. "It kicks in if anything goes wrong with the main turbine."
"Sorry. Let me try again, sir—what's the main turbine for?"
"It runs the generator."
"Oh." Rod frowned. "Wouldn't it be more efficient to run a converter directly off the
fusion plant?"
"Very good," she noted. "But you don't know anything about engines, huh?"
"I don't. That's electronics!"
"There  is  still  a  subtle  difference,"  Muldoon  admitted.  "Well,  it  would  be  more
efficient, yes—and we do use it when we go to FTL. But it's an extra drain on the plant,
and we go sublight most of the time—we're a local freighter,  running between Saturn
and Mars. When we're sublight, we use water for reaction mass, and we're heating the
water to steam and blasting it out anyway—so it might as well turn the turbine on its
way. Effectively,  we get our electricity  for  the cost of the  turbine,  and  the  company
amortizes that over ten years."
"Oh." Rod nodded. "So the best way isn't always the best way, huh?"
"Well, not optimum, anyway." Muldoon smiled. "Come on—I'll give you the four-bit
tour."
She turned away, beckoning, moving like a mermaid as she glided through the air.
Rod decided he'd follow that wriggle anywhere.
Muldoon pointed to a massive door in a dull metal wall. "Lead, a meter thick. Behind
it is the fusion plant."
Rod asked, "Why the lead? The plasma bottle is a better radiation shield than any
metal could be."
She looked up at him, surprised, and nodded. "But if the bottle fails, there could be
a brief burst of very hard radiation."
Rod gave a snort of derision.
"I know, I  know—but tell that  to  the  rest  of  the  crew.  And  my  hindbrain,  for  that
matter—my  prefrontal  lobes  may  believe  in  science,  but  my  cerebellum  is
superstitious." She put a hand over her tummy. "I still have hopes of having children."
Rod was suddenly acutely aware of his own vulnerability; before radiation, we're all
naked. In fact, we're downright transparent.
"I think you can figure out where the main turbine is,  and the generator." Muldoon
pointed  to  a  large  red  toolbox  on  the  floor.  "That's  the  emergency  kit.  Small  fire
extinguisher,  Geiger  counter…"  (her  mouth  twitched)  "…  basic  hand  tools,  first-aid
box, quick-patches in case we're holed, spot-welder, and steel patches. There's a box
of quick-patches inset next to every hatch, and one in the middle of the longest wall in
each room." She looked up at him. "You savvy?"

Rod nodded. "Maxima's only an asteroid, sir. We're very used to patches."
"Good. This ship has a good deflector field, mind you, and the signal officer—that's
Weiser, the Second—"
"I met him," Rod grunted.
Muldoon flashed him a quick look, but went on. "We both spend a lot of time making
sure the field generator and its connections stay sound. And the ship is double-hulled,
with foam filling, ready to expand—but this is the asteroid belt, and some of the junk
has a lot of punch. We still get holed once or twice each trip."
Rod grinned. "Ever taken a close look at the Maxima tugs, sir?"
Muldoon shook her head. "I don't usually get to a viewscreen while we're matching
orbits with you."
"They have a lot of patches on them. All colors,  too—and some pretty outrageous
patterns."
Muldoon wondered, "Why colors?"
Rod shrugged. "Why  not? If  you're  going  to  have  to  have  patches  anyway,  they
might as well be decorative."
Muldoon cracked a smile. "When you look at it that way, I suppose it makes sense.
On with the tour."
She moved back toward Rod's bunk, and slapped the wall of rectangles. "Here's the
accumulators, and… What the hell is that?" She stood rigid, staring at the corner.
"Oh, that's just Fess." Rod felt very sheepish. "He's my robot."
"You have your own robot?"
"Well, uh, I'd be lost without him, you know." Rod swallowed. "He's an heirloom, if
you know what I mean."
"No, I don't." Muldoon was still staring.
Rod gulped. "Sorry about the surprise. I should have told you, sir."
"Yeah, you sure should have." Muldoon shook her head. "But I'll try  to get used to
it."
Rod almost went limp with relief. "Thanks. I mean, a lot, sir. Fess, come over here
and say hello to my new boss."
The  sculpture  moved,  turned  its  head,  and  drifted  over  to  them  with  fluid  grace.
"Hello, madam. I am the old family robot." He held out his hand.
Muldoon  accepted  it  gingerly,  studying  the  joints  and  the  structure.  "Delighted.
Solenoids, huh?"
"In the hands, yes, for better feedback in applying pressure. Most of my other joints
are servomotors, though."
Muldoon nodded. "Good design. You'll have to take orders from me, too, you know."
Fess hesitated, and Rod said quickly,  "Anything she says,  Fess.  Subject  to  your
programmed restraints, of course."
"Oh, don't worry! I won't tell him to kill anyone."

"Certainly,  Rod."  Fess  bowed  to  Muldoon.  "It  will  be  a  pleasure  to  serve  you,
mem-sahib."
Muldoon actually blushed, but all she said was, "Does he always talk like that? The
titles, I mean?"
"I'm afraid so," Rod sighed. "That's an heirloom, too. I cured him of it when he talks
to me, but I forgot to tell him to hold off with other people."
"Don't bother." Muldoon grinned. "I kinda like it."
She turned away, heading back toward the workbench. Rod ventured. "You seem to
know a bit about robots, sir."
Muldoon shrugged. "A machine's a machine. If it moves and has bolts, I can talk to
it."
"Yeah, that's what I was wondering about. A robot's part mechanics, but it's mostly
computer."
"And  can  I  write  a  program?"  Muldoon  gave  him  a  condescending  smile.  "An
engineer these days has to know all the parts of a system, swabbie—including each
type of subsystem. To be a specialist, you have to be a generalist."
Rod stood still, looking off into space. "You know, that's a very good way of putting
it.''
Muldoon said, "My first professor in college told us that. It stuck with me all the way
through."
Rod focused on her again. "That's where you learned your engineering, then?"
Muldoon  snorted.  "The  ideas  and  facts,  or  what  to  do  with  the  wrench  and  the
keyboard?"
"Both."
"I learned the book-knowledge in college, swabbie—but I learned how to do the job
right here."
"You've got a bachelor's?"
"Only the degree."
"But  if  you've  got  those  kind  of  qualifications,  what're  you  doing  aboard  a  little
freighter like this?"
"Don't knock the Murray  Rain," Muldoon snapped, "she's a good ship! And we all
have to start someplace. I had your job, five years ago. Now I'm chief."
Which  hadn't meant anything, Rod noted, until he had signed on. "But  you  could
have moved on to a bigger ship."
A strange expression crossed Muldoon's face. "It's good enough here."
Rod glanced at her eyes, glanced away, and kept silent. For the first time, he began
to understand what it meant to be adult, but insecure.
A chime rang; Muldoon looked up. "Chow time. Excuse me a second." She ducked
into a closet and closed the door.
Rod suppressed a sudden urge to call out to Fess. If he'd been near the robot, he
would have had a quick discussion of the day's events—but he couldn't bring himself to

do it by yelling. Also, he'd been awake twenty hours now, and was beginning to feel it.
The  door  opened,  and  Muldoon  came  out  wearing  an  officer's  uniform  with  the
same rank insignia as Weiser's. Rod goggled; the jacket was cut loose, but not loosely
enough. Neither were the trousers. Also, the net was gone, and her hair  floated in a
cloud around her face.
She smiled at his surprise.  "Well,  thank  you.  Don't  think  it's  a  habit,  though—we
only dress up for dinner on this ship."
Rod glanced down at his own clothes, and his greasy hands.
"Don't worry, you're excepted until you're issued your uniform. You can wash up on
the way." Muldoon set her cap on and tucked the  strap  under  her  chin.  "Come  on,
meet your mates."
"Mates"  had  an  unpleasant  sound,  suddenly.  "Doesn't  somebody  have  to  stand
watch?"
"The computer will, bucko. You wouldn't know what to look for  yet,  anyway."  She
turned away, and Rod couldn't help but follow—in uniform, her glide was even more a
magnet.
As he passed Fess, the robot  murmured,  "Remember,  Rod—swabbies  should  be
seen, and not heard."
"Oh, don't worry, I won't make you ashamed of me," Rod grumbled. Just the same,
he found himself making a mental note not to talk.
 
 
Apparently,  he  was  the  only  one  who  didn't.  Now  he  knew  why  they  called  it  a
"mess." He did think of adding his two cents' worth now and then, but every time he
opened his mouth, Weiser  caught his eye and, for  some reason, Rod found himself
shutting up.
They were gathered around the table. Rod started to sit, but a tall man with captain's
bars cleared his throat, and Rod realized that the others were still standing. He pulled
himself back up, surprised that he wasn't going to have to act proletarian to fit in, then
remembered to salute. The captain  returned  it,  then  looked  around  at  the  others.  "I
hope you're  all making our new crewman feel welcome."  It  was  a  remark  certain  to
make Rod uncomfortable.
"Oh, yes, Captain! I've given him the full tour of the engine room, and checked his
background." Muldoon was standing straight,  shoulders  back,  eyes  bright  (maybe  a
little feverish), smiling. She seemed more reticent, somehow; the brassy lady projected
shyness.
"Good, good. Well, let's see he meets everyone else, then. I'm Captain Donough."
He was broad-shouldered, lean, handsome, and well-groomed. "The gentleman on my
right is First Officer Jonas Whelk."
The  first  officer  smiled  and  returned  Rod's  salute.  He  was  skinny,  balding,  and
sharp-featured.
"And I believe you've met Mr. Weiser, our second officer."
Rod saluted. Weiser returned it, narrow-eyed.

"Ah, you might ask to be excused, Albie," Donough murmured, and gave him the
eye while he ran a finger over his own cheek.
Weiser's face darkened, but he muttered, "Asking the Captain's pardon."
"Of course."
Weiser left.
Rod wondered what all that had been about—but Donough was going on. "And this
is Third Officer Noah McCracken."
Rod saluted. "A pleasure, sir."
McCracken returned it. His profile showed what free-fall could do for the figure—he
was round as a ball from hip to shoulder, with another globe on top. No sagging; he
was a perfect sphere. Rod wondered if he dared leave the ship on anything larger than
Luna.
Weiser rejoined them, looking sullen but clean-shaven. Rod's eyes widened; then he
remembered his manners and looked away, just before Weiser gave him a murderous
glare.
"Gentlemen and lady," the captain said, "this is Spaceman Rodney d'Armand."
Weiser's eye lit with a wicked gleam, hearing Rod's full name. But the young man
didn't care; just hearing the title from the captain's lips made his heart sing. He was a
spaceman!
"However, as the junior member," Donough went on, "it falls to you to serve at table.
Everyone else, please be seated."
Rod thought of mentioning something about his job description,  then  remembered
how far it was to the nearest spaceport. Besides, Weiser  had caught his eye again.
And Muldoon was sitting down. Rod moved to hold her chair, but McCracken beat him
to it. Not that it made any real difference—the  seats were securely  tracked,  anyway.
The other crewmen slid forward to lock themselves in place, and Donough said, "Stand
by the autochef, Mr. d'Armand."
Rod looked around, identified  the food synthesizer, and pushed himself over to it.
He  found  himself  really  respecting  Donough;  any  man  who  could  keep  his  crew
dressing for dinner, and even making some attempt at good manners, was pretty good.
He was also pretty smart—it was a prime ingredient in maintaining morale.
It sure seemed to work on Muldoon.
"We'll  begin  with  minestrone—key  in  I-C,  please.  And  a  plain  salad,  B-V.
Dressings?"
"French," said Whelk.
"Russian," Weiser answered.
"Clavian," McCracken stated.
"None," Muldoon said.
"And I'll have Roquefort. Now, let's see the day's menu." He picked it up, pretending
not  to  have  it  memorized.  The  others  followed  suit,  except  McCracken.  Donough
caught his eye, and the Third picked up the printout with a sigh.
The 'chef rang; Rod pulled cups out and started setting them in front of people.

"Thank you, Mr. d'Armand. Be seated, please."
Rod went to his chair, then stopped. He looked up and found the captain's eye on
him, amused. "You might want to punch up one for yourself."
"Yes, sir!" Rod went back for another minestrone, brought it to his chair, and sat.
Donough picked up his cup, sipped through the spout, and set it down as he said. "I
thought we did rather well at Maxima."
"Yes, sir," Whelk agreed. "Made a nice profit on the textiles from Terra."
"And the wines." McCracken smiled. "I  never cease to be amazed that people will
pay so much for fermented grape juice, when any decent autochef can synthesize it
just as well."
"It's the status," Weiser grunted.
"And the link to the homeworld." Donough held his cup up, gazing off into space. "I
remember when I was midshipman, on the Mars run…"
Whelk coughed politely into his fist and said, "Standing orders, sir."
Donough looked up, startled, then smiled with self-deprecation. "Yes, I have told that
one a few times before, haven't I? Thank you, Mr. Whelk."
Muldoon glared daggers at Whelk, who carefully avoided her glance.
The captain pushed his almost-empty soup cup away, and everyone followed suit.
Rod  immediately  rose  and  circled  the  table,  clearing  the  cups,  then  went  to  the
autochef and started  serving  again.  The  salads  were  just  as  easy  as  the  soup  had
been, but he did have to try  to remember which dressing went with whom. He didn't
have much trouble with Muldoon, strangely.
Donough speared a tomato through the clinging film and lifted it through the surface
tension  as  he  said,  "We  should  do  well  on  Ceres.  Not  with  the  components  from
Maxima, of course."
"No, sir," Whelk agreed. "Coals to Newcastle, and all that."
"Very. But the people on Ganymede will pay through the nose for them, and Ceres
should be a  good  market  for  the  second-grade  textiles."  He  looked  up  at  a  sudden
thought. "We don't have any furs left, do we?"
"Two, I'm afraid, sir," Whelk answered. "The demand on Maxima wasn't quite what
we thought it would be."
"Mm." Donough went after a cucumber slice.  "Well,  we certainly  won't be  able  to
unload them on Ceres."
Rod could scarcely believe his ears. All his life, "Ceres" had been synonymous with
luxury and decadence—but here these men were saying that nobody on the big rock
could afford anything nearly as good as the Maximans could!
And they couldn't be wrong. This was their living—and they were still alive.
When  the  salad  dishes  were  cleared  away,  Donough  said,  "I  think  I'll  have  the
ragout tonight—that's J-O. And I'll have a burgundy with it—A-A."
Rod  pressed  the  pressure  pads  with  the  labels  named,  and  waited.  The  others
ordered, and he entered their dishes, then almost immediately  started  removing  and
serving. For a moment, he was tempted to mention that he had a robot who was really

very good at this sort of thing, but he noticed Weiser's  eye on him and changed his
mind.
Finally they were all served, and Rod could punch in his own order  and sit.  They
dug in, and he had to admit the first two courses had done the trick—he really wasn't
all that hungry any more.
"I'm a bit worried about the political situation on Ganymede," Whelk noted.
Donough  smiled.  "We've  known  they  aren't  really  a  democracy  for  a  long  time,
Number One."
"Yes, but this new president the Council has just, um, 'elected'…"
Weiser shrugged. "A dictator is a dictator. How's that going to affect trade?"
"Not at all," McCracken said, with finality. "I remember when we stopped at Triton,
when I was a lad—little bit of a thing, scarcely two hundred pounds…"
The others all looked pained, but Donough leaned forward, all polite interest.
"They'd just elected a new Doge, and he was making loud noises about the 'Terran
menace,' and glorifying  home culture.  But  we  landed  with  a  load  of  Paris  originals,
champagne,  Beluga  caviar,  and  Cleveland  cheeseburgers,  and  his  agents  bought
two-thirds of the cargo.  Then the locals climbed all over each other bidding for  what
was left. And all  the  while,  he  was  spouting  about  the  dangers  of  thinking  anybody
could make anything better than the Tritons could." He looked around with a hard smile
that slowly slipped as he noticed his mates paying attention to their dinners.  "I've told
that one before, haven't I?"
"It  was  still  fascinating,"  Donough  said  quickly,  "and  quite  apt  to  the  situation  at
hand. Now, Mr. d'Armand—if you would serve the sweet?"
Rod  cleared,  with  a  glance  at  the  Second.  He  was  startled;  Weiser  still  looked
ravenous. Rod wondered how he could have gone through such big portions and still
be hungry.
Then he saw that the man was looking at Muldoon.
Alarm and anger flared in him, at the thought of that pig daring to even look at so
ethereal a lady—but hard on the heels of it came a surge of sympathy; Rod knew just
how the poor guy must feel, having to see the look on her face whenever she glanced
at the captain.
Which made Rod terribly confused. He chucked his load in the recycler and went to
punch in desert. Just serve the meal, swabbie—just serve.
 
 
"I push on the lower edge, right?"
"If the top edge is the outside, and if it operates as the locker does—yes."
"Okay, we'll try." Rod pushed in on the bottom line of the big rectangle on the wall,
and the bed glided smoothly out and down. A stack of sheets and blankets lay in the
middle;  one  end  of  the  mattress  bulged  into  a  pillow.  "Hmph!  Well,  here  goes
self-reliance." Rod picked up a sheet.
"I beg your pardon," Fess murmured, taking the sheet from him and shaking it out.

"Fess, no! If my shipmates catch you at it, they'll never let me hear the end of it!"
Fess paused in mid-shake. "Considering the evidence of Mr. Weiser's attitude…"
"Right." Rod took the sheet back,  handed Fess the rest  of  the  stack,  and  started
tucking. "I  cannot  believe  Muldoon!  She  is  a  real  beauty,  and  she  doesn't  seem  to
know it!"
Fess glanced back toward the engines.
"Oh, I'm not worried about her hearing—she has a cabin, and the door's closed."
"True—and she is beautiful," Fess admitted. "Still, she has not learned the graces of
a true lady."
"Well, I never learned to be comfortable with 'em." Rod stopped in mid-movement.
"Fess, when I saw her today, I felt a surge all through me."
"I was watching, Rod."
"And when it passed, I was still kind of light-headed, and the only thing I could think
was, 'So this is what it's like to be in love!' "
"Yes," the robot murmured. "Yes."
"Did it show?"
"Only if you knew what to look for."
"Which she probably does." Rod's mouth tightened with chagrin.  "Just as well she
knows it, I suppose."
"A lady is always complimented, Rod."
"Yeah,  I  suppose  so."  Rod  stood  back,  arms  akimbo,  proudly  contemplating  his
handiwork. "There! I can make my own bed!"
"You have done well, Rod." Fess omitted saying anything about hospital corners, or
smoothness.
Rod pulled out his duffel bag, took out pajamas, and glanced around him. "If  I  can
be sure that door stays shut…"
Fess boosted his audio gain, then reported, "She is breathing evenly and deeply,
Rod."
"Asleep." Rod stripped quickly.  "It still  behooves  me  to  move  fast.  Why  the  heck
don't they give us at least a privacy curtain?"
"Possibly, Rod, because the designers assumed  the  whole  crew  would  be  of  the
same sex."
"Quaint." Rod yanked the pajamas on, rolled into the bunk, and pulled the blankets
up. "Of course, I suppose I should want her to surprise me in the buff."
"It would perhaps be premature, at this stage of your relationship."
"I'll take your word for it. I have to—I don't quite know how to act."
"Yes. You have never had such vivid feelings toward another person, have you?"
"But… Why?"  Rod breathed. "When  all my life,  I've been surrounded by  delicate
ladies of high breeding, with all the graces and all the advantages—why!"

"Perhaps because Muldoon is of above-average intelligence.''
"Well—maybe. But I  don't remember anybody back home who had such  a  lovely
face,  either.  Except  Lucretia,  and  she's  so  neurotic  it's  a  wonder  she  doesn't  fall
apart."
"I  must  say  I'm  delighted  by  your  perception,  Rod.  Many  men  would  fail  to  see
Muldoon's  beauty  unless  she  used  cosmetics  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  overly
obvious."
Rod's eyes flew open, staring into the darkness. He lay back, speculations running
through his mind.
After an interval of silence, Fess murmured, "Good night, Rod."
"Hm? Oh. Yeah. Good night, Fess."
 
 
The ship shuddered, and Rod said, "Can I get up now?"
"Not yet," Muldoon called back.
"Shouldn't I have an acceleration couch?
"That's  what  your  bunk  is.  So's  mine.  Everything  has  to  do  double  duty,  on  a
freighter."
So that was why she was staying in her room.
"Docking completed," Donough's  voice  said  over  the  intercom.  "Twenty-four-hour
liberty commences now! Have fun in Ceres City, crew!"
They heard a cheer in the background, before the captain let the mike close.
Rod released his webbing and was sitting up before it had finished snapping back.
He  hopped  down,  pushed  his  bed  up  and  into  the  wall,  and  headed  for  the
passageway.  Then  he  stopped,  realizing  that  his  footsteps  didn't  have  an  echo.  He
turned around and saw Muldoon with computerboard in  hand,  checking  the  bank  of
meters on the wall. "Aren't you coming?"
Muldoon shook her head. "Always something to do, here."
"But it doesn't have to be done, does it?"
"Have to or not, I'm doing it."
"But why?" Rod frowned, coming toward her. "You can't…"
And Muldoon burst into tears.
Rod froze, staring.
"Out!" Muldoon snapped. "Let me take care of my engines in peace! Now, get out!'''
Rod got.
 
 
"But why didn't she want company?" Rod muttered.
"There are nuances in human relationships that are indecipherable without knowing

the complex of ties involved," Fess answered, sotto voce.
"Which means we don't know enough to guess."
"A sufficiently accurate interpretation. And, if you'll pardon the comment, Rod…"
"It's none of my damn business." Rod lay back, waiting for the acceleration to pass.
"But Fess, I love her."
"That does not give you the right to meddle in her affairs."
"I suppose," Rod sighed.
"But Rod, you have been worrying this problem for twenty-six hours now—and I am
certain you scarcely noticed the sights of Ceres City."
Rod shrugged. "Ceres, I've seen before. Muldoon, I haven't."
The acceleration eased  off,  and  the  intercom  announced,  "Departure  completed.
We have set course for Ganymede. Duty stations."
Rod sat up, stood, and turned to push his bunk back into the wall. "Well, let's hope
she's—"
A sudden  raucous  hooting  echoed  through  the  ship.  Rod  froze,  recognizing  the
"loss of atmosphere" signal. "We're holed!"
If  Fess said anything, it was to empty air.  Maximan reflexes  had  taken  over,  and
Rod was on his way to the emergency toolkit.
He yanked it up—it took quite a pull; the bottom was magnetized—and glanced up at
the screen above it. An outline of the ship glowed there, with a red dot blinking in the
forward hold. He turned toward the doorway, swinging the toolbox  up  as  he  sprang.
Behind him, he heard Muldoon calling, but for once, it didn't seem important.
He shot down the passageway, ricocheted off the sides of the dog-leg, and hurtled
past the entry hatch. Behind him, way behind, somebody was yelling, "Out of the way,
swabbie!" But that didn't matter. He braced himself, wrenched at the grip on the hatch,
and leaped into the forward hold, hitting the lights as he came.
It felt as though his face was trying to swell. He saw the puncture, an ugly, ragged
hole with sharp edges pointing toward him, a good  centimeter  in  diameter.  He  dove
toward it,  ripping  the emergency box open and yanking out a temporary patch, then
swinging the box down against the hull. The magnetic bottom clanked, hard,  and Rod
held onto it as he swung his feet up, went into a crouch by the hole, and slapped the
patch on. He pushed against the box as he smoothed the edges, then swung his legs
back to grasp the sides of the toolbox as he pulled an insulated glove on, then took out
a steel patch and the spotwelder. Feet pounded up  behind  him,  and  Weiser's  voice
yelled, "What the hell do ya think y're doing? Out of the way, ya spoiled brat, before I
push you through that hole!"
Rod gritted his teeth and ignored the man. He stuck the positive contact  onto  the
wall,  then  held  the  steel  patch  over  the  temp.  He  pounded  its  center  flat  with  the
hammer  end  of  the  welder,  then  tilted  the  tip  to  the  edge  and  pressed  the  button.
Lightning spat from it, and the alloy edge of the patch flowed.
He traced the rectangle around the edges of the patch, then sat back on his heels
and heaved a sigh. Now he could let the shakes hit.
And look up at Weiser.

He braced himself; he knew he had disobeyed a direct order.
But the Second was studying the patch, and, slowly, nodding.
Rod felt limpness hovering. "I'm sorry, sir. I…"
"Did what you should." Weiser still nodded. "Good job of welding, too. I should say,
'Sorry'; I didn't see you'd already put the temp patch on." He turned around to scowl
down at Muldoon, who was coming up, panting. "Y' taught him fast."
Muldoon shook her head. "Not that, I didn't."
Weiser turned back to Rod. "Where'd ya learn, rich boy?"
Rod managed a thin smile. "I  grew up on an asteroid, sir.  Our buildings  may  not
look like  pressure  domes,  but  that's  what  they  are—and  we're  raised  with  puncture
drills. I've known how to set a patch since I was ten."
" 'D ja ever really do it before?"
"Once. That was the only time I ever got there first."
Weiser nodded slowly. "Guess even an aristocrat can earn his keep. Well, the fuss
is over. Back to stations, everyone."
 
 
Rod still served at mess that night, but Weiser didn't glare at him once. Rod's heart
sang—he was proving himself!
And the topic of conversation had changed. The officers had some bragging to do.
"What were you trying to do in that restaurant, McCracken—eat the whole menu?"
"No, just everything on it."
Muldoon smiled thinly.
McCracken went on, "Too bad about the keg in the Fall Inn."
"What about it?" Weiser frowned. "I didn't see nothing wrong."
"Then why were you trying to outdo it?"
A laugh rounded the table; even Muldoon joined, and Weiser  grinned.  "Talk about
me having the high old time! Whelk was out with his wife again."
"Which one this time?"
Muldoon's smile faltered.
"The Ceres one." The first officer smiled at Rod. "Entirely legal, Mr. d'Armand—on
both Mars and Ceres. Not on Terra, of course—but I don't go there very often."
"Not unless he wants to wear his law suit," Weiser jibed.
"However, our gallant Captain must take his share of ribbing," Whelk said, with a sly
wink at Donough. "That was a beautiful brunette we saw you with at Pastiche's, sir."
"Why,  thank  you,  Mr.  Whelk."  Donough  inclined  his  head,  and  Muldoon's  smile
disappeared.
"Brunette?" Weiser frowned. "She was a redhead!"

"No, that was the one at Malloy's," McCracken corrected him. "Cute as a button."
"In a pig's eye!"
"No, the one at The Pig's Eye was blonde."
"Hey, I was at Pastiche's, and she was a redhead!"
"Oh?" said Whelk. "When were you there?"
"Twenty-one hundred."
"Oh, the early shift. Well, I saw him there when we dropped in for a morning snack,
about 0400. She was a brunette by then."
Muldoon had to look down at her plate. Rod felt a lump in his throat, and searched
wildly  for  a  way  to  change  the  topic—but  all  he  could  think  of  was  Fess  saying,
"Swabbies should be seen and not heard."
"Gentlemen, gentlemen!" Donough smiled around at them, amused. "I'm afraid  you
have caught me out. Margot is my second cousin; she was waiting for me as…"
The hoots of laughter drowned out the end of the sentence.
"And I'll bet the blonde was your Aunt Greta!"
"No, she's the sister of a friend  who asked me to  take  her  to  dinner,  poor  thing.
She's very shy, never goes out…"
Weiser howled, then smothered it to a chuckle, glanced at Muldoon, and went silent.
"As  to  the  other  two,"  Donough  said  with  dignity,  "you'll  have  to  assume  prior
acquaintance; there as no other way I  could have arranged to meet them, ahead  of
time."
"No way at all," Whelk said, deadpan. "It's too bad you didn't have time to fully enjoy
the company of any one of them."
McCracken tried to swallow a snicker.
"Social obligations must come before personal pleasure," Donough sighed.
"Yes, but personal pleasure should be considered." Whelk turned serious, and also
turned to Muldoon. "You really must take shore leave now and then, Engineer. It's vital
to your emotional well-being."
"Yes, Muldoon!" McCracken turned a genial  smile  on  her.  "Why  don't  you  come
along next time?"
"Yeah, Gracie!"  Weiser  said, with genuine concern.  "You gotta quit  moulderin'  in
that engine room! Get out an' live a little! You need it!"
"No," Muldoon said, very quietly, "I don't think so."
 
 
She  was  still  very  quiet  as  she  led  the  way  back  to  the  engine  room.  Rod  felt
awkward as he followed behind her,  knowing damn well that she wanted to be alone,
but not seeing any polite way to excuse himself. He kept feeling as though he should
make conversation, but knew it would do more harm than good.
As they came through the door, Muldoon muttered something about paperwork and

sat down at her terminal. Rod drifted around the engine room, not knowing where else
he could go, but not wanting to be in her way. She was punching at the pads as though
they  were  mortal  enemies.  The  silence  stretched  tighter  and  tighter,  till  Rod  could
almost hear it thrum.
Finally, he couldn't take it any more. "Uh, sir, I could take the watch, if you needed
to do…"
Then he couldn't hear himself anymore, because she was sobbing.
Rod  was  terrified.  Oh,  he'd  dealt  with  tears  before,  but  these  sounded  real.  His
instincts moved him to her as surely as his glands, but he didn't know what he could
do.
Finally,  he  gave  in  and  dropped  to  one  knee  beside  her.  "It'll  be  all  right,"  he
murmured. "It all comes out okay in the end! It's not really that bad!"
"Oh, shut up!" she stormed. "You don't even know what you're talking about!"
Rod recoiled, stricken.
Muldoon saw, and broke up all over again. "Oh,  I'm  sorry!  I  didn't  mean  to  be  a
beast when you were only trying to help. But it is that bad! He goes out and sees every
pretty girl he can cram into twelve hours, because he knows he won't see one again
for a month! And every day, he's sitting right across from me, seeing me every time he
looks up! But I'm not pretty!"
"You are!" Rod protested.
"Oh, be quiet, you idiot! I'm as plain as they come! I'm ugly!"
"You are beautiful!" Rod stormed. "Underneath those smudges is the most delicate,
entrancing face I've ever seen! Your figure takes my breath away! Your features are
the kind men kill each other for! Your eyes are pools that a man could lose himself in!"
She  stared  at  him,  her  sobs  slackening.  "Do…  do  you  really  think  so?"  She
hiccupped.
"I swear it!"
"Well… You're a rich boy, you must have seen the best…"
"Best,  my  fandango!  You're  so  far  beyond  them  that  you  can  look  back  at  the
galaxy!"
"But…  but  they've  got  those  lovely  dresses…  and  they're  graceful,  and  refined,
and…"
"They're as graceful as penguins on land! You move like a fairy princess!"
"You've only seen me in free fall…"
"Give me a chance to see you in gravity," he begged. "Go on shore leave. Believe
me—the Maximan girls don't have an ounce of your beauty!"
"But… in the pictures on the screen…"
"What pictures? Oh—You mean those little clips they put in on the 3DT romances?
Those're actresses, not real Maximans. Oh, sure, now and then you'll see a few shots
of a real ball—but the camera's so far  away that you can't really see the  faces  and
figures at all."

"But they're aristocrats!"
"Yeah, and they look like it, too. All they have that you don't have is pretty dresses
and makeup—and you can buy both of those."
"But I wouldn't know what to do with powder and rouge if I had it!"
Rod took a deep breath. "Trust me. I do."
He  had  studied  the  use  of  face  paint  through  many  an  inordinately  dull
banquet—since he'd had to look at his table companions, he'd had to find something to
keep his mind busy, so he'd started figuring out how they'd managed whatever effect
they'd  achieved.  Then  he'd  had  a  few  makeup  workshops  in  the  Maxima  Amateur
Theater Society, and he'd had a chance to study the process at close range, while the
female Thespians labored with brush and liner.
 
 
"Yes,  you  must  use  a  foundation!  I  know  your  complexion  is  perfect—I'd  think
you'd never exposed it to sunlight!"
"I didn't." Muldoon glared up at him. "I grew up in L-5. But I did have acne."
"Then  you  had  one  hell  of  a  doctor.  But  skin  is  skin,  and  you're  going  to  be  a
canvas!"
"Oh, all right," Muldoon griped, and sponged it smooth. Then she picked up a stick.
"No," Rod said, "not the pencil. Use the brush; shadow lines aren't really drawn with
a ruler.''
"But the pencil's so much easier!" Muldoon complained.
"Do you want ease, or results? Remember, it has to shade—chiaroscuro, just as in
a painting. That's what you're going to be, when you get done—a work of art. Dust that
color back in from the cheekbones."
 
 
"But I can't move with these things on!"
"Then you'll never be graceful in gravity. Those magnets should give you just about
the same pull as one G—I had Fess design them. Remember, now, one foot at a time,
and short steps."
"I'll never get anywhere, that way!"
"Where you're trying to get, isn't measured in meters. You can move fast if you take
lots of quick steps. Okay, try it… Good! You've got the feet right. Now, keep your back
straight, and your shoulders back a little."
"But that makes my—you know. Like I'm trying to show off."
"What's the matter—are you ashamed of them? No? Then  walk  as  though  you're
proud—that's right! Now, tilt your chin up just a little…"
 
 

Rod's head swiveled from side to side.
"Give it up," Muldoon advised. "You can't see everything at once."
"I can try, can't I? Wow! So this is Ganymede!"
"Yeah, one big shopping mall, except for the spaceport. You name it, you can buy
it."
"Oh, come on! There have to be some laws!"
"Don't tell the natives—they'll think you're swearing."
"Oh, wow-wow-wow-WOW!"
"Blink or your  eyes will dry  out," Muldoon grated. "We're  here to look at dresses,
not the lack of them!"
Rod pulled his eyes away with an almost-audible  snap.  "That  is  definitely  not  the
right style for you!"
Muldoon scowled up at him. "How do you know what a woman should wear?"
"Sir, when it comes to beauty, I'm not just a consumer, I'm an addict!  All I  have to
do is dress you like my dreams."
"I thought you said that wasn't the right style for me."
 
 
"Oh, doing your  hair?"  Rod popped in around  the  open  cabin  door.  "Remember,
now, you have to rat it before…"
"Shove  off,  swabbie,"  Muldoon  muttered  around  a  mouthful  of  hairpins.  "This  is
something I do know."
"You do?" Rod couldn't help goggling. "Where'd you learn?"
"Before school, every day for thirteen years."
"Then wh—" Rod just barely managed to swallow the rest of it.
"Because when I got to college, I  decided there was no reason to put up with the
pain, and swore I'd never do it again. Will you get out of here?"
"But what about your oath?"
"I'm going to start using it in about three seconds. Now shove off!"
 
 
"Shopping!"  Weiser  chortled.  "The  little  guy's  going  shopping!  Hey,  if  ya  see
something frilly, take it in and have it filled, will ya?"
"Let him alone, Weiser," McCracken grumped. "At least he's getting Gracie to step
out a little."
"Yeah. Nice move there, mister." Weiser throttled it down to a grin. "How come you
know all about dresses, buddy boy?"
"Mr.  Weiser,"  Rod  said,  in  his  loftiest  manner,  "I  have  always  enjoyed  studying
dresses closely—after there's something in them."

"Oh, yeah? Did you learn anything?"
"A lot, about truth in  packaging."  Rod  turned  around  at  the  sound  of  high  heels.
"Ready, sir?"
"You betcha, swabbie!" Muldoon floated up in a velvet dress, hair  falling in  gentle
waves, makeup flawless, and a twinkle in her eye. "Let's go see Titan!" She hooked her
hand through his elbow and charged out to do battle with the cash register.
Weiser's head pivoted on his shoulders as he watched her go by. He studied their
retreating forms, mostly hers. "Y' know, that kid just might be smarter than he looks."
"Yeah, and maybe he's so smart that he's dumb."  McCracken  frowned  at  him.  "I
worry too much, Albie."
 
 
"D'Armand's Finishing School," Weiser  chuckled. "It'll finish  you,  if  you don't stop
snickering."
"I'm not snickering, I'm chuckling."
"Well, stow it, whatever it is—here she comes." They tipped their hats as Muldoon
breezed by. "Hi, Gracie!"
"Good to see you, Grace!"
" 'Grace' is the word," Weiser murmured, watching her retreating back. "Maybe the
kid knows what he's doing."
"Maybe he does," McCracken agreed. "Pull your eyes back into your head, Albie."
 
 
"Ceres again," McCracken sighed. "Whelk goes off to his wife, the captain goes off
with a crowd, and I go off to dinner."
"Whatever we're doing, let's go." Weiser had the fidgets. "Do we have to wait for the
captain?"
"More a matter of him waiting for you." Whelk came up. "I understand he wants to
give us all a sermon."
"For liberty?"
Donough came up with a smile. " 'Ten-shun! Now, men, I know this is going to be
something of a strain, but I understand we're giving the good ship Murray Rain a bad
reputation."
"Bad rep?" Weiser squalled. "We've been angels! Well… compared to…" His voice
trailed off.
Donough  nodded.  "Just  what  I  had  in  mind,  Mr.  Weiser.  Who  ever  heard  of  a
sedate sailor, sea or space? Now, I do want dignity at all times—but see if you can't be
a little wilder about it, eh? All right, now, out we… What are you staring at?"
All three officers were gazing past his shoulders with eyes like saucers. "Captain…
Gracie…"

Donough turned to look, and looked again.
She came toward them with small quick  steps, one hand on the bulkhead to keep
her down to the deck,  eyes bright,  an eager smile, and a  dress  that  clung  to  every
contour.
Donough gasped as though he'd been hit, or at least smitten.
Weiser was the first to recover. "Hey, Gracie, I know this great little place…"
McCracken  bowled  past  him.  "Grace,  would  you  consider  dinner  at  the  most
fantastic restaurant…"
Whelk just looked unhappy; he had a wife waiting.
"Ten-hut!"
They all pulled a brace. The captain saw Gracie at attention, and took a deep breath
himself. "Gentlemen," he said quietly, "for  once,  I'm going to pull rank.  Ms. Muldoon,
may I have the pleasure of your company for dinner tonight?"
"Oh,  yes,  Captain!"  Muldoon  fairly  glowed  as  she  took  his  arm  and  stepped  out
under the stars, gazes locked with Donough's. Weiser  stood in the hatchway staring
after them, muttering, "She's in love with him. I  knew  it,  yeah—so  why's  it  hit  hard,
now?"
"Maybe because he never realized she was a woman before," Rod said.
Weiser turned to him, narrow-eyed.  "Speak when you're  spoken to, Mister! If  she
gets a heartbreak, it's you I'll come looking for!"
And,  for  a  moment,  Rod  didn't  think  Weiser  was  going  to  wait.  He  braced  for
combat, resolved not to lose his head this time. All he could say was, "She needed it."
"Yeah."  There  was  no  definite  sign,  but  he  could  see  Weiser  cooling  down.  "I
oughta  hate  you  for  it—but  I  can't.  'Cause  I  love  her."  He  studied  Rod  for  a  long
moment, then nodded slowly. "You, too, huh, kid?"
Rod swallowed and nodded.
Then Weiser's arm shot out—to slap him across the shoulders and turn him toward
the hatchway. "Come on, swabbie—let's go get drunk."
And they did. Totally.
 
 
He woke  to  the  sound  of  singing,  croaked  piteously,  and  tried  to  bury  his  head
under the pillow, but it was fastened down.
"Oh, Rod, it was so wonderful!"
Rod  rolled  up  enough  to  crack  one  bloodshot  eye  open.  The  ultimate  vision  of
female loveliness sat down on his bed, and he was in no condition to do anything about
it.
"The whole night, Rod! He spent the whole night, just with me! No taking me back to
the ship and going off!"
"I'm s' happy," Rod moaned.

"First it was dinner, then it was dancing! Then we went to the first night club, and a
gypsy came over and played a violin—just for us!"
Rod wanted to ask her to speak more softly, but he didn't have the heart.
"Then  another  club,  and  another,  and  I  was  hoping  he  wouldn't  proposition  me,
'cause I didn't know if I would've been able to resist—but he didn't."
Thank heaven for small mercies. Personally, Rod wished the ship would stop rolling.
Then he remembered it was a spaceship, and the waves were only in his stomach.
"No other women! No blondes! No brunettes! Just  me!"  Muldoon  glided  up  into  a
pirouette. Rod caught his breath.
"We got drunk, but not terribly—we didn't need to. We had breakfast at Pastiche's
and strolled back along the Boulevard Glazé, and I never realized before how beautiful
the  asteroids  can  be,  like  stars  in  a  waltz!  And  he  stopped  in  front  of  the  church,
Ceres' only church, and asked me to marry him!"
Rod stared, too horrified to make a sound.
"Of course I said yes. I didn't have to think about it—I already have, so many times!
I said yes, and he took me inside and caught us a minister, and he helped us catch
each other, and we stopped by a jeweler's on the way back to the ship, and here it is!"
She thrust a small glacier under Rod's nose. He goggled, staring at the iceberg and
the slim gold band next to it, and felt his stomach sink, then lurch. But he managed to
whisper anyway, "All best wishes."
"Oh, thank you, you darling! And I owe it all to you!" Muldoon seized his face, gave
him a quick,  warm, but thorough kiss, and  said,  "I'll  never  forget  you  for  this."  She
bowed  her  head,  suddenly  looking  terribly  shy,  and  breathed,  "Gotta  go  now.  My
husband is waiting."
Then she was gone, in a swirl of taffeta.
Rod moaned and rolled over on his bunk, hanging his head over the bucket beside
it. "Fess—what have I done?"
"You have made a good woman very happy, Rod."
"But it wasn't supposed to work out this way!"
"How was it supposed to operate, then?"
"Oh… I dunno… But somehow, she was supposed to realize that I was the one who
really loved her, and wind up with me!"
"You will have her eternal gratitude, Rod. You will have a friend for life."
"A friend is not quite what I had in mind…"
Chapter 11
« ^ »

A low moan echoed through the hall.
The children  were up in an  instant,  their  hair  standing  on  end.  Gwen  was  sitting
straight, glaring.
"Oh, no!" Rod groaned. "Not again!"
" T-'tis a spirit of another sort, Papa."
"I don't care what it is—we need our sleep!" Rod rolled over, sitting up to glare at
Magnus. "Who did you wake this time?"
"I  did  not,  Papa!"  Magnus's  voice  broke.  "Or  if  I  did,  'twas  unawares,  from
dreaming!"
"That's all we need." Rod held his head in his hands. "We're  gonna be living in a
haunted castle, with a son who calls up ghosts even in his sleep." He turned  go  the
spectre. "Just who do you think you are, coming in here in the middle of the night and
scaring my family half to death?"
The moan turned into words. "I  cry  thy pardon, gentle knight. I  would  not  affright
younglings an I had any other way to seek thee."
"How about catching me alone, when I'm on my way to the jakes?"
"I cannot, for 'tis thy son who doth give the power to bring me forth."
Rod glanced up  at  Magnus,  eyebrow  raised.  "Settles  that  question,  anyway."  He
turned back to the ghost, frowning, studying its appearance. The new apparition was a
stocky  suit  of  armor  with  a  sword  in  its  hand,  clanking  appropriately.  "Have  the
courtesy to show your face, and tell us your name!" Rod growled.
"Thy pardon." The knight sheathed his sword and lifted not only his visor, but  his
whole helmet, too—and stopped looking frightening. He was balding, and had wrinkles
in his kindly face,  all in softly glowing outline.  "I  am  Sir  Donde  L'Accord.  I  had  not
meant to affright, least of all little ones."
"We are no longer little!" Geoffrey snapped, but Gregory just stared.
"And I am Rod Gallowglass, Lord Warlock. This is my lady, and my children. What
do you want with me?"
"A warlock!" The ghost's eyes lit with hope. "I cry thine aid, my lord! Have pity on a
poor, troubled father, an thou wilt! Assistance, I prithee!"
"Father?" Rod was suddenly totally alert. "You wouldn't happen to have a daughter
who roams this castle too, would you?"
"Aye." The ghost's expression darkened. "As will I, till I have found the means of my
revenge!"
"Ah," Rod breathed. "Revenge on the man who wounded your daughter?"
"Aye, tortured her heart, then slew her! Would that he and I were flesh, that I might
cast down my gauntlet and dash out his brains!"
"Not exactly a worthy thought, for one who presumably hopes to win to Heaven. How
come you died so soon after your daughter's death?"
"I did not." The spirit stared. "Wherefore wouldst thou think I had?"
Well, so much for Holmes's methods; Rod wasn't scoring  any higher than Watson

had. "Had to be after, or you wouldn't have known how she died. Couldn't have been
very long after, or you would have carved the villain's gizzard,  and cheerfully  gone to
the block if you'd had to."
"Indeed I would have, an I could have." The ghost smiled sadly. "Yet I died ere she
did, in battle. My spirit surged toward Heaven, yet slowed and tarried; my concern for
her did bind me back to earth. Yet in all else I longed for the mede of the Blessed, and
so I  hung, poised between this earthly mansion and the  one  above,  until  at  last  her
longing for me grew to terror, and drew me back to this castle—at the moment that her
spirit stepped forth from her clay. Yet she could not see me, for her whole being was
consumed with weeping, as it hath been ever since."
"The poor lass!" Cordelia cried, and Gwen said,
"Was her soul so filled with anguish, then, that she could not break free?"
"Aye, and ever hath been. I have slumbered by, for when death passed, her craving
for my presence ceased; she was so filled with horror that there was room for naught
else. Only now have I  awaked—and I  must needs find  some way to ease my child's
rest!"
Rod rolled out of his blanket and beckoned to his children. "Up. Everybody up. Now
it's my mission, too."
"But their rest!" Gwen protested.
"I think we'll have better luck sleeping during the day, dear. Fewer interruptions, you
know?" Rod turned back to the ghost. "Name the villain."
Fires licked at the backs of the spectre's eyes. "The Count."
"But I  thought  he  whipped  his  son  into  line.  Did  he  turn  around  and  commit  the
same crimes himself?"
"Nay—he died. And the son became Count  in  his  turn—the  last  Count  Foxcourt,
and the final scion of an evil line."
"Evil line?" Rod frowned. "It sounded as though his father had some morals."
"True, but only what was needful to bind  his  knights  unto  his  service—and  to  be
sure that none could have their will, save he."
"Oh." Rod translated. "So his son couldn't bundle the knights' daughters  into  bed,
because that was Dad's prerogative—only Dad wouldn't do it,  because he needed to
have his knights stay loyal."
"Aye, but his son had not so much wisdom. Bad blood will tell—and in him, it fairly
howled. All his grandfathers had preyed upon the folk within their demesne, in all ways
that they could, without inciting  rebellion; they seized upon each chance  for  cruelty,
every means of exploitation. Thus were they named as they were."
"What—Foxcourt?" Rod said. "Doesn't sound all that evil."
"Nay—that was but the sound the peasants gave it, till only we, whose forebears had
been knights to that first Count, did remember its first form; for his neighbors dubbed
him with the name that he, in insolence, took up in pride: Faux Coeur.''
The French vowel and "r" made all the difference; Rod's eyes widened. "False heart
!"

"Quite false, in truth, for  he was a man who would, for  profit,  swear  to  any  oath,
then be forsworn upon the instant. He would speak bravely as he led his troops out; yet
would hang back behind while they  did  fight.  Oh,  false  he  was  in  words  and  deed,
speaking fair  and smiling sweetly, then wreaking every cruelty  he could—and all  his
heirs were like him. Yet this last Count swore to outdo them all. He did not even deign
to  marry—what  cared  he  for  the  future  of  his  House?—but  set  out  to  seduce  all
women. Harsh-faced he was, but bore himself with a swagger, and spoke in honeyed
tones, and wenches swooned when he came near."
Rod nodded. "Combination  of  a  certain  animal  attraction,  and  money.  Works  on
naive serving-wenches, every time."
"Thou hast known the kind."
"Yes—but I've also noticed their blandishments don't very often work  on  ladies  of
their own station."
"Oh, he scrupled not to seek out other ways than wooing! By fair means or foul, he
would seduce each lady that he could bring within his power, then spurn her from him,
to dwell in shame—and several slew themselves. He only gloated."
"Why, what a thorough villain!" Cordelia said in indignation.
"And he used his tricks on your daughter."
"Aye, for she was young, and very beauteous—and he, though a youth no longer,
had taken womanizing as his foremost pastime. I sought to keep her from his sight, yet
he did make a progress through his lands anon—I think more  to  espy  out  wenches
than to be sure his bailiffs dealt honestly—and called in turn at each knight's house. He
knew the number of my children, and summoned all before him—and when he saw her
beauty, there was no restraining him."
"You could have taken them and fled!" Cordelia protested.
"Aye, yet I was bound by mine oath of fealty—the more fool I, for this Count did not
feel bound by any oath of his! Yet when his man did come bearing his command to go
unto his castle to attend upon him, and with all my family,  I  did say,  'Nay.' Within  a
fortnight, he did declare a war on Count Moline, and bade me forth unto the fray."
"Ah!" Geoffrey's eyes glowed. "That command thou couldst not ignore, for 'twas the
essence of thy knighthood!"
" 'Tis even as thou sayest." The knight bowed his head. "And he set me in the front
rank, to be slain in the first  charge—yet  did  not  trust  to  fortune;  for  at  the  moment
when my lance struck home 'gainst my opponent, a bolt did strike through mine armor
'neath my shoulder blade."
"From behind!" Geoffrey  cried.  "Ah,  what scurvy  knave  of  an  archer  did  that  for
him?"
"I know not, yet I misdoubt me an his pay was aught than death, for only a fool of a
lord would chance his other knights' learning of such foul treachery. The barb pierced
home, and I  did swoon, and was mindful of naught else, till I  did step forth from my
mortal part."
"And went straight up to be caught between  your  duties  and  your  rewards."  Rod
nodded. "So you don't even know what happened to your daughter."
"Only that she was driven to death by one means or another, and that my son was

gone."
"Son?" Magnus looked up. "Nay, surely!  He must needs be removed, or he would
do all to prevent his lord from reaching to his sister!"
Cordelia turned to gaze at Magnus with a musing frown.
"Even so," the knight agreed. "He was a goodly lad, and would ward his folk from
every harm. Nay, surely he must needs have been banished or murdered—and I have
no doubt that his soul ascended on the instant of his death, for he was indeed a goodly
lad."
"And thy daughter's spirit saw thee not?"
"Nay; she is ever incoherent in her grief. I did seek revenge and, I hoped, arresting
of the Count's misdeeds, by haunting him; yet I  had died without great anger, for  I'd
had little cause ere then, and my spirit lacked its fullest strength; and for  his part, the
last  Foxcourt  cared  only  for  himself  and  his  fleshly  pleasures,  and  perceived  little
enough of others' feeling, and certainly naught of ghosts."
"Too insensitive to be haunted," Rod said, with disgust.
"  'Tis  even  so."  Suddenly,  the  ghost  was  kneeling,  with  a  spectral  clanking.  "I
beseech thee, as one father to  another—aid  me!  Find  some  means  of  bringing  my
child to the rest she merits! Avenge her murder!"
Rod's face hardened. "I don't deal in revenge."
"Art thou a craven? Why, then, pox upon thee! May thou forever be…"
"Nay, hear my father," Gregory said quietly, and, for a wonder, the ghost stilled at
his words. He frowned down at Gregory, then looked up at Rod. "What means he?"
"He knows why I  won't try  for  revenge," Rod said. "It bogs you down,  keeps  you
from going on to make the most of yourself. The goal here is to give your  daughter's
spirit eternal rest, and her chance to finish her journey on the road to Heaven. If, in the
process, the final Count finds himself on the receiving end of some of the cruelty  he
wreaked while he was alive—well and good; but that's only a byproduct."
"Yet tell us this." Magnus stood, puzzled. "How may a ghost be hurt?"
The knight sighed and seemed to grow dimmer. "I know not.''
"The last Count is now but spirit," Gregory spoke up, "yet may feel spirits'  pain.  In
truth, 'tis the agony of the soul that may yet redeem him, for if he comes to realize the
pain that he hath caused, then may he yet repent."
"The  hour  for  that  is  past,"  the  ghost  said.  "He  is  dead."  But  he  turned  to  Rod.
"What manner of child is this, who doth speak with the wisdom of a bishop?"
Rod winced. "Please! We've already been through that career plan."
Far away, a rooster crowed.
The ghost's head lifted up. "The pregnant sky doth lighten with the dawn, and all the
spectres of the night must slip away and hide themselves from light. I have overstayed
my time. Farewell! Give aid to my child—and remember me!"
He faded as he said the words, and was gone, his last words echoing in repetition
behind  him:  "…  Remember…  remember…  remember…"  Then  the  space  where  he
had stood was empty, and the room was silent.

The children turned to look at one another, and Gwen sought Rod's gaze, but he still
frowned toward the place where the ghost had been. She sighed, and turned away to
stir up the fire.
Magnus stepped over to Rod, hand lifted, not quite touching. "Papa…"
"Yes." Rod looked up, then smiled. "Good morning, son. Feel like a little hunting?"
 
 
"How canst thou now, in the same chamber thou wast in before, read more of their
tale now, than thou couldst aforetime, my son?"
"For that I  now  know  whom  I  seek,  Mama.  'Tis  like  to  searching  out  a  face  well
known within a crowd." Magnus was in one of the knight-and-lady chambers, fingertips
tracing the wall. He frowned, shook his head, and turned to touch the bed. He stared
then, and went rigid.
"What dost thou see, my son?" Gwen said softly.
"I see the  wicked  Count,  Rafael  Fer  de  Lance,  ushering  the  Lady  Sola  and  her
mother, Dame Forla L'Accord, into this chamber." Magnus's voice seemed to come to
them on a breeze, wafted from a great distance. "He is no longer young, and is harsh
of face, yet with that sort of attraction for women that a snake hath for a bird."
Cordelia shivered.
"He is the last scion of an evil line," Magnus continued, "and is more evil than most,
not even deigning to marry,  but seducing every maid he can find,  by  fair  means  or
foul,  then  abandoning  each  in  her  turn.  Only  the  Lady  Sola  endures  against  his
blandishments. She caught his eye, for she is very beautiful, and the daughter of one
of  his  knights;  so  Count  Foxcourt  commanded  Sir  Donde  to  attend  him  with  all  his
family. The knight refused, so the lord ordered him into battle, made sure of his death,
and took his family into this castle 'for protection,' no matter Dame Forla's protests—for
though her son Julius did succeed to his father's estates, he is too young to administer
them."
"Here in his lair?" Cordelia asked. "How could the lady stand against him?"
"She  had  the  love  and  support  of  her  mother  and  brother  when  first  she  came,
which did stiffen her resolve. Sin that she did resist his every blandishment, and her
mother was the core of her strength, the Count did have the good dame poisoned."
The ladies gasped, and Geoffrey muttered darkly, but Gregory demanded, "Did the
lady then find her own strength within herself?"
Rod glanced at his young son, then realized what he'd said, and stared.
"Not  so,"  Magnus  breathed,  trembling,  "for  the  Count  did  trump  up  a  charge  of
treason 'gainst the brother Julius,  but did intimate that the lady's acquiescence  might
save the lad."
"The villain!" Geoffrey cried, and Rod let out a long, low whistle.
"Then would the lady have yielded out of fear for her brother—but he contrived his
escape, and came to her secretly  to bid her stand fast. Then he laid a trail  of  false
clues that led his pursuers to think him drowned by his own hand, and hid with a band
of tinkers."

"A shrewd lad, a clever lad!" Gregory clapped  his  hands.  "Yet  did  not  the  Count
suspect?"
"Aye. He did raise the hue and cry, and searched for Julius high and low, but never
thought  of  disguises,  and  failed  to  find  him.  Yet  he  told  the  lady  that  the  boy  was
imprisoned and would be tortured."
Cordelia's eyes were huge. "How could she then hold against him?"
"The brother did contrive to bring  his tinker-band hard by  the castle walls, so that
she  saw  him  from  her  tower  window,  and  heard  him  sing  a  song  they'd  shared  in
childhood.
Gregory  sighed  in  admiration,  and  Geoffrey  muttered,  "The  lad  did  not  lack  for
courage."
"The lady became obdurate again,"  Magnus went on, "and the lord did guess that
someone in the castle had betrayed the secret that the boy was missing. He began a
hunt for his supposed traitor, and confined her to her chamber, visiting her daily, and
alone."
"Oh!" Cordelia clapped a hand over her mouth. "He forced her, then?"
"Nay,  for  the  chase  had  become  too  much  a  matter  of  pride  for  him.  Yet  he
scrupled not to bring her wine mingled with a potent drug. She was wary, though, and
knew the potion by its odor; she refused to drink—nor  would she quaff  too deeply of
brandy wine, though he did ply her with it."
"A  worthy  lady,"  Gregory  breathed,  bright-eyed,  "and  a  prudent  one.  Could  the
Count not see she was proof against his wiles?"
"Belike he did, for he lost patience, accused her of witchcraft, tried and sentenced
her—and did attempt to have his rape of her be part of that sentence."
"Would he not even then give over?" Cordelia said with some heat.
"He  did,"  Magnus  answered.  "Not  by  any  notion  of  chivalry,  no,  but  by  the
clamoring of one and all, clergy  and laity,  who cried  that he would have  intercourse
with the devil. When he discerned that they might topple him from his seat, he did give
over, and had to be content with her burning at the stake."
"Thus died a brave and valiant wench," Geoffrey murmured.
"Aye,  and  one  whose  life  brought  her  only  sorrow."  Tears  glittered  in  Cordelia's
eyes.
"What of the lord?" Gregory breathed.
"The Count lived out his life as ever he had lived, in cruelty and depravity—yet was
he more willing to resort to rape."
"And what of the lad?" Geoffrey demanded. "The bold, audacious brother? Sought
he no revenge?"
"Aye,  when he  had  come  to  manhood,  and  had  claimed  his  right  to  knighthood.
Then did he stride into Foxcourt's Great Hall  and  challenge  the  Count  before  all  his
company—with a score of King's knights at his back."
"There was no help for  it,  then."  Geoffrey  grinned.  "The  Count  must  needs  have
fought him."

"He  did,  yet  with  treachery  and  deviousness,  as  ever.  He  coated  his  blade  with
poison and did manage to nick Sir Julius, just as he was on the verge of slaying the
lord."
"Ah, poor knight! What a base, depraved Count was this!"
"He was indeed." Magnus's voice finally  hardened. "Yet he died in his bed, of no
worse enemy than jaundice and gout—and he died without issue—or legitimate heirs,
at the least."
"His line died with him, then," Gregory breathed,
"Even so. Oh, there was a cadet branch of the house…"
"Still is," Rod murmured.
"…Yet they had too much sense to want  the  castle.  Therefore  hath  it  languished
here, untenanted and grim,  whilst centuries have rolled—and the Count's shade hath
ceaselessly pursued  the  Lady  Sola,  whose  ghost,  ever  lamenting  the  deaths  of  her
mother, father, and brother, still haunts these halls, seeking some way to atone."
"Yet she hath no need!" Cordelia insisted. "There was no fault in her!"
But, "Hush," Gwen said, and reached out to take hold of Magnus's wrist, lifting his
hand  from  the  wall.  The  young  man  froze;  then,  slowly,  his  eyes  came  into  focus
again. He blinked, turning to look at Gwen. "Mother?"
"Aye," Gwen said softly. " 'Tis past, my son—hundreds of years past. Thou art with
us again, as thou ever wast, with thy father, and myself, and thy sibs."
Magnus turned to his brothers and sister, blinking.
Cordelia whirled toward her mother. "There is no rightness in it, Mama! There is no
justice!"
"The world is not always fair,  my daughter," Gwen answered, her face  grim,  "and
Heaven's judgement comes not till we are dead."
"Yet what justice hath Heaven given here,  that the lass's ghost  abides  in  torment,
while the lord's is gone!"
"Gone where?" Geoffrey said, with a curl of the lip.
"Good  point,"  Rod  responded.  "And  for  the  damsel  Sola—well,  I  can  certainly
understand why she lingers here, weighed down by false guilt for the lives of her whole
family."
Cordelia turned, eyes wide. "Dost mean that, to free  her,  we  have  but  to  tell  her
'twas the Count's guilt, and not hers?"
"No, we have to convince her of it—and with a good person, that can be very hard
indeed."
Gwen eyed him narrowly. "Thou hast summat in mind, mine husband."
"Only a little demonstration," Rod said easily.

Chapter 12
« ^ »
They slept for the remainder of the day. As the sun was setting, they were rising for a
quick breakfast of porridge and water.
"Are we to fight spectres with naught but oatmeal?" Geoffrey demanded.
" 'Twill stay with thee, and give thee endurance," Gwen assured him. She glanced at
Magnus, then looked again. "Didst thou not sleep soundly?"
"Aye, yet with many dreams. This Hall was the Count's prime place, Mama. 'Twas
not the setting for his most shameful acts, yet 'twas filled with an abundance of petty
cruelties and large humiliations."
"Thou hast awakened angry."
Magnus nodded. "I cannot wait to brace him!"
"Good," Rod said. "Good."
 
 
When darkness held the castle, and the only light came from the fireplace  and  a
single sconce nearby, Magnus turned and strode to the dais where the count had sat,
presiding over debauchery, two hundred years before.
The great chair stood there still. Magnus laid his hands upon it and called, "Rafael
Fer de Lance, Count Foxcourt! Come forth to judgement!"
The evil laugh began once again, distant, but swelling closer, till it rang and echoed
all about them—and Foxcourt was there, fully formed, even with faint colors glowing, so
strong was his spirit. He was in his prime, his early thirties, his frame still muscular, his
harsh features darkly  handsome—but  filled  with  sixty  years  of  knowledge  of  human
perversity, and delight in cruelty.
"Judgement?" he sneered. "And who will judge me, stripling? Thou?"
"That shall I! Yet I confess to wonder, that thou hast not yet been called before the
greatest Judge of All!"
"I have been too much addicted to the pleasures of  this  life—most  especially  the
delight of witnessing the suffering that I've caused." The ghost advanced on Magnus,
slapping his palm with his riding  whip. "I  find  the joys of cruelty  too great, to wish to
depart upon my final journey; though I'd have no choice, were there not foolish mortals
like thyself, whose curiosity gives me an anchor with which to hold to this, the scene of
all my pleasures."
Magnus stood firm, almost seeming to radiate a glow of his own. "Thou hast come to
thy last journey here. Yet an I weaken, I  have stronger spirits  than mine, or thine, to
draw on." He gestured toward his family. "Behold!"

An eldritch light shone about the Gallowglasses. Gregory started, but the others held
firm.
The Count's laugh rang through the room. "What have we here? Two babes? And,
ah! Two beauties!" He came down from the dais, advancing on Gwen  and  Cordelia.
"One young, one in the fullness of her bloom—yet both fresh female souls!"
"Aye," Magnus said, from behind him. " 'Tis meat and drink  to thee, to despoil the
innocent, is it not?"
"Thou speakest well." He lifted his hand as he came closer to the women.
"Hold, foul worm!" Rod stepped in front of his wife and daughter, rage seething just
beneath the surface of his face.
The count paused. "What have we here? A peasant, come to face a lord? Begone,
foolish knave!" And he reached through Rod to caress Cordelia's chin.
Rod  erupted  into  flame.  White-hot  flares  licked  out  from  him,  searing  the  night,
crisping the flesh on the spectre's form till spectral bones showed through. The Count's
ghost screamed, whirling away,  arms  coming  up  to  shield  his  face.  Then  Magnus's
eyes narrowed, and the fabric of the spirit tore, and tore again, parting and parting like
mist in a wind, as his shrieks rang through the hall, until his substance was shredded.
Finally, Rod's flames withdrew, and darkness returned.
Out of the silence, Magnus asked, amazed, "Is that all? Is there no more to do than
this?"
"Wait,"  Rod  answered.  "See  his  tatters,  drifting?  They're  coming  back  together
now."
And they were—swirling through the air  like flakes of glowing snow, they pulled in
upon themselves again, coalescing, returning to a form.
"I am ever proud when thou dost stand in my defense," Gwen said, low-voiced, "yet
mayhap thou shouldst not have spent so much of thy power so soon."
"No  fear—I've  just  begun  to  tap  it,"  Rod  answered.  "Not  that  I  had  any  urge  to
control myself, you realize."
"He comes," Geoffrey said, his voice hard.
The Count was there again, though without color now, only a pale and glowing form,
but one with fury contorting his features. "Foolish mortals, to so bait a ghost! Hast thou
no sense of caution? Nay, I shall be revenged on thee!"
Magnus was eyeing him narrowly. "He hath less hair, and more belly."
The Count whirled, staring at him in rage. "Avaunt thee, stripling! Up, men of mine!
All mine old retainers, out upon him! Men-at-arms, arise!"
Magnus stepped down and over to his parents. "What comes now?"
Rod shook his head. "Can't say. Let's see if he can bring it off."
But  the  Count  was  succeeding.  With  drunken  laughter,  his
 retainers
appeared—men-at-arms  with  ghostly  pikes,  and  knights  in  spectral  armor.  But  they
were only outlines, and their laughter sounded distant.
"The lesser evils," Rod muttered.
"To  horse,  and  away!"  Count  Foxcourt  called—and  suddenly,  his  knights  were

mounted on ghostly Percherons,  and  his  men-at-arms  advanced  not  with  pikes,  but
with sticks and horns, blowing a hunting call.
"The game is up!" the Count cried. "Ho, bearers! Drive them from the covert!"
The  men-at-arms  came  running,  eyes  alight,  shouting  with  laughter  and  glee,
thrashing at the Gallowglasses with sticks while the Count and his knights came riding,
seemingly from a great distance.
"Avaunt thee!" Magnus shouted, and a wall of flame encircled the family.
"Oh, be not so silly!" Cordelia sniffed. "We must banish them, "not hold them back!"
And the sticks writhed in the spectres' hands, growing heads and turning back on the
men-at-arms, becoming snakes which struck at their holders. With oaths, the soldiers
dropped  them.  Instantly,  the  snakes  coiled  and  struck,  then  struck  again,  and  the
men-at-arms fled shouting in disorder.
"A most excellent plan, my daughter!" Gwen cried, delighted, and the hunting horns
grew  limp,  then  swung  about,  their  bells  turning  into  gaping  jaws,  glowing  eyes
appearing behind them as they sprouted wings, and dragons  drove  at  the  men  who
had them by the tails. The soldiers yelled in fear  and fled, pursued by  instruments of
destruction.
Then the whole band of soldiers ran headlong into the advancing wall of knights.
Their masters rode them down with curses and galloped toward the Gallowglasses,
faces  filled  with  hungry  gloating,  their  mounts'  eyes  turning  to  coals,  flames  licking
about their outthrust jaws.
"This, then, is mine!"  Fess  galloped  out  between  the  family  and  the  knights  and,
suddenly, he seemed to swell and grow to twice his normal size, bleaching into a pale
and giant horse with mane and tail of flame, glowing coals for  eyes,  and bright steel
teeth  that  reached  out  past  the  Percherons'  heads  to  savage  their  riders  as  he
screamed with insane, manic glee.
"  'Tis  a  pouka,  a  spirit  horse!"  Gregory  shrank  back  against  Gwen,  and  even
Geoffrey had trouble holding his ground. "What hath possessed our good and gentle
Fess?"
"The same thing that possesses him every time someone tries to hurt us," Rod said
grimly, "and the foe are of his own form, this time."
But  the  horses  were  fleeing  now,  ghosts  overawed  by  ghosts,  while  their  riders
saved face by kicking and cursing at them, as they dwindled into distance.
"The  false  cowards!"  Cordelia  stormed.  "They  were  as  struck  with  fear  as  their
mounts—nay, more!"
The pouka had faded, darkened, and dwindled, and it was only their own, old Fess
who came trotting back to them—albeit with a ghost of glee in his plastic eye.
"When did you learn how to do that trick?" Rod asked, fighting a grin.
"I  have  been  considering  its  feasibility  for  some  time."  Fess  said,  with  airy
disregard. "I had wondered if I could exert the same ability to project illusions as you
could. Indeed, use of psionic amplifier…"
"Aye, wherefore not?" Gregory said, eyes alight as he stepped away from Gwen.
"Yet  would  real  folk  see  the  seeming?"  Geoffrey  frowned.  "Ghosts  are  illusions

themselves, and would certainly hold another such to be as real as they. Folk of flesh
and blood, though, might not."
"Yet  'tis  ghosts  we  fight  at  this  time  and  place,"  Gwen  reminded,  "and  Fess's
devising is most puissant with them."
Magnus's lip curled. "Assuredly, we shall have no difficulty with so tattered a band."
"We  won't have any trouble with  his  lordship,  either,"  Rod  said,  "except  that  he'll
come back every time we tear him apart. We need to banish him, not kill him."
"How will that aid the damsel Sola?"
"It will not." Gwen touched Rod's shoulder. "Hurt his pride."
"Of  course."  Rod  lifted  his  head  with  a  grin.  "He's  nothing  but  egoplasm,
now—where else would he be vulnerable?"
The Count had rallied his courtiers now, primarily by  banishing their horses. "Slay
them!" he screamed, pointing toward the Gallowglasses.
The ghosts turned to look, then began to march with low, gloating laughs.
"Show me how he looked when he was old,'' Rod suggested.
Magnus frowned, concentrating—and, at the head of his troops, the Count began to
age visibly. His hairline receded,  then crept  down the back of his  head  as  his  belly
grew, and his whole body began to swell. His cheeks thickened as liver spots bloomed
all over his skin.
His courtiers began to mutter among themselves, pointing. Someone giggled.
The Count halted, his lascivious leer turning into a scowl. He turned to look at his
retainers, saw the pointing fingers, and turned to look back at the Gallowglasses. His
face had swollen with fat and sagged into jowls.
"Is this how he truly looked at the end of his life?" Gwen asked.
Magnus nodded. "So say the stones."
"What kind of illnesses did he have?" Rod asked.
Magnus grinned.
The Count took another step, and howled with pain. "My gout!"
"Thou art no longer young," Gwen informed him. "Thou art an aged fool!"
But the malice in those eyes was anything but foolish.
"Didn't you say something about jaundice?" Rod muttered.
Magnus nodded, and His Lordship's skin gained a pale yellowish cast.
"Summon Sola," Gwen ordered.
Sweat beaded  Magnus's  brow,  and  the  ghost-girl  was  there,  wailing,  "Wherefore
hast thou brought me forth?"
The Count looked up, aghast, trying  to balance on  one  foot  while  he  cradled  the
other.
"Behold," Gwen called out, "thy tormentor's triumph! Old age!"
Sola turned, her weeping slackening. Her eyes widened, her lips parted. Then she

began to laugh.
"Be still!" the Count commanded, alarmed.
Sola laughed the louder.
"Now!" Rod said to Magnus. "The pratfalls!"
The Count's remaining foot skidded out from under him, and he landed flat on his
back with a howl.
Sola howled, too.
His courtiers stared, astounded.
The Count scrambled to rise, but he was too heavy. He roared in anger, trying  to
turn over, but even then, he had to kick  a few times before he could finally  work up
enough momentum.
Someone in his court began to snicker.
"I—I  shall  be…  revenged!"  the  Count  panted,  getting  his  feet  under  him,  and
treating his courtiers to a great view of his expanded backside. They began to laugh
openly. He looked back at them, startled, then managed to heave himself to  his  feet
and turned on them, his hand going to his sword, crying, "Be still, dolts!"
"The sword," Rod muttered. Magnus nodded.
The Count tugged at his hilt. He tugged again, then frowned and looked down. It was
still there, all right. He set himself and gave a mighty pull—and the blade flashed out,
describing a glittering arc through the air, heaving him around. His feet tangled, and he
fell again.
The courtiers bellowed with mirth.
Livid, the Count tried to scramble to his feet once more, giving Sola the posterior
vista. She howled the louder. "I should… not…"
"Nay, do!" Gwen encouraged. "Thou dost owe him far more!"
Sola's eye gleamed.
The Count struggled to get his knees under him.
Sola stepped forward, her dainty foot swinging hard in an arc.
The Count slammed down on his face again, and the Great Hall rocked with hilarity.
"Husband, this is humor of the lowest," Gwen said, trying to contain her laughter.
"Not quite." Rod turned to Magnus. "Aren't there always dogs under the tables, at
these feasts?"
And the dogs were there, sniffing at the Count and wrinkling their noses in disgust.
One  fastened  its  teeth  in  his  pants,  then  let  go  with  surprising  haste,  hacking  and
coughing as it backed away. The rest of the curs gave a snort, turned their backs, and
scratched dust into his face.  He was roaring,  of course,  but nobody could hear him
any more.
"Nay, let me join this mirth," Gwen said, and,  suddenly,  a  duplicate  of  the  Count
appeared, advancing toward Sola, but with his rum-blossom nose a bit more swollen,
the malice in his face somehow become foolish. "Behold, milord!" Gwen called, and the
Count turned about, on hands and knees, and looked up to see—himself.

Himself,  as  others  saw  him,  waddling  toward  a  pretty  girl  with  a  swollen  paw
outstretched, burbling, "Nay, my pretty, dost thou wish advancement?"
"Why,  aye,  my  lord,"  the  ghost-girl  responded,  and  stepped  aside.  The
doppelganger  blundered  on  by,  groping  about,  finally  managing  to  stop,  while  Sola
watched it,  giggling. There was nothing threatening about it now—it turned back,  still
groping and loosely grinning, merely an old, ugly, coarse, and foolishly leering dotard.
But Count Foxcourt laughed, too. "Why, what old fool is that?"
"Who?" Cordelia cried indignantly. "Art thou so blind? Nay, then, here's thy mirror!"
And  a  full-length  cheval  glass  appeared  in  front  of  Foxcourt,  right  next  to  his
doppelganger.  He  could  not  help  but  see,  and  blanched,  turning  to  stare  at  the
co-walker, then back to stare at the mirror, glancing from one to the other as his visage
slackened.
Then rage contorted his features. "Nay, thou shalt not mock me! All men of  mine
attack! Or wouldst thou yet be banished?"
The laughter died as though it had been cut off,  and the ghosts stared,  horrified.
They all knew what awaited them.
"Now!" the Count howled, and they started forward, faces grim.
"Remember,  all  they  can  do  is  scare  you,"  Rod  said  quickly  to  his  children.
"Everybody take a dozen or so, and keep them from being scary."
"Like  this,  dost  thou  mean?"  Gregory  chirped,  and  Sir  Boreas's  ghost  slipped,
skidded, and flopped floundering down.
"Yeah, that's the idea! Keep it up!"
Sir  Dillindag  hauled  out  his  sword,  and  found  it  was  a  daisy.  A  man-at-arms
chopped with his halberd, and it kept on going, spinning him around and around in a
circle while he howled.
"Good idea," Rod grunted, and another halberdier went spinning, but this time rose
up slowly, his halberd acting as a helicopter rotor, until he dropped it,  screaming with
fright.
Then Fess reared, his whinny a scream of fury as he whirled and struck out with his
forehooves at advancing knights.
It  was  a  mistake;  this,  they  could  understand.  The  knights  descended  on  Fess
shouting, englobing him in seconds, a melee of flailing swords and ghostly battle axes.
"Get away from that horse!"  Rod shouted, humor forgotten in the threat to his old
friend, and he waded through the knights, struggling to reach his companion.
He got there just in time to see Fess go rigid, knees locking; then his head dropped
to swing between his fetlocks.
"A seizure," Rod groaned. "Too many enemies, too fast."
"Who is elf-shot?" cried a treble voice.
" 'Tis the horse!" answered a crackling baritone. "Yet who did fling the shot?"
"  'Twas  none  of  us,"  answered  a  countertenor,  and  Rod  drew  back,  staring  in
disbelief—for miniature ghosts were climbing out of chinks in the walls and coalescing
out of thin air, translucent and colorful, and none more than a foot high.

"Mama," Cordelia gasped, "they are ghosts of elves!"
"Yet how can that be?" Gwen marveled. "Elves have no souls!"
" 'Tis he hath done it, mistress!" An elfin dame pointed at Magnus. "He doth call up
memories of such of us as once did dwell here."
"Yet what can have slain thee?" Gregory wailed. "Elves are immortal!"
"Not when we're pierced by Cold Iron—and so cruel  were this Count and his men
that they did hunt us out to slay us!"
" 'Twas good sport," said Foxcourt, with a feral grin.  "And it shall be again, if  thou
dost not take thee hence!"
"Indeed it shall," chuckled a pretty elfin damsel, "yet 'tis we who shall make sport of
thee! Gossips, what use is a count?"
"Why, for numbering," answered a dozen voices. "Shall we tally all his bones?"
And a skeleton grinned in the dark, a foolish thing that busily ticked off  each of its
own pieces—and somehow bore Count Foxcourt's face.
"How dost thou dare!" the Count cried, livid with rage.
"Why,  for  that thou canst not slay us now, foul count,"  said a larger  elf,  grinning
with malice, "for we are dead. Now ward thee from the wee folk!"
People  were  laughing  again,  and  in  the  gloom,  a  ring  of  merry  elfin  faces  was
appearing—faces crowned with caps and bells, forms bedecked in motley. The fools
and jesters had come to take their turns in the audience.
Foxcourt couldn't stay on his feet; the floor kept sliding out from under him. At one
point, he was actually bouncing about on his head, while Sola laughed and laughed,
one hand pressed to her mouth, tears streaming down her cheeks.
Behind him, his court were chopping frantically with swords that sprouted wings and
chicken's  heads  and  fluttered,  squawking  indignantly.  Knights  kept  grabbing  at
armored pants that kept slipping down, and men-at-arms kept  skidding  on  squashed
fruit, as overripe pears and plums flew from the jesters and clowns all about them, and
the manic laughter made the whole hall shake.
"What ails thee, milord?" a voice called. "Hast thou a bout of gout?"
"Good night, bad knight!" another cried.  "When  thou canst  not  prevail,  thou  must
needs take to thy bed!"
"Yet he'll not prevail there, either," a third voice answered.
A fourth called, "In what cause hast thou fallen, Sir Borcas? Art thou down for  the
Count?"
"Why, he doth flounder!"
" 'Nay, a flounder's a fish!"
"And so is he—he's found his fin!"
"Hast thou downed the Count?" a new voice cried; and another answered,
"The Count is down!"
"Nay, Count up!"

"He doth not count at all!"
"Then he is of no importance?"
Pale with humiliation and rage, the Count was inching back within the ranks of his
courtiers. But, "Nay," Gwen said, "how unseemly of thee, to depart ere the festival is
done!" And the audience of fools seemed to curve around as the howling, cursing mob
of  courtiers  faded,  leaving  the  Count  encircled  by  jeering  grotesques,  pointing  and
laughing.
"Be damned to you all!" he shouted, despairing, but the audience only laughed the
louder and cried, "Brother, will he seek to step?"
"Nay, he'll step to stoop!"
"An he doth stoop, he'll never stand up straight again!"
"Why, gossip, he hath not been upstanding since he came to manhood!"
"Aye, nor hath been upright since his birth!"
"What, was he born?"
"Aye, borne in triumph! See his noble stance!"
Which, of course, was the cue for the floor to slip out from under him again.
"Away!" the Count screamed. "Avaunt thee, monsters!"
"Doth he speak to himself, then?"
"What, shall we show him the true shape of his soul?"
"Nay, do not!" the Count cried in panic. "Go leave me! Get thee hence!"
"Why, I have hence, and roosters, too."
"And so have I. Wherefore ought we seek more?"
"To give us eggs."
A pale spheroid flew through the air and struck, breaking open on the Count's head
and oozing down over his cheeks.  He  howled  in  dismay  and  turned  to  run—but  he
could only run in place.
"There is only one direction in which thou mayest go," Gwen said, her voice hard.
"Any! Any way is good, so that it takes me from these loons!"
"What—a loon, doth he say?"
"A loon he needs, for he doth weave."
"Hath he a woof?"
"Nay, for they did spurn him."
"Then must he have a warp!"
"Aye. Now see him take it."
And the ghost began to diminish, shrinking into the distance as he bumbled away in
a limping run; though he stayed in the same place on the dais, he grew smaller and
smaller,  with  his  crowd  of  hecklers  hard  on  his  heels,  till  they  all  shrank  away  to
nothing, and were gone.

The Gallowglasses were silent, listening.
Faint, ghostly laughter echoed through the castle,  but  it  was  hilarity  now,  not  the
wicked gloating they had heard before.
"We have won," Magnus whispered, unbelieving.
Rod nodded. "I had a notion we could, if we just kept from being scared. Embedded
memories aren't going to hurt you, you see—they can only make you hurt yourself."
"Yet if they're naught but memories, how could we best them?"
"By making new memories to counter them," Gwen explained. "Now, if  the Count's
wickedness  should  echo  within  thy  brother's  mind,  these  scenes  of  humiliation  will
arise, to make him slink away again. For look you, all that he did truly seek in life were
pride and power—pride, gained by  shaming those  about  him;  and  power,  by  giving
hurt  wheresoe'er  he  could.  'Twas  that  which  was  his  true  pleasure—the  sense  of
power; his fornicating and his cruelty did feed that sense most vividly, for him."
Cordelia's eyes lit. "Yet here, he was himself held up to ridicule,  which did shame
him unmercifully."
"Aye, and at the hands of a victim, too."
"And he found he had no power, to strike back! Nay, small wonder that he fled, even
if 'twas to his just desserts!"
"If 'twas truly his soul." Magnus frowned. "If he was only memories embedded in the
stone, brought to seeming fullness by  my  mind,  then  what  we  have  seen  may  have
been but illusion."
"And  if  it  was,"  said  Gregory,  "his  soul's  been  frying  in  Hell  these  two  hundred
years."
"Gregory!" Gwen gasped, shocked at those words coming from an eight-year-old.
Gregory looked up at her, wide-eyed. "The good fathers do speak such words from
the pulpit, Mama. Wherefore may not I?"
Rod decided to save her from an awkward answer. "I think it's time to revive Fess."
"Oh, aye!" Cordelia leaped to the horse's side. "Do, Papa! How can I have not have
thought of him!"
"We were a little busy,"  Rod explained. He stepped up to Fess and felt under the
saddlehorn for the reset switch—an enlarged "vertebra." He pushed it over and, slowly,
the robot raised its head, blinking away the dullness from its plastic eyes.  "I…  haddd
uh… seizurrre?"
"Yes," Rod said. "Just wait, and it will pass."
"More quickly for me than for a human," the robot said slowly. It looked about at the
empty chamber, and the small boy building up the fire again. "The ghosts… are… ?"
"Gone," Rod confirmed. "We embarrassed them so much that they decided to seek
out new haunts."
Cordelia winced. "The elfin ghosts have affected thee, Papa."
"Ghosts of… elves?"
Magnus nodded. "I, unwitting, served for thee to bring them forth."

"I? But how could I…"
"The folk hereby do think a seizure's brought by  elf-shot," Gregory explained, "so
when thou didst seem to be so shot, the elves came forth to seek the slinger."
"But elfin ghosts could be nothing but illusion!"
" 'Tis even as thou sayest," Cordelia agreed, "yet were the Count and his men any
more?"
"Yet if the ghosts are but illusion," Geoffrey said, frowning, "how can this battle we
have held banish them?"
"By counteracting them," Fess answered.  "Believe  me,  Geoffrey—it  is  a  process
with which I am intimately familiar."
Rod  looked  up,  surprised.  He  had  missed  the  analogy  between  the  computer's
program, and the interactive loop between psychometricist  and stored emotions—but
of course, they were much alike.
"Then Sola's ghost was not truly her soul?"
Gwen spread her hands. "I  cannot say.  Yet soul or dream, I  think she's freed  for
Heaven."
"Still," Rod mused, "it wouldn't do any harm to have Father Boquilva over for dinner.
He understands computers, and he carries holy water."
Faint  in  the  distance,  a  hoarse,  raw  masculine  scream  rang  out  one  last  time,
diminishing into the fading echo of dying laughter. Then, finally, all was quiet.
"Is it cleansed now?" Gwen asked softly.
Magnus frowned, went to Foxcourt's chair,  and grasped the wood firmly  with both
hands. After a moment, he nodded. "Not even a trace doth linger—naught of him, nor
of any old angst or melancholia."
And, suddenly, she was there, radiant in the darkness before him, glowing with faint
colors, vibrant, alive, and more beautiful than she  had  ever  been.  "  'Tis  done—thou
hast wrought famously!"
Magnus could only stare, spellbound.
So it was Cordelia who asked, "The wicked lord is fled?"
"Aye."  Sola turned to her,  glowing in more ways than one. "Foxcourt saw that  he
would be forever mocked, if he dared to linger here—so he hath fled to try his fate in
the afterworld, convinced it cannot be worse."
Rod asked, "Didn't he ever have a hellfire-and-brimstone preacher?"
"Aye, and therefore called a priest,  and confessed his sins, when he foresaw his
death—yet  that  part  of  him  that  lingered  here  did  seek  to  turn  again  to  some  pale
shadow of its old delights."
"Foul!" Geoffrey glared, indignant. "Is there no justice in Heaven, either? Will he not
be dealt with as he did deal?"
"Not so." Gwen's hand was on his shoulder. "For, though he may yet be redeemed,
he must first  come to know his guilt, and to believe in it,  in his heart of hearts; then
may he make reparation. He shall be long in Purgatory, son—if he doth win to it at all.
He may not have been truly repentant when he was shriven."

Geoffrey still didn't look content, but he was silent.
"Justice,  I  desire,"  Sola admitted,  "yet  I'll  be  content  with  his  wickedness  ended.
Thanks to thine aid, good folk, none shall ever again suffer  from the cruelty  of Count
Foxcourt. Thou hast proven the worth of my father's death, and my brother's; thou hast
given their chivalry  meaning, and vindicated my mother's suffering.  Thou  hast  made
their fates worthwhile by encompassing the downfall of a villain!"
Rod  looked  around  at  his  family.  "You'll  pardon  me  if  I  feel  a  certain  sense  of
satisfaction about that.''
"As  well  thou  shouldst."  Sola  stepped  forward,  arms  outstretched  as  though  to
embrace them. "I  thank thee all, most earnestly; thou hast rescued me  from  ancient
suffering." She turned to Magnus. "Yet most greatly I thank thee, good youth, for I do
know 'twas thee who did most earnestly press to aid me. 'Tis thou hast ope'd the way
for me, that I may leave this mundane sphere, and commence my journey up toward
Heaven."
"I… I was honored…"
"As I am honored by thee! Be sure that, if I do gain the Blessed Mede, thou wilt ever
have a friend in the hereafter!"
Then she turned, lifting a hand. "Farewell, good friends—and pray for me!"
Then she was gone.
The hall lay dark and still, except for the murmuring of the flames on the hearth.
"Pray I shall," Magnus murmured, gazing at the space where she had been, "and
may thy journey be brief and blessed, beauteous lass."
But a friend, Rod noted, was not what he'd wanted.
 
 
The hall was quiet, and Cordelia and the younger boys were finishing straightening
the  furniture  that  had  been  tumbled  about  in  the  wake  of  the  ghosts.  Geoffrey,  of
course, had complained before, during, and after. "Wherefore hath Magnus not aided,
too, Mama?"
"Hush," Gwen said. "Let thy brother alone awhile, to let the pieces of his heart join
together again."
Cordelia looked up, startled. "Was he heartbroken, then?"
"Let's just say that his feelings had become too thick on one side, and too thin on
the other," Rod hedged. "He needs to get them into balance now."
"It makes no sense," Geoffrey grumbled, and went off to Fess, in search of sanity.
Gwen looked out the nearest of the high, thin windows, and just barely espied the
small, antique cemetery outside the castle walls.
"What do you see?" Rod said softly.
"Our lad," she answered, equally hushed. "He doth stand quite still, gazing upon a
tombstone."
"Ah." Rod nodded. "Sola's, no doubt. Poor kid—I know how he feels."

Gwen turned to stare at him, startled. "Dost thou so!"
Rod gazed deeply into her eyes before he let the smile lift the corners of his mouth.
"Why, of course, dear," he said quietly. "You know you had to heal my heart, when
you found it."
She gazed back at him, then slowly smiled, too. She turned to wrap his arms about
her, her back to his chest, resting her head against his shoulder as she gazed out at
the youth confronting death below them. "Will he, too, find one to heal him?"
"We can only hope," Rod breathed, "hope that he, too, will someday meet a woman
who will make all his previous wounds unimportant."
She looked up into his eyes, and hers held stars.
Across the hall, Cordelia watched them, pensive and thoughtful. "Fess?"
"Yes, Cordelia?"
"Was Mama the only lass who ever fell a-love with Papa?"
"I have spoken to you before, about asking personal questions about your  father's
past." Fess was instantly severe. "Such information is definitely confidential. You must
ask your father to tell you."
"But he will never tell me of these things that truly matter, Fess!"
"Then neither shall I, Cordelia."
"But are we never to learn more of Father's wanderings?" Gregory asked.
Fess was still a moment, then said, "I  cannot say,  children.  It will depend on your
father's permission, of course…"
"And he will never give it!" Geoffrey said, in disgust.
Fess stood mute.
Cordelia noticed, and said, "Dost thou think he might, good Fess?"
"One can never tell, Cordelia. Even I cannot tell what your father will agree to, when
the time and the circumstances are correct."
"There may be more tales, then?" Gregory asked hopefully.
"Oh, certainly there will be more stories! You had many ancestors, children, and not
all of them lived dull lives. Whenever you wish, you have but to…"
"Now!"
"Another ancestor, Fess!"
"They are ours, after all!"
"Tell!"
"Well, not immediately," the  horse  temporized.  "Even  I  feel  the  need  of  rest  and
reflection, after the upheaval of our confrontation with Count Foxcourt."
"At bedtime, then?"
"At bedtime," Fess agreed, "or perhaps another day."
"Tomorrow," Cordelia said brightly, "is another day."

Epilogue
« ^ 
Jose  rose  to  go  report  to  his  supervisor.  It  meant  his  job,  but  that  was  better  than
having a robot go wild and kill somebody because of a programming flaw.
He knocked on the door. "Al?"
The door was open. Al looked up and smiled. "Hi, Jose. What gives?" Then he saw
the look on the younger man's face and straightened. "Come on in. Need to sit down?"
" 'Fraid so, Al." Jose sat down carefully, feeling old.
"So what happened?"
"I  copied  the  Declaration  of  Independence  into  a  robot  brain  along  with  the
operating program."
Al just sat very still, his eyes growing very, very round. Then he said, "You copied
the WHAT?"
"The Declaration of Independence."
Al erupted into guffaws.
Jose  stared,  then  frowned.  "It's  not  funny,  Al!  We've  got  to  catch  it  before  it's
installed!"
"I—I'm sorry," Al managed. Then his face split into a grin, and he was off again. He
leaned back in his chair and held his belly, whooping with glee.
Jose sighed and waited for  it to pass. Illogically,  he began to feel there  might  be
hope.
Finally, Al got himself under control and leaned forward,  grinning.  "I'm sorry  about
that, Jose—but you have to admit, this is a new one. How'd you manage that?"
Jose spread his hands, the picture of forlornness. "I called it up to check something
that was bothering me, then left it on scroll when I went to help Bob. By the time I came
back, it was off the screen, and I'd forgotten about it."
"But it was still in memory." Al shook his head with a grin. "Who else would get so
upset about something in the Declaration?"
"It was an argument," Jose muttered.
"On  the  other  hand,"  Al  answered  himself,  "who  else  would  come  report  it  right
away, instead of trying to cover up?" He finally managed to look sympathetic. "You're
right, Jose, this could be bad. What kind of program was it?"
"One of those new ones—the FCC series."
Al  smiled.  "Well,  at  least,  if  you  had  to  do  it,  you  used  one  that's  just  into
production." Then he turned thoughtful. "Wait a minute, though—maybe it's not a total
loss."

Jose felt a surge of hope and tried to ignore it. "How?"
"That's  the  'Faithful  Cybernetic  Companion'  series.  The  program's  for  extreme
loyalty, as well as the usual total obedience." Al turned to his screen and called up the
program. "It just might be strong enough to counter the Declaration."
Jose  frowned.  "How  could  it…"  Then  his  face  lit  up.  "Of  course!  If  the  robot's
extremely loyal to you, it can be totally independent, and still be on your side!"
Al  nodded.  "Independence  might  counter  an  inclination  toward  obedience,  but
loyalty would make the robot do what his owner said to, anyway—unless there was a
damn  good  reason  not  to."  He  shrugged.  "But  all  our  programs  have  overrides  for
illegal or blatantly unethical commands, anyway."
Jose felt excitement building. "Then the robot might not have to be destroyed?"
"And you might not have to be fired." Al nodded. "I'm routing this whole snafu over
to programming to be checked. I don't think there'll be any problem, though—this time."
He  turned  back  to  Jose,  suddenly  totally  serious.  "But  don't  let  it  happen
again—okay?"
Jose stared straight into Al's eyes and nodded slowly. "Never, Al. My word."
"Who was the argument with, anyway?"
Jose swallowed. "My wife."
Al turned grave. "Not much you can do about that. But next time, if  you're  upset,
don't come in. All right?"
Jose nodded slowly. "I promise, Al. Better not here at all, than not all here."
Al grinned. "You got it. And you still have your job."
But  Jose's  attention  had  drifted  again.  He  was  thinking  that,  if  a  robot  could  be
independent down to its most basic programming and still be intensely loyal, maybe a
person could, too. And if that was so, maybe it was possible to be really independent
but still be married, after all. He whistled, and went back to his work.
 
^ 
 

