
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions

To Annelies, only she knows why.

Uncertainty and
Ground Conditions:
A Risk Management
Approach
Martin van Staveren
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier

Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP, UK
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400, Burlington, MA 01803, USA
First edition 2006
Copyright © 2006, Martin van Staveren. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved
The right of Martin van Staveren to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been
asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior written permission of the publisher
Permission may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science and Technology Rights
Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) (0) 1865 843830; fax (+44) (0) 1865 853333;
e-mail: permissions@elsevier.co.uk. Alternatively you can submit your request
online by visiting the Elsevier web site at http://elsevier.com/locate/permissions,
and selecting Obtaining permission to use Elsevier material
Notice
No responsibility is assumed by the publisher and the author for any injury and/or damage
to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise,
or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions or ideas contained
in the material herein.
British Library Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN–13: 978-0-75-066958-0
ISBN–10: 0-75-066958-6
For information on all Butterworth-Heinemann publications please visit our
website at www.books.elsevier.com
Printed and bound in the Great Britain
Working together to grow 
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.com  |  www.bookaid.org  |  www.sabre.org

Contents
Acknowledgements
ix
PART ONE
The context of
ground risk management in the
construction industry
1
1 Introduction
3
A new type of ground risk
management book
3
Objectives and target
readerships
4
State-of-the-art of ground risk
management
5
The book’s structure
6
2 The construction industry –
challenges and opportunities
9
Introduction
9
The magnitude of the world’s
construction industry
9
Construction challenges
12
Increasing complexity
12
Underdeveloped integrity
14
High failure costs
16
Crisis – what crisis?
18
Opportunities for the
construction industry
19
World-wide change initiatives
19
Systems thinking
21
From systems thinking to
risk management
22
Renewed inspiration
24
Summary
25
3 From uncertainty, risk and
ground to GeoQ
26
Introduction
26
The concept of uncertainty
26
Three types of uncertainty
27
The concept of risk
33
Some deﬁnitions
33
Risk types
34
Dynamic character of risk
37
Risk management
38
The concept of ground and risk
41
Ground conditions
41
Ground uncertainty and costs
42
The hybrid character of
ground risks
43
Main ground risk types
43
The concept of ground risk
management
46
The GeoQ concept
47
GeoQ and the ground-related
disciplines
50
GeoQ and risk management
53
GeoQ and natural hazard
management
54
GeoQ and quality management
55
GeoQ and knowledge
management
58
Summary
59

vi
Contents
PART TWO The people factor
in ground risk management
61
4 Individuals and risk
63
Introduction
63
The concept of the individual
63
Our discontinuities
64
Our independence
65
The concept of perception
65
Subjective perception
66
Dealing with different
perceptions
68
Individuals and risk perception
70
Complexity of individual risk
perception
71
Change of individual risk
perception with time
72
Change of individual risk
perception with distance
73
How individuals can contribute
74
Risk awareness
74
Risk responsibility
75
Beyond blame and claim
77
Beyond fear
78
Three types of intelligence
81
Time taking
82
The individual change
agent
83
Summary
84
5 Teams and risk
85
Introduction
85
The concept of the team
86
From groups towards teams
86
Teams and culture
88
Teams and risk communication
90
Risk communication
90
Risk content and risk context
91
Singularity and risk dominance
93
Risk of groupthink
94
How teams can contribute
96
Expert teams
97
Multidisciplinary teams
98
Teams as change agents
100
Summary
102
6 Clients, society and risk
104
Introduction
104
Clients and risk
105
Do you play the ostrich game?
105
A contractor’s perception of
the client and vice versa
107
Public and private clients –
risk perceptions, costs and
income
109
Confrontation or cooperation
112
Society and risk
116
From modern to post-modern
risk perceptions
116
Balancing all those risk
perceptions
118
Society, construction and
post-modern ground
conditions
120
Towards creative construction
122
Summary
123
PART THREE
The
process
factor in ground risk manage-
ment
125
7 The GeoQ risk management
process
127
Introduction
127
The six GeoQ steps
128
Gathering project
information
129
Identifying risks
131
Classifying risk
134
Remediating risk
136
Evaluating risk
142
Mobilizing risk information
143
The six GeoQ phases
144
The feasibility phase
146
The pre-design phase
146
The design phase
147
The contracting phase
147
The construction phase
148
The maintenance phase
148
Embedding the GeoQ process
149
Summary
151

Contents
vii
8 GeoQ in the feasibility phase
153
Introduction
153
Ground risk management
during feasibility
154
Site classiﬁcation
154
How to do more with a
minimum of ground data
156
Scenario analysis
160
Case studies
162
Risk based decision-making
for a light-rail project
162
Risk driven planning of an
urban development project
165
Summary
168
9 GeoQ in the pre-design phase
170
Introduction
170
Ground risk management
during pre-design
171
Team-based risk
identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation
171
Balancing risk proﬁles and
ground investigations
178
Towards risk-driven ground
investigations
183
Case studies
185
Ground risk management for
a tunnel project
185
Selecting the most suitable
horizontal boring technique
188
Summary
190
10 GeoQ in the design phase
192
Introduction
192
Ground risk management
during design
194
Risk remediation: cause or
effect approach?
194
Reducing the risk cause:
ground parameters and
the probabilistic approach
197
Reducing the risk effect: the
observational method and
fall-back scenarios
200
Detailed and advanced
ground investigations
203
Case studies
207
Liquefaction risk control
below a railway
207
Settlement risk control
under pressure
211
Summary
215
11 GeoQ in the contracting
phase
217
Introduction
217
Risk allocation and differing
site conditions
219
The concept of risk allocation
219
The concept of differing site
conditions
222
The Geotechnical Baseline
Report
224
The baseline concept
224
Preparing a Geotechnical
Baseline Report
228
Ground risk management
during contracting
231
The Dispute Review Board
232
Insurance and ground risk
management
233
From conventional
contracts to partnering
contracts?
235
Case studies
239
The USA and contractual
ground risk allocation
240
The UK and contractual
ground risk allocation
241
The Netherlands and
contractual ground risk
allocation
242
Summary
243
12 GeoQ in the construction
phase
245
Introduction
245
Ground risk remediation
during construction
247

viii
Contents
The observational method
revisited
247
Avoiding the pitfalls
250
Differing ground conditions
during construction:
what we can do
254
Case studies
260
Stability risk control by the
observational method
260
A tunnel in geohydrological
crisis conditions
264
Summary
267
13 GeoQ in the maintenance
phase
269
Introduction
269
Ground risk management
during operation and
maintenance
271
Life cycle concepts for
cost-effective maintenance
271
Rational risk management
for existing dikes
273
Ground dispute resolution
after project completion
276
Risk ﬁling and mobilization
by modern ICT tools
278
Case studies
279
Rational risk management
approach for dike safety
assessments
279
Operational risk
management at a waste
disposal site
281
Summary
283
PART FOUR
A look into the
future
285
14 To end with a new start
287
Introduction
287
Ground risk management: the
people
287
Ground risk management: the
process
288
Towards a prosperous
construction industry
290
Some last words
292
References
294
Index
307

Acknowledgements
The open GeoQ framework for managing ground-related risk, as presented in this
book, emerged after the start of the third millennium. Writing this book has only
been possible with the indispensable support of many pioneering individuals and
teams over the last years, in The Netherlands and abroad. These professionals
have both technical and non-technical backgrounds and work at many different
ﬁrms, government agencies, universities and institutions. They dared to try-out
parts of the GeoQ concept in their projects and together we learned a lot from it.
These experiments resulted in the case studies in this book. I want to thank all
of these professionals, for their opinions, suggestions and feedback on the GeoQ
risk management approach.
Special thanks go to the many organizations who gave me opportunities to
present the GeoQ process and to receive their feedback, including the Delft Uni-
versity of Technology, Rijkswaterstaat of the Dutch Ministry of Public Works and
Water Management, Fugro, Heijmans, Volker Wessels, CROW, CUR, Norwegian
Geotechnical Institute, Geo Research Institute in Japan, GeoHohai of Hohai Uni-
versity in China and Argonne National Laboratory in the USA.
There are a number of people I want to mention in particular. The late David
Price, the ﬁrst professor of Engineering Geology at the Delft University of Tech-
nology, is my great inspirator in engineering geology, particularly concerning the
relationship between risk, ground investigations and contractual aspects.
Robert J. Smith of Wickwire Gavin in Madison and Red Robinson of Shannon
and Wilson in Seattle shared their viable GBR experiences and information with
me during my visit in December 2000. With Alan Pace I had interesting exchanges
of opinions and information about ground risk allocation. Thanks go to all three
of them.
Joop Halman, professor at the University of Twente, thank you for sharing
some knowledge and experiences with risk management in general and the Risk
Diagnosing Method for industrial innovation management in particular.

x
Acknowledgements
Joost Wentink, managing director of GeoDelft and Erik Janse, GeoDelft’s oper-
ational director, thanks for providing me some appreciated time to work on this
book. Erik issued me with interesting information as well. Colleagues of GeoDelft’s
Management Team, I appreciate your understanding for my ground risk man-
agement bias and drive to complete this book in due time. In particular, Marco
Hutteman, I remember the inspiring management development week we shared
at Pierreﬁtte in France, autumn 2005, which proved to be a catalyst for this book.
Gerard Vennegoor of Pierreﬁtte, a thanks to you for your wise words.
Furthermore, thanks to all my colleagues at GeoDelft, the pioneers from the
GeoQ-team and especially the teams of the GeoLab Department. These teams
proved to have an exceptional degree of self-management during the periods I
worked on the book. Jan Mul of the GeoDelft library, many thanks for the many
papers and references you provided over the years. Alex Hollingsworth, Lanh Te
and Jackie Holding of Elsevier in Oxford, I really appreciate your professional
advice and support.
Finally, above all, Annelies, Charlotte, Josephine and Frédérique, many thanks
for all the support and understanding, which made it possible to transform my
challenge into this book.

PART ONE
The context of ground risk
management in the construction
industry


1
Introduction
A new type of ground risk management book
How can we live without construction? It fulﬁls many of our fundamental needs
and has existed since the earliest development of mankind. Incorporating engin-
eering and maintenance activities, construction, provides us with houses, schools,
hospitals, industrial plants and infrastructure. We are all affected by these struc-
tures, hour after hour, day after day, year after year.
There is no construction without ground. Any kind of construction needs a
foundation. Any construction, whether very small or extremely large, has some
form of connection with the inherently uncertain ground. Our ability to cope with
this uncertainty will make a difference between our foundation settlements or
not, between excess groundwater in our basements or not, or even whether our
structures collapse during an earthquake or not.
Until now, the ground has always been a major driver of risk in many con-
struction projects all over the world. This is reﬂected in the relatively high failure
costs and often small proﬁt margins in the construction industry. Many projects
are completed at a higher cost than estimated, as well as much later than sched-
uled. This causes serious additional expenditure for clients, reduced proﬁtability
or even losses for contractors and a lot of irritation for the public.
For many years, risk management has added value in many sectors and industries,
such as the ﬁnancial sector, the chemical industry and the offshore industry.
In construction, however, risk management has not been entirely incorporated
and exploited, in spite of the industry’s inherent uncertainties and high risks.
The application of well-structured risk management during all project stages,
from feasibility through to construction and maintenance, needs to be started or
extended to many more projects. This situation is particularly apparent in ground-
related engineering and construction activities.
A serious obstruction to the introduction and application of risk management is
the people factor. Together, we are that people factor. Typical human attitudes and
behaviour, driven by unawareness and fear, often prevent us from considering

4
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
risk in a timely and effective way. As a result, we will miss opportunities to
optimize projects and beneﬁts for our organizations, our clients and our societies
as a whole remain hidden and untouched.
The combination of these four interrelated aspects, construction, ground, risk
management and the people factor, provides an opportunity for a new type of risk
management book. Is there a need for it? Yes, I think there certainly is, in spite
of a number of related books published over recent years. Examples are those
written by Edwards and Bowen (2005), Weatherhead et al. (2005), Smith (2003,
1998), Boothroyd and Emmet (1996), Godfrey (1996), Edwards (1995), Flanagan
and Norman (1993) and Thompson and Perry (1992). All these books cover risk
management in the construction industry, but do not focus on ground risk man-
agement. The number of available books that cover ground-related risk manage-
ment in particular is limited. Although works by Clayton (2001), Hatem (1998)
and Skipp (1993) do focus on ground risk management, they pay little attention
to the people factor. None of these books combines the four interrelated factors
dealt with in this book.
Objectives and target readerships
The main objective of this book is to contribute to the application of cost-effective
ground risk management. It considers ground conditions in their widest deﬁnition
and includes all types of ground, groundwater, ground-related pollution, and
all forms of man-made structure. The latter refers to buried structures such as
pipelines, piles or archaeological remains.
In today’s increasingly global market we must differentiate or die, according to
Trout and Rivkin (2000) in their guideline on how to survive killer-competition.
Ground-related innovations in engineering and construction are urgently required
to gain competitive advantage. This book’s secondary objective is therefore that
ground risk management should act as a sort of airbag against the inherent busi-
ness risks of innovations. A similar risk management approach has been used in
other industries. For instance, the Risk Diagnosing Method (RDM) proposed by
Keizer, Halman and Song (2002) has been successfully applied in the consumer
electronics and food industries.
GeoQ, where Q stands for quality, will become the vehicle to meet our objectives.
It is an easy-to-use and ﬂexible framework for ground risk management during
the entire life cycle of all types of construction projects. It is independent of the
type of ground conditions expected and can reveal many hidden and ground-
related opportunities, such as cost savings, tighter schedules, improved project
quality and increased proﬁtability for a lot of stakeholders. Anyone can make
GeoQ ﬁt-for-purpose, to meet the speciﬁc requirements of any small or large
construction project, anywhere in the world.

Introduction
5
Given these objectives, the main target readership will include civil engineering
and construction professionals involved in ground-related issues in some way.
They may be working with contractors, engineering ﬁrms and clients, studying for
BSc, MSc and MBA degrees or teaching and performing research at universities
and institutes. Here we recognize construction managers, project planners, pro-
ject designers, geotechnical engineers, soil engineers, rock engineers, engineering
geologists, ground-related scientists, graduate and postgraduate students.
I hope to inspire and motivate this anticipated variety of readers, who will
all encounter their ground risks in some form throughout their careers. If many
of you start to participate in the worldwide adoption of structured ground risk
management, we will be able to make a difference in the rapidly changing con-
struction industry.
State-of-the-art of ground risk management
The state-of-the-art of ground risk management, as presented in this book, is a
mixture of theory and practice. It is derived from a variety of engineering, business
administration and human sciences and includes many aspects of ground engin-
eering and construction, some physics, statistics and geology, as well as several
fundamentals of psychology, sociology, and even some philosophy. According to
a modern risk management approach, as proposed by Edwards and Bowen (2005)
for instance, risk is considered to form both an obstruction and an opportunity
for project success.
Empirical developments are major drivers for innovation, particularly for
ground-related engineering and construction. I, therefore, do not intend to present
a new scientiﬁc risk management theory, but will present a structured and risk-
prone way of thinking and doing.
GeoQ ground risk management is a form of process innovation that typically
emerged by trial and error. It has been applied in a wide range of projects,
including tunnels, (rail)roads and even a waste disposal site, resulting in its present
state-of-the-art. Common scientiﬁc approaches, such as objectivity and the proof of
principle by experiment, are used within the limitations of the available experience.
I have included abundant references from a variety of disciplines to support
and criticize my opinions about and experience of ground risk management.
Colleagues from all over the world suggested many of these, others I approached
by purpose or just came across.
The GeoQ framework should not be seen as having arrived its ﬁnal state
of development. It has been introduced only recently and there will be ample
opportunity for further improvement. Many of the GeoQ supporting practices
that are presented, such as scenario analysis, risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation
methods, ground investigations, and the observational method with monitoring,

6
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
are not new but are readily available to deliver GeoQ support. Some may demand
further development to increase their cost-effectiveness and ease for daily use in
ground risk management.
The ﬁrst part of this book pays particular attention to thinking and reﬂection,
while the second part is mainly concerned with learning by doing. This combina-
tion will not be able to prevent each and every project crisis from time to time. Risk
management is by no means a panacea capable of preventing all risks in ground
engineering and construction activities. If we can merely reduce the probability of
such risks occurring, as well as their effects, then the objectives of this book will
have been achieved.
The book’s structure
The structure of this book is designed to help ﬁrst-time users, who are not yet
familiar with risk management, as well as experienced professionals using the
book as a reference guide for applied ground risk management.
GEOQ GROUND RISK MANAGEMENT
Chapter 7  
PEOPLE
PROCESS
EXPERTISE
Chapter 4 to 6
Chapter 8 to 13
Chapter 8 to 13
BASIS FOR GROUND RISK MANAGEMENT
Chapter 1, 2 and 3 
FUTURE
Chapter 14
Figure 1.1: The book structure – GeoQ ground risk man-
agement with its three pillars.
According to John Naisbitt
(1984): ‘What happens is that
whenever new technology is
introduced in society, there
must be a counterbalancing
human
response
–
that
is
high touch – or the techno-
logy is rejected.’ GeoQ ground
risk
management,
with
its
technological
tools,
should
be appraised as a form of
new technology. Experience
teaches
the
importance
of
giving ample attention to pro-
fessional attitudes and beha-
viour. If not, risk management
becomes little more than a
tick-box exercise and a waste
of
our
precious
time
and
money. This explains the high
tech and high touch approach
in this book: to provide fertile
ground for a wide acceptance and application of ground risk management.
Figure 1.1 shows the book’s structure, together with the corresponding chapters.

Introduction
7
Chapters 1, 2 and 3 serve as the foundation slab and bear the three pillars of
GeoQ ground risk management and its future: people, processes and expertise.
Following the introduction in Chapter 1, Chapter 2 presents a number of challenges
and opportunities for global construction. It serves as an appetiser for Chapter 3,
which brings us from uncertainty, via risk, risk management and the ground, to
the concept of GeoQ.
Chapters 4 to 6 focus on the high touch or human factor, the combination of
people and risk. These chapters highlight the need for risk awareness and the inher-
ent differences in people’s perception of risk. Chapter 4 identiﬁes certain charac-
teristics of individual risk perceptions, as well as how individuals can contribute
to effective risk management. Chapter 5 explores the interaction of individuals
in teams, including aspects such as team culture and risk communication. The
way in which teams may contribute to ground risk management is also discussed.
Chapter 6 describes how clients and society perceive the risk caused by construc-
tion. We can use their insights to guarantee more effective communication about
(ground) risk with these stakeholders.
Chapters 7 to 13 explore the high-tech side of ground risk management, in particu-
lar the technical-organizational or process aspect. These chapters present the applica-
tion of the tried-and-tested GeoQ method in six generic project phases, to provide us
andourteams,clientsandsocietywithhighqualityconstructionproducts.Toguaran-
tee maximum beneﬁts, six subsequent risk management steps must be taken in each
phase. Chapter 7 introduces this GeoQ process. Chapters 8 through to Chapter 13
present its application during the feasibility, pre-design, design, contracting, con-
struction, and operation and maintenance phases. Each chapter begins with several
ground risk mitigation measures and tools, followed by a variety of case studies,
where GeoQ steps and tools will add value to the project. These are intended to
help understand the many types of projects where GeoQ can be applied. Which
GeoQ tool should we apply to which situation? There is no generic answer, all
that can be said is: it depends. Concise summaries are presented at the end of
each chapter. Finally, Chapter 14 highlights brieﬂy some of the main opinions
and conclusions of this book, followed by some type of outlook to a prosperous
construction industry, as perceived from a ground risk management perspective.
The third pillar below the GeoQ concept shown in Figure 1.1 is expertise of
ground engineering and construction. Many textbooks and papers are available
about ground engineering, soil mechanics, rock mechanics, groundwater engin-
eering, environmental engineering and engineering geology and provide plentiful
information. This book provides numerous examples of the beneﬁts of sound, up-
to-date expertise, as well as experience, as these remain ultimately necessary for
responsible and cost-effective ground risk management.
In addition to ﬁgures and tables, numerous text boxes are included in the
chapters. These should be seen as a side step for reﬂection on the issues presented,

8
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
whose purpose is to raise awareness and provide fresh insights rather than give
deﬁnite answers. Readers are invited to jump from chapter to chapter, based on
their own interests, experiences and needs. Introductions and summaries in each
chapter provide a quick overview of their content. Before starting to apply the
GeoQ process using the guidelines and experiences described in Chapters 7 to 13,
I recommend that you ﬁrst read Chapters 4 to 6. After all, it is people like you
and me who are responsible for construction and its associated ground risks.

2
The construction industry –
challenges and opportunities
Introduction
The magnitude of construction is enormous and a number of major challenges
affect its current state. This chapter explores the ever increasing complexity, the
relatively underdeveloped integrity and the substantial failure costs associated with
construction activities. Ground conditions play a major role in these aspects.
Is there an ongoing crisis in our industry? Perhaps there is, but the good news is
that new solutions and opportunities continue to emerge. In recent years, a number
of countries have initiated ambitious change programmes for the construction
industry. In this chapter we will meet some of these initiatives, as they may help
us cope effectively with the challenges we face.
This chapter introduces the concept of systems thinking, a potential key to unlock
possibilities for the required industry transformation. It stipulates fertile ground
for the concept of risk management. The last part of the chapter highlights the
need for a critical mass of change-driven professionals. These individuals will
be essential for implementing ground-related risk management, as presented in
this book, in day-to-day engineering and construction practices. The summary
presents the key issues of this chapter.
The magnitude of the world’s construction industry
The global construction industry is huge, and will continue to grow substantially
in size. Based on a report by Global Insight, Sleight (2005a) predicts an increase in
construction spending from 3500 billion US dollars in 2003, to 4800 billion US dollars
in 2008 and 6200 billion US dollars in 2013. We should note that a billion is here

10
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
deﬁned as equal to 1000 million. These ﬁgures indicate an enormous worldwide
construction market that is expected almost to double in 10 years time.
The USA has the largest construction market, accounting for some 30 per cent
of the world’s construction activities. Japan is the second largest market with
approximately 13 per cent of the market share. In 2003, China was the third largest,
representing 7 per cent of the world’s construction expenditure. In this top ten of
the world’s largest construction markets, Germany is in fourth place, followed by
France, Italy, the UK, Spain, Canada and The Netherlands, ranked from ﬁve to
ten. Emerging markets such as India, Brazil and Russia are ranked numbers 11,
13 and 15 respectively. These emerging markets are expected to grow between 3
and 5 per cent per year. Compared with the USA, Japan and Europe, construction
in these countries is considered risky. Growth expectations in the USA, Japan and
Europe are substantially lower, at approximately 2 per cent per year.
Three main market segments can be distinguished: residential construction,
infrastructure and other construction. In the USA, market shares are 44 per cent
for residential construction, 32 per cent for infrastructure and 24 per cent for other
construction.
It is not only the size of the construction industry that is impressive, its inﬂuence
on societies is enormous as well, for example as provider of shelter, water supplies
and transportation. In many countries, approximately 10 per cent of the work-
force is directly involved in construction and its related sectors. The European
Construction Technology Platform (ECTP) is an industry-driven initiative whose
aim is to act as an umbrella for the construction industry’s research initiatives in
Europe. Their Vision-2030 Report states:
Europe is facing serious challenges. If we sit back and rest, by 2030, global warming will
cause increasing number of disastrous damages from ﬂoods and storms. The systems for
water supply and wastewater will be dilapidating all over Europe. Workers will continue
to die on accidents at work. Trafﬁc congestion problems will reach breaking point and
seriously hamper the economic and social development of Europe. Another 10% (sic) the
tangible cultural heritage will have been lost. These challenges are for real. It is safe to say
that the time for action is now (European Construction Technology Platform, 2005).
Urban issues are of particular importance. Barends and Mischgofsky (2005) pre-
dict that without serious concern, research and subsequent actions regarding these
issues, the future viability, economic health and quality of life of Europe’s citizens
will be in jeopardy. Such a situation is not exclusive to Europe, but is also applic-
able to many other regions. Construction, in its widest sense, must help prevent
these negative visions becoming reality.
Water in particular plays a dominant role in construction. The two cannot be
separated. Water does seriously hamper our construction activities from time to
time and many readers are no doubt familiar with groundwater problems during

The construction industry – challenges and opportunities
11
construction. In addition, a lot of areas in many parts of the world suffer excesses
or shortages of water. The construction industry is one of the main sectors able
to facilitate long-term solutions and relief. Box 2.1 presents a few thoughts about
the relationship between water and construction.
Box 2.1
Water and construction
I was born and raised in The Netherlands, a small country where the majority
of the population live well below sea level. Thousands of kilometres of dikes
protect the Dutch against attacks by high water. A major ﬂood disaster in
1954 gave rise to the enormous Delta works in the southwestern part of The
Netherlands. So far, these ﬂood defences have been able to protect the Dutch.
But for how long? The water system in The Netherlands is coming under
increasing pressure due to urbanization, as well as a lack of water-catchment
areas, land-subsidence and rises in sea-level.
Recent history reminds us how fragile our modern societies are when water
conditions become extreme. It is not easy to forget the devastating effects of the
tsunami in Southeast Asia in December 2004. Entire populated coastal areas
disappeared in Indonesia, Thailand, India and Sri Lanka. More than 250 000
people were killed within just a few hours. In September 2005, the world
witnessed the damaging effects of collapsing dikes around New Orleans in the
Mississippi delta of the USA, in the wake of the hurricane Katrina. Similar
disasters occur all too often in other parts of the world. We are all aware of
regular ﬂoods in countries such as Bangladesh.
Other parts of the world are confronted with structural droughts, while areas
in the Middle East, Africa and China face an increasing shortage of water in
the near future. Mega construction projects are needed to bring relief, such as
the three huge canal projects in China, for transporting water from major rivers
to dry areas.
Smaller projects are also required alongside the mega projects, for example,
initiatives by the ICE Commission Engineering Without Frontiers (EWF) to install
water pumps and small dams for the provision of clean water in remote villages
in Kenya (Kitching, 2005).
As members of the worldwide construction community, we are able to bring
protection and relief to society, by means of an effective and efﬁcient construction
industry.

12
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Construction challenges
Global construction faces serious challenges, in spite of or due to its enorm-
ous magnitude. To accomplish its role effectively and efﬁciently, as expected by
its numerous stakeholders, the industry needs to reduce, and preferably elimin-
ate, a number of its shortcomings. These are not only limited to its dirty and
old-fashioned image, with poor health and safety records and scant attention to
environmental impact, as stated for instance by Sleight (2005b). Most construc-
tion markets also face increasing complexity, underdeveloped integrity and high
failure costs. The latter are partly caused by out-of-date procurement practices,
where selection procedures are still only based on the lowest price criterion. It is
widely considered that the resulting number of disputes, claims and court cases
is no longer acceptable, because of the resulting unreasonably high costs for both
clients and contractors. In addition, ground conditions play a dominant role in
the shortcomings. Examples of typical unsuccessful performance include excessive
groundwater leakage in tunnels, slope instability, damage resulting from differ-
ential settlements and non-compliance with environmental requirements. In the
words of Norbert Morgenstern (2000a): ‘There are too many examples of unsuc-
cessful performance in geotechnical engineering’. When combined, these factors
put increasing pressure on construction quality, client satisfaction and proﬁtability.
We will explore three of the main challenges for the construction industry,
presented in Figure 2.1.
These challenges serve as a rationale for adopting risk management in our pro-
ject practices and should motivate us to transform. The application of structured
ground risk management may substantially alleviate them.
Increasing complexity
One of the transformation drivers in the construction industry is the increased
complexity of many projects. One example is the design and construction of
Terminal 2E of the Roissy-Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris. Some 400 (!) different
engineering and construction parties from all over Europe were involved in this
750 million euros project. Part of the terminal collapsed in May 2004, killing four
people. How can we manage projects of this fragmented and complex character
in a safe and cost-effective way?
Kevin Kelly is the author of The New Biology of Business. In his view, our tech-
nological systems have reached a complexity that acquires the characteristics of
biological systems (Kelly, 1996). These can no longer be controlled by a mechanistic
and linear method of management. It seems unavoidable that we will lose some of
our control, while our conventional management of planning and control becomes
obsolete. Terminal 2E may be an unfavourable indication of this. We must ﬁnd

The construction industry – challenges and opportunities
13
INCREASING
COMPLEXITY
UNDERDEVELOPED
INTEGRITY
HIGH FAILURE
COSTS
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY 
Figure 2.1: Three main challenges for the construction industry.
new ways to cope with this increase in complexity and its unavoidable partners:
uncertainty and risk.
Because of the many stakeholders, all with their own and often conﬂicting
interests, the construction industry is vulnerable to this increase in complexity.
In addition, most construction projects are prototypes, as suggested by Wentink
(2001). It is, in fact, what Kelly (1996) calls the Hollywood-model. Almost every
construction project is unique, due to its project-speciﬁc purpose, stakeholders,
expectations and of course the ground conditions and related challenges. In par-
ticular, medium-to large-scale projects operate temporary project organizations
formed by consortia or joint ventures. These in turn hire subcontractors to provide
specialist geotechnical and geoenvironmental services.
Finally, project complexity increases due to the demands of the external project
environment and society. In densely populated urban areas, in particular, the sur-
roundings are increasingly affected by and involved with construction projects.
This leads to a new type of management, stakeholder management, as described
for example by Edwards and Bowen (2005). It aims to manage and reduce the

14
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
inﬂuence of external project stakeholders, such as environmental pressure groups.
In addition, it strives to encourage these stakeholders to support project object-
ives, rather than obstructing them. There are numerous examples that could be
given, but the message should be clear by now: today’s construction activities are
increasingly complex and this trend is not expected to diminish.
Underdeveloped integrity
A second challenge is to answer the growing aversion many people in a lot
of countries feel towards corruption and fraud in the construction industry. This
aversion has increased after numerous major business debacles in recent years,
such as the Enron and Parmalat frauds and the substantially lower oil reserves
than earlier presented by Shell. In 2002, the Dutch were shocked by what appeared
to be the largest fraud case in their industrial history (see Box 2.2).
Box 2.2
Fraud and construction
The Dutch construction industry revealed its own integrity problems during
a parliamentary enquiry in 2002–2003. Systematic problems included irregu-
lar pricing practices, artiﬁcial constraints on markets, as well as a degree of
fraud (Process and System Innovation in Building and Construction, 2004). The
latter, in fact, appeared to be a reaction to the introduction of new European
regulations in 1992. Following this largest case of fraud in the Dutch industry,
the Dutch construction industry is currently in a recovery and transforma-
tion phase. It has agreed to return some 70 million euros to Government cli-
ents. In 2005, a number of cases went to court. Twelve top executives of four
major Dutch construction ﬁrms were prosecuted and found guilty of fraudulent
activities.
The combination of fraud and construction is not exclusively a Dutch prob-
lem. Transparency International, a London based foundation, dedicated its 2005
Annual Report to the construction industry. It classiﬁed the construction industry
as the most fraudulent industry worldwide. According to Transparency Inter-
national, approximately 400 billion US dollars (equivalent to 400 000 million US
dollars) is annually involved in corrupt construction throughout the world, with
governments as clients. Public money that is not spent in the way it was intended.
This ﬁgure represents some 10 per cent of worldwide expenditure on construction.
In no other sector of the economy is the corruption percentage estimated to be so
high (Transparency International, 2005). Box 2.3 illustrates that underdeveloped
integrity is not limited to construction.

The construction industry – challenges and opportunities
15
Box 2.3
Fraud and human behaviour
A small article in NRC, a high-quality Dutch newspaper, in September 2005,
makes clear that the phenomenon of fraud is not at all limited to one particular
industry. Recent research carried out by the Dutch association of insuring com-
panies indicates that fraud using false insurance claims totals approximately
1000 million euros per year. This fraud ﬁgure is twice as high as previously
assumed. Twenty per cent of all claims were investigated, of which 5 per cent
turned out to be fraudulent. Is fraud an inherent part of human behaviour?
It is not just the ethical perspective that raises the issue of underdeveloped
integrity. Corruption and fraud are also unfavourable from a business perspective.
Without a level playing ﬁeld with fair competition, honest and high-quality com-
panies with interesting innovations are likely to be superseded by their fraudulent
competitors. The result is less cost-effective projects and markets that do not serve
society. Furthermore, the reputation of the industry becomes tarnished. Increasing
numbers of bright and promising students are no longer choosing a construction
career. We are losing these potential newcomers, who are so urgently needed in
our complex industry.
Another unwanted effect of illegal practices is the impact on safety. Each year,
the lives of tens of thousands of people are threatened by corrupt practices because
safety standards are neglected. The previously-mentioned report from Transpar-
ency International presents numerous case studies in several countries, including
but not limited to the Philippines, Uganda, Indonesia and Germany (Transparency
International, 2005).
Underdeveloped integrity also slows down the economic development of people
and regions. In the words of Heinz Brandl:
The time is right for the engineering profession and construction industry to take a public
stance against corruption. Corruption has – amongst other things – the effect of lessening
the amount of capital invested in locations where infrastructure is often desperately needed
(Brandl, 2004).
Organizations such as Transparency International create public awareness
about the lack of integrity and its adverse consequences. Awareness is hopefully a
ﬁrst step towards long-term improvements. Explicit risk management, applied at
every stage of a construction project, may further help identify corrupt practices.
Itrequiresahighdegreeoftransparencyinaproject,anapproachthatconﬂictswiththe
inherent lack of clarity surrounding corrupt practices. Obviously, I am not under
the illusion that risk management will act as an easy solution for the widespread
and quite human phenomenon of corruption and its related practices. It may,
however, at least help to create more project transparency for its stakeholders.

16
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
To conclude, we may join David Blockley and Patrick Godfrey (2000) in their
book Doing it Differently – Systems for Rethinking Construction. This book won the
Author of the Year Award 2000 of the Chartered Institute of Building (CIOB), the
leading professional body for construction managers with over 40 000 members,
working in over 94 countries. Blockley and Godfrey state:
We believe that business ethics is an underdeveloped subject in the construction industry
and the value systems that players use are not often explicitly discussed (Blockley and
Godfrey, 2000).
High failure costs
Failure costs in the construction industry are sky-high. The third main challenge
facing the construction industry is the need to reduce these high costs. Failure costs
are deﬁned as any costs resulting from unforeseen problems in construction pro-
jects. Typical causes are incorrect actions or deliveries, delay in the procurement
of permits, (too) late design changes and particularly unforeseen ground conditions.
These unforeseen problems often result from a lack of communication, informa-
tion and time. They need to be solved, often during construction, which frequently
puts severe pressure on budgets and planning.
Let us ﬁrst consider The Netherlands. It is a rather small country with approx-
imately 15 million inhabitants. Its construction market is signiﬁcant, ranked as
number 10 among the world’s largest construction markets. Spending on con-
struction totals some 70 000 million euros per year. Failure costs in the Dutch
construction industry are estimated to be approximately 3500 to 9000 million euros
annually. These failure ﬁgures are equivalent to between 5 and 13 per cent of the
yearly expenditure within the Dutch construction industry. Table 2.1 presents a
few ‘high failure’ Dutch infrastructure projects, together with their planning and
cost overrun.
A typical example of excessive failure costs is the Tramtunnel Project. This cut-
and-cover tunnel was constructed in the centre of The Hague, the political capital
Table 2.1: Planning and cost overrun of some Dutch infrastructure projects
(after Molendijk and Aantjes, 2003)
Project
Overrun (%)
Planning
Costs
Dam: Ramspol inﬂatable dam
+80
unknown
Tunnel: The Hague Tramtunnel
+100
+90
Stormsurge barrier: Rotterdam Nieuwe Waterweg
+50
+40
Railroad: Betuweroute freight railway
unknown
+65
Railroad: Amsterdam to Utrecht
+65
+25

The construction industry – challenges and opportunities
17
of The Netherlands. Construction costs for this project soared by 90 per cent, while
the construction time increased by 100 per cent. Severe problems were caused
by an innovative design, which did not give sufﬁcient attention to groundwater
leakage and associated fall-back scenarios. During construction, the building pit
increasingly resembled a bathtub. Apart from the ﬁnancial consequences for the
parties involved, this project caused considerable inconvenience to the shopping
public and shop owners in the city centre for several years.
Like underdeveloped integrity, high failure costs are not a typically Dutch phe-
nomenon. Hoek and Palmieri (1998) evaluated a study of the World Bank, includ-
ing 71 hydroelectric power projects. It indicated that costs and schedules were on
average 27 per cent higher than originally estimated. For some of these projects,
cost and time schedules escalated to several times the original estimates. In addi-
tion, some projects were stopped and abandoned entirely. Unforeseen geological
conditions are not the main source for all of these cost and time overruns. However,
the effects of inadequate geological data, their inappropriate interpretation and
incompetence to deal with the resulting ground-related problems were signiﬁcant.
There is abundant evidence that unexpected and unfavourable ground condi-
tions are a dominant factor in many projects confronted with serious failure costs.
Numerous case histories over the last century illustrate that failure to anticipate
ground conditions is a main factor in construction problems (Fookes et al., 2000).
Brandl (2004) indicates that, according to European statistics, about 80–85 per cent
of all building failures and damages are related to problems in the ground. The
Dutch Federation of Piling Contractors assesses their own failure costs at 100
million euros per year, equivalent to 10 per cent of their turnover.
Ground-related failure costs are, in particular, caused by unforeseen and unfa-
vourable ground conditions. Contractual arrangements are often clear about
which party is responsible for unforeseen ground conditions. Deﬁnitions of what
ground conditions will be contractually considered as unforeseen are often remark-
ably vague, resulting in time-consuming and expensive disputes and claims, as
described by Essex (1997). Gould (1995) presents the results of a study carried
out by the United States National Committee on Tunnelling Technology in 1984.
It relates the scale of site investigations to the occurrence of claims for 87 major
underground projects. In total 60 per cent of the 87 projects were confronted with
claims, of which 95 per cent concerned substantial amounts. While 64 per cent
of the claimed amounts were awarded, overall construction costs increased by
12 per cent, not including additional legal costs.
Acceptance by many construction stakeholders of time and cost overruns is
decreasing dramatically. Many members of the public, for instance, ﬁnd it dif-
ﬁcult to accept that the ﬁrst people were walking on the moon in the 1960s,
while today’s construction on our planet earth still cause a range of serious
problems. For clients and owners of construction projects, failure costs have

18
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
adverse effects on their budgets, planning and reputation. For engineers and
contractors, failure costs have a serious impact on their planning, reputation, as
well as on their proﬁtability. In the Dutch construction industry the rather low
proﬁt margins of 2–4 per cent are under attack by ever increasing competition
(van Staveren, 2001).
In conclusion, failure costs result in a waste of money, time and energy for
most of the stakeholders involved. Rather than bringing projects to a minimum
acceptable level of quality, it is far better to use these resources to reduce costs
further, or to increase proﬁts and quality. I am the ﬁrst to agree with those readers
who will argue that we will never be able completely to eliminate failure costs
in construction. However, we can undertake serious attempts to reduce them,
particularly with regard to ground conditions.
Crisis – what crisis?
Some readers, with pessimistic or even realistic viewpoints, may classify the state
of the construction industry as one of crisis. The previously presented ﬁgures
and examples highlight the need for transformation. Improvement of control over
ground conditions emerges as one of the key success factors for construction.
Since such control often remains underdeveloped or clouded by activities of a
doubtful integrity, some of us may indeed conclude that there is a silent and
hidden ground-driven crisis. The need to give transparent and adequate attention,
in a timely way, to the inherently uncertain and risky ground, appears more
than ever necessary for a prosperous construction industry. This may require an
equally dramatic change of perception, as indicated by Box 2.4.
Box 2.4
Crisis and perception
The physicist Fritjof Capra published his book The Turning Point in 1983. In
many countries, the 1980s were considered as a period of crises. Many societies
struggled with high inﬂation, unemployment, environmental problems caused
by pollution and a rising wave of violence and crime. Little appears to have
changed since then. According to Capra (1983), perception is the reason for the
crises. Outdated worldviews need to be replaced by new ones. As a physicist,
he recalls the crisis in physics in the 1920s, when the mechanistic worldview of
Newton became replaced by, or at least accompanied by, the view of quantum
physics, with its dynamic and at times even chaotic character. Perhaps we
should attempt to change our perceptions of construction?
We have so far explored the ever-increasing complexity, the case for integrity
and the high failure costs associated with today’s construction industry. However,

The construction industry – challenges and opportunities
19
there is no reason to accept this situation. Mankind is able to initiate and complete
amazing achievements. Why then, should we not transform our construction
industry towards a prosperous one? An industry which can deal effectively with
complexity, where integrity is developed to acceptable standards, and where fail-
ures costs are reduced to acceptable levels, in order to allow reasonable proﬁts?
The opportunities are present and initiatives for change have already started in a
number of countries!
Opportunities for the construction industry
Construction needs a renewed licence to operate. As many books about change
management explain, any change must start with awareness for its need, followed
by the willingness to act accordingly. The preceding sections in this book are inten-
ded to serve as a loud wake-up call. The following sections explore opportunities
to transform our industry, varying from a concise presentation of some of the
ongoing change initiatives, to the role of systems thinking and risk management.
Finally, attention is given to the people factor, in accordance with the high-tech
and high-touch approach of this book.
World-wide change initiatives
The construction world is ready for change. In a lot of countries, a variety of
stakeholders asked themselves how the construction industry could become mod-
ern, competitive and innovative. These questions have resulted in industry-wide
initiatives, often supported by government. In Europe, change initiatives have
taken place in Denmark, Finland, Norway, the UK and The Netherlands. Outside
Europe, similar initiatives are running in Hong Kong, Singapore and Australia. In
2004, a Dutch delegation representing one of the main Dutch change initiatives,
Process and System Innovation in Building and Construction, visited these coun-
tries to exchange experiences and knowledge (Process and System Innovation in
Building and Construction, 2004). I present their most remarkable insights below.
The driving force for change in Norway is the offshore industry coming to land.
Close relationships with the offshore industry support the development and imple-
mentation of quality management, cost engineering and standardization. A Life
Cycle Costing (LCC) approach is mandatory for all public buildings in Norway.
It enhances the awareness of total costs of ownership and clients’ needs. In 2003,
the main players in the Norwegian construction industry agreed a common code
of ethics.
Corruption scandals in the 1980s and 1990s triggered Hong Kong’s reform initiat-
ives in the construction industry. Serious problems included the need to demolish
high-rise residential building blocks, for safety reasons, because of insufﬁcient

20
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
piling. In 2000, Hong Kong set up a Construction Industry Review Committee
(CIRC) to manage the construction industry transformation processes.
Singapore started the Construction Manpower 21 Study in 1998. It aims to trans-
form construction from the three Ds – dirty, demanding and dangerous – towards
the three Ps – professional, productive and progressive – to create a professional
and knowledge-based industry.
Labour disputes, contractual disputes and some fraud cases drove the reform
process in Australia. A number of initiatives were initiated in the 1990s, at both
commonwealth and state levels. The Australian experience demonstrates that time
is required to create real change. A clear purpose and steady commitment have
already shown, however, that it is possible to change a culture of suspicion,
corruption and lack of trust into one of collaboration and mutual respect.
The Egan Report, titled Rethinking Construction and published in 1998, chal-
lenged the construction industry in the UK (Construction Task Force, 1998).
The Egan challenge is ambitious, with targets including an annual reduction of
10 per cent in construction costs and time, as well as a 10 per cent increase in
turnover and proﬁt. Despite the fact that Blockley and Godfrey (2000) recognized
a degree of initiative fatigue due to the many initiatives in recent years, some
have been shown to work. Pilot projects, coordinated by Construction Excellence,
provide some impressive ﬁgures, such as a 2.7 per cent increase in safety and a
3.5 per cent fall in personnel turnover. One pilot project even showed a 65 per cent
rise in productivity, in terms of added value per worker. Furthermore, construc-
tion costs for these pilot projects were on average 6 per cent lower and proﬁtability
increased 2 percentage points (Heijbrock, 2005).
Three Dutch ministries jointly established the Dutch Construction Steering Com-
mittee in The Netherlands, in 2004. The committee’s mission is to transform the
Dutch construction sector within the next four years. Three themes were selected:
1
Innovation
2
Transparency
3
Quality-price relationship.
The third theme should provide an escape route from the lowest price trap, by
applying innovative procurement and contracting methods. These themes respond
to the three main challenges presented earlier. In their ﬁrst annual report (Dutch
Construction Steering Committee, 2005), the committee recommends a move from
a mainly risk-adverse attitude towards a more risk-seeking one. Cooperation
between different parties in the construction process should result in risk sharing
instead of only risk allocation. It seems that risk management has gained a stake
in the Dutch transformation process. Its concept and tools will be used as a com-
munication vehicle to transform the industry from being rather risk-unaware and

The construction industry – challenges and opportunities
21
closed towards a more risk-aware and open industry. The concept of systems
thinking may act as catalyst.
Systems thinking
Peter Senge introduced the concept of systems thinking into management in the
1990s, in his best seller The Fifth Discipline – The Art and Practice of the Learning
Organisation. Systems thinking is the ﬁfth discipline. It integrates the four other
disciplines of personal mastery, awareness of mental models, the capability to
build a shared vision and team learning (Senge, 1990), as illustrated in Figure 2.2.
Personal
Mastery 
Team
Learning 
Mental
Models
Shared
Vision
Systems
Thinking 
Figure 2.2: Senge’s ﬁve learning principles (after
Senge, 1990).
These ﬁve learning disciplines
are
personal
disciplines,
distin-
guishing
them
from
the
more
familiar and collective manage-
ment disciplines. These personal
disciplines are essential for creat-
ing a learning organization, where
professionals can discover how to
create their own reality and how
to change it. In Peter Senge’s own
words:
At
the
heart
of
the
learning
organisation is a shift of mind –
from seeing ourselves as separate
from the world to connected to
the world, from seeing problems
as caused by someone ‘out there’
to seeing how our own actions
create the problems we experience (Senge, 1990).
This view needs to be adopted by the construction industry, which is also the
opinion of Blockley and Godfrey (2000). They present an extensive set of theories,
tools and practices around the concept of systems thinking, largely building on
the work of Senge and translating it to the construction industry. One of their
main ideas is thinking differently. In their view, construction should be considered
as a construction process, with substantial human input and consequences at every
process stage, rather than just creating a construction product. Applying the systems
thinking concept facilitates this process approach.
Blockley and Godfrey (2000) introduce two fundamentally different types of
system that are also closely interrelated:
1
Soft systems
2
Hard systems.

22
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
A soft system is characterized by its human and subjective elements. It includes the
people factor and is comparable with high-touch (Naisbitt, 1984). Soft systems are
related to social sciences, management and marketing. They not only comprise the
well-known triggers of action and reaction, but also their intention. A soft system
also incorporates reasoning about why we do or why we do not. For instance, the
appraisal and improvement of team-performance and the exploration of a client’s
needs are typical aspects that require a soft systems approach. The same applies to
decisions about the type and extent of site investigations, because this is ultimately
driven by the client’s highly subjective risk tolerance.
Many technically-educated readers are likely to be more familiar with the second
type: the hard system. Contrary to a soft system, a hard system is physical and
objective. It excludes the fuzzy human factor and is comparable with the high-tech
approach (Naisbitt, 1984). The discipline of physics, which serves as foundation for
the applied engineering sciences, is typically a hard system. Geotechnical design
calculations are also hard systems, if we exclude the rather subjective character of
their input parameters. Pure hard systems comprise only action and reaction and
exclude vague human elements such as intention.
Hard systems are always embedded in soft systems. It is ultimately mankind
who develops and operates all system types, including the hard ones. There are
ample reasons for focusing on this soft system–hard system interrelationship.
Three of them have already been explored: increased complexity, underdeveloped
integrity and high failure costs. Their associated problems cannot be solved by
a hard system approach alone. Unfortunately, working life is not that simple.
We should consider the whole system, the hard high-tech cores and the softer
high-touch shells around them, in order to transform the construction industry in
a structured and irreversible way. The entire construction processes need to be
considered, from the earliest beginning through to operation and maintenance.
This is easier said than done. Communication between hard and soft sys-
tems is inherently difﬁcult, because of their fundamentally different characters.
As many of us will recognize, it is the same type of friction between the sales
department and the construction department in many companies. Representat-
ives of both departments communicate from a different viewpoint, from a mainly
soft and hard system approach respectively. Which is where risk management
may help.
From systems thinking to risk management
Risk management can be embedded in the twilight zone between hard and soft
systems (Figure 2.3). The zone boundaries are deliberately not shown as a solid
line to demonstrate that soft and hard systems are not closed in reality, as we
often like to assume for reasons of simplicity.

The construction industry – challenges and opportunities
23
Hard
System 
Soft System  
Risk Management
Figure 2.3: Risk management in the twilight zone of a hard
and soft system.
Risk management can be
seen
as
a
communication
vehicle between soft and hard
systems. It can act as the
translator between both, as
it speaks two languages. The
technical or hard systems lan-
guage is the mathematical
one of statistics and ﬁnite
element analysis. Quantitat-
ive risk analysis is a typ-
ical hard systems exponent.
Its human or soft language
equivalent is that of deal-
ing with the inherently dif-
ferent risk perceptions of pro-
fessionals and other involved
parties. It includes the wide
area of qualitative methods
for identifying and classifying
risks.
WORLDWIDE
CHANGE
INITIATIVES
IN
CONSTRUCTION  
RISK
MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEMS
THINKING
Figure 2.4: The relationship between change initiatives, sys-
tems thinking and risk management.
Systems thinking and risk
management
complement
each other and can be expec-
ted to facilitate the worldwide
change initiatives in construc-
tion (Figure 2.4).
The combination is partic-
ularly promising for ground-
related risk management, as
most ground-related problems
include subjective and soft ele-
ments, in addition to the conventional objective and hard elements. The GeoQ
concept is a mixture of hard and soft system components. Regarding the soft com-
ponent, any risk-driven action should be motivated by the risk perception of those
stakeholders responsible for that risk. Hard systems or high-tech deterministic
models are required as well. They provide data and arguments for the physical
aspects of the project. However, these hard systems always remain embedded in
their risk-driven and human context.
In view of all the challenges and opportunities described for the construction
industry, the ability to appraise and implement risk management will undoubtedly

24
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
become a critical success factor for many ﬁrms and organizations if they are
to survive in today’s construction arena. In this respect, it may be helpful to
remember the following words of Peter Senge:
Systems thinking shows us that there is no outside; that you and the cause of your problems
are part of a single system. The cure lies in your relationship with your ‘enemy’ (Senge,
1990).
We may need some renewed inspiration, to keep these words alive in day-to-day
practices.
Renewed inspiration
Which of us would not like to help to transform our industry, in order to realize
some of the promised cost savings, higher proﬁts and other beneﬁts? The applic-
ation of systems engineering and (ground) risk management will certainly help
us, but will not be sufﬁcient in isolation.
Why is it that initiating change is always so difﬁcult in practice? Why is it
that many of us acknowledge the need for rigorous and irreversible reform, but
still struggle, day after day, with ﬁerce competition using only the lowest price
criterion? Libraries are ﬁlled with books about change management, but we still do
not have the deﬁnite answer. Obviously, I do not have the answer, either. But I do
have a clue about an answer, based on inspiration and perception, as presented
by the tale in Box 2.5.
Box 2.5
Inspiration and perception
More than 4500 years ago, two workers were cutting stones in Gizeh, Egypt.
A woman passed by and asked them what they were doing. The ﬁrst worker
answered: ‘I am cutting stones, as you could see’. The second worker answered:
‘I am contributing to one of the most famous construction projects ever’. Both
persons were doing exactly the same work.
I recognize an increasing call for inspiration among many professionals in a
variety of roles and functions. There seems to be an underestimated need, which is
not limited to the construction industry. Young professionals, in particular, a new
generation embarking on their working lives, are anxious to make a difference.
We do not need to build pyramids to be inspired. The impacts and challenges
posed by our own construction projects should be more than sufﬁcient.

The construction industry – challenges and opportunities
25
One fundamental requirement is needed to channel our inspiration. I refer to it
as individual empowerment and it is closely related to the phrase of Peter Senge
at the end of the previous section. We need to be ﬁrmly dedicated to our own
contribution, by following our own unique capabilities and characters. It is very
much an individual choice. Changing organizational structures and culture is often
seen as the way to implement change in an organization, whatever these concepts
may be. These changes will not result in real and long-term change, however,
without the dedicated willingness of individuals, such as you and me, to change
(van Staveren, 2005). This places a great deal of responsibility on our shoulders.
Summary
The magnitude of construction is enormous, as demonstrated by the ﬁgures and
statements included in this chapter. A number of major challenges face the world’s
construction industry, which therefore inﬂuence our daily lives as well. We have
recognized ever-increasing complexity, an underdeveloped sense of integrity and
substantial failure costs. In all of these, ground conditions play a major role.
Is there an ongoing crisis in our industry? Perhaps there is, but the good news is
that new solutions and opportunities arise. In recent years, a number of countries
have initiated ambitious change programmes for the construction industry. They
share one main objective: to transform it into an industry where sustainability,
safety, integrity, and proﬁtability are increased. We have considered some of these
initiatives, and they may help us cope effectively with our challenges.
The concept of systems thinking is seen as one of the keys to unlock possibilit-
ies for the industry transformations required. It stipulates fertile ground for the
concept of risk management, which may act as a link between the hard and soft
systems of construction.
We should realize that only people can bring about any industry transformation,
by embedding ground risk management in daily practice for instance. These
professionals can make it happen, but they may need renewed inspiration. This
chapter has prepared the way to explore a number of concepts about uncertainty
in the next chapter, as well as risk and risk management in relation to ground
conditions.

3
From uncertainty, risk and
ground to GeoQ
Introduction
This chapter is about a number of concepts or mental models of simplifying the
world (de Bono, 1998). Concepts are, by deﬁnition, a little bit fuzzy and general,
but they prevent us from getting stuck in details in an early stage of thinking.
These characteristics make concepts so useful and I will use them a lot in this
book and particularly in this chapter.
This chapter starts with the concept of uncertainty, followed by the concepts of
risk and risk management. Many books are dedicated to these topics and I have
selected those aspects that are expected to support us in our practice of ground
risk management. Next, the concept of ground conditions is related to the concepts
of uncertainty, risk and risk management. Ground risk appears to be of a rather
hybrid nature. An overview of the main types of ground and ground-related risk
serves as a basis for the introduction of the GeoQ ground risk management concept.
The introduction of the GeoQ concept starts with some remarks on the current
status of ground risk management worldwide and a brief history of its recent
development. Then the GeoQ concept presents itself, including its perceived bene-
ﬁts. It is related to the existing ground-related disciplines and positioned within
the risk and hazard management landscapes. As the letter Q in GeoQ is derived
from the word quality, also the role of GeoQ with regard to quality management
gets attention. The last section of the chapter positions GeoQ towards knowledge
management and the chapter ends with a summary.
The concept of uncertainty
Uncertainty is a certainty. We all encounter uncertainty, in our daily professional
and private lives. Uncertainty can be deﬁned as an absence of information about
parts of a system under consideration. Uncertainty is always present, even when

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
27
information is perceived as complete (Smallman, 2000). Of course, there are some
certainties in this world, such as we will all eventually die. And if I jump from
a crane, I will certainly fall, according to Newton’s well-known law of gravity.
However, even in the apparent objective world of physics, there seems to be
reasonable uncertainty, as explained by a historical example in Box 3.1.
Box 3.1
Even sound physics is highly uncertain
In 1927, the physicist Werner Heisenberg published his so-called uncertainty
principle, which was a real break-through in the development of the, at that
time, new discipline of quantum physics. He stated that if you consider a very
small particle, the so-called quantum particle, there is only a probability about
the location of that particle in its quantum space. His colleague Niels Bohr
increased the uncertainty in the same year, by stating that the same quantum
particle can act both as a particle and as a wave, his so-called complementarity
principle. These principles upset the famous Albert Einstein, who wanted to see
an objective physical reality. He made this clear by speaking his famous ‘God
does not play dice’ (Ortoli and Pharabod, 1986).
I make this side step because physics is commonly considered as a rather
objective discipline, with a high degree of certainty and repeatability. Quantum
physics taught us that our common and successfully applied laws of mechanics
have their limits when we enter the microcosmos of our material world. Similarly,
a lot of technological solutions approach their limits as well, for instance when we
enter the macrocosmos of our construction projects in interaction with the public.
Later, we will explore this issue in more detail.
Three types of uncertainty
According to Blockley and Godfrey (2000), we have to distinguish between three
types of uncertainty: randomness, fuzziness and incompleteness. We will consider
each of these from a ground conditions perspective. They are presented in arbitrary
order of importance towards ground engineering. I use the deﬁnitions of Blockley
and Godfrey and relate them to some common aspects of ground conditions.
Randomness
Randomness can be deﬁned as a lack of a speciﬁc pattern of individual parameters or
variables. However, there may be patterns identiﬁed from populations of data. In
other words, if we consider a set of parameters, such as the unconﬁned compress-
ive strength of rock or the undrained shear strength of soil, then a pattern may

28
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
become visible. These patterns can be presented by probability-density functions.
They deﬁne the distribution of the probability of occurrence of these ground para-
meters. A well-known pattern in statistics is the bell-shaped normal distribution,
which is determined by the mean value and standard deviation of a particular
parameter (Anderson et al., 1999). These statistically derived patterns may give
at least some apparent certainty. We may think that we can make predictions
based on these statistics. We may derive parameters, like the mean value and
standard deviation. Modern software makes it easy to present the results in nice
and colourful pictures and diagrams and allows us to create all kinds of apparent
relationships, with an apparent sound statistical basis.
However, we must realize that these types of relationships between variables
are not necessarily the result of cause and effect. It is a fact that is easily forgotten
in today’s digital world, at least with some less experienced professionals. For
instance, sound theories about the geological history are still required to under-
stand and rely upon statistically derived relations between ground parameters.
This knowledge can be of great help to get more insight into certain patterns of
ground characteristics. A well-known example is the grain size distribution of sand
and gravel, which can be related to the deposition of that material by meandering
rivers (Press and Siever, 1982). Unfortunately, apart from a lot of geological theor-
ies for scientiﬁc purposes, I am still missing a lot of accessible and practical tools
to account for geological heterogeneity in ground engineering and construction.
Also, in rock engineering, we encounter a lot of random uncertainty, for instance
with regard to weathered rock and tropical residual soils. While considering these
restrictions of ground-related statistics, its entrance within ground engineering is
a fact. If used with care, it will provide a lot of additional and useful information,
as further explored in Chapter 10.
To conclude, it can be very helpful to be aware of the likely randomness of
ground as a source of uncertainty, especially in those situations where we do
not have the geological evidence for the existence of clear patterns. This is often
the case in geologically complex areas, with a rich history of different types of
subsequent deposition, erosion, glaciation, and so on. In ground-related disciplines
there is often a lack of sufﬁcient data, which are necessary to disclose any patterns
with an acceptable statistical certainty. Therefore, often these patterns, if at all
present, stay hidden in the ground. Consequently, in many construction projects
many ground related data have to be considered as random, which creates, for
example, uncertainty about what parameters to use as input in calculation models
for geotechnical design.
Fuzziness
Fuzziness is the second type of uncertainty as distinguished by Blockley and God-
frey (2000). In relation to ground engineering, it is also important to be aware
of this type of uncertainty. Fuzziness can be deﬁned as imprecision of deﬁnition

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
29
or imprecision of concept. Our highly valued concern of precision is challenged
by fuzziness. As a matter of fact, we encounter the limitation of language. We
approach the restrictions of objective communication between people, as is illus-
trated by the philosophical struggle in Box 3.2.
Box 3.2
Fuzziness and the problem of communication
The French philosopher and writer Jacques Derrida (1930–2004) is considered
to be the founding father of the concept of deconstruction. It is a critical analysis
of that which seems apparent and clear in our language and writing. I relate
this deconstruction to the concept of fuzziness in our communication. In fact
there is an existential subjectivity because of the limitations of the objective
logic of our language and writing. My intention is not exactly the same as what
I think. What I think is not exactly the same as what I write or say, which
is not equal to what you read or hear. Finally, what you read or hear is not
similar to what you interpret and understand. Our own unique perceptions and
interpretations of the world around us cause it. In addition, our language, even
supported by rules of grammar and dictionaries, is inappropriate to express
these subtle subjective individual aspects. According to Derrida, objective truth
is non-existent. True or not, that is a philosophical question. At least we should
consider our communication as a rather fuzzy process, which is an additional
obstacle to deal with uncertainty.
Obviously, with regard to Derrida’s non-existent objective truth we should
make exceptions, such as for the mechanical laws of nature, so long as we do not
enter the microcosmos. The traditional mechanical laws prove to work well in
our normal day-to-day conditions, as well as its objective language of mathematics.
However, this language is only applicable in what we earlier deﬁned as the
hard systems. It is difﬁcult, if not impossible, to apply mathematical expressions
for soft systems with subjective perceptions, such as importance, priority and
beauty.
What does this concept of fuzziness imply in our ground engineering and
construction practice? To start rather simply, for instance, the statement of soft
rock is fuzzy, because of the imprecision of the word soft. What is meant by soft?
How soft is soft? In what range of kPa can the unconﬁned compressive strength
of the soft rock be expected? Within ground engineering this type of fuzziness
can be easily countered by the use of one of the many available classiﬁcation
systems. Many countries have their own classiﬁcation systems for rock, soil and
intermediate materials, which are adapted to the local geological conditions. Other

30
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
classiﬁcation systems are of a general character and can be applied in many parts
of the world. Examples are the British Standards, the Uniﬁed Soil Classiﬁcation
System and the American Standards for Testing and Materials. Therefore, this
simple type of fuzziness is probably not a major problem within the ground-related
disciplines. Ground engineers are used to coping with this type of fuzziness.
Box 3.3
Fuzziness of ground sampling
The following three examples consider ground sampling in a fuzzy perspective:
1
Ground sampling always results in some form of sample disturbance. So-
called undisturbed samples, often mentioned in the literature, simply do
not exist. At best, ground samples with a relatively low disturbance can be
retrieved by special sampling techniques. The type of ground itself is also
a dominant factor in the degree of sample disturbance. Highly weathered
rock and very soft soil are very difﬁcult to sample in a good enough way.
But how do we measure sample disturbance and consider its effects on the
outcome of laboratory test results? How do we allow for these effects in the
selection of design parameters? How do we account for the effect of sample
disturbance in geotechnical design?
2
Cone Penetration Testing (CPT) is widely used in many parts of the world to
obtain rapid and high quality information about the type and strength of
soil and highly weathered rock at reasonable costs. However, the ground
collapses while the cone of the CPT measures ground resistance during
penetration. It is, in fact, a destructive type of research, so what is the real
strength of the ground, just before it collapses? What is the effect of the
design of the cone? How do we deal with the measured friction resistance
between the ground and the cone, a typical result of fuzzy interaction?
In spite of its high scatter, friction resistance is widely used for classiﬁc-
ation purposes, which makes it quite unreliable for classiﬁcation without
benchmarking by borings (van Staveren and van Deen, 1998). The work
of Lunne et al. (1997) provides an extensive overview of all these fuzzy
factors.
3
Environmental sampling, in which samples of polluted groundwater or pol-
luted ground are taken, is very sensitive to so-called cross-contamination.
Clean soil layers can become polluted during ground or groundwater
sampling. There are numerous cases in which this type of cross-
contamination occurred, making the problems even worse than before
sampling.

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
31
However, sometimes professionals are unaware of the fundamental implica-
tions of ground fuzziness, such as increasing ground risk or neglecting hidden
opportunities. If we go a step deeper into ground engineering and construction,
we will discover a lot of fuzzy uncertainty in all kind of ground-related issues.
The following six examples about fuzziness and ground sampling (see Box 3.3)
and ground engineering (see Box 3.4) may help to reveal ground fuzziness in our
practice.
The examples of fuzziness in Box 3.3 are a result of the interaction of the ground
sampling or testing technique with the ground itself. It provides an interesting
similarity with experiments in the human sciences, like psychology and sociology,
where there is also some kind of interaction between the person doing the test
and the tested person. Apparently, ground sciences and human sciences are not
that different.
Also in the ﬁeld of ground engineering we can see a lot of fuzzy uncertainty, as
presented by three examples in Box 3.4.
Box 3.4
Fuzziness in ground engineering
The following three examples consider ground engineering in a fuzzy perspective:
1
The calculation of horizontal deformation of foundation piles, for example,
caused by horizontal loads of an embankment, needs a lot of complex inter-
polation steps. The interaction of the ground and pile deformation necessit-
ates these interpolations.
2
What type of elasticity constant, E-value, should we select in order to calculate
the horizontal deformations of the previous pile example? Recently, I was
supervising an MSc student researching this type of problem. She identiﬁed
some 30 different E-values. What type of E-value should be selected for
what type of calculation?
3
The calculation of the bearing capacity of hollow steel piles, as in the offshore
construction of oil production platforms and jetties, includes a considerable
degree of fuzzy uncertainty as well. Is it permitted to include the bearing
capacity of the ground inside the hollow pile in the total bearing capacity?
That ground is disturbed during the installation of the pile. Neglecting the
bearing capacity of the soil plug within the pile would be safe, but may
result into an expensive over-design of the foundation.
In conclusion, there is a lot of fuzzy uncertainty in ground sampling and ground
engineering. I am sure that many of the readers who are directly involved in

32
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
design and construction with ground can add their own examples. Of course,
experienced engineers have found practical and technically acceptable solutions
to deal with this fuzziness, often by modelling and simplifying reality. In practice,
we can deal with it in one way or another. However, there is a risk that we
explicitly do not acknowledge this fuzziness anymore, because we are so used to
handling it. We deal with this fuzziness in an implicit way. If we want to bring
the ground-related engineering and construction in a risk driven context to create
more economic structures, with at least the same safety, then revisiting fuzziness is
an ultimate requirement.
Incompleteness
Finally, we arrive at the third type of uncertainty described by Blockley and
Godfrey (2000), which is incompleteness. With this type of uncertainty we will
feel really at home in our ground-related disciplines because of the inherent
lack of complete data from the ground. Incompleteness can be deﬁned as missing
information, that which we do not know. Two subdivisions of incompleteness can
be made in this respect. The ﬁrst one is that which we know that we do not know.
This type of incompleteness is common within ground conditions. Between two
boreholes for instance, we know that there is some kind of ground, of which we
do not know the precise characteristics. This type of uncertainty is foreseeable. As
we will see later in this chapter, the types of risk that may occur from this type of
uncertainty can be well managed.
The second type of incompleteness has a more difﬁcult character. It concerns
that which we do not know that we do not know, if you still can follow me. In other
words, it is about a total unawareness of what we do not know. To go back
to the example of the two boreholes, it is about an unforeseeable uncertainty of
the material between the two boreholes. It will be clear that management of the
unforeseeable is, by deﬁnition, impossible.
In our projects we can minimize the ‘unforeseeable’ by considering as many
different views and opinions from as many different experts as economically
viable. To wrap up about the uncertainty type of incompleteness, it is a given when
dealing with any type of ground condition in our projects. Incompleteness is at
least one of the few certainties we have!
Before ending this section about uncertainty, there is an additional remark to
make. The Bayesian Belief Theory involves both the randomness type of uncertainty
and the incompleteness type of uncertainty. You may encounter it in the literature
and therefore I introduce it brieﬂy in Box 3.5.
What are the possible impacts of these ground uncertainties on our construction
projects? To answer this question, we need to explore the concepts of risk and risk
management.

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
33
Box 3.5
Combining random and incomplete uncertainty
A well-known method for dealing with the interpretation of so-called random
variables is the Bayesian Theory (Bles, 2003). In this theory, probability is not
measured, such as rolling the well-known dice, but is based on the experience of
experts. With its inherent subjectivity, the latter can be called the professional
belief of these experts. These beliefs are clearly not only based on hard factual
measurements, a reason why Bayesian Theory is sometimes referred to as
Bayesian Belief Theory.
A remarkable element of this theory is that it does not allow incompleteness,
because all probabilities must sum up to one. In other words, it needs complete
information. Indeed, the absolute given factor in all ground-related aspects,
incompleteness, is necessarily excluded in this Bayesian Theory. However,
Bayesian Theory has been entering geotechnics, despite the fundamental limita-
tion of required completeness of information. While taking explicit assumptions
to arrive at complete information, the Bayesian approach can give useful addi-
tional information (Bles, 2003).
The concept of risk
Some deﬁnitions
No risk – no glory. The term risk, and the associated term hazard, have a lot
of deﬁnitions, proposed by numerous experts and institutions. Hazards can be
deﬁned as threats to people and the things that they value. In the view of Carlsson
et al. (2005), an uncertainty becomes a risk if a probability is assigned to it. Risk
can be deﬁned as the product of the probability and the eventual impact of a
hazard (Smallman, 2000). In other words, risk is the product of the probability or
likelihood of an undesired event and the consequences of that event.
Indeed, it means that the uncertainty of the risk event is twofold. First, the
uncertainty about the occurrence of the risk, which can be considered as the
probability part. Second, when the event occurs, the uncertainty about the likely
consequences, which can also be expressed in terms of probability. In the context
of risk management, uncertain events are usually considered as hazards with the
potential to have negative effects. However, uncertain events can occasionally also
give attractive opportunities with positive effects, as is reﬂected in a perception of
risk in Box 3.6. Risk may even create a new emerging market.

34
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 3.6
Risk is the gold of the 21st century
Saskia Sassen, professor at the University of Chicago and the London School
of Economics, made this statement during the third Ernst Heijmans Lecture in
November 2004, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Because of ongoing globalization,
the complexity of a lot of situations and cases for a majority of ﬁrms increases.
This is, in her opinion, the cause of the emergence of very specialized ser-
vice providers and consultants in accounting, legal affairs, design and so on.
These services are provided in no matter what market sector, thus including
the construction sector. Sassen acknowledges the emergence of what she calls
an intermediate economy. This type of economy will ﬁll an increasingly strategic
space between, in her words ‘the monsters of uncertainty and their clients’.
These clients are ﬁrms who choose to outsource their risks to this intermedi-
ate economy (Sassen, 2004). In this view, uncertainty and risk are developing
towards products of trade, perhaps even towards the gold of the 21st century.
What are the effects of this risk-as-trade movement on ground-related risk in
the engineering and construction industry?
I have a clear rationale for the above proposed simple deﬁnitions of the terms
risk and hazard, because I am a big supporter of the so-called KISS principle –
Keep It Simple and Short. The presented risk deﬁnition proved its practical value
in ground-related engineering and construction. It is left to the reader to use
more complex terminology, when appropriate and viable. Normally, that will
only be the case in the later and detailed stages of risk management, when it has
become clear that particular identiﬁed risks need a careful decomposition, in order
to manage them. Based on my experience, it is a common pitfall to make risk
management too complicated in the early stages of any project, which confuses
and frustrates the people involved. Often, this results in the unfavourable end of
any structured risk management.
Risk types
Many different risk types can be distinguished. Three main and practical types
of risk will be presented below, pure and speculative risk, foreseen and unforeseen
risk and ﬁnally information and interpretation risk, because these types facilitate the
application of the GeoQ process.
Pure and speculative risk
The ﬁrst distinction is between pure and speculative risk. Pure risks are, by deﬁnition,
related to hazards or unwanted events and, therefore, always have an undesirable

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
35
outcome. For these risk types, successful risk management can never be better than
the entire elimination of the hazard. Speculative risks can have both desirable and
undesirable outcomes. Successful risk management for speculative risks means
maximizing its opportunities. Edwards and Bowen (2005) warn that catching
opportunities should not replace remediation of those risks that threaten the
project objectives. Pure and speculative risks interact, therefore, both sets of risk
should be considered, ideally in a holistic way (Waring and Glendon, 1998). Box 3.7
illustrates how the distinction in pure and speculative risk coincides within the
Chinese language.
Box 3.7
The Chinese approach to pure and speculative risk
Since the new millennium the Chinese economy has been booming. Business
is often related to taking risks. Therefore, we may ask ourselves, is there
something special about the risk attitude in China? Considering the Chinese
language, this may be the case. The speculative and potentially positive effects
of risk appear to be reﬂected in the Chinese language, because the words crisis
and opportunity have the same Chinese character. In other words, in the Chinese
perception, risk resulting in crisis is equal to opportunity. Apparently, risks
and opportunities are perceived as two sides of the same coin. What can we
learn from this attitude?
Uncertainty:
1. Random 
2. Fuzzy
3. Incomplete
Opportunity
(positive) 
Threat
(negative)
Speculative risk
(positive) 
Pure risk
(negative) 
Speculative risk
(negative)
Figure 3.1: A simple relationship between uncertainty, pure risk
and speculative risk.
This opportunity driven
approach to risk is embed-
ded
in
this
entire
book,
because I am convinced that
such a positive approach
will ﬁnally help to estab-
lish
risk
management
in
ground-related
engineer-
ing construction activities.
Figure 3.1 relates the three
types
of
uncertainty,
as
introduced in the previous
section,
via
opportunities
and threats, to speculative
and pure risks.

36
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
As Figure 3.1 shows, all three types of uncertainty can be considered as both
opportunities and threats. Opportunities relate only to speculative risk, while
threats represent either the negative type of speculative risk or the pure risk.
Foreseen and unforeseen risk
Foreseen risk
(anticipated)  
Unforeseen risk
(not anticipated)
Real
unforeseen
risk
Apparent
unforeseen risk 
Uncertainty: 
1. Random
2. Fuzzy
3. Incomplete  
Figure 3.2: A simple relationship between uncertainty, foreseen
risk and unforeseen risk.
When considering ground
risk management, another
useful distinction is between
foreseen and unforeseen risk,
as for example recognized
by Altabba et al., (2004). Not
surprisingly,
foreseen
risks
are foreseen during the risk
identiﬁcation process. They
are
the
main
subject
of
risk management and some
examples are differing site
conditions, adverse weather
conditions and failing con-
struction equipment. More of a problem is the unforeseen risk, caused by negative
and unwanted events that are not anticipated during the risk identiﬁcation pro-
cess, such as risk of political origin and risk that is caused by unexpected market
ﬂuctuations, which can result in severe price effects. In fact, even these risks are
not really unforeseen, as we recognize them already in some way. It is better to
consider these as apparent unforeseen risks, with both highly uncertain probabilit-
ies and consequences. Real unforeseen risks remain unknown to us, by deﬁnition.
Foreseen and unforeseen risk types may originate from all of the three types of
identiﬁed uncertainties, as shown in Figure 3.2.
Both apparent and real unforeseen risks are typically located outside the circle
of inﬂuence of all project stakeholders, such as the project teams of the engineer
and the contractor, the client and the end-users of the project, which does not
make them popular.
Information and interpretation risks
Particularly in relation to contractual matters, it is common and helpful to distin-
guish between information risks and interpretation risks. Information risks are about
wrong and incomplete factual data. It is an objective risk and includes the uncer-
tainties of randomness and incompleteness, as previously described in the approach
of Blockley and Godfrey (2000).
Interpretation risk is about different and inherently subjective ways of interpreting
factual ground data. Differences in interpretation may arise from a wide range of

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
37
sources. Examples are different views on the interpretation of geological hetero-
geneity, incorporation of the effects of ground sample disturbance in the selection
of design parameters and decisions between analytical or ﬁnite element calcu-
lation models. Interpretation risk aligns with the fuzzy type of uncertainty. Its
reduction is consequently complicated, due to a wide range of sources of fuzzi-
ness. Figure 3.3 presents the relationship between the three types of uncertainty,
information risk and interpretation risk.
Uncertainty:
•    Random
•    Incomplete   
Information risk:
(objective)
-incorrect factual data
-incomplete factual data  
Uncertainty:
•    Fuzzy  
Interpretation risk:
(subjective)
-incorrect interpretation   
Figure 3.3: A simple relationship between uncertainty, informa-
tion risk and interpretation risk.
It
is
remarkable
that
incorrectness, as part of the
information risk, is lacking
in the three types of uncer-
tainties.
Because
ground
engineering and construc-
tions
are
performed
by
human beings, the uncer-
tainty and associated risk
of incorrectness, in other
words, human errors, must
not be neglected. As stated
by Cummings and Kenton
(2004): ‘The fundamental
(real) cause of failures is
human failure’. They admit immediately that most projects do not fail. I agree
with them, while acknowledging the relatively high failure costs in construction.
Dynamic character of risk
Another and elementary aspect of risk is its inherent dynamic character. One
simple but convincing factor is the time-dependent consolidation behaviour of
cohesive soils like clay. The geologically determined history of a clay layer affects
its compressibility and consequently the risk of settlement. Pre-loading by ice,
during periods of glaciation, or simply by an ancient construction, will markedly
change the clay strength and deformation properties.
However, often, probably for reasons of ease, risks are considered as static.
This assumption makes risks much simpler to manage. Unfortunately, reality is
complex and risk management is too. About 3000 years ago, the Greek philosopher,
Heraclitus from Ephesus, spoke the wise words pantha rhei – everything ﬂows
(Aufenhanger, 1985). Look carefully around you for a moment, wherever you are.
Can you mention something that is not subject to change, on the short, the longer
or even the very long term? Even we are changing, now at this very moment.
Millions of cells of our own body are renewed every day. Furthermore, we will

38
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
grow older, whether we like it or not. So, as everything and everybody is changing
around us, we can be sure that risk will be changing over time as well. We may
consider a simple two-dimensional contingency model for this dynamic character
of risk. Over time, risks are dependent on:
1
The ever changing circumstances – the factual and objective factors
2
The ever changing human perceptions – the interpretative and subjective factors.
While these factors change risk levels, their remediation measures may to have
change as well. Over time, a certain risk may become more or less serious because
of a mixture of changing objective and subjective factors, which are likely to
inﬂuence each other as well. Risk management has to deal with these types of
dynamics, preferably in the right direction of risk remediation and catching risk
opportunities at the same time. These considerations stress the importance of
a cyclic management of risk. Any changes in the identiﬁed and classiﬁed risks
should be considered at regular time intervals. It brings us to risk management.
Risk management
Like most issues in business, risk also needs to be managed in order to stay
successfully in business. Similar to the term risk, the term risk management also
has many deﬁnitions. According to Clayton (2001), risk management is the overall
application of policies, processes and practices dealing with risk. Risk management
should therefore be a well-deﬁned and understood responsibility within the entire
project organization.
Many organizations suffer large cumulative losses from a myriad of apparently
little incidents (Waring and Glendon, 1998). Sound risk management contributes
to the direct and broader stakeholders of the organization, as well to society as a
whole (Elliot et al., 2000). Thus, risk management is not only needed to avoid major
disasters, but also to improve bottom line ﬁnancial results. It is a pity, however,
that these bottom line beneﬁts of risk management are so difﬁcult to measure.
In the ground-related sectors of the construction industry in particular, there is
hardly any available evidence about bottom line improvement by the application
of risk management. In this respect, we should realize that risk management has
been embedded, for years already, in many companies in other industries. These
do consider their bottom line results as many of them are listed multinationals.
Risk management would therefore at least pay back its investments.
Some research on the beneﬁts of risk management in the construction industry
has been conducted. According to research in the USA by the Construction
Industry Institute (CII) of the University of Texas, a 1:10 cost–beneﬁt ratio can
be expected as a result of better contracting practices by improved risk allocation

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
39
(Smith, 1996). A study of two major transportation tunnel projects by Sperry (1981)
resulted in estimated cost savings between 4 and 22 per cent, by the application
of risk management practices.
In spite of these impressive ﬁgures, risk management remains primarily man-
agement of expectations. The word expectation derived from the word spectare, which
means seeing. The word ex refers to something outside ourselves. So, expectation
is something we see out there, even maybe something we anticipate in the future.
It is possibly about managing the ground conditions on a construction site, by con-
sidering the effects of a number of ground proﬁles, some measured groundwater
levels and a set of laboratory test results on pollution. Two generic approaches are
selected from the variety in the literature to manage these expectations: heuristic
and holistic risk management. These are particularly supportive to the introduc-
tion of the GeoQ ground risk management concept and therefore require some
special review.
Heuristic or rule of thumb risk management
In this book I apply the so-called heuristic or rule of thumb risk management
approach. It has a rather qualitative approach, which relies in particular on exper-
iences and the collective judgement of individuals (Waring and Glendon, 1998).
In addition, it ﬁts well with the soft systems approach of engineering and con-
struction.
Occasionally, this rule of thumb risk management approach will include some
form of quantiﬁcation of risk, which is the basis for the so-called scientiﬁc approach
of risk management. This other broad school of risk management aligns with
the hard systems approach. While it is normally based on complex mathematical
and quantitative modelling, it is not as objective as it ﬁrst appears. Any human
individual performing this type of scientiﬁc risk analysis and risk management is
inherently value-driven and inﬂuenced by his or her organizational culture. Cur-
rent methods for quantiﬁed risk assessments are not capable of including typical
soft system elements, such as power relations, motivations, organizational culture,
as well as individual attitudes and perceptions. Therefore, at least initially, the
heuristic or rule of thumb risk management approach is appropriate for most
applications (Waring and Glendon, 1998). Detailed risk analysis, including statist-
ical quantiﬁcation according to the scientiﬁc approach, may be an appropriate next
step with regard to the risk appraisal of technical (sub) systems. In ground-related
risk management this approach proved to be viable and it serves consequently as
the basis for the GeoQ concept of structured ground risk management.
Unfortunately, risk management requires more than just focusing on the major
risks. As some kind of paradox, as already stated by Ansoff (1984) and Reason
(1990), it is also very important that we pay attention to the so-called weak signals
in the heuristic risk management approach. These weak signals may be important
indicators of latent failures and risks (Smallman, 1996). They are often derived

40
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
from sources of information that provide qualitative and rather soft or subjective
information. It is all about balancing the right attention and resources towards the
recognized important risks and these weak signals. The latter may accumulate to
major risks later on, in the next phases of the project. It is this balancing of both
the details and the bigger picture, within the unavoidable limits of resources such
as budget, expertise and time, which makes ground risk management more of
an art than just a rational mean. It keeps risk management, for any construction
project, surprising, challenging, demanding and interesting as well.
Fatalistic and holistic risk management
Another set of major risk management paradigms can be distinguished: reactive
or fatalistic risk management and proactive or holistic risk management (Smallman,
1996). Reactive risk management focuses primarily on risk retention and transfer.
Retention of risk is, in fact, just accepting the risk with its consequences and losses,
if the risk occurs. Transfer of risk requires another party willing to bear the risk.
This reactive risk management approach is difﬁcult and dangerous, because risk
forecasting is limited by its inherent uncertainty, as well as by individual and
team perceptions. This reactive risk management approach is more of a laissez faire
of the recognized risk, where we or another party bear the consequences, if the
risk occurs.
Fatalistic & Reactive
Risk Management  
Holistic & Proactive
Risk Management 
Risk control by:
- retention of risk 
- transfer of risk 
Two
Risk Management
Paradigms 
Risk control by:
- avoidance of risk 
- prevention of risk
- reduction of risk   
Figure 3.4: Fatalistic versus holistic risk management.
It
is
therefore
often
favourable
to
consider
risks
and
their
interre-
lationships
on
a
more
proactive basis, by consid-
ering potential risk and
taking
measures
to
do
something to reduce the
cause or effect of that risk.
This approach serves as
basis for avoidance, preven-
tion and reduction of risk.
Risk avoidance implies tak-
ing such measures that the
risk is no longer present,
such
as
the
application
of a piled foundation to
avoid the settlement risk
of a shallow foundation on soft soil. The prevention of risk is deﬁned as taking
measures to reduce the main causes and probabilities of occurrence of the risk.
In the case of the shallow foundation, ground improvement will minimize the
risk of settlement. Reduction of risk means taking measures to reduce the effects

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
41
or consequences of the risk. In case of the shallow foundation on soft soil we
may take certain measures to allow for minimal settlements without causing
damage. Figure 3.4 summarizes the main characteristics of both described risk
management paradigms.
Finally, Murphy’s famous laws, like anything that goes wrong will go wrong,
are also valid in construction. In any construction project many things can go
wrong in numerous ways and most things can go right in just a few ways. A
big pitfall of risk management is getting drowned in a pool of negativism, which
brings us and all other participants in the risk management process into a negative
vortex. It may easily become a negative spiral of all what can go wrong in our
uncertain and dark world below ground level. Such a situation is not conducive
to a positive attitude towards effective ground risk management. My approach
is to emphasize the bright side of risk, to see risks, besides being threats as also
opportunities to make a positive difference, in line with the presented holistic and
proactive risk management approach.
The concept of ground and risk
Ground conditions
The theme of this book is managing risk as caused by differing and unforeseen
ground conditions. These ground conditions should be considered in the widest
context. Besides ground (soil, rock and all types of natural intermediate materials,
such as collapsing soils, residual soils and weathered rock), groundwater is also
considered here as an integral part of ground conditions. In addition, pollution (of
water and soil) and man-made structures (such as pipelines, archaeological remains
and old piles) are also part of ground conditions, as these prove occasionally to
contribute signiﬁcantly to ground related risk.
Ground risk management should manage all sorts of risk caused by these four
main types of ground conditions. In other words, all uncertainties about the
presence and nature of ground, groundwater, pollution and man-made structures
belong to the scope of ground risk management.
Managed risk or wild gamble?
In 1992, the Associated General Contractors (AGC) of America provided a video,
titled Managed Risk or Wild Gamble – Getting on the Team. It reﬂects that we have a
choice about how to deal with ground conditions in our project. Do we gamble with
the anticipated ground conditions? Following Brandl (2004), do we really want
to play the game of geo-poker or geo-gambling? Of course, factors, such as severe
competition on lowest price only, time pressure, a lack of knowledge, experience
and awareness about the risks and dangers of ground conditions all provoke these

42
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
gambling games. If we do so, then is it the obvious choice? Is it the only choice
we have? Do our clients indeed expect us to gamble with the ground conditions,
within their precious construction projects? In my opinion, we should manoeuvre
a choice to manage ground conditions rather than gamble, for instance by using
ground risk management. In order to do so and to develop a rationale for it,
let us ﬁrst consider some general characteristics about the unavoidable ground
conditions for any construction project. Why does the ground surprise us so often
in an unfriendly way?
Ground uncertainty and costs
Some statements, which you may encounter on a regular basis about ground
conditions, are those like:
•
The only certainty about ground conditions is its uncertainty
•
Ground investigations – pay now or pay a lot more later.
site
investigation 
laboratory
investigation 
interpretation
correlation
interpolation 
extrapolation
calcu-
lation
model 
ground
behaviour
geological and
man-made
heterogeneity
Figure 3.5: A simpliﬁed process model for dealing with ground con-
ditions.
These
statements
describe
two
main
aspects
of
ground
conditions that most
of us will recognize:
uncertainty and costs.
Ground
conditions
can
literally
make
or break our con-
struction project. We
may think of severe
differential
settle-
ments, embankment
failure, and so on.
We have already explored the random, fuzzy and incomplete character of ground
uncertainty. In addition, mistakes and incorrect interpretation of the often large
and conﬂicting number of ground data are an additional source of uncertainty.
Aspects such as the geological heterogeneity of ground and its non-linear and
time dependent behaviour in relation to loads add further to the complexity of
ground conditions. Furthermore, there is also heterogeneity in human perceptions
of ground conditions, the interpretation risk, which is at least as difﬁcult to tackle
as the geological heterogeneity. How can we deal with all these uncertainties?
Figure 3.5 presents a simpliﬁed process model for it.

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
43
Figure 3.5 can be used for all sorts of ground-related design and construction,
such as a foundation design and an environmental clean up of a landﬁll. While
hiding the complexity of ground conditions, this model provides a forecast of
ground behaviour. The reliability of this forecast will surface during the construc-
tion and operation phases of a project. Then it will become clear to what extent
the actual ground behaviour will agree with the forecast.
The mentioned uncertainties of randomness, fuzziness, incompleteness, as well
as the added incorrectness are present in each step of any construction dealing
with ground. Information risks are particularly relevant with regard to ground
investigations, while interpretation risks play a dominant role in the design pro-
cess. Within ground-related engineering, the accumulation of these uncertainties
results in an overall uncertainty of at least 50 per cent. This is reﬂected in the
widely accepted and applied overall safety factors of two, three or even more
for geotechnical design. This overall uncertainty for ground is much higher than
for other construction materials, like steel and concrete, with respective material
uncertainties of some 5 per cent and 10 per cent (Wentink, 2000). By now, we
should be convinced that ground uncertainty is a given fact and costs have to
be made to reduce it to an acceptable level within the boundary conditions and
risk proﬁle of the project. However, the hybrid character of ground risk makes it
even worse.
The hybrid character of ground risks
A complication with regard to ground risk is its hybrid character. Let me explain
this statement with an example. Main risk types for construction projects are
external risks, organizational risks, technical risks and legal risks. Occurrence of any
of these risk types will have ﬁnancial consequences and may affect other project
success factors such as safety, quality, planning and reputation. Table 3.1 presents
these four main risks types with their potential ground-related risk categories, in
a summarized and slightly adapted version of a risk identiﬁcation list by Altabba
et al. (2004).
Table 3.1 shows the external, organizational, technical or legal aspects of ground-
related risk. Given the high potential impact of ground-related risks, it is highly
advisable to consider ground risk as a separate risk type, in order to avoid confusion
and undesired mixing with other risk types. This will ensure that the inherent
hybrid ground risks get the adequate attention they need.
Main ground risk types
The previous sections introduced the concepts of uncertainty, risk, risk manage-
ment and ground conditions. Before entering the concept of GeoQ ground risk
management, I will focus in some detail about what are in fact ground risks.

44
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Table 3.1: Some risk types and their potential ground-related risk categories
General risk types
Ground-related risk categories
External
Natural hazards
Ground characteristics
Environmental
Soil/water condition and or contamination
Organizational
Schedule delays
Unforeseen site conditions
Cost overruns
Contractor claims
Technical
Design
Inadequate ground data and or ground
characterization
Construction performance
Differing site conditions
Legal
Contractual
Misinterpretations
Third party
Environmental aspects
We have already recognized their hybrid character, but what type of risks can
and should we actually classify as ground risks? Box 3.8 presents the four main
elements of ground in relation to their equivalent risk types.
Box 3.8
The four main elements of ground and their related risk types
1
Ground (soil, rock and all types of natural intermediate materials, such
as but not limited to collapsible soils, residual soils and weathered rock):
geotechnical risk
2
Groundwater (of natural origin, which can be sweet, brackish or salt): geo-
hydrological risk
3
Pollution (of water and soil): environmental risk
4
Man-made structures (such as pipelines, archaeological remains and old
piles): man-made obstruction risk.
The four main risk types of Box 3.8 are more speciﬁcally described by a number
of examples in Box 3.9.

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
45
Box 3.9
A brief introduction to a number of ground-related risk types
1
Geotechnical risks
•
Deformation – differential settlements
•
Strength – instability, collapse, hard ground layers.
2
Geohydrological risks
•
Unexpected groundwater tables
•
Groundwater overpressure, perched groundwater tables
•
Fast changing groundwater conditions due to weather inﬂuences.
3
Environmental risks
•
Polluted groundwater
•
Polluted soil.
4
Man-made obstruction risks
•
Archaeological remains
•
Old piles
•
Electricity cables, water, gas, oil pipelines in operation.
Obviously, the listing of Box 3.9 is not at all intended to be complete. The
presentation of detailed and project speciﬁc risk registers is clearly beyond the
scope of this book, with a focus on the processes of risk management. Risk registers
of various types and complexity and can be found in the literature and on the
Internet. Clayton (2001) presents a number of risk registers, which were retrieved
from some large construction ﬁrms in the UK.
Finally, Box 3.10 shows a few ground-related risks in some more detail. Accord-
ing to the previous deﬁnitions, these risks are divided into two parts, the probability
of occurrence and its effects, in case of occurrence.
The risks, as presented in Box 3.10, are all foreseeable and mainly pure risks, as
expressed in our previously applied terminology. If these risks actually occur, they
have in common a negative effect on project success factors like budget, planning,
quality and even reputation of the parties involved. The risk of the last example
of Box 3.10 has a somewhat different character, it is a typical foreseeable and
speculative risk, with an opportunity of cost reduction. After these classiﬁcations

46
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
and examples of typical ground-related risks we are now ultimately ready to enter
the next section: the GeoQ concept.
Box 3.10
Some examples of ground related risk by probability and effect
1
Pile fracture by an unexpected hard sand layer or presence of boulders – the
ground-related risk includes the probability of pile fracture and the effect of
a broken pile in terms of additional costs and delay
2
Differential settlements by a locally present soft peat layer – the ground-related
risk includes the probability of the presence of a soft peat layer and the effects
of too large differential settlements in terms of damage, like serious cracks
in the structure and the associated costs of repair
3
Instability of an embankment by liquefaction of an unexpected loose sand
layer, with an apparent normal cone resistance – the ground-related risk
includes the probability of that unexpected loose sand layer and the effect of
embankment instability with serious safety concerns, due to injured or even
lost workers
4
Collapse of the bottom of a construction pit due to an unexpected groundwater
pressure in the underlying sand layers – the ground-related risk includes
the probability of deviating groundwater levels and the effects of a drowned
building pit in terms of damaged excavation equipment, delay and its asso-
ciated costs
5
Unnecessary expensive dike design, within the project boundary conditions,
because of over-conservative design parameters. The ground-related risk
includes the probability of stronger ground than assessed and the effect of
an over-expensive dike design, which implies the client pays too much
and the contractor makes unnecessary costs and loses some (additional)
proﬁt.
The concept of ground risk management
What about the concept of ground risk management? Still, the practical and struc-
tured dissipation of ground risk management is rather slow. The concept is by
far not fully recognized and a lot of its beneﬁts remain untouched. The main
reason for the current situation is probably the gap between the rather abstract
and general theory and its application. A practical framework for ground risk

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
47
management has been awaited. Furthermore, ground-related risks are often seri-
ously considered in only one or two speciﬁc stages of a project. In the pre-design
phase, risks may be analysed thoroughly, even with sophisticated tools like Monte
Carlo analyses. The results are reported, often together with a spaghetti of cause
and effect ﬁgures. However, this type of risk analysis is not easily accessible and
applicable for those involved in the actual and later stages of the project. Con-
sequently, the often-expensive risk report will be stored in the darkest corner of
the ofﬁce-desk and during the design and construction phases no follow up takes
place. In other words, the ground risks are not managed.
The GeoQ concept
The GeoQ concept forms the beating heart of this book. It was initiated in the
year 2000 at GeoDelft, the Dutch National Institute for GeoEngineering in The
Netherlands (see Box 3.11).
Box 3.11
GeoQ or how it started
During a meeting in the year 2000, Jacob, at that time a project director of
Schiphol International Airport, The Netherlands, challenged me. We discussed
the common practice of presenting geotechnical advice. ‘I do not want one single
settlement prediction’, he stated. As an experienced and professional client, he
knew that settlements in reality always differ from their calculated forecast.
Jacob continued: ‘I want to see a certain range of possible settlements, together
with their probability of occurrence and preferably expressed in sound percent-
ages’. Only then, as a professional project director, he would be able to decide,
together with his project team, about any of the most appropriate settlement
reducing measures. He would be able to balance risk and cost consequences,
according to his own preferred risk proﬁle, as he is ultimately responsible for
the project budget. During that meeting we decided to provide a few calcula-
tions in his proposed setting. We also decided to evaluate one of his projects,
an infrastructure project. The objective of the evaluation was to check whether
more ground data, earlier in the project, would result in better project risk
management. It resulted in a structured and cyclic risk driven approach, which
evolved towards the GeoQ concept.
GeoQ is a risk-driven attempt to challenge and innovate the conventional
ground engineering and construction processes. This new process emerged in
an evolutionary way, together with the ground engineering and construction

48
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
industry, by application of existing risk management principles in a number
of stages in construction projects. With GeoDelft in a coordinating role, many
innovation-driven parties in the Dutch engineering and construction industry,
including clients, engineers and contractors, applied elements of GeoQ in their
projects. This resulted in a variety of GeoQ cases, as described in the remaining
part of this book, which became available over 5 years. This mixture of existing
and generic risk management theory and its practical translation and applica-
tion in the geotechnical parts of construction projects resulted in the actual GeoQ
concept.
GeoQ, with the Q of Quality, is a risk-driven approach to manage ground condi-
tions and behaviour in a structured way, in order to arrive at a successful project
for stakeholders. It is a cyclic risk management process as well. It makes the
requirements for ground data at every stage in the project, in terms of the type,
quantity and quality, more explicit, in order to create a true quality construction
project. This desired type of project moves beyond meeting safety and quality
standards. It is realized within budget and planning as well, which strengthens the
reputation of the parties involved. The GeoQ process provides a straightforward
ground risk management framework, which is ﬂexible enough to be adaptive to
the speciﬁc requirements of each small or large construction project. It is applic-
able for any ground conditions, anywhere in the world. Box 3.12 presents the
three main characteristics of GeoQ.
Box 3.12
The three main characteristics of the GeoQ process
1
Cyclic risk management, by the repetition of six risk management steps in six
generic project phases and the structured storage of its results in accessible
and easy-to-use risk registers
2
Just in time availability of adequate ground data, driven by the perceived
and agreed risk proﬁle of the project. In the early project phases gen-
eral ground information might do, in further project phases more detailed
ground information should be used
3
Continuity of adequate ground data, which indicates the need for permanent
and well-structured access to all available ground data, including that from
the preceding project phases. Ground data should be stored in databases
and any identiﬁed risks in risk registers. This information needs continuous
updating with new insights during the subsequent project phases.
Possibly surprisingly, there are many GeoQ tools already available in the global
ground engineering and construction communities. These tools can greatly con-

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
49
tribute to an effective and efﬁcient GeoQ process. They vary from ground risk iden-
tiﬁcation and classiﬁcation methods, via advanced ground investigation equip-
ment to geotechnical software for probabilistic geotechnical design. These tools
have already been widely and successfully used for many years in our prac-
tices. However, they will have an interesting additional value, when applied in the
risk driven context of GeoQ, because of their contribution to explicit ground risk
management.
The intention behind GeoQ is to serve all project stakeholders, i.e. the client,
the engineer, the contractor, the public, as well as suppliers or partners and the
employees of the involved organizations. Ideally, GeoQ is applied throughout
the entire project lifetime. It starts at the feasibility phase and continues during
pre-design and design, the contracting and construction phase to the operation
and maintenance phase.
In 2001, a number of countries of the European Union introduction the euro with
their ultimate statement: ‘The Euro is for all of us’. GeoQ is for all of us as well,
even well beyond the boundaries of Europe. Everybody, anywhere in the world,
is free to use the GeoQ principles in his or her projects. GeoQ can be perceived
as an open source ground risk management framework. It is comparable with other
worldwide open-source developments, such as the Linux software, the Apache
web server programme and the Wikipedia Internet encyclopaedia. GeoQ can be
adapted, as requested by speciﬁc requirements of projects and stakeholders, so
long as the core objective of GeoQ is concerned: serving the overall quality of a
construction project by structured ground risk management. It should serve as
our ground for success!
What are the main beneﬁts of this structured ground-risk management concept?
GeoQ helps to manage foreseeable ground risks in an effective and efﬁcient way. It
provides proactive risk management and has therefore to start in the earliest stage of
a project to maximize its beneﬁts. In this stage, many options for design and con-
struction are still open and to be decided upon. It means that an adequate ground
risk response can still be included rather smoothly, without major design or con-
struction modiﬁcations, with all their often unfavourable costs and construction
time consequences.
The GeoQ process supports a thorough insight into a lot of interrelated ground
aspects and their associated risk. It facilitates management of the risk of ground,
groundwater, pollution and man-made aspects, such as buried cables, in an integ-
rated way, which minimizes any suboptimum solutions. Furthermore, it relates
ground aspects to other technical and non-technical project risks and vice versa.
It helps to demonstrate the need for timely and adequate ground attention in
order to manage the major overall project risks. The application of GeoQ justiﬁes
ground investigations to non-geotechnical decision-makers of a project, because
its added value can be communicated within a risk management objective by

50
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
relating the expected ground investigation beneﬁts to meeting the overall project
objectives. GeoQ proves to be of great help to convince slightly sceptical clients
about the importance of adequate ground investigations with their associated
investments.
Furthermore, in any construction project, the contractual phase needs special
attention, especially when it comes to the widely underestimated importance of
clear contractual statements about differing ground conditions. The allocation of all
identiﬁed risks to the parties involved is of major importance during contracting.
Each identiﬁed risk needs one or more owners in order to guarantee effective
management of that risk. One of the beneﬁts of the GeoQ approach is its transpar-
ent management of the contractual consequences of differing ground conditions.
Within the GeoQ process, risk allocation is provided by the so-called Geotechnical
Baseline Report (GBR) method, which was originally developed in the 1990s in
the USA (Essex, 1997). This geotechnical baseline approach is entirely embedded
in the GeoQ approach. The GeoQ process is well suited for both traditional and
modern innovative types of contracting, such as design and construct. So far as I
know, a similar approach to this is not yet available.
In summary, the GeoQ process allows a certain degree of risk space in our
construction projects. It provides sufﬁcient ﬂexibility to allow for changing risk
perceptions and project circumstances. Normally, the risk space shrinks during
the project as a result of the information and experience gained. However, ground
has its inherent uncertainty and may expand the risk space again at an unexpec-
ted moment. GeoQ ground risk management helps to facilitate this continuous
breathing of any construction project in its risk space and serves the required
ﬂexibility for adoptions and change, at any time.
Finally, it needs to be said, the ground situation as managed by the GeoQ process
is a part of the entire project management. GeoQ deals with ground and, if the
remaining non-ground-related aspects are not given equally sound and structured
management attention, GeoQ will not save the project. We will, therefore, next
explore the positioning of GeoQ in a number of existing ground-related disciplines
and project management practices.
GeoQ and the ground-related disciplines
What is the position of the GeoQ concept in relation to the conventional ground-
related engineering and construction disciplines? What about the existing risk
management with regard to GeoQ? What about natural hazards and GeoQ? What
is the position of GeoQ towards the well-established quality management and
knowledge management areas? In this and the following sections, the GeoQ
process is positioned relative to a number of existing disciplines and manage-
ment approaches. There is one overall message: GeoQ intends to complement

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
51
existing disciplines, knowledge and experience, rather than compete with or
replace them.
As an engineering geologist, I like the fact that both Karl Terzaghi, the founding
father of soil mechanics and Leopold Müller, the founder of rock mechanics, con-
sidered themselves as engineering geologists. Together with, for instance, Bock
et al. (2005) I regret, however, they themselves and their successors are not yet suc-
cessful in establishing engineering geology as a so-called independent discipline,
with its recognition in our engineering and construction community.
This is just an example of a tendency to think from our own background and
disciplines and put that viewpoint in the centre of the world. Perhaps for that
reason I recognize a lot of confusion, both in the literature and in practice, in
several terms used and deﬁnitions of applied geosciences. Just to mention some:
soil mechanics, rock mechanics, soil engineering, rock engineering, geological engineer-
ing, engineering geology, ground engineering, geotechnical engineering, environmental
engineering and geoenvironmental engineering. All of these disciplines are related to
each other, with ground as the main binding element. The introduction of a new
discipline, ground risk management, might even increase this confusion. To avoid
this, I like to use the structure of the applied geosciences, such as for instance
indicated by Bock et al. (2005). It is not an astonishing brand new structure, but
it facilitates a clear positioning of ground risk management. In this structure soil
mechanics, rock mechanics and engineering geology are considered as the three pil-
lars of ground engineering. I hope that most readers can accept my simpliﬁcation
when considering ground engineering and geotechnical engineering as equivalent
to each other. To these three disciplines I add the recently developed discipline
of geoenvironmental engineering. The latter I deﬁne as the discipline dealing with
polluted ground and groundwater during all engineering, construction, and oper-
ation and maintenance phases of any construction project or area. In-situ cleaning
of a polluted site is, by this deﬁnition, a typical example of a geoenvironmental
project. Too often, I recognize that geoenvironmental engineering is considered
as a separate discipline, with rather isolated codes and practices, separate ground
investigations and consequently a lot of suboptimizations. Is it really effective to
have ﬁrst a geotechnical site investigation, followed by a geoenvironmental site
investigation just a few weeks later and often provided by a different contractor
and a different engineer under a different contract? Environmental engineering
still seems not to be fully integrated into the entire construction project. Such an
integration will give lots of opportunities for creating synergies because of the
high interdependence of construction and adequate dealing with environmental
issues.
In summary, for the purpose of this book I deﬁne ground engineering and
construction as the discipline that deals with any type of engineering and con-
struction of any structures in, at or with any type of ground. In this deﬁnition soil

52
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
engineering, rock engineering, engineering geology, and geoenvironmental engineering
are all considered as being part of ground engineering, as presented in Figure 3.6.
SOIL MECHANICS
ROCK MECHANICS
ENGINEERING
GEOLOGY
GEOENVIRONMENTAL
ENGINEERING 
GROUND
ENGINEERING  
Figure 3.6: A simple framework of the four main discip-
lines of ground engineering.
It is probably no coincidence
that the three relevant Interna-
tional Societies representing soil
mechanics, rock mechanics and
engineering
geology,
are
mov-
ing step by step towards each
other, in order to integrate ﬁnally
into some kind of federation of
geo-engineering societies (Knill,
2003).
Furthermore,
I
consider
ground engineering as a facilitat-
ing and supporting discipline for
the entire construction industry, as
any structure will be built on or
in ground. Castles in the air are
beyond the scope of this book.
Ground risk management is deﬁned here as management of the uncertainties
about the presence and nature of ground within ground engineering. As I men-
tioned before, by the introduction of GeoQ ground-risk management I do not
intend to introduce a new isolated discipline. On the contrary, I would like to
develop it towards an integral and inevitable part of risk- and opportunity-driven
ground engineering. The GeoQ ground risk management concept is by no means
meant to replace the conventional disciplines of soil engineering, rock engineering,
engineering geology and geoenvironmental engineering. It is a fear of ground-
related professionals that I sometimes encounter when introducing GeoQ. These
disciplines have proven already for many years their value to our societies. We
need all this deep knowledge and experience alive and kicking. GeoQ ground
risk management should add and contribute to these proven disciplines and to
ground engineering as a whole. GeoQ intends to provide a strong connection
between the technological approach of the mentioned disciplines and the dynamic
and complex outer world of our societies, where the support for purely techno-
logical disciplines and solutions is diminishing. GeoQ can bring these disciplines,
together with their experts, back into the spotlights of society, as the risk driven
approach will highlight their value to society. In fact, GeoQ can be considered
as some sort of ground-related communication vehicle. It may help engineers to
become better understood and appreciated by the many stakeholder groups in
society, such as policy makers and the public. Many of them may have a rather
limited technological awareness, but they have unmistakable high interests in the
ﬁnal results our engineering and construction projects deliver to them.

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
53
GeoQ and risk management
The GeoQ method is quite new. However, considered from a distance, it will
quickly become clear that many of the elements of GeoQ are concepts that have
been well known and proven for some time. In fact, GeoQ is literally a deepening
of existing risk management procedures, such as MARIUN (MAnaging RIsk and
UNcertainty) in the UK and RISMAN (RISk MANagement) in The Netherlands.
The latter has been in use since 1995 and successfully applied to many large and
smaller infrastructure projects.
However, a detailed and ﬁt-for-purpose translation of these systems towards
management of ground risk, with its own characteristics, was still missing. In
practice, systems like RISMAN proved to be more of a one-moment risk analysis
tool, rather than a risk management tool for the entire construction process. During
the early application of the GeoQ principles in construction projects, many col-
leagues and I occasionally experienced some hesitation. For instance, in the mind
of an engineer, something might be easily considered as wrong if it does not prove
to be completely right. It is a way of digital thinking: it is one or zero. This type of
black and white approach is often very useful for the technical solutions within
construction projects. However, the realization of the construction project includes a
construction process, from the early feasibility stage via pre-design, design, construc-
tion towards operation and maintenance. It includes both the hard technical and
the soft human systems. Blockley and Godfrey (2000) taught us that optimizing a
construction process by using solely black and white thinking is not productive
at all. Simply because it disturbs the inherent subtle and dynamic character of
the construction process, with all its internal and external inﬂuences. Therefore,
I have to disappoint those readers who might expect a one size ﬁts all approach
for their projects, by the application of GeoQ. Such an over-simplistic risk man-
agement approach cannot exist given the uniqueness of each construction project.
I compare it with the two most valuable words that I learned while taking my
MBA: it depends. When positioning GeoQ in today’s risk management landscape,
we permanently need to remember these two words.
At this stage it should be noted and taken seriously that the application of
ground risk management systems such as GeoQ, similar to any system, is not a
deﬁnite guarantee that nothing will go wrong within our construction projects.
GeoQ is just a few years old and it has the characteristics of a young child. It is
discovering the world and its place in that world. A lot of GeoQ practices and
tools will probably be further developed in the next years and even decades, based
on newly gained GeoQ experiences. To conclude, GeoQ is literally a deepening
of existing risk management procedures. Its further development may be highly
facilitated by further importing and translating theories, practices and lessons
learned from risk management in any other sector or discipline.

54
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
GeoQ and natural hazard management
Large parts of our world are increasingly vulnerable to the effects of natural
hazards, such as earthquakes, tsunamis, ﬂoods, hurricanes, eruptions of volcanoes
and landslides. These have a major negative impact on the people living in the
affected areas, with serious losses of lives, infrastructure, goods and services. In
addition, many areas in the world are regularly affected by less dramatic but still
signiﬁcant ground-related problems, such as those weather-related ones seriously
affecting the railway industry in the cold regions. As an example, much of the
tens of thousands kilometres of railway in Canada are susceptible to embankment
failure, as a result of rapid melt of snow or drainage disruption. The annual
ﬁnancial losses because of derailments and delays amount to millions of dollars
(Gitirana and Fredlund, 2005). Another indication of the impact of natural hazards
on society is presented in Box 3.13.
Box 3.13
The impact of natural hazards on society
To illustrate the impact of natural hazards on society, I looked at some ﬁgures
about Latin America and the Caribbean provided by the Inter-American Devel-
opment Bank. In the period between 1975 and 2002 the average annual losses
caused by natural hazards were estimated at 3 200 000 million US dollar. In
that period 250 000 deaths were recorded, according to Mora and Keipi (2005).
I am afraid that similar ﬁgures can be found for other parts of the world with
a relatively high natural hazard risk.
The same authors, Mora and Keipi, are of the opinion that, in Latin America
and the Caribbean, existing decision-making processes are unfavourable for the
prevention of the effects of natural disasters. Instead, centralized and reactive
disaster management systems typically prevail. It should be recognized here
that the opinions of Mora and Keipi do not necessarily reﬂect those ofﬁcially
adopted by the mentioned Inter-American Development Bank. As a frequent
reader of newspapers, I am convinced that this situation also may occur in
many other parts of the world.
In my opinion, the situation as presented in Box 3.13 calls for the inclusion
of sound and relevant risk management criteria throughout the entire cycle of
construction projects in order to include the potential effects of natural hazards on
the particular project in the design process. This is expected to result in a higher
degree of natural hazard awareness, as well as easier ways of understanding
the effects of natural hazards on a particular construction project. Obviously, it
will not prevent any single natural hazard from happening. It may, however,

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
55
reduce the negative effects of the natural hazard on the constructed objects and
its stakeholders. I understand that there may be serious budget constraints in
doing so, but the application of risk-driven concepts, such as structured ground
risk management, does not automatically require more budget. It is a new way of
perceiving and operating, within the inevitable budget constraints of any project
in any part of the world.
The GeoQ ground risk management concept does absolutely not intend to replace
the various existing risk management systems and procedures for assessing and
correcting the effects of natural hazards. Hazard management covers occasionally
(large) areas rather than just project sites, which can be covered by techniques
such as hazard zone mapping. Based on these hazard maps, an even more suitable
construction site might be selected or appropriate site preparation measures can
be undertaken. Given these known hazards, the GeoQ process can be used to
minimize the potential harmful effects of these natural hazards on the project,
from a ground conditions perspective. GeoQ is clearly complementary to existing
natural hazard management concepts and methods, by appraising and above all,
anticipating the potential harmful effects of natural disasters within the design,
construction and maintenance phases of construction projects.
GeoQ and quality management
GeoQ bears the letter Q of quality, which is obviously not a matter of coincidence.
Quality management is an established and an inevitable part of project manage-
ment in the construction industry. In this section GeoQ ground risk management
is discussed in the light of quality management.
Many experts, including the three famous American gurus, Phillip B. Crosby,
W. Edwards Deming and Joseph M. Juran, deﬁne quality in various ways. In basic
terms, quality is simply meeting the requirements of the customer (Oakland, 1993).
It is therefore not possible to provide quality without knowing the requirements
of the client. The same applies for risk management – effective risk management
is not possible without including the risk requirements and risk tolerance of the
client, while risk management goes even a step further. In a real quality project,
the risks of all stakeholders in the project, not only the client, are managed in an
effective way.
The need for risk management appears to agree quite well with the general
considerations and objectives when applying quality management. The key reas-
ons for quality management are more (global) competition, more demanding
customers and the never ending need for market share and cost control (Dibb
et al., 1997). Therefore, in today’s highly competitive and fast changing business
environment, quality is not only required for proﬁtability, but crucial to busi-
ness survival (Muhlemann et al., 1992). Furthermore, like most issues in business,
such as risk, quality also needs to be managed. Quality should be a well-deﬁned

56
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
and understood responsibility within the entire organization, including senior
management, marketing, research and development, production/operations man-
agement, etc. (Muhlemann et al., 1992). One aspect addressing this is a fully
documented quality system, for instance according to ISO 9001 standards, which
will support meeting the customer (and thus quality) requirements, while also
meeting the objectives of the organization. That is, at least according to the theory,
as illustrated by the example in Box 3.14.
Box 3.14
Quality management and ground investigations
According to my international experience, particularly regarding ground
investigations, the practice of meeting the customer requirements is often
quite different from the proposed quality management theory. Many customers
simply assume quality as a (paper) given and solely select their ground invest-
igation contractor on the lowest price criterion. Due to severe price competition,
it seems to be almost impossible to stay competitive and to keep quality to
minimum standards for these contractors.
For instance, the introduction of an industry-wide quality system for cone
penetration testing (CPT) in The Netherlands has failed, to date. Although a
Dutch CPT standard with four distinctive quality levels is available, in line
with international recommendations, the differences in CPT quality are still
fuzzy in practice. CPT providers have not yet succeeded in communicating
the beneﬁts of CPTs with distinct quality and, consequently, clients are not
willing to pay a price premium for higher quality CPTs. Another example
concerns soil drilling and sampling. Serious soft soil sample disturbance, which
I occasionally encounter in soil laboratories, is also a silent witness of still rather
underdeveloped quality management within the ground investigation sector.
As Box 3.14 may teach us, quality management should ideally be supported by
an awareness of the costs of (lack of) quality. The same applies for risk manage-
ment!
Total Quality Management (TQM) is a step beyond sole quality management
and is widely recognized as a concept that emphasizes continuous improvement,
product quality, customer focus and empowered employees. Results of TQM pro-
grammes can be staggering, such as a 40 million US dollar reduction of the Ford
Motor Company operating budget by adopting total quality principles and chan-
ging corporate culture (Daft, 1998). As in the case of quality, a general deﬁnition
for TQM does not exist (Lowery et al., 2000). TQM is even considered as some

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
57
form of pre-1965 Japanese Total Quality Control (Dean, 1998) and here we redis-
cover the cyclic character of TQM, which is similar to the cyclic character of the
GeoQ process.
Indeed, there are striking similarities between quality management and risk
management. In fact, it appears that GeoQ has a lot in common with the Japanese
quality management concept of Kaizen. This quality concept is also a cyclic and
a process-oriented step-by-step approach in which everybody is involved (Imai,
1986). This rather collective approach towards quality management differs from
the conventional western style, which is basically product- and result-oriented. It
may easily neglect the process and quite often excludes real participation of all
related people, because of some kind of top-down command structure. The reward
of effort made, and not only results, is another characteristic of Kaizen. In addition,
it has a positive and forward-looking approach. Kaizen assumes, as a given, that
every organization has its problems, at least the so-called warusa-kagen, things that
are not yet problems but are still not quite right (Imai 1986). Within Kaizen quality
management, every problem is perceived as an opportunity for improvement.
Similarly, every risk identiﬁed by the GeoQ ground risk management process is
still a risk and can be managed in some way or another. The GeoQ concept appears
generally to agree with the quality circle philosophy, which Deming introduced
in Japan in 1950.
So after all these similarities between risk management and quality manage-
ment, are there any differences between these two types of management? Why do
we need them both? We need them both, because they complement each other. It
is believed that the founding father of quality management, Deming, said that the
more important something is, the more difﬁcult it is to measure. Measurement,
which is in fact the ultimate way for quality control, excludes, however, what
we cannot yet measure. It excludes what we do not ultimately know yet. Qual-
ity management excludes hypothetically thinking about what is still uncertain. A
fully documented quality system, for instance according to ISO 9001 standards,
intends to meet the customer (and thus quality) requirements, while also meeting
the objectives of the organization. Quality management may even be supported
by the awareness of the costs of (lack of) quality and the application of tools such
as statistical process control. However, dealing with risk and uncertainty is not
part of the quality system, while this will have a major impact on meeting the
quality standards. That is where risk management can help us. Risk management
is not solely about measuring, in spite of the fact that there are a lot of quantitative
and semi-quantitative tools. Risk management can be used to map the unavoid-
able uncertainties of the project. It goes beyond known and foreseen certainty
and enters the area of foreseen uncertainty and even unforeseen uncertainty. Risk
management starts where conventional quality management stops.

58
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
In a summarizing conclusion, quality management is about realizing the project
within the pre-set quality standards, while risk management is dealing with risks
of not applying these pre-set quality standards. Regarding ground conditions,
GeoQ ground risk management covers the area outside the pre-set quality stand-
ards of quality management. This is the area where GeoQ is positioned when it
comes to quality management.
GeoQ and knowledge management
Finally, while arriving at the end of this chapter, I feel the need to dedicate a few
sentences to the position of another type of management: knowledge management.
What is the position of ground risk management in respect to knowledge manage-
ment? In a simple deﬁnition, knowledge management concerns management of
what we know in our (project) organizations. Whether knowledge is theoretical or
practical, there are limits to our knowledge, it is always ﬁnite. Risk management
in general and GeoQ ground risk management, in particular, face uncertainty,
they try to reveal what we do not know (exactly) yet. Risk management considers
what may happen when we use our imagination, which is inﬁnite. Therefore,
risk management primarily asks questions, like what if, while knowledge manage-
ment basically provides answers, like if then. Knowledge management and risk
management seem to complement each other on the continuum from knowing
towards not knowing. In other words, it brings us from fact to ﬁction, and the
latter may become a fact in the future. The more facts or knowledge we have, the
Box 3.15
Knowledge meets risk management by GeoBrain Foundations
The development of Internet accessible experience databases started in The
Netherlands around 2002 by the so-called GeoBrain Foundations. It is an on-
line experience database, in which the top ten foundation contractors in The
Netherlands store their non-competitive foundation experiences. The database
is operated by GeoDelft, the Dutch National Institute for GeoEngineering. The
purpose of GeoBrain is to provide society with all relevant knowledge and
experience in a structured way. It aims to provide engineers with local and
practical ground experiences, which they may use to verify the feasibility of
their theoretical designs. For instance, if you have to design a sheet pile wall in
the city centre of Amsterdam, then you can access the database and view the
existing experiences in that area, just by searching under the area’s postal code.
It is an easy and quick method for a design check with local experience data
and can be considered as a viable risk management tool in the design phase of
a construction project (Bles et al., 2005).

From uncertainty, risk and ground to GeoQ
59
more effectively we can deal with this ﬁction in terms of its relevance for decision-
making. That is why knowledge management may become an interesting partner
of risk management. One example is the increasing use of risk registers and large
experience databases, which may become available via Internet, as presented in
Box 3.15.
Quality Management
Knowledge Management
Risk Management
UNCERTAINTY
CERTAINTY
Figure 3.7: Partnering of risk, quality and knowledge manage-
ment.
In conclusion, risk man-
agement
provides
meth-
ods and tools to deal with
the ‘not knowing part’ of
the knowing–not knowing
continuum. Risk manage-
ment in general and man-
agement of ground-related
risk, in particular, intend
to
complement,
to
add
towards knowledge man-
agement, instead of repla-
cing it. Just as in the case of
quality management and
illustrated in Figure 3.7,
risk management should be considered as a partner of knowledge management,
rather than a competitor for the always too limited resources for operating these
types of management.
It is up to the dedicated managers in charge to distribute their resources in the
most effective way towards the complementary disciplines of quality management,
knowledge management and risk management.
Summary
The concepts of uncertainty, risk, ground and GeoQ appear to serve as a sound
foundation for the structured management of ground-related risk. Three types of
uncertainty help to recognize the inherent uncertainty of ground: randomness,
fuzziness and incompleteness. A number of examples have demonstrated that all
three of these are abundantly present in our day-to-day ground engineering and
construction practice.
From the many available deﬁnitions, a very simple and practical risk manage-
ment deﬁnition ﬁts our ground risk management purpose: risk is the product of
the probability of an uncertain event and the consequences of that event. Uncertain
events can be either negative, creating problems, or positive, creating opportunit-
ies. With regard to ground engineering and construction it is helpful to distinguish

60
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
between certain risk types, such as pure and speculative risks, foreseen and unfore-
seen risks and information and interpretation risks. A complicating factor is the
dynamic character of risks: they change over time.
The heuristic or rule of thumb risk management approach is well applicable to
manage ground-related risks, because it allows the combination of factual data
with experiences and judgement of individual professionals. It ﬁts well with the
random, fuzzy and incomplete character of ground. Furthermore, risk manage-
ment needs a proactive and holistic approach, which is primarily focused on the
avoidance, retention and reduction of risk on a proactive rather than reactive basis.
The holistic approach considers risk not as an isolated and pure technical issue,
but closely related to its social environment. The inherent subjectivity of risk and
risk management has been highlighted as of primary concern.
The danger of gambling with ground conditions, which often results in an
adverse relationship between ground uncertainty and costs, has been illustrated by
the concept of ground conditions and risk. Ground risks have a hybrid character,
which supports the vision to consider them as a separate risk type in order to
guarantee sufﬁcient attention to this major risk source in construction projects.
Four main types of ground-related risk have been identiﬁed: geotechnical risk,
geohydrological risk, environmental risk and man-made obstruction risk.
The GeoQ concept for structured ground risk management aims to improve the
overall quality of construction projects, in terms of optimizing costs and proﬁts,
planning, safety, functionality, sustainability and reputation. Three main char-
acteristics of GeoQ are cyclic risk management, just-in-time availability of the
required ground data and continuity in availability of that data, during the entire
construction process, preferably by the use of database and risk registers. GeoQ is
literally a deepening of existing risk management principles towards ground con-
ditions. It complements the well-established and proven functional disciplines of
soil mechanics, rock mechanics, engineering geology and environmental engineer-
ing. Furthermore, GeoQ is intended to complement, rather than replace, existing
management disciplines, such as hazard management, quality management and
knowledge management. GeoQ structured ground risk management is applicable
in any construction project in any ground conditions. It is an open and adaptive
framework, free of use by anybody, everywhere in the world.

PART TWO
The people factor in ground risk
management


4
Individuals and risk
Introduction
Choose a job you love and you will never have to work a day in your life
Confucius, ancient Chinese philosopher
Groundinvestigationsareanindispensabletoolformanagingground-relatedrisk,
typically involving the exploration of hidden ground characteristics. They provide
the information needed for any successful construction project. The application
of risk management in daily practice requires change, both by ourselves and the
people we work with. As an analogy to ground investigations, this chapter therefore
aims to explore ourselves. Without usurping psychologists, experience has shown
that it can be helpful to explore ourselves to some degree, before we start on the
slippery path of change, uncertainty and risk. What can we actually do, when imple-
menting ground-related risk management that may help to transform the industry?
We start by introducing the concept of the individual, followed by the concept of
perception. Our perceptions often appear to be less objective and rational than we
would like them to be. It is particularly important to realize this when considering
individual perceptions and their effects on risk.
Finally, this chapter perceives our own contribution. What capabilities do we
need to create irreversible and positive change? Deﬁnitive answers are not given,
simply because they are not available. Was it Albert Einstein who stated that the
answer is already enclosed by the question? However, six key-capabilities for the
application of ground-related risk management are provided. This chapter again
ends with a summary.
The concept of the individual
It is easy to talk about individuals, but what exactly does it mean? Can we
deﬁne the term individual and recognize the importance of a word that is often

64
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
unwittingly used? Individual literally means ‘not to separate’. One valuable charac-
teristic of an individual is authenticity. The core of authenticity is sincerity about
ourselves. It implies an acknowledgement that we are who we are, and nobody
else. Authenticity gives us the courage to be different (Kets de Vries, 2000, 2002).
Such courageous individuals are vital for implementing new concepts, such as
ground-related risk management.
Our discontinuities
Being an authentic individual proves to be not that easy. Like rock, we may be
inﬂuenced by discontinuities. Those readers involved with rock engineering are
familiar with the presence of discontinuities in rock masses. Discontinuities are a
form of fracture that occurs in a regular pattern. Depending on their characteristics,
such as orientation, spacing, and the opening, they can dramatically reduce the
bearing capacity of rock masses.
We can also experience discontinuities in ourselves, when we are not sincere
about ourselves. We often have to bridge the gap between our personal self and
our professional self. Our work, for instance, may demand a fast and isolated
geotechnical design check, while our inner feeling tells us that more time and
budget are needed to reach a responsible opinion. In such a situation, do we
work non-paid overtime? Have we already worked overtime almost continuously
for the last three months as well? We struggle with feelings of authentic guilt
and neurotic guilt (Block, 2002). The former is related to feeling insincere about
ourselves. We are not authentic in that situation. The latter implies that we have
feelings of guilt, because we are not fulﬁlling the expectations of others. For
instance, not performing that ‘quick and dirty’ design check for a client.
Is this soft talk about hard rock? What is the problem with individual discon-
tinuities? It is not simply because they may lead to a feeling of fracture, they may
create a sense of unrest too. We may feel tired, which makes us less effective in
our work. Discontinuities may affect our sincerity and stability as a person as
well. In terms of rock mechanics, if the aperture of the rock discontinuity grows
too wide, the rock mass becomes unstable or even collapses. Stress, sickness and
burnout are the ultimate results of struggling too long with our inner discontinuit-
ies, symptoms experienced by many professionals throughout today’s world. The
associated costs for their companies and society are high.
These gaps between our personal and professional selves are simply not effective
from a business perspective. Our inner conﬂicts are often recognized by colleagues,
employees and clients, who realize that there is a degree of insincerity within us.
They may, in fact, feel that what we say and do is actually different from what we
think and want. Trust is a prerequisite for change, as many textbooks about change
management teach us. This lack of authenticity undermines the precious trust of
the people around us in our intentions and actions. In the words of Goffee and Jones

Individuals and risk
65
(2005): ‘If a leader is playing a role that isn’t a true expression of his authentic self,
followerswillsoonerorlaterfeellikethey’vebeentricked’.Asubstantiallackoftrust
will make it virtually impossible to implement any sort of change.
We need truly authentic individuals, preferably with a minimum of discontinu-
ities. Only they will be able to create authentozoic organization (Kets de Vries, 2000).
This ancient Greek phrase describes an organization that is both authentic as well
as zotikos. The latter word means being of true signiﬁcance to the people in our
organizations. These are the preferred types of organizations for implementing
change successfully and the people working there are able to focus their energy.
They contribute to the organization’s success with measurable effects in terms of
quality, cost awareness, and proﬁtability. Within these organizations it will be
possible successfully to implement innovative concepts and practices as well.
Our independence
One of the world’s most well-known and respected thinkers on management,
Charles Handy, wrote an entire book, The Elephant and the Flea, about the import-
ance of obstinate and creative individuals in our service-oriented economies
(Handy, 2002). The elephant represents today’s large organizations. The ﬂea rep-
resents the individual, who works independently for those organizations. Handy
considers these self-willing ﬂeas as essential for initiating the changes and innov-
ation required within large organizations. These ﬂeas, being truly individuals, are
the keys towards change and are vital to bring the elephants to dance on the
rhythms of change in society. It seems to be their independent drive to change
that encourages the people around them to join in.
At this point I should to say a few last words about the concept of the individual.
This is meant as a genuine warning, to keep our individual feet ﬁrmly on the
ground. Let us stay modest and humble about the concept of the individual.
Dewey (1927) mentioned many years ago that any individual does not really think
independently, but simply expresses in a unique way the thinking at that time. The
ancient Greek philosopher Plato expressed his thinking in carriages and horses.
The great and early twentieth-century psychiatrist Sigmund Freud expressed his
theories in the mechanical terms of forces and machines. The future will show how
our current thinking about the concept of the individual is merely an expression
of our time.
The concept of perception
Without exception, if you work in the construction industry, in any function, you will be
confronted with the aspect of ground conditions. Every project seems to get calamity, small
or large, related to the ground. I thought that after such an event the geotechnical consultant

66
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
was wrong, but now I know that every consultant could be right. The difference is the
individual risk perception, related to the intrinsic uncertainty in ground conditions.
Joost Wentink (2000), former contractor and consultant, Managing Director of GeoDelft
The word perception has two meanings according to my dictionary. The ﬁrst
is that of receiving. The second meaning is the result of observation. The term
‘perception’ therefore goes beyond the meaning of just looking. The difference
between looking and perceiving is that perception gives some kind of sense to the
observation result. In other words, combining the two meanings of perception is
to receive an observation and to give a certain sense to it. Perception appears to
be closely related to interpretation.
Why this rather semantic start to this new section? What is the relevance of
such deﬁnitions and meanings of words that are widely used in day-to-day com-
munication? The reason is that a true understanding of the concept of perception
serves as the ultimate basis for understanding risk management in general, and
risk management of ground conditions in particular. Perception drives the way
in which a person considers risk. It implies that risk and its management have a
highly subjective character, in spite of the apparent objective statistics often linked
with risk management. This is due to the major effect of the people factor, the high
touch element it incorporates. As the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle stated
some 2000 years ago: ‘You are what you see’.
Subjective perception
By looking at two examples, careful self-observation may teach us that apparent
objectivity is not as objective as it seems. It can be demonstrated that our perception
is rather subjective, with different people having quite different perceptions, based
upon exactly the same factual data. How confusing for an engineer. We apparently
have our own individual way of looking at things, seeing only part of the whole
picture most of the time. Let us start simply and have a look at Figure 4.1. Which
line is the longest?
Figure 4.1: Which line is the longest?
(© Blockley and Godfrey (2000) with
permission of Thomas Telford Ltd).
When I ﬁrst saw these two lines, the upper line
appeared to be the longest. After a quick check with
my ruler, however, I discovered that I was misled
by my own perception. The two lines are in fact
equal in length. This type of difference in percep-
tion, the difference between what seems (subjective)
and what is (objective), is sometimes easy to resolve,
as in this example. It becomes far more complic-
ated, when this objectivity is less easy to measure.
A picture of the so-called ambiguous lady, a well-
known example within psychology, demonstrates

Individuals and risk
67
this. The psychologist W.T. Hill, in 1914, drew a picture that has been copied in
many different ways since (Turner, 1995). One version is shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The ambiguous lady (© Blockley and God-
frey (2000) with permission of Thomas Telford Ltd).
If you look at Figure 4.2 for the
ﬁrst time, you will probably recog-
nize either a pretty girl or an older
lady. Both of these quite different
perceptions originate from exactly
the same drawing. The lines in the
drawing are a fact. Our mental inter-
pretation or conﬁguration, using
those lines to give a mental pic-
ture, can apparently provide differ-
ent outcomes. In other words, there
is a clear difference in individual
perception, based upon the same
facts. By our observations there are
more ways to give sense to the same
facts. I have used this ﬁgure a couple
of times within groups of people
and am still amazed by its effect.
With some practice, you can prob-
ably see both the young girl and the
older lady. This demonstrates that
we are able to see multiple percep-
tions. At least two of them, accord-
ing to this example. We are able to
add another perception, apart from our initial one. Nonetheless, these two percep-
tions of one individual are based on the same factual data.
The preceding statement of Joost Wentink has mentioned a similar difference in
perception of ground conditions by several engineers or geologists. Based on the
same factual data from ground investigations, different interpretations are likely
to arise, which result in different calculations, as well as differences in engineering
design, as demonstrated by a few examples in Chapter 5. Further in this chapter,
we will appraise the ability of conscious shifting of perceptions as a key success
factor for effective risk management.
Another remarkable aspect of human perception is related to numerous words
that we often unwittingly use. The psychiatrist, Ron Leifer, describes this as the
dialectic of antithetic pairs (Leifer, 1999). These are pairs of words with an opposite
meaning. The word hot only has a meaning in connection with the word cold. If
there is no coldness, then the meaning of hot is, in fact, empty. Any temperature
within the continuum of hot and cold obtains only a meaning by its benchmarking

68
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
with the words hot and cold. This meaning will probably differ for each person.
An Eskimo will relate another temperature to the word cold than someone who
lives in the tropics.
We will now approach the inherently fuzzy character of ground, resulting from
our inherent differences in perception. Unless we quantify it using some deﬁni-
tion, the term hard rock will have a different meaning for different professionals.
The inherent subjectivity in the use of our words, as well as their intended pur-
pose, will only surface if we communicate carefully with each other. Effective
communication serves as the basis for dealing with the different perceptions we
encounter daily in our social environment.
Dealing with different perceptions
Anyone we approach will have different perceptions to our own. These differences
may be small and barely recognizable, but they may also be huge and act as basis
for disastrous conﬂicts.
Dealing with a variety of perceptions is not simple when carrying out our
ground-related engineering and construction activities. Frans Barends, professor
at the Delft Technical University, The Netherlands, concluded in his Terzaghi
Oration 2005: ‘The effects of subjective individual interpretation of facts and data
are underestimated.’ He preceded this ﬁrm conclusion with a geohydrological
example that could dramatically affect the perceived dike stability. His example
concerned the interpretation of an observed porewater response, caused by chan-
ging water levels. This interpretation proved to be highly subjective, as six dif-
ferent geohydrological models could be applied to interpret the data. Selection of
the type of model in fact proved to be a subjective choice. Extrapolation using a
well calibrated, although incorrect, model may give rise to unexpected behaviour.
According to Barends (2005), this is often the reason for failure and damage. In
my opinion, it results from a lack of awareness about the subjectivity involved
in ground engineering and construction, combined with of a lack of explicit risk
management. Ho et al. (2000) warn us that an open and risk driven approach
towards individual subjectivity may be well considered as a threat by individual
professionals in our industry. According to them, it would be more difﬁcult to
hide behind their so-called overall expert judgement. It reﬂects the human nature
of professionals that is also occasionally encountered in other disciplines, such as
the medical discipline.
Preferably, we should not only be aware of different perceptions, but should also
need to understand them to a certain degree. By evaluating the behaviour of chim-
panzees, O’Connell (1997) attempts to understand how we develop our abilities to
recognize how someone else perceives the world. She distinguishes and highlights
two well known but often intermingled terms: sympathy and empathy. O’Connell
deﬁnes sympathy as reﬂecting our own perception. If we consider someone to be

Individuals and risk
69
sympathetic, we like them because of the congruence of that person with our ini-
tial perception. They are in fact checked and balanced against our own perception
of the world, according to our own beliefs, intentions, and wishes. In the case of
empathy, however, we are able to see someone else according to their perceptions,
instead of our own. We now make a shift in perception in order to understand
the beliefs, intentions and wishes of the other person. For many people, such as
myself, the application of true empathy is rather difﬁcult. We need to be aware of
it and practise it, as it is the key to deal effectively with the inherent variety and
differences of people, both from our own and other cultures. We will encounter
these differences more and more in our increasingly global construction world.
Fortunately, differences in perceptions are not always difﬁcult and annoying, as
presented by Box 4.1.
Box 4.1
Dealing with different perceptions at a holiday resort
During a diving holiday in Egypt, a few years ago, I noticed that entirely
different perceptions do not automatically result into difﬁculties or conﬂicts.
On the beach at a holiday resort, people of many different nationalities, with
totally different cultural backgrounds and related perceptions, enjoyed their
holiday together. They varied from young girls in tiny bikinis to older women
dressed entirely in black. Sometimes we can simply live together with our
entirely different perceptions of the world.
Additionally, in the same way that risks may reveal opportunities, different
perceptions may also be extremely helpful. A practical advantage of a difference
in perception is illustrated in Figure 4.3. It shows a detail from my site ofﬁce
at a project in Indonesia in the 1990s, just before the current era of the mobile
phone. In my perception, I had to walk to another room to make a phone call. My
neighbour had a much more efﬁcient solution.
In conclusion, why is it important to be aware of all these differences in indi-
vidual perception? It is because they incorporate a variety of risk perceptions as
well. Effective risk management is not possible without being aware of the differ-
ences in individual perception. This is not new at all. Some thousand years ago it
is made clear in the ancient Chinese philosophy of the Tao, which literally means
‘the path’. From time to time we should return to what is known as the zero, in
order to achieve an as much as independent and objective perception as possible
(Ni, 1997). We will sometimes need this zero-point urgently when dealing with
ground-related risk management.

70
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Figure 4.3: The beneﬁcial side of a difference in perception (© photo by Martin van Staveren).
Individuals and risk perception
How may individual professionals perceive risk management? A manager of a
large contractor, I call him Bob, told me how his individual employees perceived
risk and its management: ‘First I am asked to dig my own holes, by telling
some sort of risk coordinator what can go wrong by my activities. Then I have
to convince that same person what I do to prevent myself from falling in my
own holes. I have to present that guy all kinds of so-called risk remediating
measures’. Bob continued: ‘This type of risk management is not motivating my
people!’ In other words, Bob’s employees are fed up with such management of
their risk. They feel forced to do it and do not (yet) perceive risk management
as a tool that can help them rather than providing additional hassle in their
daily busy construction activities. Risk management is perceived as a waste of
time.
While Bob himself is dedicated to the concept of risk management, despite
his struggle to ﬁnd the right way to convince his employees about the beneﬁts,
any attempt to implement risk management in such an organizational setting is
useless. An open discussion about the differences in risk perception, starting with
the purpose and expected beneﬁts of it for all people involved, is of paramount
importance. Without a number of serious discussion sessions with Bob and his

Individuals and risk
71
employees, their perceived differences about the purpose and beneﬁts of risk
management remain. Only after thorough communication may Bob’s employees
become aware that risk is simply there and that it is better to be managed, as they
manage the other aspects of their activities as well. The employees may begin
to realize that risk management is not a tool to highlight their weaknesses or
mistakes, but intended to support them in avoiding the pitfalls already provided
by reality. For Bob, his employees and the ﬁnal project result, it will be much better
discovering these hidden holes, to prevent their acting like sinkholes in limestone.
Awareness, understanding and acceptance of the inherently different perceptions
between Bob and his individual employees is a key issue to come out of this type
of situation, in which an implementation of a new concept is seriously obstructed.
Complexity of individual risk perception
A lot of managers experience it: people are not only interesting, they are complex
as well, particularly with regard to their individual risk perception. Smallman
(1998) presents three theories of risk perception to explain how we perceive risk.
Wildavsky and Dake (1990) tested each of these. The ﬁrst theory, the knowledge
theory, perceives risk as problematic because of the knowledge we have of it. I
recognize this theory very well in the practice of ground-related risk management.
A geohydrological engineer focuses particularly on geohydrological risks, while
the environmental engineer is primarily concerned with environmental risk, and
so on.
The economic theory of risk perception translates risk into a subjective utility. Risk
is judged in view of the expected satisfaction or, more likely, dissatisfaction, which
its occurrence will bring. This dissatisfaction is often expressed in money terms.
Ground risk management widely uses the economic theory of risk perception and
the effects of ground-related risk are often assessed in terms of costs.
The third and last key theory of risk perception, the personality theory, puts
emphasis on the personality or character of individuals. Some of us are more risk
adverse, others are more risk seeking. In my view, our personalities are inﬂuencing
both the knowledge and the economic theory of risk perception. The knowledge
we use to assess the cost effects of risk should be expected to be coloured by our
personalities. A risk adverse type of person is likely to assess a particular risk
effect more seriously than a more risk prone character.
The combination of these three risk theories explains the complex character of
individual risk perceptions. In addition, risk perception is affected by a number
of social and cultural factors. Rohrmann (1998) adds this social context as a third
dimension to his two proposed dimensions of the individual context and the char-
acter of the considered risk. In his model these three aspects determine any indi-
vidual risk perception, that is herewith inherently subjective. Figure 4.4 presents
the three pillars below individual risk perceptions.

72
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
INDIVIDUAL RISK PERCEPTION 
INDIVIDUAL CONTEXT
RISK CHARACTER
SOICIAL – CULTURAL CONTEXT
Influenced by: 
-emotions 
-experience
-knowledge
-personal impact
Influenced by: 
-probability
-effect
-duration
-monitoring  
Influenced by: 
-media attention
-safety tolerance
-religion
-social impact    
Figure 4.4: Three pillars below our individual risk perception.
The
three
dimensions,
as proposed by Rohrmann
(1998), are obviously highly
interdependent.
A
social–
cultural
aspect,
such
as
the degree of media atten-
tion,
has
different
effects
on
different
personalities.
Furthermore, any inherently
biased individual assesses the
seriousness of a certain risk in
a different way, with a differ-
ent outcome. Unfortunately,
even if we are experts in our
disciplines, it does not delete
our subjectivity. Research by
Slovic et al. (1982) indicates
that the judgement of experts
is as prone to bias as that of
lay people.
Awareness of the unique-
ness of risk perception is a
major step in the application of (ground) risk management. Within this context,
effective risk management can be summarized as managing different individual
risk perceptions in an effective and socially accepted way and against reasonable
costs. Additional complexity arises, however, when we recognize individual risk
perceptions as being not static. They are subject to change over time and distance.
Change of individual risk perception with time
Let us consider a construction project, for instance a road project in its design
phase. We are asked, being an engineer or a manager, to support the design team
during a risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation session. Our individual and unique
risk perception of that particular road project, at that very moment, depends on a
lot of factors. Without assuming completeness, some of them are:
•
Our experience: do we have good or bad experience with a similar project, in
similar geological areas, or do we not yet have any experience at all with road
projects?
•
Our knowledge: what did we learn during our BSc or MSc courses about this
type of project?

Individuals and risk
73
•
Our personality: do we generally have an optimistic character, or are we more
of a realist, or even a pessimist?
•
Our mood of the moment: do we feel good, or do we feel tired and worried,
for instance because of an illness of one of our family members?
•
Our company at that moment: is our company struggling for survival because
of very serious price competition and is any design work highly wanted, at
almost any price? Or is our company leading in its market and well known for
its innovative approach of road projects?
We may recognize some aspects of the knowledge, economy and personality
theories of individual risk perception in these factors, while realizing that most
of these factors are far from static. They will change over time, such as our mood
may turn to quite pleasant, after a good-news phone call. Additionally, over the
years our knowledge may have grown substantially by taking a postgraduate
risk management course. Our company may change as well, for instance because
of a merger, new management or the launch of an innovative service. Even our
personality, our unique set of personal characteristics, will have some degree of
change over time, simply as a reaction to all these changes around us.
This brings us to one conclusion: our individual risk perception is not a constant
factor. The same applies for all the other individuals, our project team members
and clients, government representatives and the public living around the project
area. Their risk perceptions will also change, due to the constant ﬂow of new
information and experiences they undergo. All of these people absorb this inform-
ation, from moment to moment, both in an aware and unaware manner. As the
ancient Greek philosopher Heraclitus of Ephesus mentioned some 2500 years ago:
Pantha Rei – everything ﬂows and changes continuously. I admit directly this it is
a very complicating factor in risk management as we need to manage something
that is changing constantly, often in a quite unexpected way as well.
Change of individual risk perception with distance
As with time, risk perception also changes with distance to the object of perception,
which provides another rather complicating factor. In this respect, the individual
degree of involvement with a risk should be regarded as some sort of distance as
well. At a greater distance, we see obviously less detail and more of the bigger
picture. We can see the wood and not only some trees. Additionally, we are less
directly involved as well.
A rock engineer will see a lot of subtle rock material details at a small distance
to a rock outcrop. By using his magnifying glass, the engineer is even able to
distinguish rock minerals and to classify the rock type accordingly. To understand
the rock mass properties as well, the engineer has to step backward to consider

74
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
the discontinuity pattern. Aerial photographs can be used to arrive at a much
more larger distance and to compare the rock outcrop with another one in the
neighbourhood. These differences in viewpoint to the rock outcrop help to assess
for instance a rock-fall risk.
The effects of the rock fall on an adjacent road may be quite differently assessed
by the rock engineer, who is living far way from that site, compared with a
local farmer, who has to pass the road a couple of times a day. The individual
involvement of the expert is high with regard to the technical part of the rock-fall
risk, but rather low in view of its impact. This simpliﬁed example highlights the
considerable confusion and misunderstanding that may arise when experts and
lay people, with different degrees of individual involvement, have to judge the
same risk. Their resulting different risk perceptions are importantly caused by
their different degrees of involvement or distance.
Therefore, to arrive at an effective and acceptable risk assessment of the expec-
ted rock slope behaviour, we must be aware the effects of these difference on
the resulting risk classiﬁcation. While considering our own risk perception in a
particular situation, it is highly advised to consider our own actual distance at
that very moment, both literally to the object at risk as well as to our degree
of technical involvement. It may be fascinating to experience the differences in
perceptions when we change our own distances for a while. Obviously, this can
be done either in reality or by our own imagination. It is just a small exercise that
may help us to stay modest about our own individual and inherent subjective
perception of (ground-related) risk.
How individuals can contribute
Awareness of our individuality with its characteristics may surprisingly support
making a difference by ourselves. Within the topic of this book, our main objective
may be implementing ground-related risk management in construction projects.
As we previously concluded, the application of explicit risk management can
act as a catalyst to the urgently required construction industry transformations.
How can we, as individuals, actually bring about the change? From experience
I have selected six principles (Figure 4.5), which may be of support during the
occasionally tedious implementation processes of risk management.
The remaining part of this section discusses each of the principles in Figure 4.5.
Risk awareness
It all starts with risk awareness when it comes to risk management. Each pro-
fessional, in some way involved in risk management, should at least have some

Individuals and risk
75
Effective
ground risk management  
Time taking 
Risk
awareness 
Risk
responsibility
Three types
of 
intelligence 
Beyond fear
Beyond
blame and
claim   
Figure 4.5: The individual contribution to effective ground risk man-
agement.
basic understanding of
the fundamentals of indi-
vidual
risk
awareness.
These were extensively
explored earlier and can
be summarized by the
knowledge,
economy
and personality theories
of individual risk per-
ception, which included
the
inherent
differ-
ences in risk perception
between
people.
Fur-
thermore, complexity of
risk perceptions, caused
by its changes over time
and distance, needs to
be acknowledged. This
type of individual risk
awareness is a prerequis-
ite
for
a
constructive
attitude to effective risk
management
in
our
projects.
Risk responsibility
There seems to be a tendency to outsourcing of individual responsibility. One
example is the development an alcohol-sensitive car key. The key prevents starting
of the car when it smells alcohol and the driver has to look for another way to
come home. This is, in fact, an outsourcing of individual responsibility for safe
driving. The car is going to make the decision about safe driving, instead of the
individual driver. This example may soon become reality, because a number of
car manufacturers are considering production of this type of key.
Let us recall the collapse of part of the Terminal E2 of Charles de Gaulle Air-
port in Paris. In this 750 million euros project some 400 (!) construction ﬁrms,
from all over Europe, were involved. How is it possible to manage risk in this
sort of complex project when individuals are not taking their risk responsibility,
but are sourcing it out? The resulting fragmented and fuzzy responsibilities are
a serious threat to the project safety and success. Critical risk fragments may slip
through the loopholes of the quality system, because the people factor of individual
responsibility is very difﬁcult, if not impossible, to catch in procedures. Despite

76
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
its possible short-term drawbacks, a risk-responsible attitude of professional indi-
viduals will ﬁnally be in the interest of their projects, clients, organizations and
themselves.
Blockley and Godfrey (2000) have considered a number of existing professional
codes of conduct for the construction industry. They have derived twelve key-
issues, shown in Box 4.2.
Box 4.2
What responsible construction players should (after Blockley and
Godfrey (2000), with permission of Thomas Telford Ltd.)
Twelve key issues for responsible construction players are:
1
Be clear about what their own values are
2
Be informed about the project in which they are involved
3
Think about the consequences of what they do and in particular try to
anticipate the unwanted and unintended consequences
4
Be up-to-date in professional skills
5
Act professionally only in their areas of competence
6
Keep health and safety and public welfare paramount
7
Communicate openly with the public about technological developments
8
Be honest
9
Disclose circumstances where there may be a conﬂict of interest
10
Neither offer nor accept bribes
11
Treat all others fairly in respect of race, religion, sex, age, ethnic background
or disability
12
Help colleagues promote growth of skills and competence
Paine et al. (2005) have performed a similar exercise. They have studied and
compared ﬁve recognized sets of guidelines for multinationals and were surprised
about the degree of similarity between them. Any differences between these codes
of conduct were complementary rather than conﬂicting. There is apparently wide
international agreement of responsible behaviour in global business. However,
according to Paine et al. (2005): ‘Like any tool, a code of conduct can be used well
or poorly – or left on the shelf to be admired or to rust.’ This is up to us!

Individuals and risk
77
Beyond blame and claim
Increasing blame and claim behaviour appears to be another trend. Smokers blame
the tobacco industry because they got lung cancer and hamburger addicts blame
fast-food restaurants, as they grew too fat. The construction industry has also a
claim tradition. For a signiﬁcant number of contractors, claiming seems the only
way to make some proﬁt and a substantial part of the failure costs can be related
to these claims.
According to Block (2002), feeling much more convenient by blaming other
people, rather than ourselves, is a normal human condition. In addition, Imai
(1986) highlights a unifying characteristic of a lot of problems: the people or
organizations that create problems are often not directly inconvenienced by it.
The same applies for risk, which can be considered as a speciﬁc type of problem.
A risk that affects somebody else may well return as a claim, as presented by an
example in Box 4.3.
Box 4.3
A blame and claim example
Let us consider a geotechnical engineer who has designed a very safe piled
foundation. The piling contractor encounters the risk of very high blow counts
during his piling activities. The over-conservative pile design of the geotech-
nical engineer causes a number of broken piles. In addition, the vibrations of
the heavy piling operation cause serious cracks in the walls of some old and
sensitive buildings, located close to the project site. The owners of these monu-
ments claim from the contractor or the contractor’s client to pay the costs of
the repair of their buildings. In response, the contractor or client claims from
the engineer for providing an over-conservative foundation design. None of
the parties involved is directly affected by their activities.
We are thus sensitive to problems and risks caused by other people. In return,
we are often rather insensitive to the problems and risks that we cause to others.
The possibility of being blamed and claimed by someone else, however, keeps us
awake and aware of our own responsibilities to other people and organizations.
Steven Covey is the well-known management guru who created the seven, and
later eight, habits of highly effective people. He relates blaming other people to
three stages of dependency that we can reach as human beings (Covey, 1992):
•
Dependence
•
Independence
•
Interdependence.

78
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
The ﬁrst stage is that of dependency, because we all start our little lives in total
dependency on our parents. Therefore, if something not so nice happens to me,
then it is not my responsibility because I am totally dependent. An external factor
or another person causes it. In this stage I blame anybody but myself.
The second stage is that of independence. In this stage we are able to blame
ourselves when something goes wrong, caused by our own activities. We take our
responsibility and realize the effects of our choices and doing or not doing.
Covey’s ﬁnal stage of dependency is what he refers to as interdependence. It is not
about an isolated you or me anymore, it is about us, about we. It is an awareness
of everybody being in some way dependent upon the other. Therefore, it seems
a wise choice to cooperate to create win-win situations. An effective application
of (ground) risk management requires this type of interdependence awareness,
which is, I agree, a rather ambitious statement. If we simply try to start raising
awareness of the interdependency-concept in our projects, we actually already
start to move beyond blaming and claiming.
Beyond fear
While taking our individual responsibilities and trying to reduce construction’s
blame and claim culture, we have to look another very human condition straight in
the eyes: fear. This human emotion prevents us from doing stupid things. During
our evolution, fear allowed us to survive as a species and, being normal people,
we all encounter fear from time to time.
Fear can be a very strong emotion because it is a response to some kind of
threat, a real one or an apparent one. The problem part of this emotion is pre-
venting rational thinking. Emotions create impulses to act without the interference
of thinking, which is reﬂected in the meaning of the term emotion. It is derived
from the Latin word movere, which means moving. The letter e in emotion stands
for moving away (Goleman, 1996). If we encounter a fearful situation, the imme-
diate response is ﬂight or ﬁght. Normally, if the situation is not extreme, rational
thinking soon takes over control and we continue to behave as decent people do.
Fear appeal can be deﬁned as attracting business by triggering the fear of people
(van Oirschot, 2003). Occasionally, when reading the newspaper or watching the
television news, I get the impression that we are living in some sort of fear factory.
A lot of fear appears to be blown up by several media and, apparently, we like to
be fed with fear-food. One example of a massive business created by fear appeal
was demonstrated just before we entered the new millennium by the so-called
millennium-bug. The ICT industry succeeded in convincing all other industries to
update their computer software to avoid disasters when the new year with the
magic ﬁgures 2000 started. Worldwide, huge sums of money have been spent and,
for sure, we will never know the effects in case we did spend less to resolve this
collective fear.

Individuals and risk
79
Regarding risk management, why are fear and its appeal reasons for concern?
Fear and fear appeal are of massive concern from a business perspective, because
fear-driven behaviour results in over-investing in risk management, without receiv-
ing the expected returns. We are buying some sort of emotional quietness at a too
high price. Our rational factors for deciding on investments are at least seriously
affected, and possibly even overruled, by these fear factors of emotional origin. If
there is an apparent overkill in ground risk management during a construction
project, initiated by implicit fear of one of its decision-makers, such risk manage-
ment would probably be experienced as highly disappointing by the majority of
professionals involved. In their next project, people with this type of risk manage-
ment experience are likely to under-invest in or even avoid risk management.
Each risk that we manage successfully consequently does not occur in its full
extent.Wewillthereforeneverknowexactlywhatwesavedbyit,becausetheadverse
effects cannot be experienced, measured and benchmarked. This inherently hypo-
thetical character is one of the key paradoxes of risk management. I have to admit
that I might have created some fear appeal, by previously presenting the ﬁgures of
failure costs in construction. I would regret, however, when risk management is
only applied because of its fear appeal. In this situation, emotional ﬂight and ﬁght
behaviour rules instead of rational thinking. It would put too much weight on the
negative problem side of risk, while neglecting the positive opportunity side.
I do not intend to neglect human emotions, nor do I underestimate them. They
give a lot of colour to our daily (working) lives. However, risk management in
the construction industry, and ground risk management in particular, should not
be based upon fear. This situation will create an unfavourable and defensive
attitude and prevents innovation and effectuating cost-effective opportunities. Too
often, I encounter good-willing professionals who do not dare to innovate just
because they fear uncertain outcomes. Of course, they do not explicitly reveal their
sources of fear, which is not done as a construction professional. Instead, these
professionals use all their creativity to argue why not to innovate. Nevertheless,
they have a risk-averse attitude. I wish they would use their creativity and energy
to support innovation instead of ﬁghting against it.
Expressing fear clearly is a taboo in many organizations. However, often it may
be far more effective to recognize fear, to be aware of it and to use it in a positive
way than to neglect fear.
This individual fear awareness and management needs to be considered as
being an integral part of risk management. We occasionally have to look these
fears straight in the eyes, in order to manage them. The same applies for risk.
According to Blockley and Godfrey (2000), most issues carrying a risk are known
to at least one member, one individual, of the team. These risks are not always
raised, because to do so, we have to enter our zones of discomfort. A number of
reasons may prevent this move, as presented in Box 4.4.

80
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 4.4
Zones of discomfort (after Blockley and Godfrey (2000), with
permission of Thomas Telford Ltd.)
Some reasons for not bringing potentially risky issues into the open:
•
The possibility of a future claim and a potentially better case for that claim
if the problem gets worse
•
Self-protection
•
A culture of blaming, rather than addressing real issues
•
A tendency to ‘shoot the messenger’
•
Competitive pressures between teams, e.g. sales teams, design teams, pro-
curement team, construction team
•
A sense of loyalty to one’s client, colleagues, teams or employers
•
People just do not want to jeopardize personal relationships by opening
them up
Fear can be recognized as being the dominating factor in the zones of discomfort.
It prevents us from entering these zones, in spite of its potential beneﬁts. Box 4.5
presents a few personal experiences to demonstrate that entering these zones of
discomfort may pay off, both in our personal and our business lives.
Box 4.5
A personal note about zones of discomfort
Due to expected discomfort and fear, there is often a small and fragile boundary
between acting and not acting. My diving experiences form one example. I
got an opportunity to learn scuba diving on my ﬁrst overseas project in Saudi
Arabia. Initially, I was seriously worried about diving. I could not even snorkel
in a decent way. The enthusiasm of my colleagues made me enter my zone of
discomfort. I got my diving certiﬁcate and had great times. The Red Sea proved
to be a diver’s paradise, even for the novice diver.
I had to enter similar zones of discomfort during a number of geotechnical
assignments abroad. Of course, I was worried while starting these adventures.
Can I achieve the objectives? It was sometimes tough, indeed. However, all of
these projects turned to be interesting experiences in which I was able to make
some difference. This was only possible by entering my zones of discomfort.

Individuals and risk
81
Entering our zones of discomfort appears occasionally to be necessary. Fear
should be challenged, of course in some balanced way. In my opinion this attitude
is required to make a difference, for instance by implementing new concepts, such
as risk management, in often change-adverse environments. In this respect, I recall
Imai (1986) who stated: ‘There will be no progress if you keep on doing things
exactly the same way all the time’. Sometimes we even need to move beyond fear
to make progress.
Three types of intelligence
While still subject to serious debate, since the 1900s, intelligence is often assessed
by the so-called Intelligence Quotient (IQ). This IQ aims to classify particularly
our rational or logical sort of intelligence. It mainly concerns our thinking, which
we doubtlessly need to solve many technical challenges within every construction
project. We use this intelligence for a wide range of activities, such as providing
cost calculations for tendering and complicated ﬁnite element calculations for all
sorts of geotechnical design. Since the 1960s, it became apparent that IQ does
not cover the entire spectrum of intelligence. The psychologist Daniel Goleman
has provided a real break-through by introducing the Emotional Quotient (EQ),
a measure for emotional intelligence. Our EQ concerns particularly feeling, rather
than thinking (Goleman, 1996). We need it for handling the people factor in our
projects.
Contrary to IQ, which is more or less ﬁxed, we seem to be able to cultivate
EQ and even to bring it to a higher level. A vital characteristic, because this may
improve also our abilities to apply our IQ. So long as we do not know how we
feel or what we feel, our emotions will largely rule our attitude and behaviour.
This will blur and even decrease our capabilities of rational thinking. According
to Goleman (1996), self-awareness or the ability to recognize our own feelings,
is the key to improve our EQ. One of the ways to increase our self-awareness is
meditation, as practised for thousands of years within many cultures worldwide.
At the end of the 1990s, neurological research conﬁrmed that we may even have
a third type of intelligence: the Spiritual Quotient (SQ). It is about being and con-
cerns who we are (Zohar and Marshall, 2004). In this context, the term ‘spiritual’
does not have any speciﬁc religious meaning. It originates from the Latin word
spiritus, which means something that brings life or vitality to a system. There-
fore, spiritual should be perceived in relation to meaning, values and fundamental
objectives.
Being a ground engineer, spiritual intelligence sounds a little bit ﬂoating above
the ground to me and I prefer to speak of inspiring intelligence. This can be seen
as the capability to ask ourselves rather existential questions like: What do I want
to reach by ﬁnalizing this construction project? Why do I have the job I have?
What is my purpose of life? Additionally, SQ may also provide us the drive to

82
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
inspire and motivate other people around us to change and innovate with us. Let
us bring the spirit in the ground!
Inspiring Intelligence
(SQ)
Being
Changing the Systems   
Emotional Intelligence
(EQ)
Feeling
Within Soft Sytems    
Rational Intelligence
(IQ)
Thinking
Within Hard Systems   
Figure 4.6: Three types of intelligence.
In the opinion of Zohar
and
Marshall
(2004),
the
conventional
IQ-type
of
intelligence operates within
the boundaries of a sys-
tem,
which
can
be
con-
sidered as the hard systems
approach with ﬁxed bound-
aries. The EQ-type of intelli-
gence is more adaptive than
the IQ-related intelligence.
It serves to play the game
within a social context by
the conscious or perhaps
unconscious application of
the social rules of any group
of people. Still, this game is played between boundaries of a soft system. The
SQ-type of intelligence may change and redeﬁne these soft systems boundaries. This
type of intelligence facilitates transformation, how it is today is transformed to
how it may become tomorrow. It gives the power to leave behind worn-out old
paradigms and to create effective new ones (Zohar and Marshall, 2004). Figure 4.6
shows the relationship between the three distinguished sorts of intelligence.
To conclude, we obviously need all three types of intelligence in a well-balanced
way to succeed in our construction projects.
Time taking
The last principle for an individual contribution to effective ground risk manage-
ment is probably rather unexpected. I may be starting to move on slippery ice,
according to an old Dutch saying. However, I think we should move like this,
once in a while, to take some distance and to reﬂect on our common patterns of
thinking and behaviour.
Often it seems we are performing some kind of rat race, which is both chal-
lenging and exhausting as well. By just rushing forward, we might miss essential
insights and opportunities. An old Chinese saying teaches us: If you are in a hurry,
sit down!
My last recommendation is therefore to take sufﬁcient time for reﬂection. Not
by taking enough sleep and days off, but just by few short periods of reﬂection
during the working day. It is a simply a matter of sitting down or standing at rest,
being quite and aware of our breathing and, most important, doing nothing for a

Individuals and risk
83
few minutes. This is, in fact, the easiest way of practising some sort of meditation
(Witten and Tulku, 1998). While meditation has been applied for thousands of
years, in many parts of the world, it slipped away from the western life-style. I
recognize, however, a comeback, for instance reﬂected by the many books about
this topic that have been published in recent years. For an increasing number
of professionals, daily meditation is a fascinating and rewarding experience. It is
amazing how relaxed and clear-minded you may feel, just after these small breaks
a few times a day. Not to forget, as suggested by Goleman (1996), meditation
strengthens the individual self-awareness as well. This will support us to act as
individual change agents.
The individual change agent
By now we are equipped with a number of mental attitudes and techniques that
prepare us to start our journey as being a change agent. The role of the dedicated
change agent is paramount in the abundantly available management literature
about change management and organizational transformations. For instance, Roo-
beek et al. (1998) stress the importance of strategic dialogues, in open network-type
of organizations, in order to realize real transformations. Many different pro-
fessional individuals should be involved, not just executives and management.
Gratton (2004) advocates the development of what she calls democratic organi-
zations, where employees perceive and encounter each other as responsible and
mature professionals. Change agents are, however, required to initiate and realize
these types of ambitious organizations.
Level 1: Risk ignorance
Level 2: Trying risk management
Level 3: Growing risk management
Level 4: Mature risk management
Figure 4.7: Ascending grades to individual risk-maturity.
With regard to risk manage-
ment in project organizations,
the
maturity
concept
makes
sense as well. Edwards and
Bowen (2005) draw upon the
work of Hillson (2002) with
regard to the concept of risk-
maturity.
They
deﬁne
four
ascending grades to risk matur-
ity
for
organizations.
These
levels do not only apply to
organizations, they may very
well be applicable to individu-
als as well (Figure 4.7).
By now we should have left Level 1 forever. The six principles for an individual
contribution to effective ground risk management are dedicated to rising further
on the steps of individual risk maturity.

84
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
This chapter started with a phrase of the ancient Chinese philosopher Con-
fucius, who lived about 2500 years ago. Times have changed since, however, some
statements appear to be timeless, as demonstrated by a phrase of one of today’s
most successful entrepreneurs, Steve Jobs, founder and CEO of Apple Computers.
He concluded a commencement address for graduates of Stanford University with
the words:
Your work is going to ﬁll a large part of your life, and the only way to be truly satisﬁed is
to do what you believe is great work. And the only way to do great work is to love what
you do (Jobs, 2005).
Summary
This chapter has explored the relationship between the individual and risk. The
concept of the individual has revealed discontinuities not to be limited to rock
masses. We may have inner discontinuities as well, when we struggle with authen-
ticity and the gap between our professional and personal selves. These discon-
tinuities may adversely affect our attempts to bring about the necessary changes
in our project organizations.
The concept of perception, together with a number of examples, have taught us
the inherent subjectivity of perception. Each individual has a different perception
and we need some basic empathy to cooperate effectively with this fact in our daily
working lives. Particularly for effective risk management, we need to appraise
and judge these differences in perception, while remembering the inevitable bias
of both expert and lay people. This complexity of risk management even increases
due to the changes in risk perceptions over time and with distance.
There is good news as well; individuals are able to play a key role in the imple-
mentation of change initiatives, like the application of (ground) risk management
in project organizations. Six key factors for individual professionals have been
distinguished and discussed thoroughly: risk awareness, risk responsibility, bey-
ond blame and claim, beyond fear, three types of intelligence and time taking.
Their awareness and application may highly support the individual change agent
to make his or her difference. This has prepared us to enter the project team.

5
Teams and risk
Introduction
Teams are of paramount importance for effective ground risk management. How-
ever, they add complexity to the already complicated behaviour of individuals.
Within teams, individuals tend to adapt their attitude and actions, which may
create positive as well as negative effects. Insight into the behaviour of teams and
their approaches to risk will help to implement ground-related risk management
in our projects.
We start with appraising the concept of the team. Groups and teams need to
be distinguished and we have to go through a number of inevitable phases when
creating a team out of a group of people. Particularly with regard to uncertainty
and risk, the concept of team culture further facilitates our understanding of teams
and their dynamics.
Our day-to-day practices teach us that communication between people is not
that simple. Better formulated, communication between people is inherently com-
plicated. Teams and their risk communication, therefore, get particular attention
in this chapter.
Finally, three types of team demonstrate how teams can contribute to the intro-
duction and application of ground risk management. For the moment, the client
is not yet considered as a team member, because their interests differ importantly
from those of the contractor or the engineer. The client in our team is not yet
that common in our industry, although innovative ways of cooperation with cli-
ents, such as partnering, have been started. Nevertheless, the client and risk will
be described separately in the next chapter. As usual, this chapter closes with a
summary.

86
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
The concept of the team
From groups towards teams
Aside from of how clever we are, today’s construction is too complicated to work
on our own. We need more people to be effective and efﬁcient. It is therefore no
coincidence that the majority of people live in societies where group interests are
considered as more important than individual interests (Hoecklin, 1995; Hofstede,
1984). In these societies the groups form the basis of the identity of their members.
More than one person being together can already be called a group. In any group
there is some sort of interaction between the individual people. They inﬂuence each
other, both consciously and unconsciously. This social component complicates
proper understanding of the attitude and behaviour of individuals in groups.
What makes a group of people a team? What is a team anyway? Teams go
beyond summing up the individuals. According to Katzenbach and Smith (1994)
teams can be deﬁned as a small number of people with complementary skills, who
are committed to a common goal and approach, for which they hold themselves
mutually accountable. There is a clear dependence between our team members
and us. We need each other to act more effectively than if we work on our own.
It is the magic of one plus one being more than two.
TIME
TEAM PERFORMANCE
forming 
storming 
norming 
performing 
Figure 5.1: Team dynamics.
Abundant
management
literature considers effective
teams as a key factor to
the
improvement
of
all
sorts of business processes.
However, we have to invest
in order to arrive at effective
teams.
Without
dedicated
attention, teams stay merely
groups of individuals and
one plus one may be even
less than two.
If these teams are widely
considered as that import-
ant, then how do we actu-
ally form them effectively?
The process of creating a
team follows four particular
phases. Before any team is
able to perform effectively, there are phases of forming, storming and norming, res-
ulting from the interaction of individuals in groups. As shown in Figure 5.1, the
team performance clearly changes over time as a result of these different phases.

Teams and risk
87
After the forming phase of the group, in which people are normally still rather
polite to each other, a storming phase should be anticipated. Politeness stops and
is replaced by hidden or even openly performed arguments and clashes between
team members about several topics, such as who is in charge. This lack of quietness
in the team may have a rather storming character. We should not expect really
effective team performance in this phase and if the team stays in this phase, we
have a serious problem. At a certain moment, the storm will die down and the
positions of each team member are settled and accepted. A certain team culture or
norming has been reached. A mutual and shared agreement about how the team
members work which each other has been developed. In the ideal team, these
items are made explicit, for instance by a written code of team conduct.
These phases of team dynamics take time. Teams should therefore start in the
earliest possible project phase, with ready available resources of time and budget,
to reserve the needed time for these unavoidable team-forming phases. Learning
to know each other is a prerequisite for the individuals in the team. In particular,
if the team is involved in risk management, its members need to be able to build
awareness of their inherently different (risk) perceptions.
Effective teamwork in the performing phase builds trust, improves commu-
nication and develops interdependence between employees, as introduced before
by the work of Covey (1992). According to Oakland (1993), independence plus
investment in Time, Energy and Resources results in InTERdependence. This goes
well beyond one-dimensional dependence of one individual to another. Figure 5.2
illustrates the route from independence to interdependence.
Indepedence
InTERdepedence
Individuals
Team 
Time
Resources
Energy
Figure 5.2: From independence to interdependence.
To
conclude,
distinct
aspects, such as individual
roles
within
teams,
its
dynamics and development
stages, and team leadership
should
be
considered
in
order to establish effective
teams
(Oakland,
1993).
Furthermore,
teams
need
to
understand
the
nature
of their problems or, more
positively
stated,
team
challenges. They need also easy access to any tools for their teamwork, like
groupware-type software. In addition, teams should understand how to use
their knowledge and information effectively (Uhlfelder, 2000). Consequently, it
is no piece of cake to realize and run effective teams. Besides the paramount
importance of the individual attitude and behaviour of team members, the team’s
success depends largely on one other aspect, which is team culture.

88
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Teams and culture
Like organizations, smaller entities such as teams also develop some sort of typical
behaviour or culture. The concept of team culture is rather fuzzy and as difﬁcult to
change as organizational culture once it has been developed. Team culture typic-
ally belongs to the soft system or human touch part of construction. When dealing
with teams, however, the concept of organizational culture provides considerable
insight into the attitudes and behaviour of individuals in groups of people.
As we have discussed several times before, at least some change in many organ-
izations seems inevitable to survive serious competition and to run successful
projects. However, the failure rate for organizational change initiatives is dra-
matically high. About 75 per cent of the major change initiatives failed entirely
or created problems, which threatened even the survival of entire organizations.
According to numerous studies, the most cited reason for failure of organiza-
tional change is the neglect of the organization’s culture. In other words, failure
to change the organizational culture will result in failure of the organizational
change (Cameron and Quinn, 1998). According to Johnson (1992), a main reason
is inadequate attention to the inherent links between strategy, culture and organ-
izational processes of change. As an additional cause, managing cultural change
will always be a painful process, with often strong resistance from the individual
people involved (Schein, 1984).
In my view, there are few terms in business which have been used and misused
as widely as the concept of organizational culture, since its introduction by Peters
and Waterman (1982) in their management classic In Search of Excellence. Culture
change appears to be some sort of panacea, widely used by management consult-
ants, to create more effective teams, organizations or even entire industries. By
the way, we also encounter the term ‘culture’ in a lot of the reform programmes
for the construction industry.
level 1: artefacts or visible characteristics 
level 2: espoused values 
level 3: basic underlying assumptions 
Figure 5.3: Three levels of organizational culture.
Is it possible to deﬁne a fuzzy term
such as culture? It can be described as
a set of shared team values. It is about
‘how things are around here’, accord-
ing to Cameron and Quinn (1998).
Edgar Schein (1984), one of the world’s
most recognized experts on organ-
izational culture, distinguishes three
levels of organizational culture, as
presented in Figure 5.3.
The ﬁrst level contains the artefacts
or visible characteristics of any cul-
ture. All team members wearing ties and white shirts is such an artefact. The
second level of culture includes what Schein (1984) calls espoused values. This

Teams and risk
89
level is about rhetoric or what people are saying. For instance, the people in our
project team may say that they are very innovative and open towards all kind of
ground-related risk management applications. Unfortunately, this saying does not
automatically imply these team members act as they say. Finally, Schein’s third
level of culture consists of basic underlying assumptions, unwritten rules about
what people really think (Schein, 1984). Possibly, our team is not innovative at all
because there is a serious fear of making mistakes. There might be a blame and
claim sort of attitude and behaviour. In reality, our team members may be not at
all dedicated to applying innovative ground risk management principles in our
project.
Despite its fuzziness, several types of culture can be distinguished, each with
their own features. Also, culture change can be stimulated, or even managed in
some way, by changing one or more elements in Schein’s three levels of organi-
zational culture. The level one and two changes are most concrete to handle. If
we are able to do it correctly, change on the deepest and most difﬁcult to reach
third level of organizational culture will follow.
The abundantly available management literature provides many frameworks for
the characterization and change of organizational culture. These may be very help-
ful during our struggle to embed the right culture in our teams. The following com-
bination of three different and complementing approaches proved to work well in
a rather easy way. Daft (1998) has described the relationship between the external
environment, strategy and organizational culture. Mintzberg et al. (1998) have
linked organizational culture to seven typical contexts of organizations. Finally,
Cameron and Quinn (1998) have developed an easy to handle instrument for the
assessment of the current and desired organizational culture, which is based on
their competing values framework. Discovering these approaches more in-depth
will move us beyond the scope of this book. The references may assist you further.
Obviously, the approach of establishing the team culture depends on the type
of team and its goals. New teams may be formed at the start of a new phase
of a construction project. This raises interesting opportunities to create the most
effective culture right from the beginning. A major advantage of a new team is the
new mixture of people. Sometimes they even come from different organizations.
The culture of a new team can more or less be made ﬁt-for-purpose for the
conditions and requirements of the particular construction project.
Existing teams have already established their own culture, either in an aware or
unaware manner. Their culture may be still suitable, in view of the team objectives.
However, less effective or even destructive team cultures are no exception, par-
ticularly when conditions, requirements and objectives have been changed since
the start of the team. These cases call for a change of team culture, to establish
stable ground for another relevant aspect of teams and risk management: risk
communication.

90
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Teams and risk communication
Risk communication
The right culture will readily facilitate another prerequisite for effective risk man-
agement by teams: risk communication. When working in a team, awareness of
the differences or ambiguity in individual risk perception, between ourselves and
our team members, is not sufﬁcient. We have to communicate these differences as
well, preferably in an effective way. Dibb et al. (1997) describe communication as a
sharing of meaning through the transmission of information. By using the simple
and well-known technical metaphor, we need a source, a medium of transmission
and a sender for our communication. Feedback is the response of the receiver
to a message, returned to the sender. Noise in between the sender and receiver
will result in some sort of distortion of the sent information that may result in
misunderstanding. Figure 5.4 presents this basic communication model.
sender
receiver 
medium 
with noise 
Figure 5.4: A basic communication model.
Abundant
authors,
as
high-
lighted by Edwards and Bowen
(2005),
present
numerous
and
mainly more complex communic-
ation models. Aside from these
models, their conclusion is ﬁrm:
the effectiveness of the project
team is directly related to the
effectiveness of the communica-
tion between the team members.
Communication between people is often experienced as complicated, also by
myself, despite the enormous supply of courses and seminars aiming to improve
our communication skills. A lot of our daily little and larger confusion is widely
perceived as caused by misunderstanding of each other, due to insufﬁcient or
ineffective communication.
If normal communication is already this complicated, then it will become even
more difﬁcult to communicate effectively about ground-related uncertainty and
risk, with its unavoidable randomness, fuzziness and incompleteness of inform-
ation. Team members, often of different disciplines, with different experiences,
backgrounds, personalities and interest, need to arrive at a shared understanding
about their different risk perceptions. We may consider it a small miracle if we
are capable of realizing this mutual understanding of risk and its management
within the project team.
By building on the above deﬁnition of communication, risk communication can
be deﬁned as a sharing of meaning through the transmission of risk information.
Consequently, the effectiveness of the project team with regard to its risk man-
agement can be directly related to the effectiveness of the risk communication

Teams and risk
91
between the team members. In addition, effective risk communication between
the team and its stakeholders will be of utmost importance. A major complication
arises from the fact that it is not only a matter of communicating knowledge about
risk (Edwards and Bowen, 2005). Research by Heath, Seshadri and Lee (1998)
points to aspects of trust, openness and involvement as key factors for successful risk
communication. Which is where we arrive at the distinction between risk content
and risk context in risk communication.
Risk content and risk context
Who does not want to make the miracle happen in their team: a shared under-
standing of risk? This shared understanding implies effective communication, for
which two elements of the so-called social–cognitive conﬁguration theory should be
acknowledged. Watzlawick et al. (1967) describe these elements as:
1
The content of communication
2
The context of communication.
The combination of the content and context provides the meaning of any com-
municated issue. Our understanding of communication depends entirely on the
content and context of what is said. This applies to our usual communication and
is applicable to communication of risk as well.
The content includes factual information. It concerns what and we use our
rational thinking or IQ (Intelligence Quotient) for understanding the content of
the communication. It implies the cognitive part of the communicated item. The
context of communication is about who and how. It is by far less straightforward,
because of the social construction of the context. This people factor provides an
additional meaning of the communicated aspect. We may relate the context to
the EQ (Emotional Quotient) of the team and its individual members. The context
interprets the factual content in a social framework. The ruling team culture will
markedly affect the interpretation of the communicated issue, as well as the result-
ing team behaviour. Watzlawick et al. (1967) describe the effect of communication
on behaviour by pragmatic communication. In their view, attitude and behaviour
are integral parts of communication, like the language of the communication. Or,
in the words of Berlo (1960), ‘meanings are in people’.
Risk communication is, therefore, by deﬁnition, emotionally loaded, which
always includes a degree of uncertainty and recalls feelings of fear with most
people. According to Arvai et al. (2001), this situation rules because the core values
of people are directly connected to risk. These values about what really matter
to people need to be made explicit to be able to decide upon any appropriate
and acceptable risk management actions. Other authors, such as Mearns et al.

92
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
(2001), support the importance of the context with regard to risk communication.
As engineers, we have some natural tendency to focus on content and facts. Par-
ticularly when dealing with risk, it is not only important what we say, but also
how we say it. Let us consider one example in Box 5.1, which aims to illustrate the
impact of this rather complicated social–cognitive theory in practice.
Box 5.1
Soil liquefaction in a risk content and risk context
Liquefaction of water-saturated and loosely packed sand layers is a common
source of risk to structures in earthquake-prone areas. Due to liquefaction,
entire buildings may topple, as for instance the Japanese experienced during
the Kobe earthquake some years ago.
Let us consider a design team. The team is involved in foundation design for
liquid petroleum gas (LPG) storage tanks in an earthquake-sensitive area. Dam-
age to those storage tanks may cause a disastrous situation and is considered
as a major risk.
The client communicates this risk to the design team and requests an
earthquake-resistant design. She provides the design team with recently per-
formed and high-quality ground investigation data. The data set includes bor-
ing logs and standard penetration test (SPT) results, which are typically factual
data widely used for foundation design in areas with liquefaction risks.
The factual data can be considered as supporting the content of the commu-
nicated liquefaction risk. The design team will interpret these data according
to its prevailing team culture. They will create their own context that drives
the team behaviour. This particular design team does not feel comfortable at
all with the boring logs and SPT data. One of the team members once had
a bad experience with apparently reliable SPTs. The design team is used to
another type of test for the assessment of the soil’s liquefaction potential. In
their opinion, they truly need cone penetration tests (CPTs), despite the fact
that another design team, with other experiences, would be ﬁne with the ready
available soil data. Because of the unique context of the liquefaction risk, the
design team decides to put aside the available ground information, in spite of
its good quality and sufﬁcient level of detail. As a consequence of their attitude
and behaviour, the design team requires the client to provide additional site
investigation, to be performed by CPTs.
The team culture and its prevailing atmosphere may also determine how the
team will communicate this risk message to their client. If they are already
behind schedule, stress, frustration, and anger are likely to affect or even
dominate their communication. They may create a rather negative context in
their risk communication to the client. This may even overrule the content of
their message and have an adverse effect on the relationship with the client.

Teams and risk
93
She may be upset about the way this design team gives her feedback on her
liquefaction risk message. In her perception, with over 20 years of experience,
the data she delivered have always been considered as adequate by other
design teams.
If the design team is in better and more professional control, they will be
able to communicate less emotionally and more rationally to the client. They
will be able to explain their adverse SPT experiences and inform her about
recent developments with up-to-date ground investigation techniques. This
may create a positive context and the client may decide to order some CPTs in
order to optimize the earthquake-resistant design of the LPG storage tanks.
This simpliﬁed example presents some of the complexity and interaction of the
elements of risk context and risk content between two communicating parties. In
practice, even for experienced professionals, it proves to be relatively difﬁcult to
separate the rational and emotional aspects of communication. Therefore, Covello
et al. (1989) emphasize targeting any risk communication speciﬁcally to the receiv-
ing person or persons. They stress the importance of paying particular attention
to the context of the risk communication. An emotionally loaded risk message
to a client, by an upset and stressed design team, is likely to miss its foreseen
objectives. Serious attention to not just the content, but also the context, will result
in a far better understanding of each other, particularly when dealing with risk
issues.
Singularity and risk dominance
Many people experience some difﬁculty with the application of the concept of
singularity: the acceptance that two opposite points of view about one factual situ-
ation are both true (Watzlawick et al., 1967). For instance, a hard ground layer may
be favourable with regard to bearing capacity and unfavourable because of high
blow counts required to hammer a foundation pile to the designed depth. Singu-
larity reﬂects the complexity of our daily working lives by the often conﬂicting
interests resulting from the same factual data.
If there are two opposite truths about one and the same fact, which truth should
we select and consider as the truth? If we realize that all of us, to some degree,
are susceptible to our social environment, this question becomes particularly sig-
niﬁcant. For instance, we seem to give more attention to the demands of certain
people, above other people, as Box 5.2 demonstrates.

94
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 5.2
About electroshocks and singularity
I recall an extreme example of the combination of singularity and risk domin-
ance from my MBA lectures. In the 1960s, the psychologist Milgram provided
some literally shocking experiments. The outcome was highly surprising and
the experiments have been repeated a number of times since then, always with
more or less equivalent results.
For the sake of a so-called medical experiment, a medical doctor requested
a test subject to give electric shocks to another person. These electric shocks
create the singularity for this test subject. They are favourable for the experiment
of the medical doctor, but turn out to be very unfavourable for the person under
attack during the experiment. The test subjects started to give low voltage
shocks. By the end of the experiment, however, electric shocks of over 300 Volts
were given to the victims, as requested by the doctor in his white coat, for the
sake of science. Typically, most test subjects followed the instructions of the
medical professional, while successfully neglecting the crying of the victims.
Fortunately, the persons under attack by the shocks were fake, otherwise their
deaths could have been expected. The experiments demonstrate how normal
people, like you and me, may be susceptible to socially constructed situations,
with an imbalance of authority and power.
If we recall the hard ground layer with respect to singularity and risk domin-
ance, how do we deal with it? In its appraisal does the bearing capacity dominate
or the pile driving? Which is the dominating risk? Is it in certain conditions
dependent upon who is responsible for which risk? Are people factors, such as
age, experience, and the level in the organizational hierarchy guiding our beha-
viour? The example in Box 5.3 indicates the possible effects of singularity and its
associated risk dominance within a project team.
Hedges (1985) emphasizes the importance of group discussions in order to guar-
antee a shared understanding of the team members’ risk perceptions. A facilitator
may lead the discussions, with due attention to the content and the context of
the communication. This approach may help reveal the singularity of particular
ground conditions, as well as the socially-constructed risk dominance within the
team. Moreover, it will reduce the chance of another adverse effect within teams:
groupthink.
Risk of groupthink
Experiments, as well as history, reveal too many examples of the dramatic effects
that so-called groupthink tends to cause to people, organizations and even societies.

Teams and risk
95
Box 5.3
A hard ground layer, singularity and risk dominance
Let us consider a geotechnical engineer and a piling contractor. Both are mem-
bers of our project team under a design and construct contract. The geotechnical
engineer and the piling contractor have different opinions about one and the
same hard ground layer, which acts as their topic of singularity. The hard layer
may be effective from a pile bearing point of view, but adverse from a pile
installation point of view.
The geotechnical engineer is responsible for a safe and economic pile design.
The piling contractor is responsible for a safe and economic pile installation.
The geotechnical engineer will evaluate the strength of the ground conditions
with regard to bearing capacity, the stronger the ground, the better for the
bearing capacity. The piling contractor will interpret the ground with regard to
pile installation. The weaker the ground, the faster his pile driving. Therefore,
they have opposite points of view about the same ground conditions. Within
the team, they need to balance safe pile bearing capacity with a smooth pile
installation, with a shared understanding of the risks of insufﬁcient bearing
capacity and broken piles.
Let us assume that the geotechnical engineer is rather old and experienced,
while the piling contractor graduated just two years ago. There is a fair chance
that the younger and less experienced piling contractor feels the need to re-
value his or her risk perception in favour of the perception of the experienced
and older geotechnical engineer. It will be difﬁcult for the young piling con-
tractor to neglect the natural preponderance of age and experience of the geo-
technical engineer. Obviously, this socially constructed attitude and behaviour
is independent of the fact that the piling contractor’s risk perception may very
well turn out to be the closest to reality during the project, despite younger age
and less experience.
Groupthink rules when team members are unwilling or unable to disagree with one
another. In such teams decisions are solely based on keeping the team consensus
and harmony (Daft, 1998). In these situations each team member conforms without
doubt to the group culture. Independent thinking and asking unconventional
questions are not supported and even neglected in these teams, which consequently
will create signiﬁcant tunnel vision. Groupthink supporting conditions are a strong
team cohesion, isolation of the team, strong and directive leadership, as well as
stressful conditions, without hope of ﬁnding better solutions than the leader sug-
gests. Teams with strong and closed cultures are particularly susceptible to group-
think. We may think of sports teams and the army’s elite troops. However, even
tourists on a holiday-trip may become a victim of groupthink according to Box 5.4.

96
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 5.4
Fatal groupthink by Dutch tourists in the Spanish mountains
The Dutch like to travel. Each year many of them visit mountainous regions to
experience the pleasure of hiking that is impossible in the ﬂat Dutch landscape.
On Wednesday 5 May 2004, a group of 11 Dutch tourists and their guide
departed to walk to the top of the Mulhacén, at about 3500 m, the highest
mountain in the Spanish Sierra Nevada. They were typically not dressed and
prepared for the adverse weather conditions they encountered after one and a
half hours of walking: storm and snow.
They planned to reach a hut at 2500 m. Another hour later, the weather was
still bad and the group had to struggle in knee-deep snow. Two tourists tried
to convince the guide and the other group members to return, because they
considered it as irresponsible to continue. According to the guide, it was well
possible to continue and to reach the hut to stay overnight. The other group
members conformed to the guide.
Because the two persons, one of them an athletics coach and the other a
fanatical rower, were not able to convince the group to return, they broke with
the group and decided to return to the village in the valley on their own.
The guide with the remaining group continued their hike. During that night
a rescue team found them on a slope below the Mulhacén. Earlier, they left two
group members behind, who died in the snow. A third member died during
that night in the hut, where the rescue team took them for shelter. A fourth
member was very seriously affected by hypothermia and went into a coma.
Conforming to groupthink or not, in this sad situation it proved to make the
difference between life and death.
Tough personalities are needed in order to break through the shared and often
fanatically defended opinions of teams that are infected by groupthink. Which
is where the self-motivated individual plays a key role. Variation with different
people with different backgrounds, knowledge and experience, is highly recom-
mended to avoid adverse team effects such as groupthink. Also with regard to
risk management, groupthink in teams should be avoided by almost any means.
How teams can contribute
Apart from their inherent complexity, their cultural aspects and their possible
adverse effects, created by singularity, risk dominance and groupthink, we have
to realize that we need them – teams. They can signiﬁcantly contribute to effect-
ive (ground) risk management, which should result in the highly desired cost

Teams and risk
97
reductions and increased proﬁts, within well-deﬁned safety and quality stand-
ards. Three types of team are explored in some detail: teams of ground-related
experts, multidisciplinary teams and teams as change agents. For effective risk
management we need all of them.
Expert teams
Still, too often, the outcome of a geohydrological or geotechnical analysis is presen-
ted as the truth. At ﬁrst this may seem logical, because it is the result of engineering
activities, supported by ﬁgures and calculations. But if we recall the inherent
uncertainties of ground conditions, then we may agree with a statement of Barends
(2005). He advocates to look for safe uncertainty rather than for unsafe certainty:
‘We need to be conﬁdent in our prediction and at the same time suspicious about
their large margins. For non-professionals this paradox may render the advice of
a geotechnical expert seemingly unreliable’. Table 5.1 provides three examples,
derived from the literature, which may clarify what is exactly meant by these
margins in geotechnical engineering.
One example by Clayton (2001) compared the observed pile performance with
the predicted performance, as provided by 16 different designers. While the
observed pile bearing capacity was some 2850 kN, the calculated bearing capacities
varied between less than 1000 kN and more than 5000 kN.
Kort (2002) measured the horizontal deformations of a sheet pile wall, while
experienced geotechnical engineers provided 23 deformation predictions. Each
engineer used exactly the same factual data. The engineers had to interpret the
data, to establish the geotechnical design parameters and to select, in their views,
the most appropriate calculation models. Their carefully selected design paramet-
ers varied with a factor of three through to ﬁve. The actually measured horizontal
deformation was some 100 mm, while the calculated deformations varied between
50 mm and 500 mm. This range demonstrates a difference of a factor of ten between
the maximum and the minimum calculated deformation.
Finally, Koelewijn (2002) demonstrated the effects of using different types of
characteristic shear strength values in slope stability calculations. Resulting dif-
ferences of the stability factor between 0.36 and 1.65 were established, which
Table 5.1: Margins within geotechnical engineering
Geotechnical analysis
Calculated
Measured
minimum
maximum
Pile bearing capacity (Clayton, 2001)
1000 kN
5400 kN
2850 kN
Horizontal sheet pile deformation (Kort, 2002)
50 mm
500 mm
100 mm
Slope stability safety factor (Koelewijn, 2002)
0.36
1.65
–

98
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
indicates an unquestionable difference between failure and non-failure. Within
the same study, ﬁve different geotechnical engineers calculated stability factors
with margins between 10 and 40 per cent. A hopeful detail forms the fact of
decreasing margins with an increase in the number of factual ground investigation
data.
The many choices which the geotechnical engineer has to make for his or her
calculations appear to be the major driving force behind the margins. The inter-
pretation of factual geotechnical information and the selection of the geotechnical
design parameters are particularly coloured by the inherently subjective engineer-
ing judgement of the involved engineers. As indicated by Flanagan and Norman
(1993), this judgement may be rooted in experience and intuition or gut-feeling.
Together, all these engineering choices result in a signiﬁcant interpretation difference
between experts. Here we revisit the interpretation risk. The existing geotechnical
standards and guidelines, remarkably, still allow these subjective engineering
approaches in the prevailing practice.
The examples of Table 5.1 highlight the effects of differences in ground percep-
tions and their impact on the results of geotechnical design. Similar outcomes can
be expected for environmental and other types of ground-related aspects, as the
underlying principles of ground uncertainty remain the same. In my view, these
examples demonstrate the urgent need for a thorough expert team approach for
many of our ground-related engineering and construction activities. The doubtless
dedicated and good-willing calculation of one single geotechnical expert, or even
one geotechnical ﬁrm, involves the risk of too much bias. These expert teams are
well beyond the for many years and widely applied concept of second opinions.
These opinions do reveal differences in approaches and results, but still leave their
underlying causes untouched. The expert team needs to explore these causes to
be able to judge their bias and scatter and to arrive at a well-balanced outcome,
which explicitly reveals the geotechnical margin to be expected. These teams will
probably be able to turn their differences in knowledge and experience into cost-
effective and acceptable risk management solutions. In particular, for the more
serious ground-related risks, it is highly recommended to establish the team of
ground-related experts preferably from different ﬁrms or institutes and maybe
even from different nations. Only together we will be able to guarantee the safe
uncertainty, as has been recommended by Barends (2005).
Multidisciplinary teams
The people working in the construction industry and its ground-related disciplines
can be characterized as professionals. They are experts in their ﬁelds and their
ﬁrms can typically be classiﬁed as professional organizations (Mintzberg, 1998). The
in-depth knowledge and experience of these professionals is obviously viable,
however, their thorough expertise may also limit their view and hinder them

Teams and risk
99
from seeing the whole picture of the entire project. Box 5.5 presents one concise
example concerning the need to oversee the whole project.
Box 5.5
The need for a multidisciplinary project approach
Let us compare the risk perceptions of two types of engineers in a road project:
a geotechnical engineer and a road engineer. The ﬁrst thinks and designs
in dimensions of decimetres or, at best, in centimetres. Settlement outcomes
expressed in millimetres do not make sense in the discipline of geotechnics.
However, this millimetre scale does make sense for the road engineer and his
pavement design. As a consequence, a gap of a factor of 10 to 100 may arise in
the design accuracy, and its related risks, between both professionals.
Regarding Box 5.5, is there a rationale for a pavement design with an accuracy
expressed in millimetres, while settlements due to underlying soft ground layers
can only be expressed within an accuracy of decimetres? At least, both engineers
should exchange their opinions about this matter, in order to avoid suboptimum
settlement risk remediation measures.
The required awareness of this sort of difference in risk perception by profes-
sionals can be created in multidisciplinary or cross-functional project teams. These
teams include members from a variety of disciplines, probably from different
departments and perhaps even from different organizations. According to Oak-
land (1993), the main beneﬁt of multidisciplinary teams is reducing so-called silo
management, which is mono-dimensional management with a reasonable chance
that the overall project objectives are suboptimized.
Ground-related teams of experts, as previously introduced, will basically man-
age their projects from their ground-related point of view. No doubt their ground-
related issues are of paramount importance, but other issues are important as well,
in order to meet the overall project targets. We may think of the timely arrange-
ment of all sorts of permits or of effective external communication by the public
relations ofﬁcer. Not all ground-experts are ultimately talented and skilled to per-
form this type of activity, which are often beyond their personal interests as well.
Well-balanced multidisciplinary project teams, with members with complement-
ary skills, can therefore add high value to the project. Every team member can
contribute according to his or her strengths, and weaknesses are compensated by
other team members. For instance, an in-depth oriented ground expert may leave
the external communication to a team member with the appropriate skills and
motivation for it. This approach may mobilize the maximum spirit and power
of the team. In my own family team it is my wife who compensates a number

100
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
of my weaknesses. In this well-working miniature team, I was able to write this
book, without becoming entirely isolated from my social environment. As shown
in Figure 5.5, any project organization should use both expert teams and multi-
disciplinary project teams, which implies some team members join more than one
team in order to provide a liaison function between the several teams.
Multidisciplinary project team 
Expert team on ground 
Expert team on concrete 
Figure 5.5: Linking expert teams with the multidisciplinary pro-
ject team.
The
combined
use
of
different types of team may
additionally
facilitate
the
development
of
learning
capabilities.
Their
cross-
functional character encour-
ages
teams
to
develop
so-called higher order cross-
functional capabilities. These
capabilities
cannot
be
reached by sole individuals,
which again highlights the importance of teamwork. These capabilities should
be chased by our organizations to create sustainable competitive advantage
(Grant, 1998). The latter can be deﬁned as creating a persistent higher rate of
proﬁt than the competitors in the same market segment. Indeed, it is a highly
desirable objective for many engineering and construction companies in today’s
increasingly competitive construction markets. Double loop learning, or gaining
new core competencies, by adopting new developments, is needed to arrive
at these higher order cross-functional team capabilities. It goes a step further
than single loop learning, which is, in fact, only strengthening existing core
competencies (Hamel and Prahalad, 1994).
The integration and application of risk management principles in teams typic-
ally requires double loop learning. Risk management competencies should be
added to existing and new construction teams, rather than replacing existing know-
ledge and experience. While introducing risk management concepts to technical
experts, I experience occasionally some unspoken fear that their expert knowledge
becomes obsolete. The contrary will occur, the explicitness of risk management
will demand, more than ever, sound and state-of-the-art technical expertise to
reduce risk to acceptable degrees. Therefore, in my view any engineering and
construction team, whether expert or multidisciplinary, should support a mixture
of single and double loop learning, because both in-depth and multidisciplinary
knowledge are essential for optimum results.
Teams as change agents
Just the enthusiasm of a risk-driven project team is usually insufﬁcient for a
successful project result. Such teams need adequate support from their parent

Teams and risk
101
organizations and management, particularly by demonstrating trust and openness
to the teams. Employees, at all hierarchical levels, should feel free and supported
to raise any type of question and to think out of the box. In addition, for truly
risk driven (project) organizations, an almost continuous dialogue with clients
and other stakeholders is required. This will result in a thorough understanding
of the client’s and other stakeholder’s needs and risk tolerances, as well as of
their changes, which supports effective risk management. Therefore, the imple-
mentation and application of risk management in our projects require a favourable
culture in our parent organizations as well.
Fortunately, teams prove to be very effective organizational change agents. They
may markedly facilitate the process of organizational transformation, as described
by a case in the remaining part of this chapter.
GeoDelft, the Dutch National Institute for GeoEngineering, needed to adapt its
organizational culture, to respond effectively to the transformations in the Dutch
construction industry. GeoDelft decided to become a partner in risk management
for its clients. The formation of teams demonstrated to work as a catalyst in
this change process. The matrix in Figure 5.6 presents the relationship between
four types of deliverables and the required organizational culture and market
knowledge (GeoDelft, 2000).
GeoDelft aimed for a strategic shift in its activities, from mainly delivering capa-
city and products towards particularly delivering services and value. A primarily
risk-driven approach of its ground-related research and consultancy activities is
one of the services of GeoDelft that adds value to clients. The transformation
was realized during the period 2001–2004 and demanded a considerable change
Deliverables
Organisational Culture
Market Knowledge
Value
No hierarchy
Strategic knowledge
Network structure
External orientation
Services
Creativity
Account knowledge
Process oriented
Less hierarchy
Products
Formal
Market knowledge
Procedures and standards
Internal orientation
Capacity
Selling hours
Technical knowledge
No aligned culture
Figure 5.6: Deliverables, organizational culture and market knowledge (© with permission of
GeoDelft).

102
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
in organizational culture towards one with a minimum of hierarchy, a network
structure and an external or customer orientation. Existing technical and market
knowledge did not become obsolete, but had to be complemented with strategic
knowledge of the market. Only with this additional knowledge would GeoDelft
be able to provide services and add value as a partner in risk management.
While it is quite difﬁcult to measure a fuzzy characteristic such as the realized
cultural change, something can be said of the organizational culture change within
GeoDelft. For example, the organization became much more customer-oriented.
A main driver was the establishment of a number of cross-functional market teams.
These are responsible for GeoDelft’s most important market segments. The mem-
bers work in different departments and vary largely in experience and education.
Following the concept of Piercy (1997), these teams perform pan-company marketing,
in which marketing is a corporate philosophy and not isolated to the traditional
marketing department. In fact, GeoDelft does not have a marketing department
anymore. Marketing is executed by the teams, which establish alliances inside and
outside the organization, based around customers and supported by information
technology. The combination of these factors resulted in a dramatically improved
client orientation. The resulting close interaction with clients, on an almost con-
tinuous basis, helps to understand better their needs and risk tolerance.
In addition, a lot of employees started to work in teams at project ofﬁces of con-
tractors and engineers. Partnerships and exchange programmes were established
with contractors, clients and foreign institutes, like Norwegian Geotechnical Insti-
tute (NGI), Geotechnical Research Institute (GRI) in Japan and GeoHohai of Hohai
University in China. Employee exchange programmes are part of these partner-
ships, in which GeoDelft employees participated in teams of the partners in an
international environment. The new expertise and experiences of these employees
were shared and combined to new expertise by knowledge teams, in which experts
with a shared interest, such as soft soil behaviour or geohydrological modelling,
share and build on their knowledge. While knowing answers remains important,
asking the right questions became an essential competence for these teams, to
indicate any white spots in knowledge that needs further research.
In conclusion, teams played an essential and even dominant role as change
agents in the transformation process of GeoDelft. Together with a number of
dedicated individuals, they proved to be the key success factor for arriving at the
desired and required risk-driven organizational culture.
Summary
This chapter has revealed and discussed the paradox of the team, which is rather
different from just a group of people. Real teams have common objectives, a
shared understanding and their members complement each other with skills and

Teams and risk
103
experiences. While such teams are not so easily brought to performance, add com-
plexity to the already complicated individual behaviour and require due attention
to their culture, they are indispensable in today’s construction. Only teams can
cope effectively with risk management in our construction projects.
However, to add real value, risk communication within and between teams is
of utmost importance. Content and context are two main elements of communi-
cation in general and of risk communication in particular. Typical features within
teams need to be acknowledged, such as singularity, factual data that result in
conﬂicting opinions, and risk dominance, opinions of more experienced and elder
team members that are more easily adopted than those of younger and less exper-
ienced members. Furthermore, groupthink, adverse team consensus and harmony
that neglects independent and rational thinking, should be avoided by almost any
means.
While applying these recommendations, teams have signiﬁcant contributions
to projects. Expert teams, preferably with members from outside the ﬁrms and
even outside the country, are essential to explore and judge the still wide margins
in ground-related engineering and construction. Multidisciplinary teams facilitate
our thinking and acting beyond the ground-related issues to serve the overall
project goals and to avoid suboptimization. They support double loop learning
as well, which is required for the integration and application of (ground) risk
management principles in projects and organizations.
Finally, entire teams can also be very effective as change agents. They are able
to facilitate the processes of organizational culture change towards more risk
management prone organizations that are believed to add value in our highly
competitive businesses.

6
Clients, society and risk
Introduction
Most of us work in the construction industry to provide our clients and society
with the projects they need, while making a reasonable proﬁt as well. By serving
clients and society, we will serve our companies and ourselves too. Eventually, it is
all about balancing the interest of the construction industry, to make a reasonable
proﬁt, and the interest of clients and society to pay a reasonable price for it. Risk
management in general and that of ground conditions in particular can contribute
to establish this balance of interests.
After previously considering individuals and some types of team, this chapter
explores the relationship of our clients and society with risk. In this chapter we
will try to connect the risk perceptions of the project providers to those of clients
and society. The latter include the public, people like you and me, who are the
end-users of construction projects.
As a ﬁrst prerequisite for the application of risk management, all parties
involved should be willing to make risks explicit and to discuss them in view
of their interests. As a second prerequisite, all parties involved need to acknow-
ledge their inherent different risks perspectives, which result from their inherently
different interests.
The ﬁrst part of this chapter explores clients in relation to risk. Differences in
perceptions are demonstrated by an example of a contractor’s perception of the
client and a client’s perception of the contractor. Public and private clients are
distinguished. The ﬁrst group represents federal or local governments, while the
latter refers to private companies, such as development companies and the oil and
gas industry.
The second part of this chapter concerns our society in relation to risk. Topics
to be covered are the current post-modern era with its characteristics, as well as
changes of risk perceptions over time within society, and the challenge to provide

Clients, society and risk
105
construction projects that really will satisfy the needs of society. As usual, this
chapter ﬁnishes with a summary.
Clients and risk
An understanding of the clients’ risk perception starts with really knowing them
and their interests and attitudes. It is of major importance to appraise the risk
tolerance of the client, the point where the risk becomes intolerable to the client
and consequently needs to be reduced or allocated to another party. Clients with
a relatively low risk tolerance often choose more conservative designs for con-
struction with lower bounds of risk. In addition, many clients value risk with high
probability and low consequences differently from risk with low probability and
high consequences, which is likely to result in a more costly design and possibly
also in a more expensive construction of the project (Altabba et al., 2004).
Are clients aware of these effects of their own risk attitude? Does our client
want to consider risks anyway? Not yet all of them, many clients seem seri-
ously to fear risks transparency. This attitude is often caused by lack of expertise
and unawareness about risks, speciﬁc responsibilities to certain stakeholders, as
well as by contractual and ﬁnancial matters that they are not able to oversee
completely.
Do you play the ostrich game?
We may notice a prevailing culture of hunting for perfection in society, which
obstructs the adoption of risk management. According to the beliefs of many of
us, making failures is not perfect. Risk management displays all sorts of failures
and other potential problems. Following one of the main principles of risk man-
agement, ﬁrst we need to become aware of potential problems, only then we are
able to take appropriate measures to prevent them from occurring. In other words,
ﬁrst we have to see the dark side of the moon.
Many stakeholders in construction, such as clients, contractors, engineers, gov-
ernment representatives, and politicians, hesitate to look at this potential dark side
of their projects, as experience tends to demonstrate. For instance, they fear that
too many explicit risks will prevent their project from starting. They choose to
close their eyes and stick their heads in the ground, the ostrich behaviour, to avoid
seeing and dealing with reality and risk.
It is difﬁcult not to play this ostrich game with our clients without losing them.
If we do not like to play anymore, there will be many competitors willing to play
the game with our clients, which creates a serious dilemma. Box 6.1 presents an
example of an often-played ostrich game.

106
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Figure 6.1: An ostrich: not yet playing the game (© photo by Martin van Staveren).
Box 6.1
The ostrich game on settlements
The ostrich game on settlements was illustrated at the symposium Settlement
Requirements – Reasonable and Affordable? The Dutch Society of Geotechnical
Engineers organized it in 2005 in Delft, The Netherlands. The symposium
was attended by more than 100 professionals, with one main question: ‘Can
the contractor realize what the clients asks?’ If the client speciﬁes residual
settlements of a road of at maximum 0.02 m over a period of 30 years, is there
any contractor able to meet that speciﬁcation at reasonable costs?
Considering the typical Dutch soils with soft clay and peat, as well as high
groundwater tables, the answer was immediately agreed by all participants:
no. As ground professionals, they know these types of speciﬁcations are not at
all realistic or feasible. However, clients still request these speciﬁcations and
contractors agree with them, at least at the start of the project, in order to win
the contract. The client apparently believes the contractor is able to satisfy his
or her pre-set requirements.
As a consequence, both parties will start the project, founded on wrong
and unrealistic assumptions. Often, the problems do already arise during

Clients, society and risk
107
construction, when settlements appear to be substantially larger than expected.
Who wants to pay for the remediation of these additional settlements? Who has
to pay? Who is to blame? Why do we start these unrealistic projects, anyway?
What is the role of risk management? Until now, the role of risk management
in this type of project is rather minimal, which makes this all happen. It seems
not just a typical Dutch disease.
During the same symposium, the attendees recognized the ready availability
of improved ground-related technology, better to assess and control soft soil
settlements. Innovative theories, as well as geotechnical software packages are
able to provide much more accurate settlement predictions. Internet-supported
monitoring programmes with easy to perform back-analyses of monitoring data
are also available. Nevertheless, this innovative technology is not yet widely
applied, simply because there is no contractual drive to apply these techno-
logies. In addition, there also is no clear ﬁnancial beneﬁt for the contractor
to apply these modern technologies, within the prevailing market conditions
with severe price competition, in spite of the sharp speciﬁcations, as set by
the client. It appears to be a rather strange construction world – where is our
collective judgement?
Many readers may have their own experiences with ostrich behaviour, for any
type of ground-related risk. Why is the ostrich game a problem? It is a problem
because is neglects a fundamental project transparency, allows a project to start
with unrealistic speciﬁcations and often results in a contractual ﬁght between the
parties, likely already during construction, with a lot of hassle about differing site
conditions, claims, costs of unexpected ground conditions and, not seldom, the
end-game at court. How can we break with this type of game without running
a serious risk of losing our precious clients? Is risk management an attractive
alternative?
A contractor’s perception of the client and vice versa
As a next step to move beyond the ostrich game, Boxes 6.2 and 6.3 present
examples of the perceptions of a contractor and a client about each other. I derived
and summarized both cases from interviews with two leaders in construction in
the Dutch magazine Building Business (Bijsterveld, 2005; Laverman, 2005). These
leaders, representing a government client and contractor, give us some insight
about their different opinions, interests, and perceptions. It will also illustrate
how risk management can serve as linking pin between these parties. In fact,
risk management seems able to bring their interests together, in the direction of a
shared understanding.

108
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 6.2
A contractor’s perception of the client and risk
Improved risk management leads to more client focus, Guus Hoefsloot, CEO
of Heijmans
Guus Hoefsloot is Chief Executive Ofﬁcer (CEO) of Heijmans, one of Europe’s
largest contractors. Mr Hoefsloot connects client focus with risk management.
He argues that it ultimately beneﬁts clients when they realize what sort of
risks contractors may encounter during construction. In case of riskful projects,
selection on lowest price will only result in unsatisﬁed clients. Therefore, con-
tractors have to become prepared and capable of presenting their risk analyses
to the client.
According to Mr Hoefsloot, there have been a number of major changes in
construction during the last decade. There has been an increase in contractor’s
risk, an increase in contractual complexity, an increase in the contractor’s
liability, as well as an increase in lump-sum type of contracts. The key for
coping with these developments is risk management. First of all, companies
have internally to professionalize their risk management capabilities. Further-
more, the industry has to share their risk management experiences by exchange
of risk management data and cases, in order to learn from it. Finally, there is
a need for much more transparency in the risk allocation between the client
and the contractor, following the principle that the party which is best able to
manage the risk should become the owner of that risk as well. Of course, this
approach needs suitable procedures and standards of contracting. As contract-
ors, Mr Hoefsloot concludes, we should not try to change the client, we should
change ourselves.
The main message of Box 6.2 reminds us of the famous German duke from
Münshausen, who pulled himself by his own hair out of the swamp. We have
to change ourselves and to become successful dukes of Münshausen, we need to
understand the client thoroughly. In other words, we have to acknowledge the
client’s interests from a client’s perception on risk of which an example is presented
in Box 6.3.
Obviously, Boxes 6.2 and 6.3 provide only two examples from Dutch practice.
However, I recognize similar opinions in many articles and interviews with
change-prone leaders in the construction industry around the globe. I therefore
dare to draw the conclusion that a lot of clients and construction providers are
willing and motivated to share their perception on risk and its management with
each other. In this view, risk management may help to bring clients, contractors
and engineers along side to align and mutually appreciate their main interests, as
much as reasonable, and to create construction projects with a maximum beneﬁt
for all involved. After these examples, let us now focus in more detail on the

Clients, society and risk
109
Box 6.3
A client’s perception of the contractor and risk
It takes time to become a good client, Bert Keijts, Director-General of
Rijkswaterstaat, the executive branche of the Dutch Ministry of Public Works
and Water Management.
Bert Keijts is Director-General of Rijkswaterstaat, which is the client of
10 per cent of all projects on infrastructure in The Netherlands. Mr Keijts expects
large cost savings from innovative contracts, such as design and construct.
He refers to private clients in the oil and gas industry, including Shell, who
have already extensive experience with these types of contracting procedures.
Another example of an innovative client is the Highway Agency in the UK,
which selects the suitable contractor by a fast process, in an early stage of the
projects, and in agreement with the rules of the European Union.
By the end of 2007, Rijkswaterstaat will have implemented innovative con-
tracting in its entire organization. This new type of contracting requires new
capabilities from both parties, Rijkswaterstaat’s employees and the contractors
in the market. According to Mr Keijts, not only Rijkswaterstaat, but also the
market have still to learn a lot in order to change their traditional attitudes. He
wants therefore to start with these innovative contracts in the rather routine
and small projects. Within these projects, contractors are expected to be able to
oversee their newly gained additional risks. In the view of Mr Keijts, innovative
contracts for large and complicated projects will still increase the contractor’s
risk to an unacceptable level. As a client, Mr Keijts is willing to take some risk
as well, when he is able both to recognize and manage them. In his opinion the
government needs to be prepared to bear certain risk, for instance to start up
Public Private Partnership projects. Finally, Mr Keijts wants more innovative
approaches from contractors, as well more interaction with them.
particular risk perception of the client. I distinguish the two main types of client:
public clients and private clients. What can we learn from their risk perceptions?
Public and private clients – risk perceptions, costs and
income
Public clients typically spend public money, largely generated by taxes, which
demands public accountability for reasonable expenditure. Federal, state and local
governments are all types of public client. Contrary to private clients, their public
equivalents normally do not have direct income from their investment, except toll
income from operating bridges, tunnels and expressways. Figure 6.2 schematically
shows this situation.

110
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Project
Budget
Project
Costs
Project income
Money
Time 
extra cost 
Figure 6.2: Public clients: budget, costs and income.
One of the major interests
of public clients is expendit-
ure
within
their
budgets.
Most clients would try to
avoid returning to their local
or federal states or minis-
tries
to
request
additional
budget,
because
their
con-
struction projects run out of
cost control. For that reason,
contracting on solely the low-
est price criterion, within a
pre-set and ﬁxed speciﬁca-
tions, is widely considered to
be the optimum procurement model. The bid with the lowest price, however,
rather seldom equals the ﬁnal costs of the project, as indicated in Figure 6.2.
I have met quite a number of government ofﬁcials who do not know how
to deal explicitly with risks within their conventional way of procurement and
contracting. Often, they cannot balance risk and price, as selection on lowest
price only rules in their practice. Consequently, numerous risks remain unspoken
about. Contractors neglect them as well, in order to arrive at the lowest possible
bid price to win the contract. However, the contractor with the lowest bid price
needs to absorb a lot of unpriced risks and sometimes even to calculate a negative
ﬁnancial project result. After contract award, particularly when some of the risks
effectuate, the contractor will become highly motivated to compensate for at least
a portion of his loss by issuing claims. So-called differing ground conditions are often
(mis)used for this reason. Therefore, despite, or perhaps, because of the lowest
price criterion, many public clients still have to request additional budgets. As
Figure 6.2 demonstrates, the project income is normally grossly insufﬁcient to
compensate for the extra project costs.
Another reason for the lowest price preference of many public clients is the
neglect of the life cycle cost of the project. Conventionally, public clients oper-
ate costs administrations that strictly separate project expenditure and income.
Budgets for design and construction are independent of budgets for operation
and maintenance, while the lowest total cost of ownership during the life time of
a project requires a joint approach of these budgets. For instance, higher design
and construction costs may be needed to realize substantially lower operation and
maintenance costs, as well as total life cycle costs. A government ofﬁcial needs
to explain and defend a higher initial project budget, while a colleague, who is
responsible for operation and maintenance, will be cut in his or her budget. That

Clients, society and risk
111
colleague may feel a lowering of professional status from managing lower budgets
and probably even fewer personnel involved in maintenance.
Therefore, if we were a public client, who works in the sketched organizational
context, why should we make our professional life more difﬁcult, for ourselves
and our colleagues? Why should we challenge the status quo? Dedicated indi-
viduals and teams, both at the public client’s and the contractor’s side will be
required to break through this conventional thinking and resulting attitudes. Risk
management may help these public clients to realize their projects with an accept-
able risk proﬁle at reasonable and public accountable costs, with a reduced chance
that they have to call for additional budget, sometime during the construction
process.
Private clients realize their projects with private money. Examples are invest-
ment companies, project developers, as well as the energy and chemical industries.
Private clients have to generate income, directly or indirectly, from their invest-
ment in construction. Figure 6.3 schematically presents this situation.
Project
Budget
Project
Costs
Project
Income 
Money
Time 
Profit
Figure 6.3: Private clients: budget, costs and income.
Compared with public cli-
ents, private clients normally
operate a much more dir-
ect relationship between the
costs of the project, the ﬁn-
ancing of these costs, and
the generation of income to
make a reasonable proﬁt, as
a return on their investment.
Private clients are more or
less in control of their costs
and ﬁnancing. Their major
risk component is normally
hidden on the income side.
Their income can be highly
inﬂuenced by difﬁcult to foresee (international) market ﬂuctuations, which is a
type of problem most public clients do not have.
Because of their need to generate income, private clients acknowledge the inher-
ent relationship between price and quality. For instance, for many years, numerous
companies in the industrial sector have applied additional criteria to the price in
their procurement practices. Lowest price is deﬁnitely not their sole criterion and
for public clients still rather innovative contracts, such as design and construct,
are widely adopted and used in these industries. Risk management is not only an
integral part of these contracts, it has also been integrated into the daily operations
of these industries. The same applies for the life cycle cost approach, which is
also more widely accepted with private clients, when compared with their public

112
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
equivalents. It is one of the ways to maximize income and proﬁts that private
parties simply need to satisfy their shareholders and the ﬁnancial markets.
We can recognize a few major differences between public and private clients,
such as the income side and the life cycle costs approach, which may give rise
to entirely different risk perceptions between them. However, if their costs are
increasing in an unexpected way, for instance by unforeseen and unfavourable
ground conditions, both types of client encounter problems in common. Public
clients need more budget, which may be politically very difﬁcult. Private clients
need more ﬁnance and to generate more income, which might be quite difﬁcult
when markets are down. Therefore, structured (ground) risk management should
be attractive for both types of client.
By now we have gained some insight into the differences and similarities of
public and private clients’ risk perceptions. I would like to build further on their
similarities, by presenting two options for working with our clients.
Confrontation or cooperation
There are two fundamentally different options for working with our clients: con-
frontation (war) or cooperation (peace). While most of us are probably quite peaceful
people, in relation to our clients we often think that we need to ﬁght. The other
way around, for the clients among us, there is a wide spread belief that there is
no other way to deal with those contractors than to ﬁght them as well. Box 6.4
provides two examples.
If we want to make a positive difference in the construction industry, by doing it
differently, then it is necessary to consider this conventional confrontation model
between clients and their providers in some more detail. Therefore, we compare
the more traditional model of conﬂict with a more modern approach of cooperation
or partnership.
Conﬂicts develop because both parties want to gather some beneﬁts, however,
from different and conﬂicting perspectives. Mutually excluding beneﬁts form the
very basis of any conﬂict. It assumes your beneﬁt by deﬁnition is contrary to
my beneﬁt, and vice versa. In these cases, both sympathy and empathy are clearly
missing. The conﬂict model hides thoughts about scarcity, the belief that there is
not enough for everybody. It is in fact a static and reactive attitude which defends
ﬁxed positions that are believed to be under attack. However, if we are able to
change our mindset towards a more cooperative model, these attacks may become
obsolete.
An alternative for the model of conﬂict is the model of cooperation, which concerns
sharing perceptions by using our possibility to practice empathy for our apparent
opponents. It is not needed to feel sympathy as well. That is likely to grow

Clients, society and risk
113
Box 6.4
The model of conﬂict around ground conditions
Examples of the model of conﬂict are abundantly available within the construc-
tion industry. Each reader will have his or her own stories. One of the main
drivers of conﬂict is the occurrence of so-called differing site conditions, when
ground conditions prove to be more adverse than expected during construc-
tion. Are resulting construction problems, such a severe deformations, caused
by differing site conditions or a wrong design? Or is the design correct and did
the contractor not sufﬁciently anticipate the ground conditions, as presented in
the ground investigation reports? The answers of the different project parties
will vary and are food for conﬂicts.
The same mechanisms occur in many ground investigation contracts. The
client selects the ground investigation contractor with the lowest price. Due to
severe competition in a declining market, the ground investigations contractor
has to bid below cost price. Once the contract has been signed, the ﬁght starts.
Suddenly, locations to be investigated are not accessible with the equipment,
as agreed in the contract. Mobilization of appropriate equipment implies, of
course, signiﬁcant additional costs. The ﬁght has started, the price of the bid will
in no way represent the ﬁnal costs to be paid by the client. Their relationship
will be damaged and they struggle on.
Experience learned there is a real chance the same client and contractor meet
again in their next project. They know each other from before and trust has
been reduced to an absolute minimum, on both sides of the table. As an old
Dutch saying says, trust comes by feet and goes by horse. Again the lowest
price criterion will be applied, market conditions have not been changed and
the story becomes predictable. How can we stop this negative spiral?
anyway, during the process of working together, as a nice side-effect. A step
further in cooperation is sharing beneﬁts, in which your beneﬁt becomes my beneﬁt
as well.
The model of cooperation is about creating a bigger cake together, so that
there will be a bigger slice for all parties involved, contrary to conﬂict, which
implies ﬁghting for the biggest slice. The cooperation model works from the idea
of abundance – there is enough for all of us and together we can create even
more. It is based on a dynamic and proactive attitude of taking responsibility and
catching opportunities by creating economies of scale and knowledge. It supports
exploration, side-by-side with our former opponent, in order to create together
the best for both parties.

114
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
This rather idealistic model of cooperation may appear attractive on paper.
However, to put it in practice is a different story. Box 6.5 presents a case about an
innovative contract, with the intention to serve both the client and its contractors.
Box 6.5
Attempts to apply the cooperation model
According to Jansen (2001), the client’s main objective for applying a design
and construct (D&C) type of contract is to arrive at a better combination of
price and quality. Priemus (2005) presents additional beneﬁts of reductions in
construction time and creative competition on quality. D&C contracts should
result in an increase in innovation and dynamics in the construction industry. In
The Netherlands, by the end of the 1990s, these advantages were still theoretical
and not based on sound practical experience.
The high-speed railway between Amsterdam and Paris is one of the mega-
infrastructure projects in recent Dutch history and applied an innovative D&C
contract. This resulted in a complete proof of the Law of Murphy, nearly
everything that could go wrong went wrong (Priemus, 2005). From a contrac-
tual point of view, main problems were:
1
The formation of illegal cartels by the contractors
2
A lack of professional knowledge of operating a D&C contract by the client
3
An overheated Dutch construction market.
According to Priemus (2005), there are several learning points. First of all, the
innovative D&C contract type did not ﬁt with the innovative-adverse culture
of both client and contractors. The culture of forming cartels is an example of
being destructive to the objectives of D&C contracts. This demonstrates the
need for a pro-innovative culture, with all parties involved, before starting
any innovative adventure together. Furthermore, the client was not capable
of providing a clear set of functional speciﬁcations. The pre-set speciﬁcations
were of a conventional type and prevented the contractors from providing
really innovative solutions.
The entire ground information risk, the risk that the factual ground data are not
correct or not complete, was allocated to the client (Jansen, 2001), which is in con-
ﬂict with the design responsibility of the contractors. Finally, the complicated
interaction of the project with its environment served as an obstacle (Priemus,
2005). Apparently, the soft systems approach was underdeveloped as well.
Risk management was considered of utmost importance, on both the cli-
ent’s and the contractors’ sides. I was involved in the implementation of
ground-related risk management for a part of the project, when construction

Clients, society and risk
115
had already been started. The contractors’ project managers were absolutely
convinced about the need and value of risk management. Risk managers
were appointed and an extensive risk register was established. However, an
awareness about the importance of risk management and, consequently, the
individual willingness and dedication to reserve time for its application, was
lacking within most of the teams. Risk management was not fully internalized
in the entire project organization.
The D&C contract, with all of its consequences, appeared to be still in the
early stage of the learning curve for the parties involved. As a consequence,
true cooperation appeared to be not that easy. The ﬁnal costs of the entire
project were some 5600 million euros, with a negotiated contract price of 4300
million euros. This implies an almost 40 per cent cost increase for the client,
which was the Dutch government. The cost consequences and proﬁt rates for
the contractors have not been disclosed. Nevertheless, the aimed cost reduction
for the client was clearly not realized by this innovative contract. On the other
hand, to highlight the positive side as well, both the client and the contractors
showed the guts to start with a new way of contracting for a very complicated
and large project.
The attempts to apply the cooperation model, as presented in Box 6.5, turned
out to result in a rather innovative version of the confrontation model. However,
while not easy, it is possible to apply the cooperation model with our clients. Risk
management appears to be an effective tool that facilitates this model, because
both risks and the interests of the parties involved become explicitly visible. Later
in this book, I will present examples of successful applications of the cooperation
models, which have been facilitated by structured ground risk management. Fur-
thermore, Chapter 11 provides guidelines about how to deal with the ground risk
in several types of contract, both according to the model of conﬂict and the model
of cooperation. Therefore, we have basically a choice between confrontation and
cooperation. A combination of both may be possible as well, which is left to the
reader to try out.
As set out before, the ultimate goal of (ground) risk management is not restricted
to reducing or eliminating risk. It is about targeting the success of our projects.
Success is usually connected with creating value. How do we add value to our
clients and their clients as well? Most clients will be satisﬁed by either lower
cost for the same quality or the cost as budgeted with more product quality or
quantity. With such projects results they will serve their clients as well, who are
often the end-users of their projects and members of the public in society. People,
like you and me, who daily use houses, schools, hospitals, roads, railroads, and
so on. What about their risk perceptions?

116
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Society and risk
From modern to post-modern risk perceptions
In his classic movie, Modern Times, Charlie Chaplin shows his perception of what
we can consider as the modern time. In one of the scenes Charlie is struggling
with monstrous machinery, including some sort of giant clockwork. This struggle
seems to be still real.
Our modern times started around 1850, with the industrialization of the west-
ern world and a sound belief in linearly forward moving developments. Con-
sequently, today’s modern societies focus largely on economic growth, with the
annual increase in the Gross National Product (GNP) as performance indicator.
However, over the last years, this modern worldview has been subject to erosion.
The ongoing globalization and its pressures on a wide range of societies have a
large stake in it. Side-effects of fast growing economies, such as increasing urb-
anization, pollution, and other social and environmental concerns are not taken
for granted anymore by an increasing number of people. Critical books about
these aspects of modernity, such as No Logo by Naomi Klein (2002) and The Silent
Takeover by Noreena Hertz (2001), became best sellers in several countries. In
addition, economies in a number of European countries and Japan have been
facing serious economic stagnation for a number of years. Our modern times are
changing, as well as the associated perceptions of the public.
Therefore, welcome in today’s post-modern era. Since the 1980s, this originally
rather philosophical term has been established in our language. It took me quite
a while to understand its meaning and consequences. The Italian philosopher,
Gianni Vattimo, deﬁnes post-modernity as the existence of innumerable realities. The
view of one single and objective reality is fragmented into a countless number of
realities. These different realities are created by the daily overﬂow of information
provided by the mass media (Vattimo, 1992). Obviously, the Internet facilitates
this reality-fragmentation in a dramatic way.
In this post-modern view, objectivity and subjectivity become increasingly
entangled in society, with an unavoidable effect on the way the public perceives
risk. Can and do we have to distinguish real risks from virtual risks? What are their
respective characteristics and differences? How do we deﬁne them? If a risk is
perceived as serious by the public and as insigniﬁcant by serious experts, does that
risk need to be classiﬁed as virtual and irrelevant? If a real risk, in the perception
of experts, is seen as only virtual by the public and their politicians, it may not
get the remediation it needs to protect that society against it. On the other hand,
if a mainly virtual risk is considered as real by society and its politicians, then is
management of that risk merely a waste of time and money? Or is it well-spent
as it fulﬁls the demands of the public? This increasing and probably irreversible
mixture of fact and ﬁction is expected to have an enormous impact on the risk

Clients, society and risk
117
perception within society. Fortunately or not, risk perceptions will change over
time, also within societies, as Box 6.6 aims to demonstrate.
Box 6.6
Changing risk perceptions over time in society
Around the year 1850, the ﬁrst train trafﬁc started between the cities of Am-
sterdam and Haarlem, The Netherlands. At that time there was some panic
with the public, in particular with the farmers among them. They perceived a
serious risk: cows would not be able to provide milk anymore because of that
loud and monstrous steam-driven train crossing the green ﬁelds. Currently,
there is a dense railway network in The Netherlands and cheese is still one of
the important export products.
Two lessons can be drawn from the brief example in Box 6.6. First, risk percep-
tions within society change. Secondly and very much linked to the ﬁrst lesson,
within society risk perception is often caused by fear in its members, which is a
normal human response to new and uncommon situations. At the moment new
situations arise, there is often a lack of knowledge in the public. Additionally, an
open view towards the new situation may be lacking, sometimes within govern-
ments as well (see Box 6.7).
Box 6.7
The struggle of a federal government with changing risk perceptions
In the Dutch daily construction newspaper Cobouw of 22 March 2005, Professor
Jacob Fokkema, Chairman of Board the Delft University of Technology, com-
plained about the government for hiding an open debate with the scientiﬁc
world about ﬂood risk and construction. In his view, recent views of the Delft
University of Technology on the risk of ﬂoods to the stability of dikes appeared
to be neglected by the government. These new insights were apparently con-
sidered as ‘unwanted hassle’ by the government and improved scientiﬁc risk
perceptions seem to be difﬁcult to adopt.
Box 6.7 shows that even starting a debate about risk-related topics, with a high
degree of public effects, can be difﬁcult in society. Furthermore, the public’s trust
in experts, who aim to explain how relevant their new insights and developments
are, erodes in our post-modern societies, in particular, when other experts express
conﬂicting opinions over the same topic. With today’s abundant mass media,
these conﬂicts between experts become quite confusing and frustrating for many

118
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
people, especially when their opinions affect their daily lives. In this respect I
quote Ho et al. (2000):
…Finally, our societies are becoming less and less tolerant of failures of engineered struc-
tures, including disasters brought about by natural phenomena affecting developed areas.
Engineers tend to get blamed for their actions or inactions. There is a pressure for increased
accountability and more transparency. Practitioners can hardly hide behind ‘expert judge-
ment’ or esoteric explanations anymore. Blind public conﬁdence in ‘experts’ is gradually
being replaced by a sense of suspicion: ‘It should have been foreseen!’
Balancing all those risk perceptions
As we recognized previously, so many people, so many different risk perceptions.
Is it possible to acknowledge and consider all these different risk perceptions in
our post-modern society?
Everything surrounding us, our chair, desk, ofﬁce, house, food and drinks, is
the accumulated result of the work of lots of generations of people. Since most
of us are not full-time hunters or farmers anymore, our lives depend highly on
the activities of other people. Similarly, there is an inevitable interdependency
between construction and society. Why is it that so many construction projects
are controversial in their society?
Externalities, particularly, can have a large impact on the public’s perception of
construction projects. This term ‘externality’ is typically encountered in textbooks
about economics and means third-party effects of certain activities in the market
(Mulhearn and Vane, 1999). This can involve costs incurred or beneﬁts received
by other members of society than the owners and providers of a project. Many
construction projects are controversial because they affect individuals and groups
of people in an adverse way, while their externalities have not been explained,
communicated and reduced in an acceptable way to their stakeholders. Box 6.8
presents how externalities may inﬂuence a project.
Independent of the outcome of the additional study of Box 6.8, it shows how
the conﬂict model between the client and representatives of the public has been
transformed towards a cooperation type of model, by the power of a hunger strike
of one individual.
Obviously, the interests of individuals and groups of people should be bal-
anced with the interests of society as a whole. If we consider each and every
individual interest too seriously, most construction projects will never leave the
drawing board. On the other hand, when it comes to risk and risk perception in a
(post-)modern society, the concerns of its individual members deserve to be taken
seriously. Blending all these different risk perceptions to arrive at a successful con-
struction project, as perceived by a maximum number of different stakeholders,
is the ultimate challenge for any project manager.

Clients, society and risk
119
Box 6.8
The impact of externalities on public risk perception in South Korea
One of the numerous examples of the effects of externalities caused by construc-
tion projects on the public is provided a 13 km railway tunnel under Mount
Cheonseong, some 400 km south of the capital Seoul in South Korea. Envir-
onmental pressure groups cited more than 30 protected species and plants at
serious risk of disappearance by the tunnel construction. Their perception was
at odds with the Ministry of Environment which conducted studies showing
out that no endangered species lived on that mountain. Nevertheless, for a
48-year-old Buddhist nun there was ample reason to start a 100-day hunger
strike, which stopped the entire construction process of the tunnel. A joint
committee of government ofﬁcials and environmental experts carried out a
three-month study to bring the parties together and arrive at a shared risk
perception of the environment (NN, 2005).
How do we have to deal with this variety in risk perceptions within the com-
plex social structures that form our societies? One of the ways out is involving all
stakeholders, including public representatives, as early as possible in the entire
construction process. An open communication about risk with all of these stake-
holders should be considered as a pre-condition, in order to make them interested
and involved in the project of concern. The stakeholders will acknowledge that
their interests are valued and balanced with the interests of other stakeholders.
The Australian community of Pittwater demonstrates an enlightened example of
structured public involvement in geotechnical risk management, as presented in
Box 6.9.
Box 6.9
Public involvement in ground risk management – the Australian way
Like many local communities today, the Council of Pittwater in Australia
operates a website with all kinds of information about their community ser-
vices. Remarkably, it includes the Interim Geotechnical Risk Management Policy for
Pittwater – Council Policy No 144. This provides a risk management approach for
property affected, particularly by landslides, within the Pittwater Local Gov-
ernment Area. Its criteria are based upon the guidelines, as established by the
Australian Geomechanics Society (2000). In addition to the policy, a number of
forms can be downloaded, such as the Checklist of Requirements for Geotech-
nical Risk Management Report for Development Application. Those readers
interested can visit the website: www.pittwaterlga.com.au.

120
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Another necessity for appraising and acting on society’s variety of risk
perceptions is ﬂexibility, which allows for project adaptations during the entire
construction process. Too often, at least in a highly regulated and densely
populated country such as The Netherlands, construction projects are completely
cast-in-concrete in their early development stage. Attractive opportunities and
alternative solutions typically emerge at unexpected moments, sometime during
the realization of the project. These opportunities may satisfy one or more stake-
holders and serve society as a whole, but often still remain unused (Versteegen
and van Staveren, 2004).
Society, construction and post-modern ground
conditions
In the world of ground conditions, the post-modern view is much older than
in the social sciences. In fact, since its very early beginning, ground engineering
and its related disciplines combine facts and vision, objective ground data and
subjective interpretation, to provide optimum ground-related solutions for con-
struction projects. The ultimate and one-dimensional reality of ground conditions
is non-existent and did never exist either.
Depending on the anticipated use of the ground and the perceptions of the
geologists and engineers involved, each ground interpretation includes a largely
subjective assessment, as we have discussed thoroughly before.
This inherent subjectivity aligns with our post-modern society and should not
be a problem, so long as we are aware of this subjectivity. This awareness may,
however, be underdeveloped because today’s professionals, particularly engin-
eers, are usually trained to apply technical rationality (Blockley and Godfrey, 2000).
Schon (1983) deﬁned technical rationality as a speciﬁc type of problem solving,
which is based on the technical application of scientiﬁc theory. The prevailing
education in our societies is largely based upon this principle, because it proved
to be successful for the hard system type of problems that are independent from
the observer. The common scientiﬁc laws apply to these problems, such as repeat-
ability under equally controlled conditions. These hard system problems can be
effectively solved by using analytical formulas that provide one deterministic out-
come, according to the outdated modern worldview. However, most problems
within construction projects are not independent from the observer, particularly
when the observer is the project’s end-user.
In many projects purely technical solutions, according to sound technical
rationality, do only give suboptimum solutions for the whole project, despite the
brilliance of the solution from a technical point of view. This technical oriented
solution will not serve the entire project and its public stakeholders, because
relevant non-technical factors from psychological, sociological, political or cultural

Clients, society and risk
121
origin are neglected. This situation explains a lot of communication problems
between technicians and the remaining members of society.
In order to deal with these situations, Schon developed the so-called reﬂect-
ive practice (Blockley and Godfrey, 2000; Schon 1983). It is based on what works
in practice rather than what is considered as the ultimate scientiﬁc truth. While
science is truth oriented, engineering is primarily goal related. Science deals with the
absolute truth, while engineering deals with the relative and context dependent
truth. In this view, the character of science is modern, while engineering has
post-modern features. The reﬂective practice is based on the dependability of
information to its context, rather than on objective truth and precision only, which
makes it remarkably suitable to the post-modern worldview on ground condi-
tions and construction. According to the reﬂective practice approach, any major
project decision needs judgement from several (public) stakeholder perspectives.
Additionally, any expected and required result by the stakeholders should be an
integral part of this judgement. Therefore, ideally, for any construction project
the reﬂective approach should be added to the conventional scientiﬁc approach,
in order to become successfully embedded in society. Awareness of the large
subjectivity within the construction practice, together with the recognition of the
limitations of the technological approach to problems, will arm us to deal with
the post-modern characteristics of construction in general and ground conditions
in particular. As a consequence of this inherent subjectivity, success in engineer-
ing and construction is much more difﬁcult to measure than success in science,
particularly for the non-expert public in society. This may be an explanation why
so many construction projects are rather controversial in their societies. Box 6.10
presents an example.
However, it is not all moaning and misery with construction in society. Technic-
ally complex construction projects can also be appraised as successful by public
stakeholders, as demonstrated by the case in Box 6.11.
These measures of the New York Transportation Authority are comparable to
those of the Amsterdam City Authorities in The Netherlands for the North-South
Line Underground Project. Together with a lot of public communication, many
risk remediation measures have already been taken in the very early stages of
this mega-project. One example is operating one of the world’s largest monitoring
programmes ever, in order to control any deformations of the existing buildings
during the preparations and actual construction of the underground metro line.
These latter two examples demonstrate a large public participation already in
the early project stages, in fact by the application of some sort of reﬂective practice.
Within these mega-projects the externalities of these projects have been seriously
considered and managed. It is our challenge to provide similar approaches to the
many smaller construction projects. If we succeed, it will give a major positive
boost to the reputation of construction within society to arrive at a reputation it
deserves.

122
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 6.10
How a technically successful project is perceived as disastrous
The Dutch Betuwe railway project, running from the port of Rotterdam to
Germany, can be considered a success story from a technical point of view.
Abundant ground-related risk was effectively reduced and construction optim-
izations were realized by innovative approaches and techniques. One of the pro-
ject’s construction consortia, constructing the so-called Sliedrecht–Gorinchem
part, saved some 25 million euros within an innovative partnering agreement
with the client. These savings were shared between the partners and part of it
ﬂowed back to the government.
However, from a macro-economic perspective the Betuwe railway project is
not remotely considered as a success within society. Some may even use the
term ‘disastrous’ from this view point. The operator of the Betuwe route, which
starts operation in 2007, expects to operate at break-even level at the earliest
in 2012. Until that year, the government should subsidize the railway with 20
million euros per year (Schaberg, 2005). Indeed, this amount is approaching the
above indicated total savings of the Sliedrecht–Gorinchem part of the railway.
Due to this huge macro-economic risk of the government, which is clearly
outside the circle of inﬂuence of the project consortia, the Betuwe route gained
a doubtful reputation from a large part of the Dutch public and politicians.
This is a rather sad appendix of a technical success story. Like risk, success is
also apparently a matter of perception.
Towards creative construction
The economist, Joseph Schumpeter, introduced the term creative destruction.
According to Schumpeter, innovation is the central component of competition and
the driving force of the evolution of any industry and if these innovations occur
at high pace, entire industries can be destructed (Grant, 1998). We will obviously
not serve our society by destruction, our task is to construct.
Let us therefore move from creative destruction towards creative construc-
tion. Can we realize a creative construction industry? This question was raised by
Annemieke Roobeek, professor at Nyenrode Business School and change man-
agement consultant, during a workshop in the summer of 2005. Can we give
ground engineering and construction some more attractive appeal in our societ-
ies? Design clearly demands a lot of creativity, with an important role for the
architect. Construction requires much creativity as well, not least because of the
inherently uncertain ground conditions. However, until now, the construction
industry has not yet been widely recognized as a member of the select group of
creative industries. Are we perhaps too much down to earth?

Clients, society and risk
123
Box 6.11
How a technically complex project is perceived as successful
The East Side Access Project in New York City is possibly the largest trans-
portation project undertaken ever, at least in the city of New York. This some
6300 million US dollars project was initiated by the New York Transportation
Authority and will connect Long Island with the East Side of Manhattan in
2012. Geotechnical considerations are a key factor towards the success of this
mega project, as well as the communication of its risks with the public of New
York (Munfah et al., 2004).
In this project due attention has been paid to all types of environmental
issues by extensive coordination with the project’s stakeholders and the pub-
lic. The authorities are fully aware of the fact that a positive public opinion,
together with approval of the various affected citizen groups, will signiﬁcantly
contribute to the success of the project.
Therefore, since the earliest project stages, the concerns of these groups have
been recognized and tried to be solved by reaching consensus, which can be
characterized as operating the cooperation model. Typical concerns are disrup-
tion to business activities and nuisance by construction noise, dust, pollutants,
and vibrations. An extensive public outreach programme has been effectuated
already in the design phase of the project, for coping with these issues. This
programme will be continued during construction.
In this respect I cite Barends (2005): ‘We must explain to decision makers the
uncertainty in geotechnics and raise awareness of the social and economical bene-
ﬁts that derive from risk reduction.’ If we are able to blend the application of
risk management with innovations, then we may be able to deliver true value to
our societies by our construction activities. These innovations can be of various
types, such as innovative products, innovative processes and particularly innov-
ative people who make it happen. Only this type of creative construction will be
able to deal with all those different risk perceptions.
Summary
The combination of clients, society and risk creates numerous different perceptions
of any construction project. These different perceptions are caused by the variety
of interests of the many project stakeholders in our societies.
Often, the risk perceptions and underlying interests of clients remain hidden.
It appears to be difﬁcult not to play the ostrich game with clients without losing
them. There are many competitors who do want to play this game of a mutual

124
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
and conscious denial of risk. To avoid this unfavourable game, we should learn
to know about the risk tolerances of our clients.
Differences in (risk) perception have been demonstrated by an example of a
contractor’s perception of the client and a client’s perception of the contractor.
Risk management may serves as a vehicle to discuss these differences and it may
even facilitate a shared understanding of different interests.
Public and private clients have been distinguished, as both have their differ-
ent risk perceptions. Contrary to private clients, their public equivalents do not
normally have direct income from their project investment. One of their main
concerns is to stay within their budgets and many of them use selection on lowest
price in their procurement practices, in spite of its adverse effects on risk trans-
parency. Private clients tend to acknowledge the relationship between price and
quality, because they need to generate income, directly or indirectly, from their
investment in construction. This serves as a basis for life cycle costing and the
application of thorough risk management.
Two fundamentally different options of working with clients have been
appraised: confrontation (war) or cooperation (peace). The ﬁrst is still common prac-
tice, the latter is promising, yet difﬁcult to apply in practice as well. Sharing of
perceptions and beneﬁts is essential for successful cooperation with a minimum
of conﬂicts.
The members of our societies form the end-users of construction projects. Often
the public is the client, or at least stakeholder, of our direct clients. Over the years,
our societies transformed from modern to post-modern, in which perceptions in
general and risk perceptions in particular became highly subjective, diverse, frag-
mented, and dynamic in time. Balancing all these different risk perceptions, while
including the effects of the construction’s unavoidable externalities, is the ulti-
mate challenge for successful and widely accepted construction projects. Creative
construction, by combining the beneﬁts of innovation and risk management, may
lead to the highly desired construction results which serve both our clients and
society as a whole.

PART THREE
The process factor in ground
risk management


7
The GeoQ risk management
process
Introduction
This chapter provides the bridge from the mainly conceptual thinking about the
GeoQ concept in the previous chapters towards the practical application of GeoQ
process in the forthcoming chapters. It introduces the application of the GeoQ
process in our day-to-day construction projects. The key importance of the people
factor has been highlighted in the three previous chapters. It is therefore suggested
to consider for a while at this moment the following questions, with regard to
your own role and those of your team members, client and other stakeholders in
your current or next construction project:
1
Are they motivated to make all foreseeable ground-related risks transparent?
2
Are they willing to identify all foreseeable ground-related risks?
3
Are they willing to classify all foreseeable ground-related risks?
4
Are they willing to allocate each identiﬁed and classiﬁed ground-related risk to
one or more of the parties involved?
If you expect a loud and clear yes on these questions, by each of the persons and
parties involved, a giant step forward has been made in the acceptance of ground
risk management in the project. If not, some more work has to be done further
to convince those still somewhat reluctant persons and parties about the need for
risk management.
Anyhow, after this intermezzo we are able to proceed with this chapter about
the GeoQ risk management process. First, six GeoQ steps are introduced and
explained. These will be further explored in depth in the following chapters. Next,

128
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
six GeoQ phases are presented, in which these GeoQ steps have to be made. Each
of the chapters 8 through to 13 is dedicated to one of these subsequent project
phases. Embedding the GeoQ process within the project organization forms the
last part of this chapter, which ends with a summary.
The six GeoQ steps
Six general steps of the GeoQ process provide a conventional risk management
procedure that is applicable for any engineering and construction project, big or
small, anywhere in the world in any type of ground conditions.
Project
Information 
Risk
Identification 
Risk
Clasification 
Risk
Remediation 
Risk
Evaluation
Risk
Mobilisation
Project
Phase A 
Project
Phase B 
Figure 7.1: The six cyclic GeoQ steps.
It starts with gathering
of
project
information,
to
provide clarity about the
project objectives. Based on
this information, risks are
successively identiﬁed and
classiﬁed: what are the fore-
seeable risks and how ser-
ious are these risks? Then
risk remediation measures are
selected and implemented,
which may require a ser-
ious analysis and even a
further breakdown of the
already identiﬁed and clas-
siﬁed risks. After the imple-
mentation
of
these
risk
remediating measures fol-
lows risk evaluation of the
remaining or residual risks.
Finally,
all
precious
risk
information of the previous
steps is stored in a risk
register and mobilized to the
next phase of the project.
Figure 7.1 present these six steps of the GeoQ process from phase A towards
phase B in a construction project. Phase A can reﬂect the design while phase B
represents the construction phase.
As stated, for instance, by Macpherson (2001), the initial risk assessment should
ﬂow into a continuous risk management programme. Therefore, ideally, these six

The GeoQ risk management process
129
steps should be repeated in every following project phase. This will provide a
cyclic process that facilitates management of the dynamic character of most risks.
Gathering project information
The GeoQ process starts with the gathering of all relevant project information, in
order to provide clarity about the project objectives. We earlier deﬁned risks
Project Information 
Hard
Factual
Objective 
Soft
Interpretative
Subjective
General:
- type of project
- function
- specifications 
Ground-Specific:
- ground
- groundwater
- pollution
- man-made obstructions 
General:
- public opinion
- client’s opinion 
Ground-Specific:
- design team experience
- construction team experience
- expert opinions 
Hard project objectives:
- budget
- planning
- safety standards
- quality standards 
Soft project objectives:
- perceptions
- interests
- expectations
- reputation
RISK TOLERANCE OF:
- individuals
- teams
- clients
- public 
Figure 7.2: From project information to risk tolerance.
as obstructions that prevent
meeting objectives. Therefore,
the objectives to be realized
need to become crystal clear in
this ﬁrst step, which serves as
basis and context for the fol-
lowing GeoQ steps. We must
know the objectives of our pro-
ject, together with their main
characteristics, to be able to
manage the project’s risks of
not realizing them.
As
we
encountered
in
Chapter 2, any hard technical
system
is
embedded
in
its
environment, which forms a
soft system (Blockley and God-
frey, 2000). Therefore, by fol-
lowing the systems approach,
we can distinguish two main
types of project information:
1
Hard
systems
informa-
tion: factual and objective
information
2
Soft systems information:
interpretative and subject-
ive information.
Figure 7.2 presents a break-
down of both types of inform-
ation into general and ground-speciﬁc information. Ideally, all of this information
serves as a basis for the hard and soft project objectives. In other words, the pre-set
hard and soft objectives need the support of the available project information, in

130
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
order to be realistic and achievable. These project objectives, both the hard and the
soft ones, will inﬂuence the risk tolerance of the project’s stakeholders, because
the overall risk of any project is not meeting its objectives.
Project speciﬁcations can typically be considered as hard and general inform-
ation. With regard to ground conditions, the maximum allowable differential
settlement is a typical example. Hard and ground-speciﬁc information can be sub-
divided in factual ground data, factual groundwater data, factual environmental
data and factual data about man-made obstructions in the ground. Maps, boring
logs and laboratory test results are sources of this type of project information.
Obviously, the availability of this factual information is highly dependent upon
the type and the phase of the project. The accumulated hard project data are very
useful to appraise the hard and quantitative project objectives, in terms of budget,
planning, as well as any pre-set safety and quality standards.
Also the soft project information can be subdivided into general and ground-
speciﬁc information. Public opinion can be considered a sort of soft and general
project data, as presented in Box 7.1.
Box 7.1
Soft project information can be expressed loudly
When a new underground metro-line was planned in the city centre of
Amsterdam in the mid-1990s, a lot of frustration about the nuisance of the
previous underground metro project surfaced in the local press in Amsterdam.
Many inhabitants feared living in a large construction pit for a number of
years, as they experienced before. These soft and subjective, but very loudly
expressed, signals were taken seriously by the local authorities. This resulted in
the design of a mainly bored tunnel, instead of a cut-and-cover type, which will
minimize the nuisance for a maximum of inhabitants of the city centre during
the tunnel construction.
One example of a source of soft and ground-speciﬁc information is the experi-
ence of a geotechnical project team with the design of a diaphragm wall in a city
centre. Another design team may have other experiences. Like the hard project
data determine the feasibility of the hard project objectives, the soft project data
are of great help to get insight in the soft project objectives of the stakeholders.
The latter may include factors like perceptions, interests, expectations and repu-
tation. The legacy of politicians, by the realization of a major construction project,
is an example of a soft project objective. While the hard project objectives are
measurable, their soft equivalents inherently remain a little diffuse and fuzzy.
The combination of hard and soft objectives provides an indication for the risk
tolerance of the project’s stakeholders and will markedly inﬂuence the next steps

The GeoQ risk management process
131
of the GeoQ process. Matching these accumulated project objectives with the risk
tolerances of its stakeholders is the key to a successful project. Armed with these
insights, we are now prepared to take the next step: identifying risks.
Identifying risks
Risk Identification 
Literature study 
Risk questionnaires 
Risk interviews 
Risk brainstorm sessions 
Scenario analysis 
Risk registers 
Risk checklists 
Figure 7.3: Risk identiﬁcation methods.
Which risks can we foresee for the con-
struction project, in the current and fol-
lowing project stages? Risk identiﬁcation
is the second step in the GeoQ pro-
cess.
It
is
an
important
step
and,
according to Baya et al. (1997), the
beneﬁts of risk identiﬁcation are even
more important than the next steps of
risk classiﬁcation and risk remediation.
This may be caused by the favour-
able effects of making the unforeseen
foreseen, the unspoken spoken and the
unwritten written during the process of
risk identiﬁcation. Anything foreseeable
that might obstruct the project object-
ives gets a name and identity by calling
it a risk, such as groundwater pollu-
tion of a site for domestic housing, rock-
slides from a steep slope above a new
road and excessive settlements of a rail-
road embankment on soft soil.
However, often the largest damage
unfortunately results from the unfore-
seen risk, rather than from a wrong ana-
lysis of the foreseen risk (CUR, 1997). In
the mean time, we simply have to accept
that the unforeseeable, by deﬁnition,
always remains unforeseen. In spite of
these facts of life, our challenge remains
to arrive at a maximum number of fore-
seeable risks and a number of different tools can assist us. If we combine these
different tools with as many as economically affordable different risk perceptions,
we have done what we reasonably can do and at least the most urgent foreseeable
risk will become identiﬁed. Figure 7.3 presents a number of widely used risk
identiﬁcation methods or tools that have been derived from a literature research

132
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
by Viehöfer (2002). The tool of scenario analysis, as suggested for instance by Bles
(2003) and Altabba et al. (2004), has been added in Figure 7.3.
The literature study as a tool for risk identiﬁcation probably does not need much
more explanation. Numerous textbooks and papers are available worldwide about
all types of ground-related issues for engineering and construction activities.
Scenario analysis provides a look into the future, by asking the question what if
(Thompson, 1997). This type of analysis has been derived from scenario planning
that is widely used in the ﬁeld of strategic management. In the 1960s, the Royal
Dutch - Shell group of companies pioneered with multiple scenario development
as a basis for their long-term planning (Grant, 1998). It proved successful in the
oil and gas industry with its riskful, very long-term and huge investments. In the
view of Altabba et al. (2004) scenario analysis requires a detailed description of
the project. This forces thinking through the entire project in an early stage by
looking towards different types of future. Baya et al. (1997) suggest considering
the two extremes, the dream and the doom scenario. It is likely that reality will
be encountered somewhere in between. Normally, scenario analysis results in a
wealth of identiﬁed risks and opportunities. It has proven to be useful to continue
scenario analysis beyond the step of risk identiﬁcation, to support risk classiﬁcation
and to select suitable risk remediation measures.
Risk registers and risk checklists are documents with perceived or even occurred
risks and their appropriate remediating actions. Clayton (2001) deﬁnes the ﬁle
where risk information is stored as a risk register. Apart from a risk description, it
usually contains information about the probability of occurrence of the risk and
expected risk effects, as well as the ownership of the risk and the risk remediating
actions planned or already taken. The British Tunnelling Society (2003) deﬁnes the
risk register as a formalized record of risks and the primary means for recording
and monitoring the risk management process. Doubtless, the project-speciﬁc risk
register must be established right from the start of the GeoQ process. Spreadsheets
or more advanced software packages can be used to store all information digitally.
The book, Managing Geotechnical Risk by Clayton (2001), includes a number of risk
registers of leading British construction companies.
Risk checklists are simply lists with a number of foreseeable risks, often related
to a particular object. For instance, checklists may be available about the risks
associated with hard rock tunnelling, clean-up operations of polluted sites or
excavations in soft soil.
Companies or governments may start to create their own risk registers and
checklists. It may also become a task of the professional institutions or national
institutes. Both risk registers and checklists are helpful during the process of
risk identiﬁcation, as they include the learning effects of previous projects. Risk
registers and checklists can also be used in the next steps of risk classiﬁcation and
risk remediation, as many of them may include risk classiﬁcation and risk control

The GeoQ risk management process
133
information as well. However, as a warning signal, we have to stay aware of
the very project- and site-speciﬁc character of risk management. While using risk
registers and checklists, independent thinking and judgement remains of utmost
importance.
Risk interviews may include individual or small groups of experts. Existing and
well-known interview techniques can be used to arrive at a maximum of informa-
tion. So-called open questions, which start with words like why, what and how can
be interchanged with closed questions, which give only answers by yes and no.
Many individuals tend to give more information when interviewed on their own
than when interviewed in groups. The more different the interviewed people are,
the more different their risk perceptions are likely to be, which supports the idea
of interviewing both very experienced and less experienced experts with differ-
ent educational and even cultural backgrounds. Risk interviews can be expanded
towards the next GeoQ steps, to obtain information about the risk classiﬁcation
as well.
Risk questionnaires can be used to obtain a lot of identiﬁed risks in a structured
way from a lot of different experts. Today’s electronic mail works very efﬁciently to
reach many experts all over the world with just a few mouse-clicks. As suggested
by Keizer et al. (2001), risk questionnaires can be derived from the results of the
previously discussed risk interviews. In this approach, risk questionnaires will
challenge the experts to add new foreseeable risks of their own experiences. Risk
questionnaires can also be applied in the next GeoQ step of risk classiﬁcation or
further.
Groups of people identify risks, based upon a mixture of their individual per-
ceptions and experiences, in risk brainstorm sessions. A speciﬁc type is the so-called
Potential Problem Analysis (PPA), with a focus on problem identiﬁcation and asso-
ciated risks (Versluis, 1995). These brainstorm groups may only involve ground
experts or have a more multidisciplinary character. Which kind of groups are
likely to be most effective depends on the phase and the type of the project of con-
cern. Obviously, these brainstorm sessions can build further on the risks already
raised in individual interviews and risk questionnaires. These brainstorm sessions
can be facilitated by software and so-called Electronic Board Room sessions (EBR).
They can be also used to classify risks and to select risk remediation measures.
After considering all these risk identiﬁcation tools one reasonable question
remains: which tools do we need to select for our speciﬁc ground engineering
and construction project? All that can be said is: it depends. A lot of factors, such
as the type, size and phase of the project, the anticipated ground conditions, the
available budget and time, and the anticipated risk tolerance of the client and other
stakeholders determine which combination of risk identiﬁcation tools provides
the best investment. Using a number of the presented risk identiﬁcation tools will
reveal that risk identiﬁcation is in fact a creative process. It is driven by both

134
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
hard and soft information from the people involved. Besides experience, which is
already a quite subjective factor, also fuzzy aspects such as individual intuition
and gut feeling play their (unconscious) role. This may result in a huge number
of identiﬁed risks of different types and with totally different characteristics.
Examples are the earlier introduced pure risks, speculative risks, information risks
and interpretation risks.
A common pitfall is to get totally drowned in an overﬂow of risks at the end of
the identiﬁcation process. If for a particular construction project several hundreds
of risks have been identiﬁed, which is not uncommon, there is a reasonable chance
that the risk management process simply stops, because the people involved
cannot oversee and handle it. A simple solution to keep at least some structure
during the risk identiﬁcation process is to store each identiﬁed risk in a certain
risk group. All ground-related risks can for instance be grouped as geotechnical
risks, geohydrological risks, environmental risks and man-made obstruction risks.
Another solution to avoid risk-drowning is to apply the concept of the risk ﬁlter,
before starting the risk identiﬁcation process. By risk ﬁltering, the involved parties
agree to exclude certain risk types from the risk identiﬁcation process. Obviously,
these types of risks have to be covered by the competencies of the parties involved,
such as sound quality control. For instance, if a piling contractor with a proven
track-record and a reliable quality control system will be selected, the risk of failure
of a cast-in-place concrete pile may be left out of the risk identiﬁcation process.
The application of risk ﬁltering requires thorough thinking about the construction
process in an early stage. In my opinion, this kind of strategic thinking about
ground risk management is still in its early development phase. Therefore, in case
of any doubt it is advisable to widen the meshes of the risk ﬁlter, to minimize the
chance of overlooking any relevant risks.
Classifying risk
How serious are our identiﬁed risks? All identiﬁed risks are classiﬁed during
the next step of the GeoQ process. Risk seriousness can be expressed in the
likelihood or probability of occurrence and the likely effect or consequences of the
risk. Therefore, often risks are classiﬁed in terms of probability and consequences.
Figure 7.4 presents an overview of a number of widely applied risk classiﬁcation
methods.
Viehöfer (2002) proposes three methods for risk classiﬁcation: qualitative, semi-
qualitative and quantitative risk classiﬁcation (see Figure 7.4). Qualitative risk clas-
siﬁcation is simply ranking risks in the anticipated order of seriousness. A little
more advanced is classifying each risk with terms as high or low, or symbols like
+ or −. Both the probability and the consequence of each risk can be classiﬁed in
this fast, easy and straightforward method.

The GeoQ risk management process
135
Semi-qualitative or semi-quantitative methods for risk classiﬁcation give both the
probability and consequence of a risk a score. These may range from 1 to 3 or
from 1 to 5. Multiplying the probability score by the consequence score of that
risk gives the risk severity. Risk scores from 1 to 3 will give a minimum score of
1 (very low risk) and a maximum score of 9 (very high risk).
Risk Classification 
Qualitative methods
(subjective)
 - ranking of risks
 - classification by words or numbers  
Quantitative methods
(objective and subjective)
- probabilities expressed in %
- consequences expressed in
  quantities of costs and time   
Semi – qualitative methods
(subjective)
- scores of probabilities
- scores of consequences  
Figure 7.4: Risk classiﬁcation methods.
Smallman (1999) suggests
a
more
advanced
semi-
qualitative risk classiﬁcation
method. He subdivides the
probability
and
the
con-
sequences of a risk into a
number of factors, each with
an individual score. The risk
probabilities are driven by
factors such as the availabil-
ity of knowledge about the
risk and the way the risk
occurs, suddenly or gradu-
ally.
Also
a
consequence
break-down can be made,
in terms of cost and time.
This method provides addi-
tional insight into the nature
of the risk, which supports
developing suitable remedi-
ating measures later in the
risk management process.
Finally,
quantitative
risk
classiﬁcation estimates prob-
abilities and consequences in measurable ﬁgures. While risk probabilities are
expressed in a clear percentage risk, consequences are quantiﬁed in terms of
costs and time. Engineers and economists tend to like this approach because it
allows them to calculate risk with these ﬁgures. However, there are drawbacks.
First, if possible at all, obtaining ﬁgures with an acceptable degree of accuracy is
mostly expensive and time consuming within ground engineering and construc-
tion. Second, if we have them, these highly desired ﬁgures are not as accurate as
we may assume because they often hide a lot of subjective judgement.
The three subsequently presented methods for risk classiﬁcation increase in
complexity and detail. The required investment in time and cost rises accord-
ingly. Starting any risk classiﬁcation qualitatively or semi-qualitatively is therefore

136
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
normally recommended. If required, some speciﬁc risks can be classiﬁed in greater
detail by quantitative assessment.
Altabba et al. (2004) present a slightly different approach in their subjective and
objective risk classiﬁcation. The subjective probability and effect estimate is based
on experience and forecasting by experts, which is closely related to the qualitat-
ive and semi-qualitative approach. Their objective probability and effect estimate
is based on statistical records, such as relative frequency records, which aligns
with the presented quantitative approach. I have mentioned already the common
problem of a lack of sufﬁcient data to allow for statistically sound and objective
estimates of probabilities and consequences. However, perhaps we do not need
to be too worried about this. As argued by Toft (1993, 1996), Waring (1996) and
Waring and Glendon (1998), these Quantiﬁed Risk Assessments (QRA) may create a
false and reduced perception of the real world situation. In reality, risk behaviour
is actually much more complex than can be derived from technical knowledge
only. QRA might deﬁnitely help to judge ground-related risk, as advocated by Ho
et al. (2001), however, so long as it is not the sole source for any risk remediation
measure. To conclude, for the indicated reasons, I will particularly use the qualitat-
ive and semi-qualitative risk classiﬁcation methods in the GeoQ risk management
process.
Remediating risk
After gathering hard and soft project information, identifying risks and classifying
them as well, this risk analysis needs transformation into action. We have to do
something, at least with the serious risks. This next GeoQ step concerns the
selection and application of risk remediation measures.
However, before jumping into action, we often need some more structure in
the freshly identiﬁed and classiﬁed risks. In addition, a further breakdown and
analysis of the risks of serious concern are normally required, before we can select
the most appropriate risk remediation measures for them. Figure 7.5 presents
these three sub-steps.
Risk Structuring 
Risk Analysis 
Risk Remediation
Figure 7.5: From structuring via analysis to remediation.
Contrary to the previous
open-minded
and
rather
subjective processes of risk
identiﬁcation and classiﬁc-
ation, risk structuring and
risk
analysis
are
partic-
ularly
rational
processes.
Figure 7.6 presents a number of methods for structuring risks that proved to be
suitable in ground engineering and construction practices.

The GeoQ risk management process
137
Risk Structuring 
Risk types
- pure and speculative risks
- information and interpretation risks
- risks per subsystem
- risks per project phase  
Risk controllability
- Who can control the entire risk?
- Who can only control the risk cause?
- Who can only control the risk effect? 
Figure 7.6: Risk structuring methods.
The
easiest
way
of
risk
structuring
is
to
group them into certain
risk types. To get insight
into their similarities and
differences
it
is
advis-
able to group risks in
more than one way. In
Figure 7.6 we can recog-
nize the pure and specu-
lative risk types, as well as
the information and inter-
pretation risks. Grouping
risks according to the sub-
systems of a project, such
as the risks of embank-
ments and building pits,
is another widely used
method. Risks are often
also related to the process phase in which they may occur. However, care should
be taken for the risk on the interfaces of the subsystems and project phases.
Another risk structuring method distinguishes risks by their controllability.
Keizer et al. (2001) even add the ability to inﬂuence or control a risk as the third
main risk characteristic to risk likelihood and risk effect. As indicated by many
authors, including Smith (1996), one of the general rules within risk management
is that a risk should be the responsibility of the party who is best able to control
that particular risk. Useful additional risk structuring is therefore provided by
answering the three questions, as presented in Figure 7.6. Based on risk control-
lability, the optimum allocation of the risk may arise. If it is clear which party is,
at least partly, able to control a risk, then it is also clear which party should be
able to select and implement the most effective risk remediation measures.
Obviously, insight into risk controllability also helps to select the optimum
risk remediation measure. However, an almost inevitable step in between risk
structuring and risk remediation, particularly for the major risks, concerns the
analysis of the risk cause and effect relationships. Nor do most risks occur because
of one single cause, neither do they occasionally have one single effect and often
risks are accelerated by a number of factors. Figure 7.7 shows four proven and
widely applied methods for detailed risk analysis.
The Fault tree analysis (FTA) is a schematic representation of any causes which
can result in a pre-deﬁned uncertain event or risk. In other words, FTA aims to
identify all possible causes that may contribute to a particular risk. For instance,

138
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Risk Analysis
(cause and effect relationships)  
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA)
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA)
Failure Mode, Effect and Criticality Analysis (FMECA)
Multiple Risk Causation (MRC)
Figure 7.7: Risk analysis methods.
the risk of a rock fall at the foot of a mountainous rock slope can be divided into a
set of conditions that ultimately determines the occurrence of the rock fall. Aspects
such as the discontinuity spacing and orientation, as well as the water pressures
in the rock mass of the slope will all have their contribution to the rock fall. FTA
is typically a top-down methodology and it represents the causation of risk.
The Failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA) can be considered as the opposite
of the FTA. This bottom-up methodology extrapolates the occurrence of a certain
event, failure or risk to its possible effects. If we return to the rock-fall risk, the
FMEA considers all possible effects when the rock fall takes place, like obstructing
a road at the foot of the slope and causing trafﬁc victims. In addition, a remote
village cannot be supplied anymore, and so on.
For reasons of completeness, I also mention the Failure mode, effect and criticality
analysis (FMECA). This extended version of FMEA assesses and rates both the
probability of failure and the severity of its effects, which explain the added
term criticality (Muhlemann et al., 1992). By building forward on the rock-fall risk
example, the FMECA assesses and rates the probability of occurrence, as well as
the severity of the effects of the rock fall. Indeed, the FMECA method approaches
closely the method of risk classiﬁcation by scoring probabilities and effects. Due
to the structured approach, the FMECA method particularly adds value in those
cases demanding a detailed analysis of failures of technical systems. The FTA,
FMEA and FMECA methods provide an in-depth insight into both the causes

The GeoQ risk management process
139
and effects of the risk of concern. In addition, these tools often identify new risks
that would remain hidden with the sole application of the previous discussed risk
identiﬁcation tools. Figure 7.8 illustrates a simpliﬁed cause and effect analysis for
the rock-fall risk example.
ROCK-FALL RISK 
Fault Tree Analysis – causes of rock-fall risk
Water pressure in
rock mass  
Discontinuity
spacing and
orientation   
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis – effects of rock-fall risk 
Town not
accessible
Road block and
traffic victims  
Figure 7.8: Combined cause and effect analysis of rock-fall
risk.
The FTA and FMEA methods
approach
analyses
one
par-
ticular risk by a detailed break
down into a number of causes
and effects. Acknowledgement
of the causation of several risks
is
another
signiﬁcant
aspect
of risk analysis, because many
risks are interrelated. This is
what I deﬁne as Multiple Risk
Causation (MRC). A major risk
event might occur where appa-
rently unrelated risks line up
in
a
risk
chain.
Shrivastava
et al. (1988) developed a risk
model
for
the
avoidance
of
industrial crises, which gives
insight into this interrelation-
ship or causation of risks. Their
risk causation framework dis-
tinguishes so-called HOT fail-
ures – Human, Organizational
or Technological failures – that
are event initiators. In addition,
they introduce so-called RIP factors, which are Regulatory, Infrastructural and
Political factors that act as event accelerators (Smallman, 1996). The human, orga-
nizational and technological failures trigger a certain risk or crisis, while the
regulatory, infrastructural and political factors accelerate and increase the risk or
crisis. Figure 7.9 applies this approach to the simpliﬁed rock-fall risk example
and illustrates how apparently very different factors may contribute to the risk of
rock-fall.
In this stage, it is of the utmost importance not to get stuck in risk analyses. We
should remember that any risk analysis, including preparatory risk structuring, is
just a means to arrive at the appropriate risk remediation measures. It is not an
objective as such, which I occasionally encounter in practice. In those cases risk
management stops when the risk analysis report is ready and issued to the client.
Let us avoid this pitfall. After a careful analysis of the structured risks, we are

140
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
“HOT” FAILURES (EVENT TRIGGERS)
Human
Organisational
Technological
Limited experience of the
engineer
No standard design check by
a senior engineer
Failing measurement of
water pressures in
discontiuities
Ultimate Risk
Slope instability by a rock-fall
Regulatory
Industry structure
Political
No regulation avaible for
rock slope design
Severe price competition with
selection on lowest price only
None
“RIP” FACORS (EVENT ACCELERATORS)
Figure 7.9: Multiple Risk Causation for a rock-fall.
well prepared to select the most appropriate risk remediation measures. It is time
for action!
Flanagan and Norman (1993) suggest a few widely used risk remediation or
risk response strategies. I add another common strategy, which is risk ignorance.
Figure 7.10 presents these risk remediation measures.
Risk retention is, in fact, just taking or accepting the risk, which may be appro-
priate for risks with a limited probability of occurrence and limited effects as
well. This retention applies also to the so-called residual risks, the remaining risks
resulting from risk reduction.
Risk reduction is concerned with either reducing one or more of the risk causes,
or one or more of the risk effects, or a combination of both. In order to select the
most suitable risk reduction method, it is useful to get an insight as to whether
the causes or the effects of the risk are dominant (de Ridder, 1998). For instance,
in the case of a differential settlement risk of a shallow foundation, risk reduction
may involve a detailed ground characterization to obtain a reliable settlement
prediction (cause reduction) in combination with the installation of vertical drains
and monitoring during construction (effect reduction). The combined application of
FTA and FMEA might be helpful in this respect.
Risk transfer or risk allocation changes only the responsibility or ownership of a
risk. Without any additional risk remediating action the risk stays the same, so
long as all factors of inﬂuence on that risk are constant as well – remember the
dynamics of risk. The risk controllability exercise may help to decide whether it is
interesting to transfer a particular risk to another party. Risk transfer to insurance
companies is common for risks with a (very) low probability of occurrence and
rather high consequences. The higher the assessed risk probability, the higher the
risk premium asked by the insurer will be.

The GeoQ risk management process
141
Risk avoidance or risk elimination is simply about getting rid of the risk, for
instance by stopping the project, or less dramatic, choosing a different design
solution. A very high differential settlement risk of part of the high-speed railway
from Amsterdam to Paris, has been eliminated by a foundation on thousands
of piles. This rather expensive but reliable settlement risk remediation solution
has been jointly agreed by the parties involved. If the foregoing options of risk
retention, risk reduction and risk transfer are not suitable at reasonable costs, then
risk avoidance is normally the remaining option. This is often the case for risks
with both a high probability and (very) serious effects.
Risk Remediation 
Risk retention 
Risk avoidance 
Risk transfer 
Risk ignorance 
Risk reduction:
- cause(s)
- effect(s)
- cause(s) and effect(s)  
Figure 7.10: Risk remediation strategies.
Finally,
risk
ignorance
should
not be an option anymore for
any reader of this book. In my
view, the considerable failure costs
in the construction industry res-
ult, to a substantial extent, from
still widely applied risk ignorance.
This ignorance is in no way sim-
ilar to risk retention because risk
ignorance neglects foreseeable risk,
either unaware or, even worse, in
full awareness. It has more to do
with the ostrich game and geo-
gambling than with responsible
engineering and construction. For
reasons of completeness, this risk
ignorance strategy needs still to be
presented.
Obviously, each potential risk
response
measure
needs
to
be
judged on feasibility, costs and
likely
effects
to
related
risks.
Unfortunately, no risk is for free.
Each type of risk reduction will
incur
a
certain
cost.
However,
interesting opportunities may arise
as well, which may save other costs and perhaps even increase some proﬁts. Selec-
tion of the most suitable risk remediation measures is a tedious and complicated
task, which should preferably be timely executed by teams rather than individuals,
to avoid tunnel visions and over-biased perceptions. Relative outsiders may also
be very helpful to put an independent and fresh eye on any proposed risk mit-
igation measure. Abundant examples of the implementation of risk remediation

142
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
measures are provided in the forthcoming chapters. It allows us to proceed with
the process of evaluation of these measures.
Evaluating risk
After the appropriate risk remediation actions have been taken, the next and ﬁfth
GeoQ step can be made, which involves evaluation of the resulting risk proﬁle. This
step’s objective is verifying whether the remaining risk proﬁle is acceptable to the
responsible and affected (third) parties, or not. In other words, the risk response made
needs to be checked and balanced with the risk tolerance of the affected parties.
As indicated earlier in Chapter 4 through to Chapter 6, risk tolerance depends
highly on risk perception and is dynamic as well. The risk evaluation, therefore,
involves two sub-steps. The ﬁrst is a process check of the risk management pro-
cedure applied so far. Have all identiﬁed risks indeed been classiﬁed? Have all
classiﬁed risks indeed been remediated in some way or another? Are there any
agreed remediation measures not yet executed?
Risk Evaluation 
Risk identification
- are all identified risks classified?  
Risk remediation
- are all risk remediation measures performed?
- are all residual risks as expected?
- are there any signs of risk ignorance?  
Risk classification
- are all classified risks remediated?  
Figure 7.11: Risk evaluation questions.
The second part of
the risk evaluation is
a careful analysis of
the (expected) results
of
the
risk
remedi-
ation
measures.
This
concerns an appraisal
of the residual risks –
the
remaining
risks
after
the
risk
mitig-
ating
measures
have
been taken. Have the
risk causes and effects
indeed been reduced
to the agreed? Regard-
ing the settlement risk
example, during this
evaluation
step
the
forecasted settlements
need to be compared
by
the
extrapolated
results of settlement monitoring results. Evidently, the larger the difference
between the initial risk and residual risk, in terms of probability and consequences,
the more effective the risk remediating measures appear to be. Some main ques-
tions that deserve an answer during the process of risk evaluation are summarized
in Figure 7.11.

The GeoQ risk management process
143
After this evaluation we will probably approach the end of the particular phase
in the construction project. We need, therefore, to prepare all risk information
ready for use in the next project phase; all relevant risk information needs to be
mobilized.
Mobilizing risk information
Finally, in the sixth and ﬁnal step of the GeoQ process, all gathered and ana-
lysed risk management information needs to be properly ﬁled for transfer to the
next project phase. The risk register has already been introduced and discussed
as a risk identiﬁcation tool. According to the British Tunnelling Society (2003),
these registers should be ‘live’ documents that are continuously reviewed and
revised where appropriate. An important moment for such a review is at the end
of a particular construction phase. All precious risk information of the preceding
GeoQ steps should be prepared, in a suitable format, to be mobilized to the next
phase of the project. I have deliberately chosen the term ‘risk mobilization’, to
highlight the necessity for moving and arrival of all relevant risk information in
the next project phase. Too often, parties are unwilling to act accordingly, par-
ticularly in the contractual phase, which is, in my opinion, a severe threat to
the overall transparency of the entire project risk management process. Further-
more, this is a waste of the money previously spent on the risk management
process.
We have to realize that by the mobilization of risk information any risk remains
untouched regarding its cause and effect, as well as the risk allocation and respons-
ibility. Only the risk information, likely by an updated version of the risk register,
will be transferred to the next project. Risk mobilization is thus no alternative to
getting rid of our risks!
The successors of our risk ﬁles will be grateful to us if they receive their desired
risk information in a decent way. Today, there are numerous approaches to
presenting risk, on paper or digitally. Again, I propose the KISS-principle here. We
should strive to keep it as simple and short as possible. In addition, we endeavour
to present all risk information as transparently as possible.
All these mobilized risk data should preferably serve as a basis in the risk
management process of the remaining project phases. Only one GeoQ risk man-
agement cycle, as has been presented in this section, will not fully optimize the
project’s risk exposure. As indicated by the British Tunnelling Society (2003), the
ALARP – As Low As Reasonable Practicable – risk level will not be reached by
risk management during only one project phase. Whether risk management is
successful or not depends largely on our ability to keep the cyclic process going
throughout the entire project.

144
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
The six GeoQ phases
The six GeoQ steps reﬂect a conventional risk management process, applicable for
any engineering and construction project, big or small, anywhere in the world in
any type of ground conditions. The GeoQ process divides any construction project
into six generic and distinct project phases. This section presents these six phases
and in each of them the GeoQ steps can be applied. That the distinguished project
phases reﬂect a conventional construction process will not bring a large surprise.
I am not aiming to be predictable, but I do want to demonstrate the smooth
inclusion of the GeoQ process within the day-to-day activities of our engineering
and construction projects. Figure 7.12 shows the six GeoQ phases.
Maintenance
Phase  
Pre-design
Phase 
Design
Phase
Contracting
Phase 
Construction
Phase  
Feasibility
Phase  
TIME
GEOQ PROCESS
Figure 7.12: The six GeoQ phases.
Figure 7.12 shows ﬁve of
the
six
steps
well-aligned.
Any construction project will,
in
some
way
or
another,
go through these phases of
feasibility, pre-design, design,
construction
and
mainten-
ance,
during
its
lifetime.
Doubtless, these phases may
have other names in various
markets and countries. For
instance, The British Tunnel-
ling Society (2003), together
with The Association of Brit-
ish
Insurers
present
four
phases in The Joint Code of Prac-
tice for Risk Management of Tun-
nel Works in the UK:
1
Project development stage – aligns with the GeoQ feasibility phase
2
Construction contract procurement stage – aligns with the GeoQ contracting
phase
3
Design stage – aligns with the GeoQ pre-design and design phases
4
Construction stage – aligns with the GeoQ construction phase.
This joint code, which is in use by insurers and re-insurers in the UK, Australia,
Canada, France, Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, Spain and the USA (Knights, 2005),
does not explicitly refer to the maintenance phase.

The GeoQ risk management process
145
The GeoQ process is entirely independent of a further breakdown in additional
project phases for large projects. A combination of certain phases, like joining
pre-design and design into one phase, is also possible within the GeoQ process.
The six GeoQ steps, however, have to be performed in each of the distinguished
project phases.
One of the six GeoQ project phases, the contracting phase, deliberately has a
different position in Figure 7.10. As mentioned earlier, in many markets segments
in various countries contracts have moved from traditional practices to Design
and Construct (D&C) contracting approaches, also referred to as Design and Build
(D&B) contracts. Parts of, or even the entire design, are embedded in the scope of
work for the contractor in this type of contract. For other projects, maintenance
and, even ﬁnance and operation, have also been included, which results in
contracts like Design, Build, Finance and Maintenance (DBFM) and Design, Build,
Finance and Operate (DBFO). Much more of these contractual aspects in connec-
tion to ground risk management is explored in Chapter 11. The deviated position
of the contracting phase in Figure 7.10 demonstrates the ﬂexibility of the GeoQ
process to any type of contract. In other words, the GeoQ process is well applic-
able to conventional construction projects, in which design is totally provided by
the engineer and the contractor just builds, as well as for all sorts of innovative
contract.
GROUND RISK
GROUND INFORMATION
feasibility
pre-design design
contracting construction maintenance
THE 6 GEOQ PHASES 
TIME
Figure 7.13: The anticipated GeoQ effect.
In
each
distinguished
project
phase,
the
GeoQ
process
aims
to
reduce
ground
risk,
as
a
result
of an increase in ground
information,
compared
with the situation without
applying the GeoQ process.
Figure
7.13
schematically
shows the anticipated GeoQ
effect.
According to Figure 7.13,
the
accumulated
ground
risks would be lower by
the application of the GeoQ
risk management process,
while the total amount of
available ground informa-
tion will be higher than in
a similar project without the
application of GeoQ. The

146
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
latter does not automatically involve higher costs for ground investigations and
related activities. Within the GeoQ process, any resources spent on the acquisition
of ground information are highly focused on the ground-related issues of real
(risk) concern, which increases its effects and efﬁciency and results in a larger
amount of information at the same costs. While these beneﬁts are demonstrated
by the case studies in Chapter 8 through to Chapter to 13, the six GeoQ phases
are brieﬂy introduced below.
The feasibility phase
This book considers the feasibility phase to be the ﬁrst phase of any construction
project. It results in a go–no-go decision about the project’s continuation. This
decision will be highly dependent upon the ﬁnancial aspects of the project in
relation to its technical feasibility. Also the regional, national or even international
political situation and economic developments may inﬂuence whether to proceed
or not. It is a widely spread misunderstanding, at least in my opinion, that risk-
driven ground information data are not relevant factors in this highly uncertain
early project stage. Even in this early project beginning ground information is
relevant, simply because any construction project literally builds on the ground
conditions. It is better to be fully aware of this in an early stage, when it is still
possible largely to change or even terminate the project.
Ground risk management in this feasibility phase depends on a number of
factors, such as the type, complexity and size, as well as the proposed location(s)
of the project. The requirements for ground risk management for a large under-
ground subway in a city centre will be quite different when compared with a
small and rather simple project in a remote area. Sometimes, it is already clear
that a tunnel has to be constructed, in other situations only a connection between
city A and city B has been speciﬁed. The main GeoQ purpose in this phase is to
provide adequate ground data that contribute to a sound go–no-go decision on
the project. Chapter 8 explores in detail the GeoQ process in the feasibility phase.
The pre-design phase
Some sort of pre-design will follow feasibility, at least when the project has proved
to be feasible. The pre-design phase normally results in one or a few general and
rough design options for the project. The subdivision between pre-design and
design is deliberately made in this book. In many projects, the client still wants to
stay in control of the ﬁrst engineering solutions and to decide upon major issues,
such as a cut-and-cover or bored tunnel, before bringing the project to the market.
During this phase several engineering solutions are considered and compared.
GeoQ is used as a risk-driven facilitator in the process of identifying the optimum
engineering solutions, in view of the anticipated ground risks and opportunities.

The GeoQ risk management process
147
The optimum solution will be selected at the end of the pre-design phase, based on
the speciﬁcations of the project, the client’s wanted risk proﬁle, and the expected
ground conditions.
Then the client will continue a more detailed design or bring the project to
the market. In the latter situation the contracting phase will be next. Chapter 9
explores in-depth the GeoQ process in the pre-design phase.
The design phase
Conventionally, design follows pre-design, either initiated by the client or per-
formed by a contractor in a design and construct type of contract. During the
design phase the selected solution is worked out in detail, in order to start con-
struction. For instance, after deciding a bored tunnel for a river crossing, this
solution will be worked out in detail and the bored tunnel design will be ready
for construction by the end of this phase.
In this book detailed design for construction is considered as part of the design
phase, while recognizing that a lot of the larger projects usually separate these two
phases. As mentioned, this will not inﬂuence the GeoQ approach, apart from the
fact that the entire GeoQ process should be performed in both phases, including
all six steps. During design and detailed design the GeoQ process provides risk-
driven engineering support, within the project speciﬁcations, the risk tolerances
of the parties involved, and the expected ground conditions.
If there is a contracting phase in between design and detailed design, implying
the contractor performs the detailed design, then it is of particular importance
contractually to allocate all ground-related risks. Any contractor deserves to start
activities with a maximum and accessible insight into the existing risk registers of
the project. By the end of the day, both the client and the contractor are expected
to beneﬁt from this type of transparent risk management. Chapter 10 explains the
GeoQ process in the design phase in more detail.
The contracting phase
Contracting follows the design phase for conventional projects. To an increasing
extent contracting takes place after the completion of pre-design or directly after
the feasibility phase. The client selects and contracts a suitable contractor, who
will realize the project. Operation and maintenance is sometimes included, for a
number of years. The result of this phase is a hopefully clear contract between
the client and the contractor, with transparent and acceptable conditions, for both
parties involved. If not, then this phase is likely to be the start of a ﬁght between
these parties, often with a lot of disagreement about ground conditions probably
in a dominating role. There are seldom real winners after these construction ﬁghts
resulting from the inevitable cost increase.

148
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Combination with the Geotechnical Baseline Report (GBR) makes the GeoQ
process particularly interesting in this contracting phase, because it provides a
practical tool for the clear allocation of all types of ground-related risk. Only then
may we expect ground risk to be really managed. Each risk should have one or
more owners, who are contractually responsible for that risk. Any risk can become
the sole responsibility of one of the project parties or is shared. This approach
proved at least to reduce the claims about all kinds of perceived different ground
conditions, as is explored in detail in Chapter 11.
The construction phase
Depending on the type of contract, construction follows either the contracting
phase or the design phase. Construction should result in a well-completed project,
preferably within budget and planning and according to the pre-set safety and
quality standards. Depending on the appraised project results, which includes a
large portion of subjective perception as previously has been described, the com-
pleted project may have either a positive or an adverse impact on the reputation
of both the contractor and the client.
During construction, GeoQ supports a smooth, i.e. efﬁcient and effective, con-
struction process from a risk-driven ground conditions point of view. Ideally,
also in this phase all of the six GeoQ steps are performed, particularly because
construction is the proof of design quality, including the anticipated ground con-
ditions. Also in construction, the proof of the pudding is in the eating. Many types
of monitoring proved to be of great help in minimizing construction risk, as well
as to catch unforeseen opportunities from better ground conditions than expected.
Examples are ground strength higher than foreseen and pollution concentrations
less than anticipated. An innovative contractor may use these opportunities for
increasing the project’s proﬁtability, by the application of innovative approaches to
catch the formerly hidden ground surprises. Chapter 12 focuses on the application
of the GeoQ process during construction.
The maintenance phase
Sooner or later, during the lifetime of its operation, the completed construction
project needs some sort of maintenance. Sometimes this maintenance phase is part
of the contractor’s scope of work, for example for 10 or 20 years after completion
of the project. The rationale for this type of contracts is a more sustainable design
and construction, which reduces the total life cycle costs for the client. In addition,
it is in the interest of the contractor to reduce the maintenance costs within the
entire scope of work, in order to maximize proﬁts. This may also be of interest to
the end-users of the project, such as a road or railway, because they will experience
less annoyance by reduced maintenance activities.

The GeoQ risk management process
149
It may be helpful also to perform the GeoQ steps in this phase, in order to obtain
insight into the behaviour of the construction during its operation with regard
to ground behaviour. In addition, the results of the GeoQ process may help to
dissolve any disputes in a mutually effective way, in the case that the project’s
behaviour differs from the agreed quality standards as a result of unexpected
and adverse ground behaviour. Again, like during the construction phase, also in
the maintenance phase, many types of monitoring contribute to sharpen insights
into the object’s behaviour and its optimum maintenance programme. Finally,
Chapter 13 explores the GeoQ application in the maintenance phase.
Embedding the GeoQ process
Finally, the last section of this chapter allocates some words to the implementation
of the GeoQ risk management process within the project organization, based
on experiences from colleagues and myself. Generally speaking, if there is not
sufﬁcient support in all ranks of the project hierarchy, it will be most unlikely
that the full potential of GeoQ ground risk management arises. This means that
we are likely to miss opportunities of cutting costs or adding more value to
the project. It may pay off to get risk management embedded in the genes of
the most important project players. In the words of Findlay Macpherson (2001),
ﬁnance expert of International Construction: ‘The cost of employing an independent
engineer to provide the risk overview (as many project lenders now insist upon)
is real value for money when set against the project cost, and more so if cost and
time overruns are prevented.’
However, a common pitfall is to establish a separate risk manager in the project
organization, who is responsible for the entire risk management of the project. How
wrongthisprovedtoworkout!Itisexperiencedthatmany,ifnotall,people involved
in the project point to the poor risk manager when there is anything to do with risk
management. They expect the risk manager to solve their problems, which typically
belong to their own responsibilities. I recall the basic risk management rule about
who has to manage which risk. Within any project organization, the application of
this rule implies the risks and even certain risk causes to be managed by the people
who are best able to do so. Normally these are the well-known professionals in
every project organization, such as the project director or manager, the design
manager, the construction manager, the site superintendent, the quantity surveyor,
and so on. The role of any risk manager should be restricted to coordination of the
risk management process. Perhaps it is even better to avoid the use of the term
‘risk manager’ in the project organization, to avoid any confusion.
The overall responsibility for risk management needs to be allocated to the
project director or project manager. Integrating risk management in the entire
project organization is typically a challenging responsibility for these persons.

150
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
They have to make risk management a normal and accepted part of the day-to-day
work of all involved in the project, like the daily registration of the working hours
is an accepted part of anybody’s work.
However, because risk management is still rather new to many (project) organ-
izations in the construction industry, this structured implementation of risk man-
agement in the daily activities proves to a rather heavy management responsibility,
as indicated in Box 7.2.
Box 7.2
Attempts to embed GeoQ
One of my colleagues was working as a ground risk coordinator at a site ofﬁce
of a design and construct consortium of contractors that constructed a part
of the high speed railway from Amsterdam to Paris. I had the opportunity
to attend a number of meetings with him and the management of the project
organization. The project director previously worked in the offshore oil and gas
industry, and he proved to be a real advocate of risk management. So was the
management team of the project organization. However, it proved to be very
difﬁcult for the risk coordinator to keep the highly required risk management
attention alive within the different project teams of designers, planners and
builders. There occasionally was a lack of time, or more a lack of priority, with
many of these employees, not due to any wrong intentions, but simply because
their full awareness about risk management, with all its hidden beneﬁts, proved
to be underdeveloped. They simply were not yet able to see their own and their
organization’s beneﬁts of risk management. Therefore, from their perspective
it seemed quite logical not to dedicate that much time and energy to it, in the
heat of their daily construction work on site.
Unfortunately, I do not have any quick wins or easy solutions to deal with
this type of risk management implementation problem. In fact, we are entering
the discipline of change management, which moves beyond the scope and focus
of this book. As a pioneer and change agent on ground risk management, you
are likely to encounter the many obstacles as described in the abundant books
about change management. For your necessary inspiration, and to compensate
for the unavoidable transpiration, for instance the works of Cameron and Quinn
(1998), Jick (1993) and Senge (1990) may be of assistance. Box 7.3 presents a
few recommendations, which merged from a mixture of book wisdom and my
colleagues’ and my own experiences.
The recommendations in Box 7.3 may give some direction during the challenging
process of embedding (ground) risk management in the project organization.

The GeoQ risk management process
151
Additionally, we should remember risk management not only concerns managing
risk, but also supports and facilitates innovations. In this respect the following
statement by Manfred Nußbaumer and Konrad Nübel (2005), made in their paper
Portfolio Based Approach to Project Risk Management, may motivate: ‘Transparent
organised risk management and well-structured display of the risk situation of a
project is always the key element in technical development’.
Box 7.3
Recommendations for the implementation of the GeoQ process
•
Do not appoint a separate risk manager, use a consultant to train and imple-
ment the risk management process, if required, or appoint a risk coordin-
ator, but make risk management explicitly an integral part of the usual
management tasks and responsibilities, such as project management, design
management, construction management, quality management and safety
management
•
Start as soon as possible with the risk management process and reserve
ample time and resources to teach the key players in the project about its
people and process aspects
•
Do not accept any concession to any agreements made about the operation
of the risk management process, be very tough about this topic, the process
needs to be continued to the end of the project
•
Read a few books about change management and translate some of their
lessons to your own risk management practice
•
Stay dedicated and patient, it may even take another generation of construc-
tion professionals before risk management is really embedded in the genes
of construction professionals and will be developed to its full potential.
Summary
This chapter has introduced the GeoQ process for ground-related risk manage-
ment, by its six GeoQ steps and its six GeoQ phases. The ﬁrst step, gathering project
information, provides clarity about the project objectives and creates insight into
the risk tolerance of the project’s stakeholders. Based on this information, risks
are successively identiﬁed and classiﬁed by steps two and three. Step four involves
taking risk remediation measures, after risk structuring and a careful analysis of the
causes and effects of the major risks of concern. Then follows risk evaluation of the
remaining or residual risks, by GeoQ step ﬁve. Finally, in step six all the precious

152
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
risk information of the previous steps is stored in a risk register, often supported
by databases, and mobilized to the next phase of the project. For each of these steps
a number of tools and methods have been introduced. We will encounter these in
much more detail, including their use in numerous cases in practice, in Chapters 8
through to Chapter 13.
Six general project phases, in which the GeoQ process steps have to be applied,
are feasibility, pre-design, design, contracting, construction, and maintenance. The
main objectives of these phases, as well as the role of the GeoQ process, have
been concisely presented. Both the GeoQ steps and the GeoQ phases include
conventional, proven and ﬂexible risk management practices, which allows their
application to all types of projects and ground conditions, anywhere in the world.
However, in spite of its ﬂexibility and foreseen beneﬁts, embedding GeoQ in the
project organization proves to be rather complicated, similar to many other change
initiatives in (project) organizations. If there is not sufﬁcient support in all ranks
of the project hierarchy, it unfortunately will be most unlikely to catch the full
GeoQ potential, which means missing interesting opportunities of cutting costs,
adding more value, or raising increased proﬁts from the project. Some proven
recommendations may guide the reader along this large pitfall.

8
GeoQ in the feasibility
phase
Introduction
Feasibility normally is the very ﬁrst phase of any construction project and
Figure 8.1 shows the feasibility phase at the very beginning of the GeoQ process.
Maintenance
Phase
Pre-Design
Phase
Design
Phase
Contracting
Phase
Construction
Phase
Feasibility
Phase
TIME
GEOQ PROCESS 
Figure 8.1: The feasibility phase within the six GeoQ phases.
In the feasibility phase,
the GeoQ process partic-
ularly concentrates on the
ﬁrst
two
GeoQ
steps
of
gathering
information
and
risk
identiﬁcation.
Ground
conditions can be domin-
ant and may even act as
the so-called fatal ﬂaw to
the project. We may think
of
a
large
dam
planned
on a geological fault zone
in an earthquake-sensitive
area. In such a situation the
project needs to be entirely
relocated or even cancelled,
because of the unacceptable
ground conditions.
This
chapter
starts
by
introducing
and
discuss-
ing
three
approaches
that support ground risk
management in this earliest project phase. These approaches are related to the
two GeoQ steps of gathering information and risk identiﬁcation. The ﬁrst approach

154
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
applies to the ﬁrst GeoQ step and classiﬁes the project site with regard to the
four main ground-related risk types. The second approach presents how to do
more with a minimum of ground information from a ground risk management
perspective and the purpose and advantages of scenario analysis forms the third
approach.
After discussing these three methods two case studies are presented, in which
the presented ground risk management methods have been successfully applied.
As usual, the chapter ﬁnishes with a summary.
Ground risk management during feasibility
Site classiﬁcation
Ground risk management in the feasibility phase depends on many factors. Prob-
ably the most important are:
•
The type of project
•
The project’s complexity
•
The size of the project
•
The project’s functional speciﬁcations
•
The proposed location(s) of the project.
Information about the project’s type, complexity, size and functional speciﬁca-
tions will be readily available in most cases. This may be quite different for the
characteristics of the proposed location(s) of the project. For some projects just a
wide region has been selected somewhere in which the project should be located,
which typically occurs for infrastructural projects in remote areas. The location
for other projects is more or less, or even totally, ﬁxed, such as the extension of
a new metroline in a city centre or the development of a new urban area at the
boundary of an existing city.
Any decision upon the project’s feasibility demands a certain minimum amount
of information, including the proposed project site(s). Three main types of project
site are distinguished: greenﬁeld, brownﬁeld and greyﬁeld site. For an effective gath-
ering of project information, ﬁrst considering the main site characteristics will be
highly supportive. Figure 8.2 presents the key characteristics of these three types
of site.
Please be aware of the dominating character of the ground aspects in Figure 8.2.
Obviously, the four major types of ground risk – geotechnical risk, geohydrological
risk, environmental risk and risk caused by man-made structures – will surface
in most projects to a certain degree. However, in a real greenﬁeld site ground and

GeoQ in the feasibility phase
155
Figure 8.2: Three types of project site.
groundwater pollution or man-made structures like buried pipelines are unlikely
to be encountered. The geology will dominate in these types of projects, with the
associated geotechnical and geohydrological risks. It may be possible to relocate
the project to an area with more favourable geological conditions, for instance to
avoid the active fault zone for a dam.
For brownﬁeld sites the pollution of ground and groundwater is often dominant,
in particular, when former industrial sites are redeveloped for new functions, such
as domestic housing. These situations occur in Japan for instance, where industries
move to China and their sites become available for other functions.
The existing built environment dominates the greyﬁeld sites, with normally
numerous structures and services in full operation. Greyﬁelds are in fact not real

156
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
ﬁelds anymore and huge underground metro projects or massive high-rise build-
ings in cities are typical examples of these sites. In addition, also quite smaller
projects, like an ofﬁce building or a subsurface parking lot with a construction pit
closely located to a historical building, are typically realized on greyﬁeld sites.
By distinguishing between greenﬁeld, brownﬁeld and greyﬁeld project sites, the
ground information to be gathered for early ground risk management in the feasi-
bility phase can be focused to do more within minimally available time and budget.
How to do more with a minimum of ground data
Most of the ground data are fuzzy and random. In addition, ground data are
by deﬁnition incomplete. This incompleteness is at a maximum level in the early
feasibility phase of any project, when site investigations normally have not yet
been performed. We have to deal with the scarce ground data that we can retrieve
in this stage, at reasonable costs, and we should make the best of it. Therefore, the
second risk management approach during feasibility concerns how to do more
with a minimum of information from a ground risk management perspective.
This supports the ﬁrst GeoQ step of gathering information and the classiﬁcation
according to greenﬁeld, brownﬁeld and greyﬁeld sites is followed.
True greenﬁeld sites are often located in remote areas. Distance, a lack of existing
infrastructure and harsh climatic conditions, which may vary from desert to polar
circumstances, usually make it difﬁcult, if not impossible, to obtain a reasonable
amount of ground data. However, some data may be available, like geological
maps, hazard maps, aerial photographs, and satellite pictures. Sometimes, an
engineering geologist, who performs some simple ﬁeld tests and brings back a
few ground samples for index testing, visits the selected region. Depending on
the morphology and topography of the area, the engineering geologist can obtain
precious ground data from such a site visit. Rock outcrops provide invaluable
data on the ground conditions, which is much more difﬁcult to reveal in rather
ﬂat areas that are covered by soil and vegetation. The type of vegetation may
disclose some possible subsoil characteristics. Furthermore, project experiences in
areas with a similar geological setting may be of great help, while acknowledging
the fact that the actual local site conditions can be quite different from the ﬁrst
estimates that are based on apparently similar or comparable sites. This early
project phase with a greenﬁeld site will be a real challenge for an adventurous
engineering geologist. Figure 8.3 shows a picture of a typical green ﬁeld site: a
remote area in the Middle East, where for instance a road is planned.
The acknowledgement of the inherent scarcity of ground data in the early phases
of greenﬁeld projects is a ﬁrst step to a risk-driven project approach. Clients,
particularly, need to become aware of this simple reality and have to accept the
associated risks of taking wrong decisions, because of the limited ground data
available.

GeoQ in the feasibility phase
157
Figure 8.3: A typical greenﬁeld site.
Brownﬁeld sites are located in or near cities and are typically industrial areas.
Many of these are (partly) abandoned, often for a number of years. Pollution
of ground and groundwater is highly likely in these areas. The awareness of
pollution, caused by industrial activities, has developed during the last decades
of the 20th century. The expected type and concentration of pollution is highly
dependent upon the type of industry and its history. Sometimes, industries have
been operating for a hundred years or more at these locations. The rather new
discipline of geoenvironmental engineering largely contributes to gathering suit-
able ground data in this early project phase. Archives of local governments may
reveal (indirectly) valuable indications about the type and concentration of pol-
lution to be expected. Geotechnical and geohydrological data can be present to
some extent, because of foundations and other elements of the former industrial
structures. However, these data are probably incomplete and out-of-date, due to
major changes on the site during the industrial activities.
As for greenﬁeld sites, for brownﬁeld sites the amount of relevant ground
data normally are of limited extent. In particular, a lack of knowledge about
the concentration and type of pollution involves major risk for any client, as
environmental clean-up programmes vary dramatically in terms of investment and
time required. In addition, as raised by Quint (2005), within the existing regulations

158
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
and guidelines there is a lot of confusion about what exactly is ‘contaminated
land’. Figure 8.4 shows a photograph of a brownﬁeld site in south-east Asia.
Such a site will be a real challenge for an engineering geologist with geoenvir-
onmental knowledge and experience to get a maximum of relevant ground data
on the desk in this early project stage. Again, the acknowledgement of the restric-
ted ground information facts is a major ﬁrst step towards a risk-driven project
approach. The parties involved have either to accept the situation with the asso-
ciated risk, or to invest further in gaining some more data, to take the required
decisions in this early project phase.
Greyﬁeld sites are typically located in a built environment; the project location is
more or less or entirely ﬁxed. We have to deal with the local ground conditions,
these are a given, whether weak or strong. In this respect the following words
of Heinz Brandl (2004) may inspire: ‘There are no (insurmountable) weak soils
or rocks, there are only weak engineers’. By the way, he adds to minimize this
weakness by education, training and gaining experience.
Another reality for greyﬁeld projects are the existing structures, located at,
below, above and around the proposed project site. These structures are still
in operation or service and may be very sensitive to the slightest construction
Figure 8.4: A typical brownﬁeld site.

GeoQ in the feasibility phase
159
work. Some good news; there is probably quite a lot of existing geotechnical,
geohydrologial and may be even geoenvironmental data, once applied to the
realization of the existing structures. These data may be still up to date in rather
new development areas, like the Pudong Business District in Shanghai. In older
city centres the available data will be more obsolete, because of age, incompleteness
and serious changes after the data have been retrieved. Anyhow, some ground data
should be available for greyﬁeld sites and in several urban areas even databases
with ground information are available, in which we are able to select ground data
on-line via the Internet, just by entering the postal code of the project area.
Figure 8.5: A typical greyﬁeld site.
The main challenge for
a greyﬁeld site is to arrive
at some reasonable judge-
ment about the feasibility
of the anticipated project
in view of unfavourable
effects
on
the
existing
structures.
Monitoring
results and photographs
of existing structures may
help. Indeed, this serves
a
real
challenge
for
a
geotechnical
engineer
with a sound structural
engineering
background,
to retrieve a maximum of
ground data in this phase
of the project.
As for greenﬁeld and
brownﬁeld sites, also for
greyﬁeld sites the amount
of relevant ground data
are
normally
still
too
limited. A lack of know-
ledge about the interac-
tion of new and existing
structures can particularly
involve major risk for the
client and any third parties
involved. Figure 8.5 shows a picture of a typical greyﬁeld site, close to the Petronas
Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

160
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Imagine the consequences, regarding safety concerns, disputes and claims, in the
case of unacceptable differential settlement of a high-rise ofﬁce building, because
of a deep construction pit in its close vicinity. Such events have a dramatic impact
on the project and its stakeholders. Particularly for greyﬁeld projects, the appraisal
of this type of risk is an important ﬁrst step towards a risk-driven project continu-
ation. Clients should be convinced about this situation and be willing to accept
the associated risks.
The gathered ground data at either greenﬁeld, brownﬁeld or greyﬁeld sites
have to be reported in a clear way, preferably with a sound motivation for the
man-made and natural hazards to be faced. Factual data should be clearly separ-
ated from interpretative data, to allow distinction between information risks and
interpretation risks later in the process. Major uncertainties should be expressed
explicitly, like those of geological origin (greenﬁelds), geoenvironmental origin
(brownﬁelds) or the interaction between existing and new structures (greyﬁelds).
All of these data can be well used as a basis in the next step of the GeoQ process:
risk identiﬁcation. Scenario analysis is one of the tools for this.
Scenario analysis
If we have classiﬁed our project site as either greenﬁeld, brownﬁeld or greyﬁeld
and have gathered all available ground data, then we are well prepared to take the
next step of the GeoQ process: risk identiﬁcation. For two reasons scenario analysis
seems very suitable as a risk identiﬁcation tool in this very ﬁrst project phase:
1
The still very open character of a construction project in this phase. Apart
from functional speciﬁcations and rather general project characteristics, such
as purpose, size and possibly the location, not much more has been cast-in-
concrete yet. There are ample possibilities for all kind of ground engineering
and construction solutions
2
The restricted availability of ground data with respect to geotechnical, geohydro-
logical and environmental conditions, as well as the presence of any man-made
and subsurface obstacles.
As an attractive characteristic, scenario analysis combines these two aspects and
with some creativity it is very possible to create a number of interesting and real-
istic project options, based on a limited data set. Courtney et al. (1997) distinguish
four basic types of scenario. Box 8.1 presents these scenarios, together with my
translation of them towards engineering and construction projects in the feasibility
phase.

GeoQ in the feasibility phase
161
Box 8.1
Four types of scenario
1
A clear enough future is like a straight road from town A to town B, based
on complete information, which is impossible in our practice of engineering
and construction with its inherent fuzzy, random and incomplete ground
information
2
True ambiguity is the opposite from the clear enough future. There is no
basis for any forecast about the ﬁnal format of the project. It is not as bad
as that in construction, so also this type of scenario is unlikely to be of use
to us
3
A range of futures is like a continuous range of possible outcomes. In spite
of the fact that construction projects are typically discrete objects, aspects
such as the expected trafﬁc over a road may range from a certain minimum
to a certain maximum. The amount of trafﬁc within this range will affect
the loading conditions and the settlements of a road. Consequently, main-
tenance schedules are inﬂuenced by these ranges, which is of interest while
considering life cycle costs. Therefore, this type of scenario may be helpful
in our projects
4
Alternate futures indicate scenarios that result into a few discrete outcomes,
contrary to the range of outcomes of the previous scenario type. This will
feel as coming home to many of us. With this type of analysis we can for
instance compare the scenario of a bridge with that of a tunnel.
Because it is all about trying to deal with the future, van Oirschot (2003) refers to
scenario analysis as some kind of future management. However, scenario analysis
has nothing to do with any crystal ball. This is not about predicting the future,
rather anticipating on future developments, by using our experiences and ima-
gination to create a desired and successful construction project. In the words of
David Blockley and Patrick Godfrey (2000): ‘Evidence of progress to success comes
from past performance, present performance and possible future performances
(scenarios)’.
By the presented types of scenario analysis it will be possible to reveal a wealth
of foreseeable risks and opportunities for our projects. Altabba et al. (2004) advise
applying scenario analysis for a detailed description of the entire project. In partic-
ular, the entire process, in other words the six distinguished project phases through
which the project is realized, is important to consider in their view. Baya et al.
(1997) suggest considering the extremes of a dream scenario and a doom scenario. It
is likely that reality will arise somewhere in between these extremes.

162
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
As a result of a scenario analysis, each of the identiﬁed (ground) risks of each of
the scenarios can be classiﬁed by the next GeoQ step. A practical ground risk classi-
ﬁcation tool will be presented in Chapter 9 about the pre-design phase. According
to the GeoQ process, after risk classiﬁcation the steps of risk remediation, risk
evaluation and risk mobilization follow. In most cases these steps are not yet
relevant to ground risk management in the feasibility phase, as ﬁrst the project
feasibility has to be decided upon.
One of the results of the GeoQ process in the feasibility phase is a clear
deﬁnition of the required ground data for the next pre-design phase, further to
verify and classify the identiﬁed ground-related risks. Without the GeoQ pro-
cess, the deﬁnition of the required ground investigation will be mainly based
on rather subjective experiences and judgement of the involved professionals.
By using the GeoQ process, the knowledge of the identiﬁed foreseeable ground
risk serves as a foundation for the deﬁnition of an effective ground investiga-
tion programme, in which the identiﬁed ground-related risks get the attention
they need.
Finally, scenario analysis may also be of great use to classify the identiﬁed risks
and to deﬁne appropriate risk remediation measures. In addition, it has been
widely proven successful to develop so-called fall-back scenarios for the construction
phase. The following two case studies aim to give some insight into the practical
application of the GeoQ ground risk management process in the feasibility phase.
Case studies
This section presents two case studies of projects in the feasibility phase, and aims
to demonstrate the appraisal of project feasibility from a ground risk management
perspective. GeoQ was in its full development at the time these cases took place
in practice. For this reason, not all presently available GeoQ steps and approaches
could be fully applied. The ﬁrst case was in fact the very ﬁrst attempt to apply
the GeoQ process, in order to evaluate an existing project with regard to the
decision-making processes in relation to ground-related risk. The second case
already reveals clear contours of the presently available GeoQ process steps and
tools
Risk based decision-making for a light-rail project
The development of the GeoQ process started in 2001 with a risk-based evalu-
ation of an infrastructure project. The trigger was the need of a project director,
representing the client. He and his project team wanted to be able to decide for
themselves about the feasibility of geotechnical options for their project, rather
than relying on one single solution by a geotechnical consultant. Therefore, he

GeoQ in the feasibility phase
163
suggested another approach of geotechnical reporting, based on discrete scenarios
and risk analyses. He wanted to have a number of geotechnical options for his
most important project decisions, together with an indication of the associated
risks. In order to verify the feasibility of this innovative demand, it was decided
to evaluate one of his projects, which was in the ﬁnal construction phase at that
time. GeoDelft performed the evaluation, with the author as project manager, and
it turned to serve as a foundation for the development of a ground risk manage-
ment concept, that later was named GeoQ. The main results of this evaluation
were published in The Netherlands (van Staveren and Bolijn, 2003) and the evalu-
ation is concisely presented and discussed below. The case aims to demonstrate
how careful consideration of the ground aspects contributes to more transparent,
rationally motivated and even better project decisions.
Let us begin with the ﬁrst GeoQ step of gathering project information. The so-
called Zuidtangent is aimed to become the future light-rail connection between
Schiphol International Airport and the city of Haarlem, located west of the Dutch
capital, Amsterdam. This densely populated area, in which, in fact, every square
metre has been used, is a typical greyﬁeld site. The routing of such an infrastructural
project is determined by all kinds of town and country planning issues, including
local political factors. Ground conditions are not a relevant factor for the alignment
and should be considered as a given to deal with. In this part of The Netherlands,
these ground conditions typically consist of some 10 to 15 m soft deposits, mainly
clay and peat, underlain by Pleistocene sand layers. Ground water levels are high,
often some 0.5 m below ground level. Furthermore, groundwater overpressures
are locally present in the Pleistocene sand layers, due to artiﬁcial groundwater
management of the polder areas.
For the purpose of the project evaluation, the client’s project team identiﬁed,
with their hindsight knowledge, the top ten most important project decisions
they had to make. This exercise can be considered as some sort of backward
risk analysis. Six out of ten decisions typically had an alternate futures scenario
character. Each of these included two options, such as: should a canal crossing be
a bridge or a tunnel? The effects of each of these scenarios on the project success
factors planning, costs, quality and reputation were assessed in a qualitative way.
Obviously, during the actual project process, these effects were uncertainties or
risks of not meeting the project’s objectives. Table 8.1 presents, in an arbitrary
order, these six sets of scenario and their appraised impact on the project success
factors.
Crossing 5 of the future light-rail passes an existing road, while Crossing 6
passes a canal. Table 8.1 presents the decisive factors in bold. In two of the six
scenario sets costs were dominant in the selection of the most suitable scenario.
Quality and reputation dominated each in two of the remaining scenarios sets.
If we connect these scenarios sets to ground conditions, we arrive at the core

164
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Table 8.1: Scenarios and their impact on project success factors
Alternate future scenarios
Effects on project’s success factors
Set
Description
Planning
Costs
Quality
Reputation
1
Crossing 5: below or at surface level?
Large
Large
Large
Large
2
Crossing 6: tunnel or bridge?
Small
Large
Large
Large
3
Crossing 6: in situ or prefab construction?
Small
Large
Small
Small
4
Poelpolder area: below or at surface?
Large
Large
Large
Large
5
Part 5 to 6: concrete or earthworks foundation?
Large
Large
Large
Large
6
Entire route: concrete or asphalt pavement?
Small
Large
Large
Small
of the evaluation. For each scenario set the following three questions have been
answered by the client’s project team:
1
Was ground information available for selecting the scenarios?
2
Was ground information critical for the scenarios?
3
Was ground information actually considered for selecting the scenarios?
The ground information was of both factual and interpretative type and con-
sisted mainly of the results of cone penetration tests (CPTs), the alternative for
borings in the Dutch soft soils. Results of some preliminary geotechnical calcula-
tions were also available. Table 8.2 demonstrates the answers to the three questions
for each of the six sets of scenario.
According to Table 8.2, ground information was available for each scenario
set. In ﬁve out of six scenario sets, ground information was assessed as critical.
However, in three out of six scenario sets, which was 50 per cent of the cases, the
available and critical information was remarkably not considered in the decision
Table 8.2: Scenarios and ground information
Alternate future scenarios
Ground information
Set
Description
Available?
Critical?
Considered?
1
Crossing 5: below or at surface level?
Yes
Yes
No
2
Crossing 6: tunnel or bridge?
Yes
Yes
No
3
Crossing 6: in situ or prefab construction?
Yes
Yes
Yes
4
Poelpolder area: below or at surface?
Yes
Yes
No
5
Part 5 to 6: concrete or earthworks foundation?
Yes
Yes
Yes
6
Entire route: concrete or asphalt pavement?
Yes
No
No

GeoQ in the feasibility phase
165
Table 8.3: Effects of two ground-related scenarios on the project’s success factors
Scenario set number 5
Effects on the project’s success factors
Two light-rail
foundation
options
Planning
(months)
Costs (million
euros)
Quality
(remaining
settlements
in m)
Reputation
(additional
construction
time in months)
Settlement-free concrete
slab
2.5
1.14
0.00
0
Earth embankment,
including a geotextile
9.0
0.95
0.04
3
process (presented in bold in Table 8.2). This is a remarkable result and supports
the use of the GeoQ process approach, to guarantee that both available and critical
ground information are considered when deciding about the most favourable
scenarios for the following project phases.
For those readers interested, Table 8.3 presents the effects of two options for
scenario set ﬁve on the project success factors planning, costs, quality and repu-
tation. This illustrates how the effects of ground-related scenarios can be made
explicit and expressed in terms of the project success factors.
In spite of its rather evaluative character, the presented approach should be
well applicable in the feasibility phase of any project, where the relevant ground
data may contribute to making the best possible decisions about the go–no-go of
the particular project.
Risk driven planning of an urban development project
This second case about the feasibility phase describes a risk-driven domestic
development planning of the Almere Pampus project, located in a polder below
sealevel, about 30 km east of the city of Amsterdam. An area of 8 million m2
will be developed to an urban area for domestic housing, including the necessary
infrastructure of roads and sewerage systems. It also includes recreational areas
with some lakes and parks. In spite of the ﬁxed location of the entire project, the
planning of all structures and typical functional locations within the area was still
to be decided upon. This situation classiﬁes the project as of greenﬁeld type in
which ground conditions play a dominant role in the actual planning of the entire
domestic area.
The local government of the city of Almere had already provided three layouts
or scenarios for the set-up of the project area. However, almost as usual, ground
conditions were not yet involved. The Dutch Almere region is notorious for its

166
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
heterogeneous ground conditions resulting from a dynamic geological history. Soft
clay, peat and densely packed sandy deposits vary highly at very short distances
of even a few metres. Because of the locally highly unfavourable and soft ground
conditions the client requested a risk-driven assessment for the optimum layout
of the area. The objective of this exercise was to save a maximum amount of
money for site-preparation activities and maintenance during the entire lifetime of
the domestic area. The results should support decisions concerning the ﬁnancial
feasibility of the project.
The consultant decided to provide an additional scenario for the layout of the
entire urban development project, in which different structures and functions of
the area were matched with local ground conditions. Recreational areas, with a
lot of water and parks, should ideally be situated at locations with the worst soft
soil conditions, while roads and houses should be located in areas with the most
sound and favourable ground conditions (Hounjet, 2005). Obviously, the ground
conditions would not rule the entire layout of the project, however, major potential
cost savings were anticipated by a smart use of the given local ground conditions.
Reverse situations, with the most sensitive structures located at the worst spots,
from a ground conditions point of view, has been shown to be a reality, at least
in The Netherlands.
Considering the ﬁrst GeoQ step of gathering information, quite a lot of ground
information proved to be already available:
•
A geological map with a subdivision into favourable and unfavourable areas
for foundations
•
The thickness of the Holocene ground layers, consisting of mainly soft
deposits
•
The level of the top of the underlying Pleistocene sand layers, which form
normally a sound foundation layer
•
Expected settlements in case of 1m ﬁll for site preparation
•
Expected foundation levels for the light structures.
This information was presented on ﬁve separate maps and based on this inform-
ation a number of scenarios for the entire area were developed. Three main
functions for the new urban have been distinguished:
1
Domestic housing
2
Roads and sewerage systems
3
Recreational areas with a lot of water and parks.

GeoQ in the feasibility phase
167
Figure 8.6: Risk maps for three functions of an urban development area (© with permission of
GeoDelft).
Figure 8.7: Ground risk remediation: matching
functional areas with expected ground conditions
(© with permission of GeoDelft).
Next the two GeoQ steps of risk
identiﬁcation and risk classiﬁcation were
taken. For each of the three identi-
ﬁed functions a separate map was
developed, which indicated areas with
favourable and unfavourable condi-
tions for that particular function. The
favourable areas involve a low risk
for additional costs, extra construc-
tion time and reduced quality, because
these areas were suitable with regard
to the proposed functions. The unfa-
vourable areas present a relatively
high risk, as these areas are assessed as
less suitable for the particular function.
Figure 8.6 presents these three maps,
in which the relatively dark shaded
parts represent the unfavourable areas.
The relatively light shaded parts in
Figure 8.6 represent the more suitable
locations for the particular function.
As a measure of risk remediation, GeoQ step four, these three maps were com-
bined into one map with the most suitable layout of the development area, from
a ground conditions perspective. This map is presented in Figure 8.7 in which
different shades identify different functions.
As an agreed rule within the project team, the most sensitive function was
located in the areas with the most favourable ground conditions. Therefore, the

168
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
sewer systems, which are relatively sensitive to differential settlements, were
located as much as possible in areas with the least expected settlements.
In the next GeoQ step of risk evaluation, the map of Figure 8.7 was compared
with the three initial existing layouts, which has omitted any ground condition
risk. It became clear that the newly proposed layout would result in a reduction
of 1000m3 sand ﬁll per 10000m2. This will signiﬁcantly reduce both costs and site
preparation time. The speculative settlement risk, with settlements either larger
(negative) or smaller (positive) than anticipated, turned out to be positive in this
risk assessment and compared with the initial situation. A foreseeable and specu-
lative risk has been transformed into an attractive opportunity. If the maintenance
costs during the lifetime of the project are included, then the risk-driven altern-
ative layout results in 20 per cent lower maintenance costs, compared with the
most unfavourable initial scenario. The total cost savings for the municipality of
Almere, for a maintenance period of 50 years, are calculated at 64 million euros
(Pereboom et al., 2005).
The ﬁnal GeoQ step, mobilization of all retrieved ground risk information to
the next project phase of pre-design, could easily be made, because of the ready
available risk maps. These maps were all digitally available in colour (unlike the
prints in this book), which make them very easy to use by all kinds of project
participants in the following project phases. In addition, new ground information,
as a result of detailed ground investigations for roads and houses can be easily
added to the maps, by today’s available Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
and related software packages.
To conclude, the application of the GeoQ ground risk management process in
an early phase of the urban development project revealed an opportunity for a
major cost saving. Not only did the negative side of ground conditions and risk
became visible, opportunities also surfaced. This case supports the statement that
ground risk management, in an early phase of a construction, may contribute to
both risk reduction and project optimization.
Summary
This chapter demonstrated the application of the GeoQ process in the feasibility
phase of a construction project. It focused on the ﬁrst two GeoQ steps of gath-
ering information and risk identiﬁcation. Three approaches to support ground risk
management in this earliest project phase have been introduced and discussed:
project site classiﬁcation in terms of greenﬁeld, brownﬁeld or greyﬁeld sites, how
to do more with a minimum of ground information from a risk management
perspective, and the concept of scenario analysis, of which the range of futures
and alternate future types tend to be most useful for ground engineering and
construction activities.

GeoQ in the feasibility phase
169
These GeoQ approaches appear to be viable for ground risk management in the
feasibility phase. As the two cases have demonstrated, the approaches do not only
facilitate risk identiﬁcation at an early stage, they may very well reveal attractive
opportunities as well. Both support the project’s go–no-go decision at the end of
the feasibility phase.

9
GeoQ in the pre-design
phase
Introduction
The previous chapter covered the very ﬁrst phase of any construction project, this
chapter continues with the next phase in line: the pre-design phase. Figure 9.1
positions this phase within in the six phases of the GeoQ process.
Maintenance
Phase
Pre-Design
Phase
Design
Phase
Contracting
Phase
Construction
Phase
Feasibility
Phase
TIME
GEOQ PROCESS
Figure 9.1: The pre-design phase within the six GeoQ phases.
During pre-design, sev-
eral engineering solutions
will
be
considered
and
compared, such as a cut-
and-cover
or
bored
tun-
nel?
GeoQ
ground
risk
management facilitates this
process
in
view
of
the
anticipated ground-related
risks and opportunities. The
optimum
design
solution
will be selected at the end
of
the
pre-design
phase,
based on the project spe-
ciﬁcations, the risk toler-
ance of the parties involved
and the foreseen ground
conditions. For instance, it
will be decided to continue
the tunnel project with a
bored tunnel.

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
171
This chapter starts with the introduction and discussion of three approaches for
supporting ground-related risk management during pre-design. These methods
are speciﬁcally related to the three GeoQ steps of risk identiﬁcation, risk classiﬁ-
cation and risk remediation. The ﬁrst approach is a team-based risk identiﬁcation
and classiﬁcation procedure. This approach can be facilitated by the so-called
Electronic Board Room, which is an ICT-supported tool. The risk identiﬁcation
and classiﬁcation procedure results in a risk proﬁle of the project.
The second ground risk management approach explores the relationship
between costs of ground investigations and risk. It aims to balance the established
project risk proﬁle with the optimum scope of ground investigations. An adequate
ground investigation is a way to risk remediation and, based on its results, we
should be able to select the most suitable pre-design solution.
The third ground risk management approach is closely related to the second one
and presents a number of considerations for a risk-driven ground investigation.
This method decribes how to balance ground investigations with risk. For a ground
investigation in the pre-design phase, the type, quantity and quality are deﬁned in
a risk-driven way, while matching the project’s risk proﬁle. Two case studies are
presented, in which the presented ground risk management methods have been
successfully applied. As usual, the chapter ﬁnishes with a summary.
Ground risk management during pre-design
Team-based risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation
The ﬁrst ground-related risk management approach, which is particularly useful
in the pre-design phase, concerns a practical way for identifying and classifying
risk. We will explore the risk brainstorm session, in which groups of experts,
based upon their mixture of expertise, experience and perceptions, identify and
classify risks.
Preparation of the risk session
Like other brainstorm sessions, the team-based risk session needs to be carefully
prepared to become successful. Its objectives, risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation
structure, proposed participants, and programme require due attention. Preferably
the project’s key success factors, with regard to costs, planning, safety, quality and
reputation are already expressed in measurable targets. These are the benchmarks
for the risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation process, because the overall project
risk is not meeting these objectives.
The risk structure also needs to be considered before starting any risk identiﬁ-
cation. For instance, risk of technical and non-technical origin can be distinguished

172
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
and it is possible to subdivide ground-related risks in geotechnical, geohydro-
logical, geoenvironmental and man-made structure risk groups. Furthermore, a
project-speciﬁc risk classiﬁcation system needs to be selected. Typically, the semi-
quantitative method is applied in team-based risk sessions.
The participants for the risk brainstorm session have to be selected with due
care. In the pre-design phase of a project, the risk session participants probably
have a multidisciplinary character and a variety of backgrounds, expertise and
experience, to identify and classify the widest range of foreseeable risk. During the
later design and construction phases similar sessions with more mono-disciplinary
experts are able to focus on the remediation of speciﬁc ground-related risks.
Risk identiﬁcation
Two main streams of team-based risk identiﬁcation can be distinguished:
1
Building further on already identiﬁed risks
2
Starting with an entirely fresh risk identiﬁcation process.
The main advantages of the ﬁrst approach are efﬁciency and focus. Many identi-
ﬁed and already structured risks, possibly retrieved from preparatory individual
interviews, completed risk questionnaires, and risk registers and databases, serve
as the foundation for the group session. However, participants in the risk session
are already inﬂuenced and biased by the existing risk information, which may
severely reduce their out-of-the-box thinking capabilities during the session. The
latter is required to bring as much as possible risk from the unforeseen to the
foreseen risk space. For this reason, the second way may be most suitable in cer-
tain project occasions. It is up to the risk coordinator in charge to select to most
suitable way for his or her particular project.
Once identiﬁed, the risks need to be prepared for their classiﬁcation as major
or minor risks, which requires special attention to the people factor. According
to Blockley and Godfrey (2000), the human mind appears to be more effective
at addressing success than failure. Keizer et al. (2001) bring up the prospects
theory, which shows negative framing of risks to result in more positive risk
perceptions than positive framing. In confrontation with negative statements we
intend to respond by considering that ‘it should not be as bad as that’. Positive
statements, however, seem to trigger our awareness of possible pitfalls, in terms
like ‘I am not so sure about this statement’. It motivates Keizer et al. (2001) to
translate identiﬁed risk towards so-called positive formulated statements. A risk
statement like ‘differential settlements cause structural damage’ can be positively
formulated in ‘differential settlements will be limited in order to avoid structural
damage’. This type of risk reframing probably needs some more preparation time
and guidance.

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
173
Risk classiﬁcation
It is possible to express the seriousness of a risk in the probability of occurrence
and the likely effects or consequences, if the risk indeed occurs. Therefore, risks
are often classiﬁed in terms of probability and effects. Reframing risk becomes
some sort of challenge, because it appears rather difﬁcult to classify positive risk
statements in the conventional way of probabilities of occurrence and effects. We
still want to assess probability and effects if the positive statement of ‘differential
settlements will be limited in order to avoid structural damage’ is not reached. In
other words, we still have to appraise the probability and the effect of the occur-
rence of the negatively framed statement ‘differential settlements cause structural
damage’. For this reason, I tend to choose the conventional negatively framed
way of classifying risk. A team with a variety of risk perceptions should be able
to prevent over-optimistic risk classiﬁcation.
Figure 9.2 presents a proven matrix for semi-qualitative or semi-quantitative
risk classiﬁcation. The terms ‘semi-qualitative’ and ‘semi-quantitative’ risk have
here the same meaning and are widely used in an intermingled way.
Figure 9.2 distinguishes six risk classiﬁcation criteria and these are applicable to
each risk. Three of them relate to the risk probability of occurrence. The remaining
three criteria classify the risk effect. The knowledge about the risk concerns, for
instance, expertise about in-situ transport mechanisms of polluted groundwater
in an aquifer. The period of occurrence is an indicator for the time frame in which
the risk can take place. A deformation risk in a building pit is largely limited to
the time required for the excavation and installation of any struts. A differential
settlement risk, however, typically continues over a long period of time and often
proceeds after completion of the project’s construction. Similarly, the effect-criteria
of time, costs, as well as safety, quality and reputation can be scored according to
the criteria presented in Figure 9.2.
RISK CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA
RISK PROBABILITY
RISK SCORE = 1
(criterion with low signiﬁcance)
RISK SCORE = 2
(criterion with high signiﬁcance)
Knowledge
a lot of knowledge available
limited to no knowledge available
Period of occurence
less than 1 month
more than 1 month
Way of occurence
slowly and gradually
fast and sudden
RISK EFFECT
Time (planning)
less than 1 month delay
more than 1 month delay
Costs (budget)
less than 50,000 Euro extra costs
more than 50,000 Euro extra costs
Safety, quality and reputation
some reduction is acceptable
any reduction is not acceptable
Figure 9.2: A semi-qualitative risk classiﬁcation matrix.

174
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
This type of risk classiﬁcation needs to be made ﬁt-for-purpose for the project of
consideration. The criteria for the risks scores have to be adapted to the project’s
objectives and character. In addition, everyone is free to add other criteria or even
to delete criteria, again depending on the type of project and the degree of risk
awareness of the team. For instance, it is possible to add the ability of the project
team to inﬂuence the identiﬁed risks, expressed in risk control, as a third main
criterion besides risk probability and risk effect, as suggested by Keizer et al.
(2001). Also the risks scores can be easily revised, by adding one, two or even
more risk scores.
The example shown in Figure 9.2 refers to a rather small project, which is
reﬂected in the rather small extra costs criterion of 50 000 euros. For a larger
project these extra costs can be extended to 0.5 million euros or even 5 million
euros.
Figure 9.3 shows ten identiﬁed and scored ground-related risks and has been
retrieved from a team-based risk session with a contractor for a bridge project.
Figure 9.2 showed a risk classiﬁcation matrix with a simple risk score, limited
to one and two. Each of the ten risks as shown in Figure 9.3 has been scored
one, two, or three for each classiﬁcation criterion, where a one represents a low
score and three refers to a high score. As an agreed rule, every participant of
the risk session should only score the classiﬁcation criteria of which he or she
has a judged opinion, based on expertise and experience. The scores shown in
Figure 9.3 are the average values of the scores of the individual participants on each
criterion.
It is useful to analyse the number of scores for each individual risk criterion
and to calculate the standard deviations as well, because this provides viable
information about the risk. For instance, if only one participant scored the costs
criterion for risk number one, the presence of archeological remains, then a serious
indication of lacking knowledge within the team has become clear. The sum of the
risk factors that classify probability (knowledge, period and way of occurrence)
result in the probability risk score (Ptot). In theory, the maximum risk score for
both probability and effect is nine, the sum of the maximum score of three for
each individual criterion. The minimum score is three, which is the sum of the
minimum score of one for each individual criterion. The same applies for the risk
criteria that classify the total risk effect, which results in the effect risk score (Etot).
If required, Ptot and Etot can be summed or multiplied to arrive at a single risk
score number of each classiﬁed risk.
Results of the risk session
The results of the risk session are usually plotted in a risk matrix. The matrix has
two dimensions and presents the total scores on risk probability and risk effect for
each classiﬁed risk. Each classiﬁed risk of Figure 9.3 has been plotted in Figure 9.4
and the risk numbering of Figure 9.3 corresponds with Figure 9.4.

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
175
Probability 
Risk Score 
Effect
Risk Score 
Total
Risk Score 
Risk
No.
Ground-related risk 
description 
K 
P 
W 
T 
C 
S 
Ptot 
1
Presence of archeological 
remains
2.6 
1.7 
2.6 
2.4 
1.1 
1.3 
6.9 
2
Horizontal and vertical
deformations 
1.4 
1.9 
1.6 
2.0 
2.3 
2.7 
4.9 
3
Geotechnical parameters
worse than assumed 
1.5 
1.9 
1.6 
2.4 
2.6 
2.3 
5.0 
4
Presence of bombs and 
grenates in the ground 
2.3 
1.9 
2.6 
1.6 
1.4 
1.3 
6.8 
5
Sand bearing layer deeper 
than assumed 
1.8 
1.4 
2.5 
1.8 
2.0 
2.0 
5.7 
6
Geotechnical model is not 
correct
1.8 
1.8 
1.5 
2.2 
2.6 
2.8 
5.1 
7
Factual ground data is not 
correct
2.0 
2.1 
1.8 
2.5 
3.0 
2.4 
5.9 
8
Assumed loading
conditions are not correct 
1.2 
1.8 
1.6 
2.2 
2.6 
2.3 
4.6 
9
Heterogeneous ground 
conditions
2.0 
1.5 
1.4 
1.8 
1.8 
1.6 
4.9 
10
Presence of polluted 
ground or groundwater
2.4 
2.3 
2.1 
2.0 
2.2 
2.0 
6.8 
Etot 
4.8 
7.0 
7.3 
4.3 
5.8 
7.6 
7.9 
7.1 
7.3 
6.2 
Legend: 
K = Knowledge about risk (influence on risk probability) 
P = Period of occurence (influence on risk probability) 
W = Way of occurence (influence on risk probability) 
T = Time refers to planning (influence on risk effect)
C = Costs refers to budget (influence on risk effect)
S = Safety, Quality and Reputation (influence on risk effect)
Ptot  = sum of the scores of K, P and W 
Etot = sum of the scores of T, S, C. 
Figure 9.3: A semi-qualitative score of ten ground-related risks.

176
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
3.00
4.00
8.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
9.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
total score risk effect
total score risk probability
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 9.4: A risk matrix with ten classiﬁed ground-related risks.
Evidently, the more the
risk is located in the upper
right
corner
of
the
risk
matrix, the more severe the
classiﬁed
risk.
Figure
9.4
identiﬁes three risk zones
by two diagonal lines. The
zone below the line that con-
nects the total risk scores
of six can be considered as
a low risk zone. The zone
above the line connecting
the scores of nine is typically
a high risk zone. The zone in
between presents the inter-
mediate
risks.
Obviously,
the risk team may decide
about the most appropriate
risk zonation for their project.
Any risk remediation measure, by risk cause reduction, risk effect reduction or
the combination of both, will become visible in an updated version of the risk
matrix. Typically, the resulting residual risk will move in the lower-left direction
of Figure 9.4. A repetition of this risk classiﬁcation process in a later project phase
will reveal these effects.
ICT-supported risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation
The Electronic Board Room (EBR) is an ICT-facilitated method for team-based risk
brainstorming. It proves to be a fast and effective method for the identiﬁcation
and classiﬁcation of project risks by the approach as discussed just before.
During an EBR session, 10 to 15 (laptop) personal computers are connected to a
software package. Behind each computer one or two professionals identify risks,
while they follow the results of the other EBR participants, real-time, on their
screens. This may trigger them to identify other and new foreseeable risks, which
is the brainstorming part of the session. Figure 9.5 shows a typical setting of an
EBR session.
Usually, the EBR system works anonymously, which means that the parti-
cipants do not know who has identiﬁed which risk. This approach minimizes
the unwanted group dynamics of conventional brainstorm sessions. You have
probably also encountered those good-intended but rather loud and convincing
voices who overrule the other participants and adversely dominate the brainstorm
procedure.

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
177
Figure 9.5: A typical setting of EBR-facilitated and team-based risk session (© with permission
of GeoDelft).
Besides risk identiﬁcation, the EBR facilitates risk classiﬁcation as well. It is
easy to apply the described semi-qualitative method. Table 9.1 presents a typical
programme for an EBR session that proved to be successful in practice for a
large number of projects. It demonstrates the feasibility of performing a risk
identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation in just half a day.
Table 9.1: Programme for an EBR-facilitated and team-based risk session
Time (hours)
Activity
09.00–09.30
Introduction, including project and session objectives
09.30–10.15
Risk identiﬁcation
10.15–10.30
Coffee and tea break
10.30–10.45
Preparation of risk classiﬁcation
10.45–11.30
Risk classiﬁcation
11.30–12.00
Presentation of results in risk matrices
12.00–13.00
Joint lunch, agreements on next steps and closure

178
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Obviously, depending on the characteristics and objectives of the project of
concern, alternative programmes may be preferred and established. Anyhow, each
session will start with a general introduction about the session’s objectives and
the risk assessment software to be used. This software is user-friendly and can
normally be operated by every participant just after a concise test run.
Then the risk identiﬁcation takes place, either by building on existing risk ﬁles
or by starting from zero. After a check of the identiﬁed risks, with regard to their
appropriate structuring in pre-deﬁned risk groups, the risk classiﬁcation system
will be introduced, to be followed by the risk classiﬁcation. Two major advantages
of the ICT-facilitated risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation are efﬁciency and the
digitally available results, as presented in Figures 9.3 and 9.4. Other formats for risk
presentations can be easily derived when demanded by the project circumstances.
This risk information serves obviously as a sound basis for the project’s risk
register.
After the team-based risk session
Based on the results of the team-based risk session, the next GeoQ steps of risk
remediaton, risk evaluation and risk mobilization can be made. The steps are
extensively described in Chapter 10 through to Chapter 13. In addition, each risk
needs an explicit allocation to one of the project participants, such as the client,
contractor and perhaps even the engineer, as discussed in Chapter 11.
The deﬁnition and performance of a ground investigation is one of the main
risk remediation measures after the team-based risk session in the pre-design
phase. Besides the sort of site – greenﬁeld, brownﬁeld or greyﬁeld – the scope
of the ground investigation should be highly driven by the results of the project
risk proﬁle that resulted from the risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation process.
In other words, which risks should be remediated by the additional knowledge
of a ground investigation? This demands balancing risk proﬁles and ground
investigations.
Balancing risk proﬁles and ground investigations
The dream of optimum ground investigations
Anyone involved in design and construction understands that any form of ground
investigation is required in order to arrive at an effective design and construc-
tion. Nothing new so far. Every ground investigation does not just need proper
planning, it calls also for creativity, a critical attitude and a risk-driven approach.
Typical questions to be asked are of the type: ‘Is a standard investigation sufﬁcient
or is it worthwhile performing some additional tests?’ An appropriate answer to
this type of question is highly risk proﬁle dependent.
A wish I regularly encounter, expressed by both ground engineering experts
and lay people who have to manage ground-related aspects in their projects, con-

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
179
cerns the suitable scope of the ground investigation. A question that echoes in
each and every construction project, at a certain moment, is: ‘How much ground
investigation do we have to do?’. The hidden wish underlying this question is a
clear and uniform answer, that says: ‘With so many boreholes and those labor-
atory tests we have exactly the right ground investigation scope for our project’.
Unfortunately, reality is not that nice and such an answer is simply non-existent.
The optimum ground investigation depends on the earlier indicated variety of
project speciﬁc factors. Perhaps even more important, the right scope of ground
investigation is not an objective fact. Here we revisit the soft systems and people
factor within any construction project. The most appropriate ground investigation
is particularly dependent on the subjective perceptions of the ground-related pro-
ject risks. Therefore, the best thinkable ground investigation varies (widely) with
probably most of the individual experts within the project. While interpreting
ground data, who does not recognize sighs of ground engineers, like: ‘How is it
possible that these guys did not take a sample of this very important ground layer’.
This is due to the differences in risk perception between these individual profes-
sionals, the effect of team dynamics on risk attitude and not forgetting the risk
tolerance of our clients. Therefore, this entire book will not provide one formula
with an absolute validity for the optimum ground investigation. That dream has
gone.
From dream to reality – the relative costs of ground investigations
However, what we can do is highlight the relationship between ground investiga-
tions and the project risk proﬁle. Based on the ﬁrst three GeoQ steps of gathering
information, risk identiﬁcation and risk classiﬁcation, we have to remediate the
most important pre-design risks in some way or another. Normally, we need addi-
tional ground information to be able to take suitable risk remediation measures.
We should balance the costs of these ground investigations with the seriousness
of the risks we need to remediate. Figure 9.6 presents the balance we are look-
ing for.
Figure 9.6 presents two trends with, in my view, only a theoretical validity.
The ﬁrst trend relates a ground risk decrease to an increase in the scope of
ground investigations. In other words, if more ground data (the knowledge factor)
were available, then the degree of ground-related risk would reduce. This trend
agrees with our gut-feeling but is usually hard to prove by factual data. We will
recognize the second trend from our practice: an increase in the scope of ground
investigations results in an increase in the ground investigation costs. Our main
challenge is to balance ground investigation costs with an appropriate reduction
of ground risk. The resulting ground risk proﬁle should be in due balance with the
initial costs of the required ground investigation. Deliberately, Figure 9.6 presents
this optimum as in a cloud. In my vision, this optimum cannot be reached in an
objective way because the inherent uncertainty of the cost effects of the residual

180
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
risks can never be compared with the certainty of the ground investigation costs
within a certain scope of work. We remain at best guesses, unfortunately.
Ground investigation scope 
Ground related risk
Ground investigation costs
Theoretical
optimum…. 
Figure 9.6: The theory of balancing costs of ground investi-
gation with risk.
However,
the
costs
of
ground
investigations
and
related
activities
are
relat-
ively
low
when
expressed
as a percentage of the total
project
costs.
According
to
Smith (1996), costs of ground
investigations
are
typically
less than 1 per cent of the
construction costs. Blyth and
de Freitas (1984) assess the
costs of ground investigations
to be between 0.5 and 1.0 per
cent of the project costs, but
this should not be taken as
a rule. Ground investigation
costs between 0.2 and 0.5 per
cent are typically considered
as adequate in the construction
industry (Knill, 2003), while
Brandl (2004) estimates ground investigation costs to be between 0.1 and 1 per
cent of the project costs. Indeed, the literature presents a variety of percentages,
which have in common that they are typically (far) below 1 per cent of the total
project costs.
In addition to this wide ground investigation costs scatter, Brandl (2004) adds
that ‘money cannot buy risk free ground’, even if the usual percentages of ground
investigation costs were to be multiplied by a factor of 5 to 20. As far back as 1984,
the US Subcommittee on Geotechnical Site Investigations and the US National
Committee in Tunneling Technology recommended increasing the expenditure
on ground investigations to an average of 3 per cent of the project costs in
order to arrive at better overall project results, at least for typical underground
constructions (US Subcommittee on Geotechnical Site Investigations, 1984). Their
evaluation of 22 case studies of underground construction projects demonstrates a
clear connection between expenditure on ground investigations and the deviation
of the ﬁnal project costs from the initially estimated project costs. Projects with
ground investigation costs up to 1 per cent of the estimated total project costs,
showed deviations in ﬁnal project costs from −40 to +70 per cent, compared to
the estimated total project costs. With an expenditure on ground investigations
of typically more than 2 per cent of the estimated total costs, these deviations

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
181
stayed within a margin of 10 per cent. Clayton (2001) presents the results of an
investigation by Mott McDonald and Soil Mechanics Ltd (1994) for more than 50
UK highway projects. The evaluation of these projects conﬁrms the relationship
between construction cost overruns and the degree of investment in ground inves-
tigations. The US and UK research also conﬁrm the relationship between the
degree of ground-related risk and the scope of ground investigations, as presented
in Figure 9.6.
If we recall the facts of ground-related problems easily adding 5 per cent, 30
per cent, 50 per cent or even more than 100 per cent to the initial project price
(Clayton, 2001), then there is a huge potential added value of adequate ground
investigations. However, the attitude towards ground investigations is sometimes
not yet favourable to bring this potential into practice.
Towards risk driven cost awareness
As presented in Chapter 2, it is estimated that a signiﬁcant portion of all failure
costs in the construction industry are directly or indirectly connected to uncertain-
ties related to the ground conditions. At least in The Netherlands and, for instance,
also in Norway, the USA, China and Japan, there is an unfavourable history and
an ongoing habit to buy ground investigations occasionally on the cheapest price
criterion only. The client or client’s engineer provides a ‘shopping list’ with a
number of in-situ and laboratory tests, often with minor or even no context of
the project requirements. The bidder with the lowest price wins the contract, and
apparently everybody is happy. As demonstrated by the previous studies and
examples, these types of ground investigations, without a well-deﬁned risk driven
strategy and not seldom of a doubtful quality, are by far not the most cost effective
at the end of the project. It is even more remarkable when we look at ground
investigations from a medical point of view. Box 9.1 presents a comparison of
ground investigations with medical investigations.
Ideally, the choice of the type of ‘geotechnical hospital’ to deﬁne the most effec-
tive and efﬁcient scope of ground investigations should be based on the results of
the ground risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation. A number of standard penetration
tests in the ﬁeld (‘the family doctor’) are usually sufﬁcient in rather small-scale and
simple projects in the early design phase. For larger and more complex projects
it is often worthwhile performing some undisturbed sampling and laboratory
tests (‘the local hospital’). In the case of serious risks or a low risk tolerance
of the parties involved, innovative site investigation techniques (‘the specialist
hospital’) may provide important added value, possibly even in the pre-design
phase.
We are able to act in a risk-driven way in order to attempt to optimize our
ground investigations. Indeed, an early and risk-driven approach to ground
investigations and consultancy services may be initially more expensive than the

182
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 9.1
Ground investigations from a medical perspective
Let us explore the actual ground investigation approach from a medical per-
spective. If you visit your family doctor with a broken leg, you cannot expect
that he or she is able to provide you with the necessary treatment. You will be
sent to a local hospital where your leg will be set in splints. In the case of a
complicated fracture, you will probably be treated in a specialist hospital. For a
whole range of other health problems, though, your family doctor is certainly
the right person to approach. We accept this situation as being completely
normal.
The fact that you cannot consult your family doctor for each and every prob-
lem is, however, far less obvious when it comes to geotechnical engineering
in the construction industry. For example, to manage geotechnical problems,
such as the stability of a construction pit which is located just 1 m from a
historical building, it is often the ‘family doctor’ who is approached in such
cases, since this often seems to be the cheapest option. In reality though, the
complex ground behaviour and the associated risks often require a ‘local‘
or even a ‘specialist hospital’, in order to minimize the total ﬁnal project
costs.
conventional approach. It may, however, deliver tangible results, as indicated by
the previous research examples. Ground risks can be managed more effectively.
The potential savings are generally far higher than any initial additional costs that
may be incurred by a sound ground investigation, when we remember the presen-
ted percentages on ground investigation investments in relation to the anticipated
deviations in ultimate project costs. In addition, this type of risk-driven ground
investigation does not necessarily always mean more expensive investigations.
When extending a motorway section in The Netherlands, an alternative site invest-
igation programme resulted in cost savings of 35 per cent in comparison with a
conventional approach. This was achieved by making use of existing ground data
(the results of information gathering) and a combination of cone penetration tests
(CPT) and relatively inexpensive electromagnetic measurements.
In conclusion, everyone involved in a project must realize that there is no
standard formula with regard to the optimum scope of the ground investigation.
Like in the medical sector, differentiation within the ground investigation sector is
highly necessary. Obviously, the selection of the ground investigation contractor
should not be based on the lowest price only. Apart from an attractive (low) price,
aspects such as quality and the type of investigations in relation to the risks and

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
183
project complexity have to be appraised. This seems to call for risk-driven ground
investigations!
Towards risk-driven ground investigations
The main objective of the previous section was to create awareness about the fact
that ground investigations should be balanced with the agreed risk proﬁle of any
project. This section explores how ground investigations can be balanced with
the agreed risk proﬁle in the pre-design phase. Here a major pitfall arises, the
often approached mindset that a risk-driven approach is inherently difﬁcult and
complex, as for instance mentioned by Smith (1996) and Ho et al. (2000). Risk
management does not necessarily imply difﬁcult probabilistic calculations and a
jungle of cause and effects diagrams. Also with regard to ground investigations,
risk management starts with common sense and well-structured thinking about
the main project goals to be achieved, the probability and effects of unfavourable
events or risks and how to remediate these by proper site investigations. This
type of analysis, which can be very brief for small projects and more extensive
for large and complex projects, results almost ﬂuently in the required ground
investigations.
Therefore, by balancing ground investigations with the agreed risk proﬁle of our
projects, we should add a dimension to our conventional way of deﬁning ground
investigations. Likely the combination of codes of practice and the experiences
of the involved experts determine the scope of the ground investigation, likely
with the best intentions. By adding the third dimension of risk, from the results
of the risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation processes, we should be able to answer
effectively and efﬁciently the following three generic questions about ground
investigations:
1
what type of ground investigation do we need?
2
what quantity of ground investigation do we need?
3
what quality of ground investigation do we need?
We should acknowledge here the statement of Clayton (2001), that about 85 per
cent of all ground-related problems are directly related to the quality and extent
of ground investigations. In the pre-design phase, the primary objective of a
ground investigation is to arrive at a risk-driven conceptual model of the ground.
Given the rather sketch-like character of the pre-design to be made, normally a
preliminary, but risk-driven (!), type of ground investigation is sufﬁcient. It should
reveal the ground layering and different ground masses, together with the main

184
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
geotechnical, geohydrological and geoenvironmental material properties of these
ground layers and masses. Detailed ground investigations, to ﬁll the white spots,
the unknown areas of ground properties and behaviour that surfaced during the
pre-design phase, will be performed in a later project phase.
Therefore, regarding the ﬁrst question about the type of ground investigation
techniques, usually the more conventional site investigation techniques, like (core)
drilling with sampling and cone penetration testing, are appropriate. Laboratory
testing involves normally the well-known index tests, such as sieve analyses, com-
pleted with testing of the deformation and the strength properties by oedometer
testing, triaxial testing, unconﬁned compressive strength testing, and so on. In
addition, geophysical techniques may add value, as well as aerial photographs
and even satellite pictures. The added value of more specialist site investigation
tools surfaces probably in the next phase, because then the really important risks
are disclosed, including their risk driving parameters. Many specialist textbooks
describe the numerous available drilling, sampling and cone penetration tech-
niques. It is considered beyond the scope of this book to provide a detailed lists
with all pros and cons of the existing site investigation tools. Specialist advice
should be sought if we do not feel up to date about our actual ground invest-
igation knowledge. This may turn out to be a very good investment in our
project.
The second question is about the quantity of the site investigation. How many
tests should we do with the selected techniques? Again, this question is very much
dependent upon the site characteristics, the project characteristics and the agreed
risk proﬁle of the project. Therefore, the only answer I have is: it depends.
The third question about the quality is easier to answer: the quality should
be according to the internationally widely available but still often neglected
codes, standards and guidelines. We should be able to feel conﬁdent about the
factual ground investigation results. Even if the factual data are correct and
state-of-the-art in their presentation, the inherent fuzzy, random and incomplete
character of ground conditions provide still ample challenges for a successful
pre-design.
An increasing number of ground investigation contractors are ISO certiﬁcated.
For the more large and complex projects a project speciﬁc quality programme
may add value. The certiﬁcation of ﬁeld and laboratory investigation worldwide
is in the very early development stage. I expect a real increase in certiﬁcation, like
in many other sectors, in the coming years, in particular if risk-driven ground
investigations become more widely applied. Because with a risk-driven approach
it is quite difﬁcult to hide poor quality.
In my opinion, this risk-driven approach of the deﬁnition of the type, quantity
and quality of ground investigations requires much more attention in day-to-day

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
185
practice. The following case studies reveal some practical experiences with this
risk-driven approach of ground investigations.
Case studies
In this section two case studies are presented concerning the pre-design of a
project or parts of a project. The purpose of these cases is to demonstrate how the
GeoQ process may work in practice in the pre-design phase of a project. The ﬁrst
case demonstrates how the GeoQ process facilitates the tender preparation for
a quite large design and construct (D&C) project. The second case demonstrates
how GeoQ can also contribute in the pre-design phase of a rather small project.
It describes the process of ground risk management for a rather small directional
drilling project.
As mentioned, GeoQ was in its full development during the cases studies. For
that reason the steps and methods are not yet fully applied in these cases, with
the hindsight knowledge and experience we now have gained so far.
Ground risk management for a tunnel project
As in many large cities worldwide, the city of Amsterdam also experiences its
daily trafﬁc jams. The capacity of one of the city’s major tunnels, the Coentunnel,
will be doubled by a second tunnel in an attempt to reduce some of these trafﬁc
jams. The Ministry of Transport and Public Works decided to apply the GeoQ
approach in the pre-design phase of this design and construct (D&C) project, to
support contract preparation for the tender. One of the main reasons for this client
applying the GeoQ process was to prepare a transparent set of tender documents,
in order to avoid, as much as possible, disputes about differing site conditions in
the later phases of the project.
Let us start with the ﬁrst GeoQ step of gathering information. The site of this
second Coentunnel is typically a greyﬁeld site, because of its location adjacent to
the existing Coentunnel. There are no alternatives for the location of the second
Coentunnel. The ground, with its geotechnical, geohydrological and geoenvir-
onmental properties has to be considered as a given fact. Management of the
interaction of the new tunnel with the existing tunnel will be one of the main
challenges.
Because of the existing Coentunnel and motorways a lot of historical ground
data are already available at the pre-design phase. The project was started a num-
ber of years ago and then became postponed. A lot of factual and interpretative
geotechnical could be used, varying from data back in the 1960s to more recent
data from the 1980s.

186
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
With the existing ground data and project speciﬁcations as a sound basis, the
next two GeoQ phases of risk identiﬁcation and risk classiﬁcation were entered.
For this purpose, experts from both the client and the engineer organized a team-
based risk session, facilitated by the Electronic Board Room. During this session
the foreseeable ground-related risks were identiﬁed and classiﬁed, according to
the method as described before. Considering the objective of the preparation of
D&C tender documents with a maximum of transparency about ground-related
risks, the following six risk categories were distinguished:
1
Geotechnical risks
2
Geohydrological risks
3
Geoenvironmental risks
4
Risks caused by man-made structures in the ground
5
Contractual ground-related risks
6
Risks of unacceptable quality of ground data.
We may recognize the ﬁrst four risk categories as the four main types of ground-
related risks. The remaining two risk categories were added, because of the speciﬁc
client’s objective.
In total, 141 ground-related risks were identiﬁed, classiﬁed and stored in a
ground-related digital risk register. Based on the risk register, adequate risk
remediation measures were deﬁned for the most important risks, which implies
GeoQ process step 4. The two main ground risk remediation measures were:
•
The deﬁnition of an additional ground investigation
•
The preparation of a Geotechnical Baseline Report (GBR).
The identiﬁed and classiﬁed ground-related risks revealed the need for additional
ground information, in order to be able to provide the tendering contractors an
appropriate set of ground information. The deﬁnitions of the additional ground
investigation programme were based on the type, quantity and quality of the
existing ground data and the main ground-related risks. The costs of the ground
investigation were carefully balanced with the actual ground risk proﬁle of the
project.
It became apparent that such an approach is still quite new. In particular,
the experienced ground engineers in the project needed to transform their con-
ventional way of engineering, with implicit ground risk management, towards
the GeoQ process with explicit ground risk management. It required quite some

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
187
change management competences of the project management in order to apply
the GeoQ process as intended.
In spite of the project’s early pre-design phase, the risk-driven approach res-
ulted in the application of a few rather innovative and specialist site investiga-
tion methods. Serious risks of intolerable horizontal and vertical deformations of
both the new and the existing tunnel were the main drivers for this advanced
testing. It included in-situ measurement of the elastic ground properties by con-
epressiometer testing (CPM) and continuous ground proﬁling by using the so-
called Consolitest, a geophysical tool. Furthermore, the compression moduli of the
ground were carefully determined by so-called K0-Constant Rate of Strain (CRS)
laboratory testing (Pereboom et al., 2005). The ground engineering experts among
the readers may recognize these tests. For the remaining readers the message is
just that, even in an early project phase, advanced ground testing may be judged
as cost-effective, when based on a risk analysis and serving as a risk remediation
method.
The results of the additional ground investigation were very welcome to serve
as an additional basis, together with the historical ground data, for the second
ground risk remediation tool: the preparation of the Geotechnical Baseline Report
(GBR). In this GBR each identiﬁed ground-related risk is clearly allocated to the
contractor or the client. The GBR serves as a contractual document and is issued
together with the other tender documents. Chapter 11 explores the GBR approach
within the GeoQ process in detail.
The preparation of the GBR included the ﬁfth GeoQ process step, the evaluation
of the remaining risk proﬁle. A digital database was built for the storage and use
of all available ground information. It served also as tool to perform step 6 of
the GeoQ process: mobilization of the ground risk data to the next project phase.
In fact, the GBR and the database served as a combination in this respect. The
GBR is part of the tender documents to the bidding contractors, together with a
set of factual and interpretative ground data that can be easily retrieved from the
database. Alternatively, the client can choose to provide the bidding contractors
full on-line access to the database. Advantages are the reduction of transaction
costs and full disclosure of all ground-related data to the bidding contractors.
One lesson learned should be added to this case. The contracting phase of this
project was in full swing, during the writing of this book. In this tender phase,
one of the bidding contractors lacked essential ground information, in spite of the
careful and risk-driven preparation of all ground data in the tender documents.
That particular contractor proposed an innovative tunnel design, which required
very deep piling. As a consequence, in the view of that particular contractor,
the ground investigation depth of about 30 m below ground level should have
been extended to at least 50–60 m below ground level. This design scenario was
clearly unforeseen by all experts involved in the pre-design phase. It is one of the

188
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
consequences of a design and construct type of contract. With this lesson I want
to conﬁrm that GeoQ is not a panacea to avoid any ground-related problem. It
may be a big step in the right direction, but as this case reveals, the ground, as
well as the solutions to deal with it, are very difﬁcult to predict.
Selecting the most suitable horizontal boring technique
This second GeoQ case study about the pre-design phase concerns a rather small
project, as against the large tunnel project presented in the previous case. It is to
demonstrate that the GeoQ process can also be applied for rather small projects in
an effective way, without using sophisticated tools such as the Electronic Board
Room for ground risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation. In this case the GeoQ
approach was initiated by a contractor.
During the construction of a motorway in the south-eastern part of The Nether-
lands, it was necessary to relocate several existing pipelines. Complications were
foreseen in that section of the project where the new motorway crosses a river. An
important National Park-like nature conservation area is located in the vicinity
of the river crossing and any excavation activities are forbidden by Dutch law.
In the pre-design phase of this project the horizontal directional boring technique
appeared to be an interesting option to relocate the pipelines below the river and
to keep the protected area undisturbed as well. The contractor who was appointed
to relocate the pipelines decided on a risk-driven veriﬁcation of the suitablility of
this option and a GeoQ approach was applied.
By starting with the ﬁrst GeoQ step of gathering information, this project can be
considered as some sort of greyﬁeld project, because the location of the motorway
and pipelines are more or less ﬁxed by all kinds of federal and local regulations.
In this particular project, interaction with the environment meant no disturbance
of the protected nature reserve area. The existing ground data were rather limited
in this early phase, prior to construction of the motorway. It consisted of only two
borings at a considerable distance from the proposed river crossing, as well as a
few cone penetration tests.
For this rather small project the second and third GeoQ step of risk identiﬁc-
ation and classiﬁcation were performed by using the joint expertise and experi-
ence of the client, the engineer and the contractor. The presence of gravel was
considered as the main ground-related risk for this particular directional bor-
ing. For those readers interested, Box 9.2 presents some background information
about what may be indicated as the gravel nightmare for horizontal directional
boring.
A careful analysis of the limited existing ground data, from the gravel risk
perspective, showed that the quantity and quality of the existing ground data
were insufﬁcient in order to assess whether the gravel risk was acceptable or not
for the contractor. The available borings were carried out to only 6 m below the

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
189
surface, while the horizontal boring would be drilled a lot deeper, in order to be
able to cross the river. Clearly, the borings were not deep enough. The available
cone penetration tests (CPTs) did not really contribute either, as these show refus-
als on gravel layers, of which the thickness remains hidden. In addition, while
acknowledging the geologically determined heterogeneity of river deposits, it was
considered as not acceptable to interpolate between the borings. The limited depth
of the borings could even be caused by refusals on serious gravel deposits. This
worst case ground conditions scenario was further supported by a boring carried
out at even greater distance, where a 12 m thick gravel layer was encountered at
6 m beneath the surface. If a similar body of gravel was also present at the loca-
tion of the pipeline junction, then only a very expensive boring technique could
be used. This would involve so-called obliquely boring through the gravel layer
using an auger at the start and ﬁnish point of the boring section. Major extra costs
would be the result of this situation.
Box 9.2
The gravel nightmare for horizontal directional boring
To install pipelines using horizontal directional boring, a relatively small hole
is ﬁrst bored along the required route. The diameter of the bored passage is
then enlarged using a reamer, so that the pipeline can be pulled though. To
ensure that the borehole remains stable, a boring ﬂuid is introduced under
pressure into the passage. This works well in the case of sand and clay. If gravel
is present along the pipeline route, however, the boring ﬂuid may ﬂow away
between the gravel particles and provide insufﬁcient counter pressure. This
can lead to collapse of the borehole, particularly where the horizontal sections
of the bored route are located. As a consequence, the drilling equipment gets
stuck and is very difﬁcult, if not impossible, to retrieve. Obviously, occurrence
of this kind of risk creates a maximum pressure on the budget, planning and
quality of the project. This blocking of a horizontal directional boring, because
of unfavourable ground conditions, occurs at least a number of times each year
in Dutch practice. It is a nightmare to all parties involved and often results in
major disputes, claims and eventually legal affairs.
Therefore, as a risk remediation measure, step four of the GeoQ process, an
additional ground investigation was deﬁned. To obtain more certainty to decide
upon the very expensive horizontal boring solution, more information was needed
about the ground conditions at the location of the river crossing. Balancing the
risk proﬁle of the project with the additional site investigation costs resulted in

190
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
the execution of two deep conventional vertical borings, with sampling, on both
banks of the river.
As part of the risk evaluation, step ﬁve of the GeoQ process, these borings were
carefully interpreted. The ﬁndings from these borings were unexpected but highly
desired. Only a thin gravel layer and a thick hard sand layer were demonstrated
to be present by the two additional borings. These layers presented no problems
when carrying out the directional boring, according to the expert opinions of the
ground and drilling professionals involved. The favourable ground conditions
enabled the pipeline to be installed by the proposed directional boring technique
without the need for very expensive gravel risk reducing measures. These ﬁndings
were reported, as the GeoQ mobilization step of ground risk data, ready for use
in the following projects phases, by those parties involved.
This case study of a rather small project demonstrates a quick and easy applica-
tion of the GeoQ process, without the aid of rather sophisticated tools, such as the
EBR for risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation. In this case GeoQ proved to be just
a structured and risk-driven process. It did not involve any extra costs, compared
with the conventional activities in the pre-design phase. However, a major risk
became foreseen. The necessary risk remediating measure, by a very focused and
limited ground investigation, was carried out. As a result the major gravel risk
was reduced to an acceptable level. Therefore, the horizontal directional drilling
option could proceed in the next project phase, with an acceptable risk proﬁle for
the parties involved.
Summary
This chapter demonstrated the application of the GeoQ process in the pre-design
phase of construction. It focused on the GeoQ steps of risk identiﬁcation, risk
classiﬁcation and risk remediation. Three approaches to support ground risk
management during pre-design were introduced and discussed. First, the team-
based approach for risk identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation can be applied highly
efﬁciently by ICT supported facilities, such as the Electronic Board Room. Second,
the relationship between site investigation costs and risk has been demonstrated.
Only by subjective judgement are we able to balance the project risk proﬁle
with the optimum scope of ground investigations. However, major cost-saving
opportunities arise if we add risk as a third dimension to the conventional dimen-
sions of guidelines and expertise for the deﬁnition of ground investigations. An
adequate site investigation appeared to be a viable part of risk remediation and,
based on its results, we should be able to select the most suitable pre-design
solution.
The third ground risk management approach presented a number of consider-
ations for a risk-driven ground investigation. It described how to balance ground

GeoQ in the pre-design phase
191
investigations with risk, by deﬁning the type, quantity and quality in a risk-driven
way, while ﬁtting the project’s risk proﬁle. Two case studies, a large tunnel pro-
ject and a much smaller horizontal directional boring project demonstrated the
application and value of the GeoQ approach in practice.

10
GeoQ in the design phase
Introduction
For any construction, an appropriate design serves as a foundation of success. In
other words, design will make or, on the contrary, literally break the project. The
previous chapter covered the project phase of pre-design and is followed here by
design, either arranged by the client or performed by a contractor in a design and
construct project. Figure 10.1 presents the design phase as the third step in the
GeoQ process.
Maintenance
Phase
Design
Phase
Contracting
Phase
Construction
Phase
Feasibility
Phase
TIME
Pre-Design
Phase
GEOQ PROCESS 
Figure 10.1: The design phase within the six GeoQ phases.
The project’s pre-design
will be worked out in detail
during the design stage. If
it has been decided for a
bored tunnel at the end
of pre-design phase, then
a bored tunnel design will
have
to
be
worked
out
in detail. The GeoQ pro-
cess aims effectively to sup-
port the risk-driven design
activities, from a ground
conditions perspective and
within the project speciﬁca-
tions and the risk tolerance
of the involved parties. By
the end of the design phase,
the indicated bored tunnel
should be ready for con-
struction with a known and

GeoQ in the design phase
193
accepted risk proﬁle. If the client is involved in design, the contracting phase will
be next, in which the client brings the project to the market for tendering. If the
contractor has already got the project, in the case of design and construct, this
means that the design phase will be followed by the construction phase.
For reasons of simplicity, this book considers detailed design for construction as
being part of the design phase, while recognizing the separation of these phases
in many (large) construction projects. However, this approach does not affect the
application of the GeoQ process. In both phases, design and detailed design, the
entire GeoQ cycle should be executed, to raise maximum effectiveness.
Two methods to support ground risk management during design will be intro-
duced and thoroughly discussed. These methods are, in particular, related to the
fourth GeoQ process step of risk remediation, which is now of paramount import-
ance. Any (detailed) design costs a lot of effort and resources and major design
changes are occasionally (very) expensive, time consuming and frustrating to the
professionals involved.
The ﬁrst method identiﬁes and selects the most appropriate remediation of
foreseeable ground-related risk. General options are the reduction of the risk cause,
the reduction of the risk effects, or a combination of both. After an introduction of
risk cause and effect remediation, these two approaches are explored separately
in more detail. The role of probabilistic methods will be highlighted for risk
cause reduction, while the observational method and fall-back scenarios prove
to be useful for risk effect remediation. Indeed, the concept of scenario analysis
is revisited here as a risk remediation tool and in close cooperation with the
observational method. The latter monitors the ground during construction for
checking whether the anticipated behaviour, as used for the design, indeed occurs
or not. If not, the fall-back scenarios have to be used.
A risk-driven deﬁnition and application of ground investigations is the second
method of ground-risk remediation during design. Detailed and advanced ground
data are often highly desired, to decide on the most suitable risk remediation meas-
ures, while this information is obviously also required for normal design activities,
according to conventional design standards and speciﬁcations. A six-step model
will be introduced, which breaks object-related risks down to ground parameter
level. This method serves as a basis for truly risk-driven ground investigations in
the design phase.
The order of application of these two ground-risk remediation methods is highly
project-speciﬁc. Some projects may ﬁrst need an additional ground investigation,
to decide on the type of risk remediation. Other projects will explore the risk
remediation options and then perform the required ground investigation, to verify
the risk remediation options.
Two case studies are presented, in which the GeoQ process played a dominant
role and, as usual, the chapter ends with a summary.

194
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Ground risk management during design
Risk remediation: cause or effect approach?
Risk remediation is step four in the GeoQ process and should be preceded by the
GeoQ steps of gathering information, risk identiﬁcation and risk classiﬁcation. After
these three steps, the most serious ground-related project risks should explicitly
be known. Next we have to deal with these risks. Chapter 7 introduced ﬁve
risk response strategies, in order to remediate risk in some way or another: risk
retention, risk reduction, risk transfer, risk avoidance and risk ignorance. Which
of these speciﬁcally apply to the design phase?
This section explores the risk response strategy of risk reduction, which proves
to be particularly useful during design when compared with its alternatives. Risk
retention, by just accepting the risk and doing nothing, will be unacceptable for
any serious risks. Transfer of serious risk to another party is often not possible,
particularly when ground-related risk is an integral part of a design and construct
contract. Only if a risk is out-of-control of the designer, risk transfer is possibly a
serious option by following the golden rule of risk management, about who should
be responsible for which risk. Avoidance of risk is often worthwhile considering
during design, as an alternative to risk reduction. For instance, the settlement risk
of a shallow foundation can be avoided by a piled foundation towards deeper
and stronger strata. Obviously, the last risk response strategy of risk ignorance
should not be taken too seriously anymore.
The concept of risk reduction demands a more detailed exploration. This
approach has in fact three dimensions:
1
regarding the risk probability or likelihood of occurrence: risk cause reduction
2
regarding the risk effect or consequences: risk effect reduction
3
regarding both risk probability and effect: combined risk cause and effect
reduction.
Figure 10.2 presents these three types of risk remediation within the earlier presen-
ted risk matrix.
Morgenstern (2000b) introduces the Consequential Risk Analyses (CRA) as,
in his words, ‘attempts to prevent a particular outcome from occurring or to
mitigate the impact of the outcome’. This phrase indicates a cause and effect
approach for risk reduction and Morgenstern advocates combining the systematic
application of qualitative risk analysis tools, like Potential Problem Analysis (PPA)
and Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA), together with the observation of
ground behaviour during construction. How does this approach work in practice?

GeoQ in the design phase
195
risk effect
risk cause
ground-related
risk
effect reduction
cause and effect
reduction
cause reduction 
Figure 10.2: Ground risk remediation by cause and effect reduction.
From time to time,
the risk of ﬂooding is a
serious threat to many
people
all
over
the
world living in relat-
ively low-lying areas.
This
risk
of
ﬂooding
provides an illustrative
example to the possibil-
ities for risk cause and
risk effect remediation.
For reasons of sim-
plicity, let us limit the
risk cause to the fail-
ure of a water retain-
ing structure, such as
a
dike.
The
strength
of these structures is
highly dependent upon
the underlying ground conditions. An aspect such as piping is a failure mech-
anism, in which groundwater ﬂows create some sort of pipes or holes in sand
layers underlying the dike. These may seriously undermine the dike stability and,
in situations with extremely high water levels and the resulting extreme loading
conditions, such a dike may fail.
The cause reduction of the risk of ﬂooding involves the reduction of the cause
part of the ﬂood risk. Many Dutch dikes are designed to an extremely high water
level of once in the 10 000 years. Consequently, the dike should be strong enough
to resist this extreme high water and its associated loads. This evidently results
in rather heavy dikes that, in fact, turn out to be over-dimensioned for 9999 years
during the 10 000 year’s period.
Alternatively, risk effect reduction involves measures to reduce the effects of dike
failure. Therefore, in the early days, the Dutch living in high-risk and low-lying
areas furnished the ground ﬂoors and walls in their houses with tiles, to about
1 m height. If high water conditions were expected, typically to be judged by the
weather conditions in those times, then they moved their precious furniture to the
ﬁrst ﬂoor. In the case of a ﬂood, which was quite normal, they moved themselves
to the ﬁrst ﬂoor as well. As a result of the tiled ﬂoors and walls, the water-damage
was limited and needed mainly cleaning. Obviously, if there was a serious ﬂood
with water levels considerable higher than 1 m, these brave people got into trouble.
Large-scale evacuation programmes are more modern equivalents to the ancient
risk effect measures against ﬂooding.

196
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
The combination of the cause and effect reduction implies the reduction of
both risk dimensions. In this example it means both strengthening the dikes
and preparing large-scale evacuation programmes. Box 10.1 presents the Dutch
tendency to pay more attention to risk effect reduction with regard to the risk of
ﬂooding.
Box 10.1
Revival of risk effect reduction
Recently, in The Netherlands, the aspect of ﬂood risk effect reduction gets
more attention, in particular from the Dutch ministry that is responsible for
ﬂood protection. This revival is caused by the increasing lack of space in
The Netherlands. Many local governments want to develop domestic areas in
the abundant low-lying parts, close to the main rivers and coast. However,
insurers are not ready to insure the risk of ﬂooding, in spite of the fact that
many people want to live in these areas. The costs for upgrading dikes to the
modern safety standards are enormous, apart from a lot of resistance by all
kind of environmental pressure groups, who want to protect the typical Dutch
landscape. This situation triggers the development of innovative construction
methods that serve as a ﬂood risk effect remediation. Examples are houses on
piles above ground level, as well as the design of ﬂoating houses. Indeed, this
type of construction has already been common practice for a long time in other
parts of the world.
Both risk cause and effect reduction need due consideration in the design phase,
even while risk effect reduction is typically implemented during the construction
and maintenance phase. The choice to remediate after design, however, should be
made already during design. This results, for instance, in a number of fall-back
scenarios, to be agreed upon during design and to be applied during construction,
when required.
If cause reduction, effect reduction and even their combination is considered
as not appropriate for a particular risk, we may consider the remaining response
strategy of risk avoidance. I recall the example of the ﬂood risk and the dike for
a new domestic housing project in a low-lying area. If both dike strengthening
and speciﬁc construction measures against ﬂooding are likely to become over-
expensive, then relocation of the project to a less ﬂood-sensitive area would be
required. This need for relocation has preferably already surfaced by the risk
analyses during the feasibility or at least pre-design phases. While forced to take
such a relocation measure during the design phase, the risk management pro-
cess typically failed in the previous project stages. However, it is even better

GeoQ in the design phase
197
to become aware of it during design, rather than just continuing the project in
unawareness. This situation would result in an unacceptable ﬂood risk during the
operation phase of the domestic housing project, when the people actually live
there.
Finally, also the type of construction contract often inﬂuences the selection of risk
reducing options. In a design and construct project the contractor is responsible for
both design and construction. Therefore, it is up to the contractor to decide upon
ground risk remediation during design or construction and the contractor will
beneﬁt from it. In a traditional type of contract, with a clear distinction between
design and construction, it is much more difﬁcult to anticipate risk reduction
during construction, simply because it is the responsibility of another party.
Reducing the risk cause: ground parameters and the
probabilistic approach
If we choose to remediate a ground risk by its cause reduction, we have to look the
inherent ground uncertainties straight in the eyes. We have to deal with the fuzzy,
random and incomplete ground character. In this respect, the earlier introduced
methods of Fault Tree Analysis (FTA), Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA),
and Failure Mode, Effect and Criticality Analysis (FMECA) help to break the risk
causes down to the level of individual ground parameters. However, these para-
meters, such as the undrained shear strength, rock discontinuity shear strength,
soil permeability, vary inherently, as many readers may have experienced from
their ground investigation, engineering and construction involvement. Which val-
ues of these parameters should be applied in the design in order to arrive at the
desired risk cause reduction, without expensive over-dimensioning? A probabilistic
approach may help to deal effectively with this inherent parameter variation.
What is a probabilistic approach? Let us ﬁrst have a small look backwards.
Since the development of the ground engineering disciplines, somewhere in the
1920s, the so-called deterministic approach has been widely adopted in ground
engineering. It assumes an explicit and unique answer to a geotechnical problem,
either by the application of theoretically sound relationships, or by empirical or
semi-empirical methods (Bell, 1987). However, as we already had to accept earlier,
explicit and unique answers are non-existent when dealing with ground. Ground-
related answers depend on a number of uncertain factors and are subject to a
certain probability. A common deﬁnition of probability is a numerical measure of
the likelihood that an event will occur. This probability measure is often expressed
in a percentage, like 20 per cent or 80 per cent. The concept of probability may help
us in measuring, expressing and analysing the uncertainties of future events, as
expressed by Anderson et al. (1999). If we were really sure about a ground-related
answer, then the probability of that answer would be 100 per cent. In reality,

198
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
we have to live with answers typically far below this 100 per cent probability.
As stated by Bell (1987), a probabilistic approach adopts the concept that several
outcomes are possible. Therefore, a probabilistic approach can be of great help to
deal explicitly with uncertainty in design. Authors, such as Lacasse and Nadim
(1998) and Ho et al. (2000), who also advocate a wider application of this approach,
conﬁrm this statement. Typical ground-related aspects covered by probabilistic
methods, which became available in the 1990s, are groundwater ﬂow, settlements,
slope stability assessments and the consideration of liquefaction potential (Hicks
and Samy, 2002).
However, because of its new and rather complicated nature, probabilistic
methods still remain in the neighbourhood of highly educated and experienced
specialists. More easy to handle software will certainly contribute to a much wider
application and, in the near future, I foresee a sharp increase in the application of
probabilistic approaches within the GeoQ ground risk management process.
Obviously, there are some reservations to be made. The large amount of reliable
ground data, as required for a lot of probabilistic analyses, is often still lacking, in
particular in the smaller construction projects. Furthermore, as stated earlier, we
should not over-rely on this apparent objective approach that is inherently driven
by subjective expert judgement. However, we should not miss the opportunities
of probabilistic methods, as these may at least provide some minimum but explicit
level of certainty about the most relevant ground parameters for the project. Often,
these parameters have proven to be the drivers of many of the identiﬁed and
classiﬁed as serious ground-related project risks.
Recent evolutions in the approach to the safety factor demonstrate the irreversible
advance of probabilistic methods in the ground-related disciplines, as presented
in Box 10.2.
First the good news about this evolution of the safety factor. The total ground
uncertainty is split up and allocated to the relevant ground parameters and the
loads to be used in the design calculations. Also geological heterogeneity of the
ground explicitly gets attention. Now the bad news; this approach appears to
cause a lot of confusion and controversy, because of the lack of knowledge and
experience about the way to arrive at quantiﬁed values for these partial factors of
safety (Hicks and Samy, 2002). According to Hannink et al. (2004), research within
the Dutch geotechnical community resulted in similar ﬁndings. Not being fully
familiar with the ins and outs of recent geotechnical guidelines resulted in project
inefﬁciencies, conﬂicting opinions between the different ground specialists and
unnecessary conservative design with hidden safeties. Obviously, unnecessary
costs are involved with over-dimensioned design. The probabilistic approach and
its methods are apparently not yet fully adopted and used within the geotechnical
community.

GeoQ in the design phase
199
Box 10.2
The evolution of the safety factor
The conventional factor of safety is used in the well-known deterministic type of
geotechnical design calculations. In theory, a safety factor above 1 will be sufﬁ-
cient. In geotechnical practice, however, safety factors vary normally between
approximately 1.5 and 4.0. These values combine all uncertainties about ground
conditions, loading conditions and calculation models (Bell, 1987).
A piled foundation design is considered safe and acceptable, if the ultimate
bearing capacity of the piles is at least two times the actual maximum load on
the piles, which results in a safety factor of 2. Since the 1990s, the conventional
and deterministic safety factor concept became step-by-step replaced by the
concept of characteristic values for the geotechnical design process. In fact, it is
the announcement of the (semi-) probabilistic design in ground-related engin-
eering. The Eurocode 7 of the European Union has adopted this principle of
characteristic design values, which are based on 95 per cent reliability. In other
words, the probability that the actual properties deviate adversely from the
design values is 5 per cent (ENV, 1994). Within the concept of characteristic
values, each ground parameter to be used in a certain calculation model will
have its own so-called partial factor of safety.
While considering the characteristic values of ground properties to be selected for
an appropriate design, we should realize that we are dealing with speculative risks.
It means that a ground-related risk may increase or decrease with a similar or
opposite variation of the main ground properties that drive the risk. For instance,
the risk of slope instability will be caused, among other factors, by the undrained
shear strength of the slope material and underlying ground layers. If higher values
of undrained shear strength can be used in slope stability calculations, the risk
of slope instability will decrease, while applying in this simpliﬁed example the
ceteris paribus principle, that all other factors remain constant.
A well-known question arises again: does more or other ground investigation
data allow us to use more favourable ground parameters in our calculations,
which will result in a reduced risk? Hannink et al. (2004) dare to give an answer:
more ground data involve often a major potential for design optimizations. By
catching the opportunities, these improvements reﬂect the positive side of risk
management. The same design reliability may be reached at lower net cost, which
is the reduced project cost including the additional cost for the extra ground
investigation. The second case study of this chapter is dedicated to a probabilistic
design approach, which has been used to select more favourable ground para-
meters with still an acceptable reliability. This approach resulted in attractive cost
savings within the project.

200
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
The decision about what type of design to apply, deterministic or probabilistic,
has meanwhile one well-known answer: it depends. The ground-related risks, as
retrieved from the previous GeoQ steps of information gathering, risk identiﬁc-
ation and risk classiﬁcation, need to be carefully analysed, in order to select the
most appropriate design method with regard to the risk cause remediation. In
many projects, probabilistic design certainly will add value, because it provides
insight into the main ground-related drivers of a particular risk. This information
may help in the process of deciding upon the main risk remediation options of
risk cause reduction (during design), risk effect reduction (during construction) or
risk avoidance (during design or construction). However, we should realize that
the latter option will induce new ground-related risks, as ground uncertainty is
always there.
I consider it beyond the scope of this book to explore further in detail the many
available probabilistic calculation methods, like Monte Carlo analysis, because
there are many and detailed books available about this topic. For instance, Bell
(1987) presents an accessible introduction into statistics and probabilistics in geo-
technical engineering. In addition, Anderson et al. (1999) provide a complete and
thorough description of the discipline of statistics and probability, which extends
to business and economics.
In conclusion, it is up to ourselves and the probabilistic experts we may con-
sult, to decide whether probabilistic approaches add value to the ground-risk
management activities during design of construction projects. This responsibility
requires some basic understanding of the science and art of probabilistics. At least,
we should be able to communicate effectively with the experts on probabilistics,
to check and balance their results in the decision process for our most appropri-
ate risk remediation measures. Let us now have a look at the other side of risk
remediation: reducing the risk effect.
Reducing the risk effect: the observational method and
fall-back scenarios
Let the ground-related risk happen, but in a controlled way. This, in fact, is the core
of the second risk remediation option: reducing the risk effect. Box 10.3 presents
an example.
In essence, Box 10.3 illustrates the application of the observational method, as widely
introduced by Peck (1969). By combining fall-back scenarios and monitoring dur-
ing construction, it is possible to challenge the foreseen limits of ground behaviour
within an acceptable risk proﬁle. However, while applied during construction, the
decision to use the observational method needs to be taken early in the design
phase. While designing, less conservative ground parameters have to be applied, for
instance for slope stability and settlement calculations. This is the ultimate reason

GeoQ in the design phase
201
for discussing risk effect remediation during construction in this chapter about the
design phase. The example of Box 10.3 aims to act as an appetiser for a case study
in Chapter 12 about the construction phase, where the observational method in
combination with fall-back scenarios has been successfully applied.
Box 10.3
Let the ground risk occur, but in a controlled way
A road construction project provides an example of a controlled ground risk
that may occur without problematic effects. Two risks of concern are the slope
instability of an embankment that is constructed on rather soft soil and the
embankment settlements. During construction, the height of the embankment
is restricted by the undrained shear strength and the consolidation behaviour of
the underlying soft soil layers. The load of the embankment causes groundwater
overpressures in these layers, which will temporarily reduce their effective
stresses and strength.
By the conventional way the contractor could only start with a 2 m high
embankment, to prevent embankment instability. After a certain period of time,
often in terms of several months in which the groundwater overpressures in the
underlying ground dissipate to lower levels, the next layer of 2 m can proceed.
However, the faster the embankment can be constructed, the earlier the
embankment settlements will have occurred and the more certainty the con-
tractor will generate about meeting his residual settlement requirement. This
demands balancing the risk of temporarily embankment instability, during con-
struction, against the risk of not meeting the settlement requirements at the
end of the project. By reducing the risk effect of the embankment instability,
it may be allowed to hasten its construction, in favour of reducing the settle-
ment risk. One or a few fall-back scenarios for the embankment instability are
required and include the methods, time and resources to be reserved for repair
activities. These fall-back scenarios provide a set of measures to be executed in
case the risk of embankment slope instability effectuates. By monitoring changes
in groundwater pressures in the underlying ground layers, before, during and
after the installation of the embankment ﬁll, valuable information about the
ground response to the embankment will be gained, which might even allow
the embankment construction to be further speeded up. In addition, the set-
tlement behaviour can be monitored by measuring the vertical deformation at
and in the vicinity of the embankment. Any effects of the embankment con-
struction process on the settlements become visible and by back-analysis the
expected residual settlement predictions can be reﬁned. In this way, besides
controlling the embankment instability the effect of the settlement risk is also
being controlled.

202
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
For the less serious ground-related risks, in particular, reducing their effects
instead of their causes can be cost-effective. Hidden opportunities of better ground
behaviour than expected, which can only be revealed during construction, are
used by this approach. Contrary to the concept of risk cause reduction, the
majority of risk remediation costs are only made when the risk indeed occurs,
obviously apart from costs made for the preparation of fall-back scenarios and
the execution of additional monitoring. Preparedness for surprise, change and
adaptation during construction are, however, deﬁnite prerequisites for the applic-
ation of risk effect reduction as a remediation measure. This project ﬂexibility
during construction needs to be explicitly anticipated and built-in by suitable
design.
Chapter 8 discussed scenario analysis as a risk identiﬁcation tool in the feasibility
phase. Here we revisit the concept, to apply it as a fall-back scenario for supporting
risk effect reduction. The types of range of futures and alternate futures scenarios
can both be applied as fall-back scenarios. The ﬁrst provides a range of possible
outcomes. An example is a range of increasing damage to adjacent buildings,
from cracks to even collapse, caused by adverse horizontal deformations due to
construction pit excavation. The risk effect reducing measures will depend on the
degree of horizontal deformation. They can vary from just repairing the minor
crack to the installation of (additional) horizontal struts in the construction pit,
when the horizontal deformations grow larger, to ground improvement by grout
injection techniques outside the construction pit, after stopping excavations in
case of real unexpectedly large deformations. In this case, the risk of unacceptable
horizontal deformations should already have been considered as a foreseeable risk
during design. Consequently, an unnecessarily heavy and expensive sheet pile
wall can be avoided. Monitoring will be required during construction in order
to measure the horizontal deformations during the excavation of the construction
pit. All these risk effect reducing measures demand explicit consideration in the
design phase of the construction and, obviously, the cost savings of the lighter
sheet pile wall have to be judged in view of the probability and costs associated
with the range of possible horizontal deformations.
The second scenario type of alternate futures provides a number of discrete
outcomes. Let us consider dewatering of a project site to allow for construction
in dry conditions. In this example, dewatering may reduce the groundwater level
in the project area to a considerable distance, which causes damage to crops of a
number of farmers. A discrete fall-back scenario is to use the pumped water for
irrigating the crops. Another scenario is to compensate the farmers ﬁnancially for
having no crops during one season.
Obviously, each fall-back scenario has its costs and possible other unfavourable
side effects, such as demanding a monitoring programme and delay when the
work has to be stopped in case the fall-back scenarios become reality. Therefore,

GeoQ in the design phase
203
reducing the risk effect should be carefully compared with the alternative of
reducing the risk cause. This judgement needs seriously to take place during
design. As many readers probably recognize and even may have experienced,
major changes during construction are normally highly unwanted, because of
their often enormous costs and planning complications. This brings us to the next
section, because detailed and advanced ground investigation proves to be another
viable remediation measure in order to minimize the risk of major changes during
construction, caused by inappropriate design.
Detailed and advanced ground investigations
The previous chapter presented the main objective of the preliminary or, rather
general, ground investigation in the pre-design phase: to arrive at a conceptual
model of the ground. This model reveals the main ground types, together with
the main geotechnical, geohydrological and geoenvironmental mass and material
properties, within the risk proﬁle as available during pre-design. In the next phase
of design, the most important ground-related risks for the remaining project phases
need to be disclosed, including their main risk-triggering ground parameters.
Usually, major design decisions in relation to ground risk remediation measures
have to be taken and the effects of these decisions echo through all the remaining
project phases. Additional ground information is needed to complete the risk-
driven design in detail, with ample attention to ground-related risk management,
either by risk cause or by the risk effect remediation. This calls for detailed ground
data to be retrieved by sensitive and advanced ground investigation techniques. The
results of these detailed ground investigations colour the white spots, the unknown
areas of ground properties and behaviour, which doubtlessly surface at a certain
moment. Therefore, the second method for ground risk remediation concerns how
to deﬁne a balanced and risk-driven ground investigation programme during
design. Box 10.4 presents six steps to arrive at such a programme, by a breakdown
of risks to ground parameter level. (It presents an example in parentheses.)
These six steps in Box 10.4 provide a receipt that more or less automatic-
ally results in a risk-driven ground investigation. An additional risk manage-
ment loop is, in fact, made for each ground-related object of the project. Step
three may require a further cause and effect breakdown of risk, possibly by
using the FTA, FMEA or FMECA risk analysis tools. By this in-depth risk ana-
lysis of all ground-affected constructions and the resulting ground investiga-
tion, a number of hidden and critical risks, as well as opportunities, are likely
to surface. Their remediation measures can be incorporated in either design or
construction.

204
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 10.4
Six steps to arrive at a risk-driven ground investigation
1
Determine the ground-related constructions of the project (ground embank-
ment for a road that serves as connection with a bridge on piles)
2
Determine the main geotechnical, geohydrological and geoenvironmental
mechanisms that affect the ﬁt-for-purpose of these constructions (unaccept-
able large settlements of the embankment)
3
Determine the risks, assessed by probabilities of occurrence and effects, if the
identiﬁed geotechnical, geohydrological and geoenvironmental mechanisms
act adversely (the probability and effects of unacceptable large settlements)
4
While considering the risks of step 3, determine the most appropriate
design techniques for the geotechnical, geohydrological and geoenviron-
mental mechanisms (ﬁnite element settlement calculation)
5
While considering the selected design techniques of step 4, determine the
most critical ground parameters (soil stiffness for the ﬁnite element settlement
calculation)
6
While considering the ground parameters of step 5 and the anticipated
geological heterogeneity on the site, determine the type, quantity and quality
of the ground investigation (10 borings with undisturbed piston sampling
and 30 constant rate of strain deformation tests in the laboratory).
Probabilistic approaches can be added to the model of Box 10.4. For instance,
Calle (2002) demonstrates how a probabilistic approach can be used to decide on
the optimum quantity of ground investigations. By his approach, costs of ground
investigations are compared with the probability of achieving the objectives of
the ground investigation. An example is the detection of sandy channel-deposits
by Cone Penetration Testing (CPT). These deposits are highly variable, as a result
of their alluvial or river-deposited geological history. We recall the risk of piping
below dikes, which is highly dependent on the presence of these underlying sand
layers. Calle (2002) balances the probability of locating a channel deposit with the
number of CPTs. More certainty about the channel deposits will demand more
CPTs. The cost of remediating the piping risk by a dike improvement is compared
with the cost for the site investigation and the probability that sandy deposits are
located. This approach allows restriction of the piping risk remediating measures
to those areas were the channels are located with an acceptable reliability. Con-
sequently, dike strengthening can be avoided in those sections were the channel
deposits are not located by the CPTs, again with a certain agreed reliability. The

GeoQ in the design phase
205
Table 10.1: Increased safety factors by a set of local ground parameters
(Greeuw and Van, 2003)
Ground types
Safety factor against slope instability
By Dutch design
code NEN 6740
By a local data set
of 12 triaxial tests
Clay: Wad-deposit
0.95
2.15
Dike material: Schieland deposit
0.71
1.74
Clay: Duinkerke deposit
0.95
1.82
Note: Stability factors are calculated by the method of Bishop in MStab software
appropriate number of CPTs is, in fact, the key to this approach, which may result
in signiﬁcant cost reductions in dike reinforcement programmes.
Detailed ground investigations can also be used to provide databases with local
and project-speciﬁc ground properties. These properties may allow the application
of more favourable values of ground parameters in design calculations, when
compared to parameters as recommended by guidelines. Greeuw and Van (2003)
demonstrate the value of a rather limited local data set. A relatively small set of
12 triaxial tests resulted in a safe application of much more favourable ground
parameters when compared with the necessarily conservative characteristic values
of the same parameters in the design codes. The values from the design codes
were considered as safe, but as (too) conservative as well, which would result in
an over-dimensioning of a slope design. Table 10.1 presents the increase of the
safety factor, for three soil types, by using the results of the triaxial tests for a
slope stability design.
As demonstrated in Table 10.1, slope stability calculations with ground para-
meters derived from the design code resulted in safety factors below 1, which
indicate an unstable slope. By the application of the local data set, the safety
factor increased to values around 2, reﬂecting an acceptable safety against slope
instability. This example resulted in a much more cost-effective slope design and
demonstrates the potential beneﬁts of locally better ground conditions, compared
with the necessarily conservative assumptions based on regional data sets and
national design codes. The application of detailed ground data during design is
therefore not only favourable to risk reduction, it may pay off with respect to
value engineering as well. More favourable geotechnical design parameters may
be allowed to be used, while retaining the same pre-set reliability and safety stand-
ards. This implies reaching a pre-set design reliability at lower net cost, which is
corrected for the extra ground investigation cost.
Apart from more detailed ground data, the quantity aspect, the application of
more advanced site investigation tools may also be attractive, the quality aspect.
Box 10.5 presents some concise examples, drawn from my own experience, of

206
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
using a few relatively advanced ground investigation techniques in projects in
different parts of the world.
Box 10.5
Detailed and advanced ground investigations for risk remediation
In Singapore, the behaviour of weathered rock and residual soils played a domin-
ant role in the foundation design for a chemical plant with near-shore facilities.
Advanced triple tube core drilling has been speciﬁed and performed, because
the properties of these fuzzy materials contributed largely to the risk of unac-
ceptable differential settlements.
In West Africa, the foundations for Liquid Natural Gas (LNG) storage tanks
needed detailed attention. Also for this project the risk of unacceptable settle-
ments demanded a detailed ground investigation. Very heterogeneous soft soil
deposits in a delta area, with a thickness over 40 m, were investigated by elec-
trical Piezo Cone Penetration Test (PCPT) techniques. The PCPT measures not
only the soil’s strength properties, but also pore water pressures. By so-called
dissipation tests, the reduction of groundwater overpressures over time has been
measured. This detailed geotechnical and geohydrological information added
value to the design of appropriate settlement-reducing measures for the LNG
tanks.
The extension of a coal terminal in Indonesia required a detailed assessment
of the soil liquefaction risk, because of its location in an earthquake-prone
area. During a detailed site investigation, conventional Standard Penetration
Tests (SPTs) have been complemented by PCPTs. By comparing the SPT and
PCPT results, the contractor was able to perform a more detailed and reli-
able assessment of the site’s liquefaction potential. The ﬁndings resulted in an
appropriate design by piled foundations of the industrial facilities, as a risk
cause remediation measure.
I immediately admit that both the site investigation tools and their application,
as presented in Box 10.5, are probably not brand-new to many readers. However,
their application occasionally still requires considerable debate with clients. It is
often rather difﬁcult to communicate explicitly their added value to decision-
makers who are less familiar with ground conditions. The risk-driven motivation
to apply these techniques may release them from their reputation as ‘too expensive
for my project’.
Also in the ﬁeld of geoenvironmental engineering, sophisticated tools, like
CPT technology combined with soil resistivity measurements and groundwater
sampling, proved to add value for geoenvironmental risk remediation. Chapter 13
presents a case study about this topic. Evidently, risk-driven and sophisticated

GeoQ in the design phase
207
laboratory investigations, such as triaxial tests with unloading and reloading cycles
and model testing in geocentrifuges, may signiﬁcantly contribute to risk reduction
during design for particular projects all over the world.
The indicated advanced ground site investigation and laboratory techniques
are just a fraction of the many globally available tools and techniques. I consider
it beyond the scope of this book to provide comprehensive lists of all technolo-
gies available, together with their advantages and disadvantages. Specialist advice
should be sought in this respect in order to arrive at the most cost-effective ground
investigation programme during the design phase. Besides satisfying the conven-
tional demands for safe and reliable design, detailed ground investigations with
advanced tools also provide the essential information to remediate ground-related
risk, either already in the design phase or in the next construction phase. This latter
function of detailed ground investigations seems not yet always explicitly realized
by the professionals involved. In view of the presented six steps approach for
deﬁning risk-driven ground investigations, advanced ground investigation tools
offer ample opportunities for both risk remediation and value engineering within
the GeoQ risk management process. The next section of this chapter presents two
case studies, in order to support this statement.
Case studies
Several concise cases, from all over the world, have previously been presented.
This section presents two Dutch case studies in some more detail. They concern
the design of (parts of) a project. The purpose of the cases is to demonstrate
the possible application of the GeoQ process in the design phase of construction
projects.
Liquefaction risk control below a railway
The area of one of the world’s largest ports, Rotterdam, provides locally probably
the worst soft soil conditions in The Netherlands. In this area, from the city of
Rotterdam towards the Dutch political capital of The Hague, a light-rail link will be
constructed. The project will be realized in a bored tunnel between the Rotterdam
Central Train Station and the northern part of the city of Rotterdam. The tunnel is
going to cross the existing Rotterdam–Gouda (well-known for its cheese) railway
at 14 m depth. This particular part of the project is the topic of this case study.
The project site can be considered as a typical greyﬁeld, by applying the ﬁrst
GeoQ step of gathering information. The location of the tunnel is ﬁxed and charac-
terized by an existing and intensively used railway above the tunnel. According
to a conventional method in the past, the existing Rotterdam–Gouda railway
appeared to be constructed by the so-called continual pressure method: sand has

208
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
been deposited at the proposed alignment until it simply no longer settled. This
method resulted in a water-saturated foundation layer of rather loosely packed
sand. Existing ground data revealed a 12 m thick, loose man-made sand bed, which
pushed away the originally very soft peat layers. Figure 10.3 shows a cross-section
with the soil proﬁle and a typical Cone Penetration Test (CPT) result.
qc (Mpa)
0
0
5
10
15
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Sand
Gorinchem clay
Anthropogene Sand
Peat
embankement
Figure 10.3: A typical cross-section of a railway on soft soil.
Based
on
this
existing
information, the second and
third GeoQ steps of ground
risk
identiﬁcation
and
risk
classiﬁcation were performed.
While existing ground data,
by the CPT-results, proved to
be of great help, the available
information appeared insuf-
ﬁcient
for
acceptable
risk
remediation.
Geotechnical experts of the
client’s design team identi-
ﬁed a serious risk. During the
boring operation, the tunnel-
boring machine would gen-
erate vibrations, which might
liquefy the loosely packed
and saturated sand underneath the existing railway. The occurrence of unaccept-
able degrees of deformation of the existing and busy railway line raised concern.
This liquefaction risk was classiﬁed as highly serious, as it could cause substantial
damage along the existing railway. The causation of the liquefaction risk provides
a relationship between the density of the sand and the sensitivity to liquefaction.
Generally, the liquefaction potential of a site increases with a decreasing density
of the sand deposits underlying the site.
During the fourth GeoQ step of risk remediation the project team had to decide
between two main risk response strategies: risk avoidance or risk reduction.
Avoidance of the entire risk by another tunnel construction method was con-
sidered as unacceptable. In the densely populated area a bored tunnel has a lot of
advantages, including minimum disturbance of the city life in the neighbourhood
of the tunnel. Regarding the remaining option of risk reduction, possibilities for
both cause and effect reduction needed appraisal and judgement. Reducing the risk
cause, the vibrations generated by the tunnel-boring machine, was considered as
not feasible and thus the risk response by effect reduction remained. A temporary
steel bridge to support the existing railway was proposed as a promising solution.
The application of soil improvement techniques alongside the existing railway line

GeoQ in the design phase
209
could act as a fall-back scenario, in case the temporary bridge could not entirely
fulﬁl its function.
The resulting risk proﬁle was carefully analysed by interpreting all existing
ground data in the next step GeoQ step of risk evaluation. However, the rather
loosely packed sand deposits below the existing railway link remained a source of
uncertainty. Although conventional electrical CPTs are reliable for the assessment
of soil conditions, the correlation of its results with the in-situ sand density is
known to have quite a wide margin of uncertainty. Therefore, in close cooperation
with an external geotechnical consultant, the project design team decided to deﬁne
a detailed and advanced ground investigation. This was expected to pay off in
terms of a more reliable liquefaction risk remediation. It was decided to perform
in-situ electrical density measurements, by using small-sized conventional cone
penetration test equipment. The tests were performed under an inclination of 30
to 45 degrees below the existing rail track, adjacent to the existing railway that
could stay in full operation during the ground investigation activities, as shown
in Figure 10.4.
With the same small-sized CPT-equipment it was possible to take a number of
sand samples for calibration purposes in the laboratory. Box 10.6 dedicates a few
sentences to this advanced type of ground investigation, for those readers who
are interested.
Figure 10.4: In-situ and inclined electrical density testing below a railway (© with permission
of GeoDelft).

210
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 10.6
Advanced ground investigation by in-situ density testing
The in-situ electrical density method measures continuously the electrical con-
ductivity of the soil and the groundwater with two specially equipped cones,
a soil cone and a groundwater cone. The soil cone has two sets of electrodes
for sending and receiving an electrical current. The water cone measures the
conductivity of the groundwater. The cones are operated by conventional cone
penetrometer equipment, which is widely used for Cone Penetration Tests
(CPTs). By the same CPT equipment it is possible to retrieve samples, by sev-
eral available sampling techniques, including the so-called Begemann system
and MOSTAP systems. The test results are converted to in-situ density, after
measuring the conductivity of the sand samples with different densities in the
laboratory.
Additional laboratory testing was performed to determine the sand deform-
ation properties under shear stress, by simulating the stress conditions during
the passage of the tunnel-boring machine. The results of the additional ground
investigation were beyond expectations. Even an alternative design for liquefac-
tion risk remediation came up. It involved a combination of only soil improvement
techniques, without the need for the temporary bridge. These proven techniques
included increasing the height of the sand alongside the existing railway line,
stiffening the soil in the vicinity with lime-cement columns, and strengthening
the sand layers by using gel-injection techniques. Advanced model calculations
were performed to test these alternative risk remediation measures. The tests and
calculations indicated only limited deformations, which would take place rather
gradually. By means of monitoring and maintenance it would be feasible to con-
trol any minimum subsidence of the existing rail line. After balancing all possible
options, in close cooperation with the geotechnical consultant, the project team
decided to omit the temporary bridge entirely and to apply only soil improvement
measures (Korff, 2003). The evaluation of these risk reducing methods resulted
in an acceptable risk proﬁle for the parties involved. Avoidance of the temporary
bridge saved a few million euros in risk control costs. In addition, the tempor-
ary bridge would have required interruption of the operation of the existing and
busy railway during at least two weekends, to install and remove the bridge. This
unfavourable side effect has also been eliminated. The detailed and advanced risk-
driven ground characterization demonstrated, therefore, how to reduce the per-
ceived liquefaction risk in a cost-effective way by deﬁning of a number of proven
techniques to control the risk effect. This may be considered as an example of risk-
driven value engineering in the design phase. Finally, as the last GeoQ step, all
ground risk information gathered had to be ﬁled in a risk register, so that it could
be used effectively by the contractor during the construction phase of the project.

GeoQ in the design phase
211
Settlement risk control under pressure
Many urban areas in the world are located in deltas at or near the coast. A
complex geological history with subsequent alluvial and marine deposits has
often one characteristic in common: these deposits are soft and will cause serious
and long-term settlement when loaded by almost any type of construction. Piled
foundations are a way to deal with these settlements. However, for infrastructure
projects like railways and roads, piled foundations over distances of several tens
to hundreds of kilometres are very expensive, if not unfeasible.
The last case study of this chapter demonstrates the application of the GeoQ
ground risk management approach for a railway project in its last part of the design
phase, just before the start of construction. The geotechnical considerations are
deliberately presented in some detail. The geotechnical professionals among the
readers will probably recognize many of the presented issues of ground concern.
I believe, however, that this case also will interest those readers who are less
familiar with geotechnics and particularly read this book for learning how to deal
effectively with those ground professionals within their projects. For the latter
group of readers this case aims to demonstrate how an innovative geotechnical
approach can be communicated, by means of risk management, towards any
less geotechnically underlain project stakeholder. These people may very well act
as the decision-makers of the project and have to judge and balance all these
ground-related risks, as being responsible for the project’s success. The following
case demonstrates how rather subjective but sound engineering judgement can be
made explicit and more objective, in order to arrive at a cost-effective reduction
of serious ground risk.
The Betuweroute is a new double-track and electriﬁed freight railway. The line
has a length of 160 km and connects the Rotterdam harbour with Germany, as
part of the European Network of Freeways. The western part of the Betuweroute
passes through typical Dutch polders with very soft subsoil conditions. In the
section between the cities of Sliedrecht and Gorinchem, the poorest soil conditions
and tightest contractual time span met each other. This 22 km long part of the
Betuweroute was contracted as a Design, Construct and Maintenance (DCM)
contract to a consortium of contractors. An alliance agreement, with a joint risk
management budget for the client and the contractors, was the driving force to
pay rigorous attention to subsoil risk management (van Staveren, 2004).
The consortium based its initial design on a rather traditional approach of using
a sand-ﬁll embankment and so-called wick drains. This price-competitive solution
resulted in the winning bid. In the ﬁnal design phase, however, the contractor’s
consortium and the client had to take a few major decisions regarding their risk
control of the ground.
With regard to the ﬁrst GeoQ step of gathering of information, this site can be
considered as typically greyﬁeld, because it was located very close to an existing

212
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Figure 10.5: Challenging working conditions during day and night (© with permission of
GeoDelft).
railway and the busy motorway A15. Figure 10.5 demonstrates how parts of
the project needed the motorway to be constructed. To disturb the trafﬁc to a
minimum, a lot of night shifts could reduce the trafﬁc disturbance to a minimum.
Abundant ground data were available during the ﬁnal design phase of the pro-
ject. Prior to contracting, the client had already conducted a very extensive ground
investigation programme, including 658 CPTs, 145 undisturbed and continuous
so-called Begemann borings, 201 triaxial tests and 198 oedometer tests. One of
the ground layers of concern is the so-called Gorkum clay deposit. The derived
settlement properties of this deposit indicate a very slow settlement process that
is expected to continue for many years. The interpretation of the available ground
data in the ﬁnal design phase highlighted the extremely poor subsoil conditions
of the project.
During the next two GeoQ steps of risk identiﬁcation and risk classiﬁcation, the
occurrence of unacceptable post-construction settlements, typically larger than
0.3 m, was one of the major risks that needed some sort of remediation. The
causation of the settlement risk indicated, particularly, the contribution of creep
to the ﬁnal settlements as being a major uncertainty. This creep mechanism is a
consolidation-independent ongoing ground deformation as a result of a load. The
consortium selected the combination of both risk cause and risk effect remediation
as the main risk response strategy. In the ﬁnal stage of design, the cause of the

GeoQ in the design phase
213
settlement risk would be evaluated by a settlement prediction model. During
construction, the occurring settlement would be carefully monitored and a number
of fall-back scenarios to accelerate the settlements, when required, were prepared.
However, a new problem arose, the Dutch state-of-the-art model for settlement
predictions was judged as inadequate by the project’s team ground experts. In spite
of its wide application, the so-called Koppejan model provides rather inaccurate
predictions of creep settlement (Molendijk et al., 2003). The seriousness of the
settlement risk and the subsoil creep as the main risk driver demanded a new
and innovative model for improved assessments of creep behaviour. Based on the
work of Den Haan (1994) and Yin and Graham (1999), a so-called isotache model
was developed.
After the application of the risk reducing isotache creep–settlement model, the
remaining risk proﬁle was judged in view of the GeoQ step of risk evaluation. The
expected post-construction settlements were subjected to a Monte Carlo simulation
on 10 000 sets of parameters. However, the Monte Carlo analysis resulted in a
probability of 70 per cent of not meeting the post-construction settlement limitation
of 0.3 m. Figure 10.6 illustrates the results of the Monte Carlo analysis.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
10
100
1000
10000
Time [days]
best guess
parameters
5% boundary
median
Settlement [m]
Figure 10.6: Range of calculated settlement curves by Monte
Carlo analyses (© with permission of GeoDelft).
In other words, the prob-
ability of meeting the set-
tlement requirements was
only 30 per cent, based on
the 10 000 executed calcula-
tions. This low probability
of success was considered
as not acceptable by the
project’s consortium. There-
fore, at that moment cause
reduction of the settlement
risk, by the application of
an
innovative
calculation
model,
failed.
However,
based on sound engineering
judgement of the involved
ground engineers and their
local experience in the area, the contractor’s consortium remained strongly con-
ﬁdent of being able to meet the settlement criteria. They even kept relying on their
conventional and rather cheap construction method that helped them win the con-
tract: the combination of pre-loading by sand-ﬁll embankment and wick drains,
to accelerate the consolidation part of the settlement. In which way could this
rather subjective risk perception of the geotechnical project team become ration-
alized to a more objective approach? How to prove their rigorous engineering

214
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
judgement? It demonstrated the need for an even more reliable ground charac-
terization, with the most reliable subsoil information possible: actual monitoring
data. Therefore, the results of a recent Dutch research project, performed in the
Delft Cluster Research Programme, were applied in practice. It was decided to
add early available construction monitoring data in the Monte Carlo analysis, by
following the procedure as described by Hölscher (2003). Here the approach of
the observational method entered the project which was already in the detailed
design phase. To derive the actual consolidation coefﬁcient from ﬁeld settlement
data, Asaoka’s method was applied, as proposed by Dykstra and Joling (2001). It
appeared to work: excellent ﬁts between the isotache creep–settlement model and
the recorded settlements were found. Figure 10.7 presents the mean value and
the 5 per cent and 95 per cent boundaries, indicating the 90 per cent probability
interval for the settlement curves.
3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
10
100
1000
10000
Time [days]
mean
5% boundary
95% boundary
Settlement [m] 
Figure 10.7: Mean and 90 per cent probability interval for the
settlement curves (© with permission of GeoDelft).
The range of the 90 per
cent
probability
interval
from
Figure
10.7,
which
includes the early monit-
oring data, is much smal-
ler than the similar range
in
Figure
10.6
without
use of monitoring results.
Therefore, adding monitor-
ing data, representing the
real ground behaviour in
practice,
into
the
Monte
Carlo
analysis
decreased
the uncertainty in meeting
the settlement requirement
dramatically. By the end of
this extensive GeoQ step of
ground risk evaluation, the resulting risk proﬁle was considered as acceptable by
the parties within the consortium. The last GeoQ step involved the mobilization
of all relevant ground-related risk data towards the construction phase.
In line with the GeoQ process, the derived method of monitoring and back-
calculation has been applied continuously during construction, which reﬁned the
ground characterization to an unusually high level during construction of the
railway project. At the moment of completion of the construction, 3.5 years after
the start of the work, the post-construction settlements were predicted at 0.2 m.
The probability that the post-construction settlement is larger than 0.3 m is only
0.21 per cent, which is considered as very acceptable by both, the client and the
contractor’s consortium (Molendijk et al., 2003).

GeoQ in the design phase
215
This case demonstrates the added value of a risk-driven approach during the
detailed design phase of a project. In fact, the contractor’s consortium took a
substantial risk by bidding with a conventional and cheap settlement reduction
method. They succeeded in reducing the major post-construction settlement
risk by a combination of innovative calculation methods, the application of the
probabilistic Monte Carlo analysis and a rigorous application of the observational
method. It is in my perception an excellent example of how to do more with our
ground data. In this case, not one additional detailed and advanced ground inves-
tigation was chosen as ground risk remediation measure, but additional detailed
and advanced ground interpretation and correlation by using abundant monitoring
data. The statement of no risk – no glory is applicable to ground risk management,
as the dedicated geotechnical team of the contractor’s consortium proved. This
particular section was the only part of the entire Betuweroute railway project that
was constructed well within budget and planning, in spite of the worst ground
conditions of the entire project.
Summary
This chapter demonstrated the application of the GeoQ process in the design
phase of construction projects, while focusing on the GeoQ step of risk remediation.
Two approaches to support ground risk management during design were intro-
duced and discussed. The ﬁrst identiﬁes and selects the most appropriate way of
remediating foreseeable ground-related risk. General options are the reduction of
the risk causes, the reduction of the risk effects, or a combination of both. Proba-
bilistic approaches appear to be useful to obtain insight into risk cause reduction
possibilities. However, the available techniques are not yet widely adopted, partly
because of their highly specialist character. The combination of the observational
method with fall-back scenarios proved to be useful for risk effect remediation.
While the observational method largely depends on monitoring and back-analysis
during construction, it should already be a due part of a ﬂexible design, in order
to be effective.
The risk-driven deﬁnition and application of ground investigations is the second
approach to ground risk remediation during the design phase. Detailed and
advanced ground data may be highly desired, in order to decide upon the
most suitable risk remediation measures, while this information is obviously also
required for conventional design activities, according to design standards and spe-
ciﬁcations. A six step model translates the causes of object-related risks to ground
parameter level and serves as a basis for a truly risk-driven ground investiga-
tion. This model largely determines the type, quantity, and quality of the ground
investigation. The model can be supported by probabilistic methods that balance

216
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
the costs of ground investigations with the expected probability of reaching its
objectives.
A few concise cases from different parts of the world illustrated the possible
beneﬁts of detailed and advanced ground investigations for risk remediation dur-
ing design. Two detailed cases demonstrated the application of the described
ground-risk remediation tools in practice. The ﬁrst case has been demonstrating
how the GeoQ process facilitates the design of a bored tunnel, below an exist-
ing railway founded on sand with a serious liquefaction risk. A detailed ground
investigation with advanced techniques provided a sound basis for cost-effective
risk remediation. The second case has been demonstrating how GeoQ contributes
to reduce serious residual settlement risks during the ﬁnal design of a railway
project, with very unfavourable and soft ground conditions. A contractor’s con-
sortium won this design and construct project with a conventional and cheap
method for settlement control and they succeeded in realizing the project within
the challenging settlement margins by combining innovative approaches with
proven techniques.

11
GeoQ in the contracting
phase
Introduction
There is no construction without a contract. The drawing up of effective con-
struction contracts has been developed towards a signiﬁcant discipline within the
construction industry. As construction projects become ever more complex, their
contracts need more attention, which results in a steady increase in the number
of pages over the years. The days with a contract of just several pages with a few
attachments are gone, probably forever. Particularly if dealing with ground, trans-
parent contracts with clear responsibilities for the parties involved are usually
highly valued. Because of the inherent ground uncertainty with fuzzy, random
and incomplete information, transparent ground-related contracting faces major
challenges.
During the contracting phase, the client or owner selects a suitable contractor to
realize the project. Contracting can take place in several phases of the project, for
instance after the feasibility phase, the pre-design phase or the design phase. In
this book the latter situation has been worked out, because this Design-Bid-Build
(DBB) type of contract still represents the actual situation in many construction
projects worldwide. For instance, the North American tunnelling industry applies
DBB contracts for the majority of projects (Essex, 2003). In this book the DBB
contracting approach is mentioned as the conventional way of contracting. There
is an increasing trend, however, to involve the contractor earlier in the process
of the construction project, after completion of the pre-design phase or even
just after the feasibility phase. This type of Design & Construct (D&C) or Design-
Build (DB) is considered a modern contract in this book. If maintenance also has
been included, for instance during a 10-year or 20-year period after completion
of construction, we reach the so-called Design-Build-Maintenance (DBM) sort of

218
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
contract. Outsourcing the ﬁnancing of the project to the contractor as well gives
a Design-Build-Finance-Maintenance (DBFM) contract. Figure 11.1 shows the GeoQ
ground risk management process to be well applicable to all of these contract
types.
Maintenance
Phase
Pre-Design
Phase
Design
Phase
Contracting
Phase
Construction
Phase
Feasibility
Phase
TIME
GEOQ PROCESS
Figure 11.1: The contracting phase within the six GeoQ phases.
This
chapter
presents
GeoQ
as
a
facilitator
of
ground-related
risk
management
during
the
contracting
phase.
The
main
GeoQ
purpose
is
reaching the best contract
for the construction project,
seen from a ground risk
management
perspective
and within the risk toler-
ance of the parties involved.
This chapter builds forward
on the answer to the last
question in the introduction
of Chapter 7: are we, our
team members, our client
and our other stakeholders
willing
to
allocate
each
identiﬁed
and
classiﬁed
ground-related risk to one
of the parties involved in the project? While assuming a clear and dedicated yes
on this question, we explore in this chapter how to allocate ground-related risk in
a transparent way, in spite of the inherent uncertainty of the ground. A paradox
appears to arise here, but there is a way out.
Contractual risk allocation is a foundation for the last three GeoQ steps of risk
remediation, risk evaluation and risk mobilization. In fact, effective risk remediation
can only start after a clear risk allocation, because only the party explicitly respons-
ible for a risk will be dedicated to control that risk. The three preceding GeoQ
steps of information gathering, risk identiﬁcation and risk classiﬁcation are obviously
indispensable to start any contractual (ground) risk allocation. We have to know
our risks, including their seriousness, to be able to allocate them in some way or
another.
This chapter starts with the introduction of the concept of risk allocation and
describes its purpose and demonstrated added value. Next, the concept of differing
site conditions is introduced and compared with the so-called common law approach.
We will disclose the concept of differing site conditions as being fundamental

GeoQ in the contracting phase
219
to the allocation of ground-related risk. This reveals the need for a method to
implement ground risk allocation in the construction practice by the concept
of the Geotechnical Baseline Report (GBR), a promising method for ground risk
allocation which has been successfully applied, since the 1990s, in several parts
of the world. In the mean time, it is still subject to considerable debate. The GBR
may develop to become one of the main tools within the GeoQ process, because it
translates implicit ground uncertainty to explicit and controllable ground-related
risk. The GBR’s baseline concept, as well as the way to prepare a GBR is covered
in relation to conventional and modern construction contracts. Three additional
aspects, the Dispute Review Board (DRB), construction project insurance and the
concept of partnering may further support ground-related risk management during
contracting and the following project stages.
Finally, experiences with the application of ground risk allocation by the GBR
are shared by a number of cases from the USA, the UK and The Netherlands. The
application of the GBR during the resolution of disputes with differing ground
conditions is worked out in more detail in Chapter 12. As usual, also this chapter
ends with a summary.
Risk allocation and differing site conditions
The concept of risk allocation
A key success factor for effective risk management is the contractual allocation of
risk arising from differing ground conditions. I cite David Hatem (1998) accord-
ingly:
Whatever the precise circumstances, the allocation and assumption (conscious or not) of
heightened or intolerable risk for either the owner or the contractor on a subsurface project
bears a direct relationship to the increased probabilities of disputes, claims, ‘pathological’
project relationships, and eventual litigation or arbitration.
The term risk allocation has been used a few times without presenting a deﬁn-
ition of it. What exactly does it mean? Risk allocation implies an identiﬁed and
classiﬁed risk becoming the explicit responsibility of one or more involved parties.
For instance, the risk of unacceptable differential settlement becomes the respons-
ibility of the contractor, as a result of allocating that risk to the contractor. If
the risk occurs, the contractor bears the ﬁnancial and other consequences. It is
therefore in the contractor’s interest to appraise, as soon as possible, the serious-
ness of the particular risk to be able to take timely appropriate risk remediating
measures.
Why should we allocate risk? The answer is simple: risk will be managed and
controlled when the risk has been explicitly allocated to one or more parties. The

220
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
relevance of risk allocation seems to be time-independent. In the 1970s, Walter S.
Douglas (1974) stated:
What threatens the stability and ﬁnancial security of the construction industry is not design,
but the problems of distributing the risks inherent in the construction process among the
owner, the construction contractor, and the architect and engineer…The industry cannot
be healthy unless the risks are forthrightly recognised and acknowledged, and the various
contracting parties assume under contract, without ambiguity, their respective parts of
the risk.
This refers to the manageability of risk (Smith, 1996), each identiﬁed and classiﬁed
risk needs to be assigned, consistent with widely accepted principles of risk alloca-
tion. According to the American Society of Civil Engineers (1980), these principles
are:
1
Every identiﬁed risk has an associated and unavoidable cost that must be
considered somewhere in the construction process
2
Risks should be the responsibility of those parties who are best able to control
the risk, including bearing the costs and potential beneﬁt
3
Many risks are best shared, with respect to their most cost-effective control.
The ﬁrst principle is covered by the application of the GeoQ process, at least
with respect to ground-related risk. The second principle explicitly advocates risk
allocation, while the third principle assures the power of a mutual interest in risk
management. These principles support the application of fair risk allocation that is
likely to minimize the risk of litigation (Wildman, 2004). In addition, a reasonable
risk allocation will reduce the likelihood of professional liability exposure for the
involved design and construction professionals (Hatem, 1998), which may avoid
a lot of unwanted hassle and cost for these professionals. There appears sufﬁcient
reason to explore risk allocation in more detail. I distinguish four main types of
risk allocation:
1
Unshared risk for the client: the risk is entirely allocated to the client, who has
to deal with the (cost) consequences, if the risk occurs
2
Unshared risk for the contractor: the risk is entirely allocated to the contractor,
who has to deal with the (cost) consequences, if the risk occurs
3
Completely shared risk by both the client and the contractor: the risk is entirely
allocated to both parties and together they have to agree their joint risk remedi-
ation measures, as well as which party is going to pay what portion of the cost,
if the risk occurs

GeoQ in the contracting phase
221
4
Unshared risk, part of the risk is the client’s responsibility and the remaining
part is the contractor’s responsibility: the risk is partly allocated to the client
and partly allocated to the contractors, by mutually agreed baselines.
This latter approach will be worked out in detail in the Geotechnical Baseline
Report (GBR), later in this section. Figure 11.2 puts these four risk allocation
options in one diagram.
Who wants to
own this risk?  
Client
Full Risk
Contractor
Full Risk
Client & Contractor
Full Risk
Client
Risk
Part 
Contractor
Risk
Part
Client
Risk
Part 
1
3
4
2
Figure 11.2: Risk allocation: four options.
Each identiﬁed and clas-
siﬁed
risk
needs
alloca-
tion to one of these four
types of risk allocation to
guarantee that each and
every risk becomes expli-
citly
owned
by
one
or
more parties, who will be
more or less forced take
responsibility for the risk.
Risk allocation is not lim-
ited to ground-related risk.
Many, if not all, remain-
ing risk types can be expli-
citly
allocated,
such
as
performance-related
risks
and outside-inﬂuence sort
of risk, including changes
in governmental acts and adverse weather conditions (Smith, 1999). Anticipated
advantages of explicit risk allocation for the client are:
•
Lower bid prices, because contractors do not have to include contingencies in
their bids for risk they cannot cost-effectively control; these risks are allocated
to the client
•
Lower total project costs, because of a reduction of disputes and claims, par-
ticularly concerning differing ground conditions
•
Improved working relationships with the contractor, because it is clear which
party is responsible for each identiﬁed risk.
Obviously, for the contractor clear beneﬁts are also expected:
•
Improved opportunities for competitive and innovative bids, within clear and
pre-set risk responsibilities. The contractor is only responsible for risks that
are manageable in some way. Innovative contractors may propose their clients

222
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
allocate even more risks to them, because they have distinguishing solutions
to control these risks. Therefore, contractors will be better able to bring their
speciﬁc and unique competitive advantages to the market
•
Higher proﬁts, because the contractor bears only responsibility for a control-
lable set of risk. Contractors are be compensated for effectuated risk beyond
their responsibility
•
Improved working relationships with the client, because of the transparency
of risk responsibility.
These advantages have been experienced in a number of projects, worldwide, and
seem to pay off. A thorough study of two large transportation tunnel projects that
have applied risk management by risk allocation revealed estimated cost savings
between 4 and 22 per cent (Sperry, 1981). The Construction Industry Institute
(CII) is a consortium of clients, contractors, engineers and universities, with its
administrative basis at the University of Texas in Austin (Smith, 1996). According
to CII research, well-performed risk management may reduce total project design
and construction costs by 20 per cent, while the time required for design and
construction can be reduced by 39 per cent (Construction Industry Institute, 1994).
In addition, CII studies on contracting practices point to a 10:1 cost-beneﬁt ratio
of risk management in projects where contracting is accompanied by improved
risk allocation (Smith, 1996).
In the following section we return to ground-related risk allocation. According
to Smith (1996), the best controllable risk allocation is that of contractual risk
allocation. How can we contractually allocate ground-related risk? We have to
explore the concept of differing site conditions and its counter-approach of the
so-called common law.
The concept of differing site conditions
Earlier we explored the relationship between ground conditions and failure cost
in the construction industry. Unforeseen ground behaviour, particularly, is a main
source of construction risk and associated problems. In the words of Heinz Brandl
(2004): ‘Experience tells us that the largest group of claims and disputes in the
civil engineering ﬁeld is in the ground’. In other words, differing site conditions of
geological or man-made origin cause numerous disputes, claims, cost overruns,
and delays in many projects.
However, despite our dedicated attempts to manage ground-related risk, actual
site conditions will continue to differ from our expectations from time to time.
Therefore, particularly from a contractual point of view, we need to be able to
act effectively when we encounter these differing site conditions. Contractual
allocation of ground risk appears to be an interesting option for reducing the

GeoQ in the contracting phase
223
adverse effects of differing site conditions. By translating ground information
into contractual statements, the unfavourable effects of differing site conditions
may dramatically reduce. However, ﬁrst we have to acknowledge two entirely
different schools of thinking about which party should bear the consequences of
differing site conditions. Two common approaches, encountered in many parts of
the world, are:
1
The application of the common law rule
2
The application of the Differing Site Conditions (DSC) clause.
The application of the common law rule implies that the contractor bears all risk
of differing site conditions. In the USA, the common law rule applies in absence
of a speciﬁc contractual statement. In Japan, however, the common law rule is
non-existent. According to Tani (2001), it is common Japanese practice that clients
issue additional work orders to overcome differing site condition problems of
contractors. I am not sure whether this approach avoids any differing site condition
problems in Japan.
A generally accepted escape route from the common law rule is the inclusion of
a differing site conditions clause in the contract, which states that the contractor
will be compensated for different site conditions, often under conditions (Abbott,
1998). The rationale behind the DSC clause is that ownership of the site implies
ownership of its differing conditions as well (Hatem, 1998). The common law rule
entirely neglects this automatism, by typically allocating all site condition risk to
the contractor, as being the party to construct.
According to Gould (1995), the purpose of the DSC clause is simply to decrease
the contingency that a contractor should include in the bid to anticipate differing
ground conditions. Wildman (2004) motivates the need to escape out of the com-
mon law rule by avoiding adverse project situations, such as endless litigation
over claims of unforeseen site conditions and contractors who went bankrupt. The
latter were not able to complete the work, which is obviously a problem for the
client as well. These experiences resulted in an increase in the application of the
DSC clause, which is now almost standard in ﬁxed fee construction contracts. At
present, many standardized contract models, such as the international FIDIC and
also the Dutch UAV-gc2005, include the DSC clause. In addition, agreements of
the American Institute of Architects (AIA), the Federal Acquisition Regulations
(FAR) and the Engineers Joint Contract Committee (EJCC) operate DSC clauses
(Wildman, 2004). The concept is not new, as the ﬁrst DSC clause was deﬁned and
approved in 1926, by the President of the USA himself. While acknowledging the
concept of DSC being existent for many years, widely applied and being based
on common sense, what can we exactly consider as differing site conditions? The

224
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
United States Federal Differing Site Conditions Clause of 1984 deﬁnes two general
types of differing site conditions (Essex, 1997):
•
Type I: subsurface or latent physical conditions, which differ materially from
those indicated in the contract
•
Type II: unknown physical conditions at the site, of an unusual nature, which
differ materially from those encountered and generally recognized as inherent
in the work of the character provided in the contract.
Type I differing site conditions deal in fact with foreseen risk, as a result of the
inherent incomplete, random and fuzzy ground character. Both information risk
and interpretation may result in Type I differing site conditions. Type II differing
site conditions deal with unforeseen risk, which effectuates because the unknown
cannot be known.
Why is it that, in spite of the DSC clause and its updates over time, disputes
about differing site conditions have increased to a widely acknowledged almost
unacceptably high level? For instance, the US National Committee on Tunnelling
Technology reported low level subsurface site investigations leading to differing
site conditions claims averaging 28 per cent of the contract price (Smith, 1996).
Perhaps this situation occurs because Type I and II differing site conditions deﬁn-
itions only provide an apparent transparency about the owner’s responsibility for
unforeseen conditions. Guidelines on how to decide what ground conditions are
reasonably ‘materially different’ and of an ‘unusual nature’ are still vague, if not
absent. Obviously, we need a method to develop further the concept of different
site conditions to a measurable and contractual statement. The baseline concept
of the Geotechnical Baseline Report appears to be promising.
The Geotechnical Baseline Report
The baseline concept
By building forward on the concepts of risk allocation and differing site conditions,
we need a practical method that allows us to allocate ground-related risk. We
require an as objective as possible answer on the following question: what ground
conditions are materially different? The baseline concept gives the answer to this
question. The Technical Committee on Geotechnical Reports of the Underground
Technology Research Council of the USA developed the concept of the Geotechnical
Baseline Report (GBR) in the 1990s. It describes basically what type of site conditions
are materially different by using so-called baselines. In the UK, these baselines are
occasionally mentioned as ground reference conditions (British Tunnelling Society

GeoQ in the contracting phase
225
2003; Construction Industry Research and Information Association, 1978), or agreed
model ground conditions (Clayton, 2001). Also the term benchmark parameters can
be encountered. In these cases the GBR is referred to as Ground Reference Report,
Agreed Model Conditions Report or Geotechnical Benchmark Report. For reasons of
consistency, I continue to use the terms baseline and GBR in this book.
The objective of the GBR is to provide contractual deﬁnitions of ground conditions.
The GBR attempts to make explicit whether ground conditions are materially
different and the differing site conditions clause is applicable, or not. So-called key
risk drivers connect the baseline concept to the practice of ground risk management.
In most cases, ground-related risk is caused, or at least highly accelerated, by one
or a few speciﬁc ground parameters. A key risk driver is deﬁned as a measurable
parameter which largely determines or ‘drives’ a particular ground-related project
risk. Ground-related parameters, such as the thickness and strength properties
of ground layers, but also groundwater levels, concentrations of pollution and
the presence of old foundation piles may all act as key risk drivers. Baselines are
numerical threshold values of these key risk drivers and allocate risk.
Baseline:
number of boulders = 100
risk contractor < 100 boulders
risk client > 100 boulders
Baseline:
number of boulders = 75
risk contractor < 75 boulders
risk client > 75 boulders
25 boulders: risk
reduction of
contractor equals
risk increase of
client  
Figure 11.3: The baseline mechanism: allocating the boulder risk.
How does the baseline
concept work? Risks that
relate
to
ground
condi-
tions, consistent with or less
adverse
than
the
agreed
baseline value, are allocated
to the contractor. Risks that
result from more adverse
values than deﬁned by the
baselines are allocated to
the client. Risks are no free
lunch and allocating (more)
risk
to
the
contractor
is
likely to increase the bid
price. In this situation, the
ground
risk
premium
is
paid in advance by the cli-
ent to the contractor. On the
other hand, the allocation of
(more) risk to the client will reduce the initial bid price of the contractor, assuming
competitive markets. By setting different baselines it will be possible to realize
different risk proﬁles for the client and the contractor. Figure 11.3 presents the
baseline mechanism of the risk of boulders that adversely affect construction
activities, such as tunnel boring or driving of sheet-piled walls.

226
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
As Figure 11.3 demonstrates, allocating more boulder risk to the client equals
less boulder risk for the contractor. In an open and competitive market, the con-
tractor will have to reduce his bid price, as a result of his lower risk proﬁle, because
competitors are likely to do the same. With some creativity and practice, baselines
can be deﬁned for most of the geotechnical, geohydrological, geoenvironmental
and man-made obstruction risks. Additionally, non-ground-related risks can be
allocated by baselines as well, such as the trafﬁc intensity from the number of
passing cars per day, in the case of a DBM contract. Table 11.1 presents a number
of examples of risk allocation by the baseline concept.
Ground-related risks, their related key risk drivers, as well as their baseline
values are obviously project-speciﬁc. All of them depend largely upon the risk tol-
erance of the client and contractor, the type of project, and the anticipated ground
conditions. I recognize a wide agreement on restricting baselines to physical para-
meters. So-called behavioural baselines depend, for instance, on the construction
method applied and are therefore very difﬁcult to anticipate, because different
contractors usually apply different construction methods. Except for the risk of
archaeological remains, all baselines, as presented in Figure 11.4, are of the phys-
ical type. The baselines for the archaeological remnants are not directly related to
natural ground conditions as such, but to the presence of man-made obstructions.
This risk depends largely on how effectively the archaeologist will do his job and
is therefore considered beyond the responsibility of the contractor, when the delay
and additional costs rise beyond the baselines.
A common pitfall of risk management in general and setting baselines in par-
ticular is growing out of control, as up to hundreds of identiﬁed risks apparently
need to be allocated. In the process of risk allocation, we should realize that a
large number of risks are already implicitly allocated to one of the parties within
the (standard) type of contract used. This may also apply to a number of ground-
related risks, while staying conscious of the inherent fuzziness of the different site
conditions clause. Figure 11.4 presents the concept of the risk ﬁlter, which can be
applied to keep the number of risks to be allocated as limited as allowable.
Table 11.1: The baseline concept: risk allocation by key risk drivers and baselines
Ground-related risk
Key risk driver
Baseline
Risk allocation
Contractor
Client
Unacceptable settlements Thickness of clay layer
5 m
< 5m
> 5m
Compressibility of clay layer 6m2/kN
> 6m2/kN
< 6m2/kN
Groundwater inﬂow
Rock fracture permeability
10 cm/s
< 10cm/s
> 10cm/s
Polluted groundwater
Presence of hydrocarbons
200 ppm
< 200ppm
> 200ppm
Archaeological remains
Delay by excavations
2 months
< 2months
> 2months
Additional cost
50 000 euros < 50000 euros > 50000 euros
Adverse weather
Temperature below −10C
10 days
< 10 days
> 10 days

GeoQ in the contracting phase
227
Identified and classified
ground-related risks  
Contractors’s core competences
Project specifications
Pre-set quality standards
Ground-related risks
to be allocated  
Figure 11.4: The concept of the risk ﬁlter for ground risk
allocation.
According to Figure 11.4, risks
that are clearly related to the core
competencies
of
a
contractor,
the project speciﬁcations and the
pre-set quality standards can be
ﬁltered out of the ground risk
allocation process. Two of the
original six risks in Figure 11.4
need ﬁnally to be allocated. The
type and size of mesh of the
risk ﬁlter depends largely on the
characteristics of the project and
the parties involved.
A GBR is meant to have a
true contractual status, which is
rather uncommon for ground-
related information. Who of the
readers is not familiar with the
stamp ‘for information only’ on
a factual, an interpretative or
a
geotechnical
advice
report?
However, while experts such as Morgenstern (2000a), Clayton (2001), Knill (2003),
and Altabba, Einstein and Caspe (2004) advocate the importance of geotechnical
risk management and the baseline approach, the concept is still surrounded with
certain reservation by others. For instance, Brierly (1998) mentions the effects on
the liability for professionals writing a GBR are as yet unknown. There is also no
abundant case law associated with the use of baseline statements as part of the
construction contract. In addition, Brierly (1998) mentions the debate on whether
baselines should only reﬂect the most likely ground conditions to be expected, or
should be used to allocate more or less of ground-related risk to either the client or
the contractor, as I have demonstrated by the previous boulder example. Hatem
(1996) questions the degree of detail of the baseline statement. He brings up an
example of a baseline statement, which also concerns the number of boulders to
anticipate. Let us now assume that the contractual baseline is set at 300 boulders,
resulting from the client’s low risk tolerance. Based on the available ground data,
a best-guess assessment of 100 boulders would be reasonable in the particular gla-
cial till deposit. Can the contractor claim any production-loss, after encountering
only 50 boulders during the excavation activities, while he mobilized much slower
excavation equipment to handle effectively 300 boulders? Figure 11.5 illustrates
this baseline issue for the boulder risk during excavation.

228
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
baseline:
number of boulders
100 boulders:
best-guess by
factual data  
50 boulders:
encountered by
the contractor   
300 boulders:
set as baseline
by the client   
Figure 11.5: A baseline dilemma for boulder risk during
excavation.
This example illustrates the
way towards clear baselines
being still unpaved. In The
Netherlands, where I joined a
national committee to provide
a Dutch GBR guideline, sim-
ilar issues are subject to debate
by both ground and contracts
professionals.
On
the
other
hand,
if
the
GBR
concept
becomes
embedded within an overall
risk management framework,
I foresee these issues will be
solved in the near future. Nev-
ertheless,
we
still
face
the
fuzziness and importance of the differing site conditions clause. For this reason I
embrace the concept of the GBR, in spite of its actual and practical complications.
The next section presents some guidelines on how to arrive at a GBR within the
GeoQ process.
Preparing a Geotechnical Baseline Report
Straightforward guidelines for preparing a GBR are presented by the American
Society of Civil Engineers (Essex, 1997). An update of these guidelines is scheduled
to become available in 2006–2007. In recent years, I have encountered an increasing
demand for additional ‘know how’ about the Geotechnical Baseline Report, in
particular concerning its application within the GeoQ process.
The ﬁrst three steps of the GeoQ process, gathering of information, risk identiﬁc-
ation and risk classiﬁcation serve as the basis for the allocation of ground-related
risk in a GBR. These GeoQ steps have to be done before entering the contractual
phase of the construction project. The differences between the GBR, of which the
primary purpose is the contractual allocation of ground-related risk, and other
common ground-related reports need to be acknowledged. Typically related but
different reports are the Geotechnical Data Report (GDR), the Geotechnical Inter-
pretative Report (GIR) and the Geotechnical Design Summary Report (GDSR),
as presented for instance by Brierly (1998) and Essex (1997). While of utmost
relevance for applying the GeoQ steps of risk identiﬁcation and risk classiﬁca-
tion, these reports should and can by no means replace these steps as well as
a GBR.
In the contractual phase, any ground-related risk identiﬁed and classiﬁed needs
to be (re)considered from a contractual rather than technical view. The contractual

GeoQ in the contracting phase
229
consequences of each of the signiﬁcant ground-related risks need careful appraisal.
The major question in this phase is who should own the ground-related risk and
why. Obviously, the risk tolerance of the client plays a dominant role in answering
this question, as well as other considerations, such as the possibility of reserving
contingency budgets and the (local) political impact of differing ground conditions
with severe effects on the community.
The degree of detail of the risks to be allocated depends largely on the type of
contract. In a conventional contract, with a ready available project design, ground-
related risks to be allocated require probably more detailed baselines than in a
design and build type of contract, for which a set of functional speciﬁcations
serves as the sole basis for any design yet to be made. In the latter situation, where
totally different engineering solutions, varying from a bridge to a tunnel, have
to be worked out, baselines may not need to be deﬁned to the detailed level of
ground parameters. More likely, sets of baselines are ground proﬁles and models,
possibly combined with a number a factual index-properties. Furthermore, the
presence of ground and groundwater pollution, as well as archaeological remains,
can serve as baselines. However, also for this type of issue, the optimum approach
has not yet been fully agreed by the professionals in the industry.
It has been widely agreed that normally the client provides a GBR as part of the
bidding documents and the future contract. Therefore, the client has primarily to
decide upon two major strategic options for the project with regard to risk and
rewards:
1
To allocate (part of) the risk to the contractor, at an initial cost (the risk premium
for the contractor) that is paid, independent whether the risk occurs or not
2
To allocate (part of) the risk to him- or herself and to provide a contingency
budget, to pay only when the risk occurs.
In the latter option, the risk premium is, in fact, stored in a risk contingency
budget, while recognizing that the risk premium and the risk contingency budget
may be of different size. When the procurement procedure allows this ﬂexibility,
the contractor may provide alternatives for baselines. Therefore, an innovative
contractor may be willing to accept more of a risk at the same price level than
the competitors, because of better control of the risk of concern. In my opinion,
ultimately, the innovative capabilities of the entire industry will be stimulated by
this kind of risk allocation mechanism.
Another debate, already ongoing for decades, concerns the status and degree of
disclosure of the available ground data to the bidding parties. In other words, what
type, quantity and quality of information should the client supply in the procure-
ment process and what is the legal status of that information? Occasionally, clients
choose the option ‘for information only’, attempting to avoid any responsibility for

230
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
the effects of possible misunderstanding or even omissions in their own data. In
view of a transparent and fair bidding process, supported by well-understood risk
management principles by both the client and the bidding contractors, I advocate
full disclosure of all ground-related data. Experience shows such full disclosure
contributing to risk reduction for both the client and the contractor, as well as
to lower project costs (Munfah et al., 2004; Smith, 1996). In addition, courts state
over and over again that the client has an obligation to make the contractor at least
aware of all information that may affect the contractors’ activities in terms of costs
and time (Brierly, 1998).
The way to set baselines has been described earlier. Many ground-related
baselines can be deﬁned using existing project information data, as provided by
the previous project phases but, in the case of very critical risks and related
baselines, additional, detailed and advanced ground investigation data may be
required. Similar to the concept of partial safety factors in geotechnical engineer-
ing, a surplus or reduction can be applied to geotechnical baseline parameters
in order to allocate more or less contractual risk to the contractor. However, we
should remember the discussion in the previous section concerning the baseline
example of the boulder risk. Setting baselines beyond the most likely ground con-
ditions is not without debate in many geotechnical and contractual communities.
Nevertheless, the following criteria can be considered during the process of setting
the probably most appropriate baseline parameters:
•
The anticipated geological variation or heterogeneity on the site
•
The degree of impact of the proposed key risk driver on its related risk
•
The severity of the risk, expressed by its likelihood of occurrence, multiplied
by the anticipated impact of the risk
•
The preferred risk tolerance of the client, contractors and any third parties
involved, as well as the associated cost of their (lack of) risk tolerance.
While appraising these criteria in view of the complexity of most construction
projects, the reader may agree that selecting key risk drivers and their baselines is,
like architecture and parts of engineering, more of an art than a science. However,
state-of-the-art ground engineering is not yet adequately prepared to assess the
contractual implications of baselines, in addition to their technical implications. This
situation opens a window of opportunity for the ground-related disciplines to
develop more advanced methods and software to facilitate the baseline selection
process. Methodologies and means to assess easily the ﬁnancial impact of different
baseline proposals on the project results would make a major step forward.
Nevertheless, we should not feel discouraged by this lack of technology.
For many years, modern software allows provision all kinds of ground-related

GeoQ in the contracting phase
231
sensitivity analyses, which can highly facilitate any decision-making process for
the most suitable baselines.
In this context we meet again the decisive role of the people factor in the
adoption of an innovative approach. With a high degree of individual and team
willingness and true dedication to reduce the adverse effects of differing site
conditions, the application of a GBR may provide major improvements in many
projects. There is no chicken without an egg and we have no eggs without a
chicken. The GBR will never become common practice without clear communi-
cation of its proven beneﬁts. We will, however, not realize these beneﬁts without
increasing our GBR experience. The cost of a GBR should not obstruct its applica-
tion compared with the costs of one single claim about differing site conditions.
It is up to clients and their consultants to decide upon the degree of effort and
associated costs to invest in a GBR. As I will demonstrate in the case section of
this chapter, there are already favourable beneﬁts of the GBR in several countries,
which fade away its rather limited cost. Fortunately, I do not stand alone with
these statements. The British Tunnelling Society (BTS) and the Association of
British Insurers (ABI), which represent insurers and re-insurers on the London-
based insurance market, issued their The Joint Code of Practice for Risk Management
(Mining Communications, 2004). The GBR concept is entirely adopted in this code
(British Tunnelling Society, 2003).
Finally, a key success factor of the application of GeoQ in the contracting phase
of a construction project is completely to integrate it into the project’s procurement
system. Risk allocation needs to be embedded in procurement. This requires a more
professional approach towards ground-related risk in the contracting phase, for
instance by avoiding playing ‘the ostrich game’. Contracting on lowest price only
becomes simply impossible if different bidding parties have bids with explicitly
different ground risk proﬁles. An evaluation of these different risk proﬁles by clear
criteria is required, which is in fact the risk evaluation step of the GeoQ process
during contracting. A further in-depth exploration of this procurement issue goes
beyond the focus of this book. However, by now many readers may agree that the
combination of procurement and risk allocation needs adequate attention in the
years to come, in order to apply ground risk management effectively and efﬁciently
in the contracting phase of our projects. In my opinion it is an indispensable
element of the ﬁnancial success that we chase by the application of the GeoQ
ground risk management process.
Ground risk management during contracting
We may conclude that the GBR is a promising means to specify the inherently
fuzzy differing site conditions clause. This aims to minimize the likelihood of
money- and time-wasting disputes and litigation. This section introduces three

232
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
additional risk remediation approaches that support ground risk management in
the contracting phase of construction. The purpose of this section is to demon-
strate how these measures may contribute to the application of a GBR within the
GeoQ ground risk management process. It is certainly not the intention that these
measures replace the GBR and the GeoQ process.
The Dispute Review Board
The Dispute Review Board (DRB) is a proven concept to avoid and resolve ground-
related disputes and litigation in a cost-effective way. Research by Matyas et al.
(1996) indicates a remarkably high resolution rate of almost 100 per cent. A DRB
generally consists of three persons, one representing the client, one representing
the contractor and a third who acts as chairman and will be selected by the other
two members (Munfah et al., 2004). The members of the DRB inform themselves
on a regular basis about the progress of the project in relation to the actual ground
conditions encountered. Visiting the construction site at a regular time interval is
common for a DRB. While the recommendations of DRBs are not legally binding,
their ﬁndings are not likely to be reversed in litigation, due to usually thorough
knowledge of both technical and contractual aspects of the DRB members (Caspe,
1998). According to Munfah et al. (2004), widely acknowledged beneﬁts of the
DRB are:
•
Lower bid prices
•
Improved communication and less acrimony on the project site
•
More timely and cost-effective resolutions
•
Fewer claims.
GROUND-FRIENDLY
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT
DSC
GBR
DRB
Figure 11.6: The three pillars of a ground-friendly
construction contract.
The
DRB
can,
therefore,
be
con-
sidered as some sort of overall risk
remediation measure for reaching the
main project
objectives.
The
DRB
is preferably already established in
the project’s contracting phase, which
distinguishes it from other so-called
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
methods. The latter aims to solve dis-
putes when they are there already,
while the DRB aims to avoid seri-
ous disputes. ADR methods concern-
ing the construction phase are further
described in Chapter 12.

GeoQ in the contracting phase
233
The DRB can be considered as one of the three main pillars for a cost-effective
construction contract, with adequate attention to ground-related risk, as illustrated
in Figure 11.6. The Differing Site Conditions (DSC) clause and the Geotechnical
Baseline Report (GBR) form the other pillars.
In the 1990s, the application of the DRB increased dramatically in the USA.
Countries outside the USA where the DRB concept has been applied include
China, India, Honduras, South Africa, Canada, The Netherlands, France and the
UK. In the latter two countries, the Channel Tunnel project, connecting the UK
and France, used a DRB. Several international organizations embrace the DRB
concept as well. Matyas et al. (1996) mention for instance:
•
The World Bank
•
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNICITRAL)
•
Fédération Internationale Des Ingénieurs Conseils (FIDIC)
•
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
•
UK Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE)
•
Engineering Advancement Association of Japan (ENAA).
It is beyond the scope of this book to explore the DRB concept in more detail.
For instance, the Construction Dispute Review Board Manual by Matyas et al. (1996)
provides a wealth of practical recommendations and experiences. Because of its
inherent transparency, applying the GeoQ ground risk management process may
further increase the effectiveness of a DRB. The combination of the DRB, DSC and
GBR forms the core of the GeoQ process in the contracting phase and I foresee a
bright future for the joint application of these concepts, with mutual beneﬁts for
all parties involved.
Insurance and ground risk management
The well-known risks remediation measure of insurance is usually applied for risk
with a low likelihood of occurrence and (very) high effects. We insure ourselves
against car accidents and our houses against ﬁre. The insurance of construction
projects, in particular those such as tunnels with a major ground risk exposure, is a
specialized discipline. For reasons of completeness I want to address the insurance
issue, however, in a concise scope.
Ground risk is often in some way implicitly part of project insurance. Typically,
clients require contractors to carry a comprehensive general liability insurance

234
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
that should protect the client’s, the engineer’s and any third parties’ interests.
For instance, a third party needs to be ﬁnancially compensated in the case
of property damage due to unexpected ground deformations during excava-
tion. Wildman (2004) advises the client to purchase a client controlled insurance
policy, which includes all parties involved in the construction project, in order
to minimize the dispute and litigation potential. Gilmartin (1998) presents the
following risk exposures that need to be covered by insurance in construction
projects:
•
Professional liability
•
Commercial general liability
•
Workers’ compensation and employers’ liability
•
Builders’ risk
•
Construction equipment
•
Environmental issues and the contractor’s pollution liability.
It is considered beyond the scope of this book to explore all these insurance types
in more detail. For instance, Gilmartin (1998) provides a clear introduction to the
presented types of insurance.
Due to the increasing complexity of construction projects, insurance premiums
have increased. In The Netherlands, it has become almost impossible to obtain an
insurance, at a reasonable premium, for the rather high risk construction projects
such as horizontal directional borings. This situation is an additional driver for
structured ground risk management, either for convincing insurance companies
about reasonable ground risk control, or for realizing the project without insur-
ance, but within an acceptable overall risk proﬁle. In recall in this respect the
risk-driven Joint Code of Practice for Risk Management of Tunnel Works in the UK has
been initiated by the Association of British Insurers (ABI) (Mining Communica-
tions, 2004). Box 11.1 explains why.
The option to insure ground-related risk should be seriously considered as part
of the risk allocation process in the contracting phase of any project, while we
need to acknowledge that insuring a risk is not the same as eliminating a risk. It
is typically a risk effect remediation measure, in which the effects are ﬁnancially
compensated after they occurred. Therefore, we deliberately need to consider with
our project team and client whether we can allow a risk to occur and be ﬁnancially
compensated afterwards, or that it is more favourable to implement risk cause
remediation measures, in order to reduce the risk probability of occurrence. Again,
illustrated by Box 11.2, clear and uniform answers about whether and which
ground-related risks are better to be insured are non-existent.

GeoQ in the contracting phase
235
Box 11.1
Why British insurers advocate risk management
Based on data from insurer Munich Re, Knights (2005) presented 15 tunnel
projects over the period 1994–2004, which all faced major ground-related prob-
lems with ﬁnancial losses, in total, of more than 500 million US dollars. These
tunnel problems occurred in Europe, North America and the Far East. One
striking example is a 10 km and 60 million pound tunnel project in Hull, the
UK, which collapsed over 150 m. The insurance claim for reinstatement was
some 42 million pounds, which implies more than 40 times the original sched-
uled costs for that 150 m tunnel length. These ﬁgures explain why the British
insurers initiated the mentioned risk-driven code of practice.
Like the example of Box 11.2, the GeoQ process steps during the contracting
phase may challenge the conventional ways of project insurance, to arrive at more
cost-effective risk remediation measures within an acceptable risk proﬁle of the
project. Innovative partnering agreements may help in this respect.
Box 11.2
Risk management replaces insurance
The North-South Metroline is a major underground project which intersects the
historical centre of Amsterdam by a bored tunnel with a number of deep sta-
tions. From the earliest beginning, risk management has been a major issue in
this project. Very comprehensive risk remediation by the observational method
and detailed monitoring has been applied. The public client’s project team con-
sidered therefore it permissable to omit insurance against third party liability.
Instead, the reserved insurance premium served as a contingency budget to
allow payment to third parties in case of any damage because of the construc-
tion activities.
From conventional contracts to partnering contracts?
Many construction project risks, including the well-known ground-related ones,
are principally independent of the type of contract. However, the allocation and
responsibility of these risks are highly dependent on the type of contract. For
instance, some standard types of contract in the UK, like the Joint Contracts
Tribunal (JCT) and the New Engineering Contract (NEC) allow several contractual
purposes with different risk allocations (Edwards, 1995). The most suitable type of
contract for a particular construction project depends on many factors, including

236
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
the risk attitude of the client and the type and complexity of the project, like a
surface or subsurface project (Brierly and Hatem, 2002). Even contract specialists
occasionally do not agree about the most suitable contract for a project. Their
contract preference can be rather subjective and appears to be a matter of (risk)
taste. We may recall here the inﬂuence of the people factor and the inherently
different perceptions of the project stakeholders.
As for instance indicated by Essex (2003) and Wildman (2004), most tunnel
projects follow still the conventional type of DBB contracts, which separates design
from construction. If a problem occurs during construction, such as unexpected
groundwater inﬂow in a tunnel or building pit, normally the following question
arises: ‘Is it a design problem or is it a construction problem?’ In the ﬁrst situation,
in the case of a design problem, the client or engineer is responsible, while the
contractor bears responsibility in the second situation. Ground conditions, by
differing site conditions, often play a dominant role in differentiating a design
problem from a construction problem. If the parties involved can quickly agree on
whether the actual site conditions are differing or not, the responsibility question
is much easier to answer. As a matter of fact, also in conventional contracts, the
GBR and DRB can save a lot of money and time by classifying ground conditions
as differing or not.
Wildman (2004) relates a rather risk adverse attitude of today’s design com-
munity to the inherent uncertainty of subsurface construction. Clients may have
to defend their engineers against claims of contractors, for instance in cases of
differing site conditions. From a client’s perspective, this unfavourable perspective
can be a main driver to advocate the modern D&C or DB type of contracts, in
which there is one single responsibility for engineering and construction. Other
beneﬁts are an increased opportunity for innovation, because design and construc-
tion professionals work together in one team. In case of shared performance goals,
these innovations are expected to result in savings in cost and time (Essex, 2003).
The number of innovative contracts in construction projects tends to increase,
which appears to be a global trend. In fact, James P. Gould highlighted this trend
during The Twenty-Sixth Karl Terzaghi Lecture in 1995: ‘The overriding purpose
of improved contracting practices is to provide a constructed product at least cost
for the owner, with an appropriate proﬁt to both the sponsor and contractor’. He
added to this: ‘Success of this process depends largely on the performance of the
geotechnical engineer’.
In addition, the concept of the target price contract is evolving, a special type of
D&C contract, in which a pre-set price for a ﬁxed scope of work has been agreed.
The contractor will gain an incentive fee that increases if the contractor operates
well below the target price. If the costs of the contractor exceed the target price,
then the fee is reduced. The British Airport Authority is including this type of price
mechanism in its contracting approach (Finch and Patterson, 2003). The chasing

GeoQ in the contracting phase
237
Conventional contracts
with separate design
and construction
responsibilities  
Innovative contracts
with integrated design
and construction
responsibilities 
Partnering contracts
with shared interests in
design and construction
responsibilities  
Figure 11.7: A ground-friendly contractual evolution?
of mutual beneﬁts by this type of contracting strategy evolves into some sort
of partnering. Do we have to move from conventional contracts, via innovative
D&C types of contract towards partnering or alliance contracts, as the ultimate
cost-effective and ground-friendly type of contract in construction? Figure 11.7
illustrates such an evolution.
This contractual evolution is interesting from a risk management viewpoint,
because it aligns, to an increasing degree, the interests of the client and con-
tractor in joint ground risk management. This may act as a driver for cost-effective
reduction of the adverse effects of differing site conditions. Particularly in the off-
shore oil and gas industry, relationship-based contracts, like partnering agreements,
proved to have substantial performance increase and cost improvement. Blockley
and Godfrey (2002) describe partnering as a structured management approach
to facilitate teamwork across contractual boundaries. The high degree of inter-
dependence between various organizations in the supply chain of the offshore
industry makes it especially suitable for partnering.
While the construction industry can be characterized by a similar high inter-
dependency in the supply chain, for instance, by the many different suppliers
and subcontractors in most of the projects, the concept of partnering is relatively
new. In 1989, the US Army Corps of Engineers (COE) brought partnering to the
industry (Neff, 1998), with the following deﬁnition:
Partnering is the creation of an owner-contractor relationship, that promotes the achievement
of mutually beneﬁcial goals. It involves an agreement in principle to share risks involved in
completing the project, and to establish and promote a nurturing partnership environment
(US Army Corps Of Engineers, 1989).
This deﬁnition is more or less similar to the one in the UK, which adds dispute
resolution explicitly in its partnering deﬁnition (Construction Task Force, 1998).

238
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
According to Neff (1998), partnering does not involve a contractual agreement,
nor does it create any legally enforceable rights or duties.
The partnering process may start after contract award (Smith, 1996), which
resulted in a success story in The Netherlands, as described by Box 11.3.
Box 11.3
Partnering raises 25 million euros
Around the year 2000, after negotiations of nearly one year, the client and
contractor’s consortium of a part of the Dutch Betuweroute railway project
transformed their D&C contract towards a contractual partnering agreement,
the ﬁrst one in The Netherlands in such a type of construction project. Risk
sharing rather than risk allocation to separate parties, including ground-related
risks, was one of the pillars of this contract. The total costs savings in this
project were some 25 million euros, which is about 10 per cent of the budget at
contract award. Like risk, the client and the contractors also shared the beneﬁts
of these savings on a 50:50 basis.
Remarkably, there has been no legal escape built into the contract to get
out of the partnering contract. The client and contractors were contracted to
each other, which has been proven to work effectively. The people factor ruled
and succeeded as well. As indicated by Wuite (2005), both representatives of
the client and the contractor worked effectively and pleasantly together. They
preferred their partnership above to conventional contractual ﬁghts.
It could be even more effective to establish the partnering arrangement during
the contracting process itself in order to gain a (more) legal status, for instance,
with regard to a shared and contractual allocation of ground-related risk. Munfah
et al. (2004) describe a formal partnering provision that has been be incorporated
into contracts by the New York Metropolitan Transport Authority for their 6300
million US dollar East Side Access underground project.
Blockley and Godfrey (2000) advise building relationships and sharing mutual
values, needs and objectives even before contracts are signed. Partnering candidates
may very well start with a team-based risk brainstorming session, as described
earlier, in which issues of concern, like different risk perceptions, as well as
potential challenges for value engineering are raised and addressed. The results
of the GeoQ process, as performed in the project phases preceding contracting,
may typically serve as a useful foundation for the partnering process.
Partnering can be considered as contributing to the people factor and the soft
systems in construction projects. As described in Box 11.3, the effects of partnering
depend largely on a positive attitude of the representatives of the parties involved.

GeoQ in the contracting phase
239
Shared interests of clients and the contractors will prove to be the main drivers to
work together. Therefore, any shared goals, objectives and risk demand crystal-
clear communication while establishing any partnering relationship.
The concept of partnering rises preferably beyond project-level to industry-level.
The need for it can be retrieved from a statement made by Abramson et al. (2002):
The future of underground development in North America depends on our ability to accur-
ately forecast underground tunnelling conditions, estimate costs, and complete tunnels
within those estimates. The contractor’s collecting and sharing these performance data with
equipment suppliers and tunnel owners should assist in minimising misunderstandings
relating to the development future of underground infrastructure development.
This seems to provide a clear view on the necessity to mobilize the entire supply
chain within the industry for joint innovation, which supports further develop-
ment of not only underground infrastructure but construction activities in general.
A thorough application of the GeoQ process may largely contribute the neces-
sary trust building within any partnering process, because it demands full dis-
closure by risk registers and all other relevant project information. The National
Association of Dutch Contractors supports a shared risk allocation of, among oth-
ers, ground-related risk by partnership types of contracts (Koenen, 2004). Matyas
et al. (1996) perceive the positive attitudes, as fostered by partnering, as fully
compatible with the concept and intentions of the DRB. All of these developments
tend to point in the direction of cost savings for clients and increased proﬁtability
for contractors. The following section presents a number of cases demonstrating
how good intentions can be transformed to the pursued concrete and positive
results.
Case studies
Despite its promising concept, since starting in the USA in the 1990s, contractual
ground risk allocation by the GBR appears to remain in a rather early phase of
development. Otherwise, I meet a lot of enthusiasm with construction profession-
als in a variety of countries, such as the USA, the UK, Norway, Germany, France,
Greece, China, Japan and The Netherlands.
The number of GBR-related case studies describing the contracting phase within
a risk-driven framework proves to be rather limited. For instance, the proceedings
of the sixteenth International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical
Engineering (ICSMGE) held in Osaka in 2005, includes some 600 papers. However,
less than 1 per cent of these papers explicitly concerns ground risk management
and none of them mentions the GBR or a similar concept. In this respect, professor
Frans Barends of the Delft University of Technology ‘saved’ the conference by his
Terzaghi Oration 2005, by one of his conclusions:

240
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Transparency of the uncertainty in geotechnical works will facilitate proper risk assessment
and risk sharing by use of appropriate forms of contracts, avoiding inﬂexibility, indecision
and time overrun (Barends, 2005).
Because of this actual situation, I present in the following a number of concise
case studies from the USA, the UK and The Netherlands, to provide an overview of
today’s worldwide GBR-related experience in the contracting phase of construction
projects.
The USA and contractual ground risk allocation
Matyas et al. (1996) provide some general but promising GBR experience. For
instance, since the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA)
has introduced the GBR, the number of site condition claims and subsequent ﬁn-
ancial awards has decreased signiﬁcantly. All tunnel designers engaged by the
WMATA have since accepted the concept. Other clients, who incorporated the
GBR concept in their projects are, and not limited to, the Alaska Power Author-
ity, the cities of Los Angeles and Honolulu, the municipalities of Anchorage and
Seattle and the Colorado Department of Highways. This list expresses a wide vari-
ety of GBR-applying clients from all over the USA. Reports from clients, engineers
and contractors seem to judge the GBR concept as consistently favourable. Some
credited the GBR for saving millions of dollars because of the avoidance of claims
and litigation.
Wildman (2004) describes the application of the DSC clause for the Milwau-
kee Metropolitan Sewerage Tunnel Project. The contractor encountered materially
different ground conditions of large water inﬂows and poor rock support during
the project execution, compared with the ground conditions as represented in the
contract documents. While the GBR is not explicitly mentioned in this paper, the
engineer of the owner granted the differing site conditions status to the contractor’s
construction problems. The owner ended up paying 166 million US dollars to the
contractor, almost four times the contractor’s original contract price of 46 million
US dollars. This demonstrates the impact that differing site conditions can have
on a project. Wildman suggests considering a D&C contract for similar projects, to
establish a single point responsibility to the designer-builder, which may protect
the client against signiﬁcant design-error claims by the contractor.
Munfah et al. (2004) presented a very large scale GBR-case. The earlier men-
tioned 6300 million US dollar East Side Access Underground Project is the largest
transportation project ever undertaken in New York City. A continuous risk man-
agement process, including of risk identiﬁcation, risk quantiﬁcation, risk response
development and risk response monitoring was started at the early stages of the
project, which appears in line with the GeoQ process as described is this book.
Due to the high risk exposure of this typical greyﬁeld project, with numerous adja-
cent and overlying structures, the client judged the conventional design-bid-build

GeoQ in the contracting phase
241
process as most appropriate. The contract documents provided full-disclosure of
ground data, by including a GDR, GIR and GBR. The latter includes quantitative
values for selected ground conditions that are expected to have a great impact on
construction. These values are established by technical interpretation, while con-
sidering the commercial implications for ground-related risk allocation and sharing
between the client and the contractor. The client decided to take some additional
portion of risk, in exchange for a lower initial bid. Here the baseline mechanism,
as discussed with a balance between risk allocation and initial bid prices, appears
to be applied in practice. Munfah et al. (2004) present the following anticipated
advantages by the application of the GBR in this mega-project:
•
Ease of administration of contractual clauses
•
Unambiguous determination of entitlement
•
Clear basis of contractor’s bid
•
Clear allocation of risk between client and contractor.
The award of the ﬁrst tunnelling contract of this project was scheduled to be early
2004, while the entire project is planned for completion by 2012.
The UK and contractual ground risk allocation
The UK practice on ground reference conditions, the British equivalent of the
baseline approach, was initiated in the 1970s by the Construction Industry
Research and Information Association (CIRIA). However, it has not yet been
widely adopted by the UK construction industry. In 2002, the late Sir John Knill
(2003) stated in the First Hans Cloos Lecture : ‘It is now regarded as good practice
for as much information to be provided to a contractor as possible as part of
the contract documentation, within the framework of carefully devised baseline
conditions’. The British Tunnelling Society (BTS), together with the Association of
British Insurers (ABI), integrated the statement of Knill in their The Joint Code of
Practice for Risk Management in the UK, by the adoption of a truly risk-driven
and staged project approach, which include the GBR-approach (British Tunnelling
Society, 2003).
Rigby (1999) provides a remarkable case study, in which not only the GBR
but even the entire GeoQ process is reﬂected. Contrary to the major projects of
the previous cases, the John Pier Tunnel Project in the north-west of the UK is
a much smaller activity. It demonstrates the suitability of GeoQ-related ground
risk management processes, including the application of a GBR, for rather small
projects as well.
The project described by Rigby (1999) includes a 2 km long, 2.9 m diameter,
tunnel in challenging ground conditions. The site included old mine shafts, silts

242
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
that are susceptible to liquefaction and glacial deposits with very strong boulders
showing rock strengths up to 350 MPa. These ground conditions were retrieved
from an initial desk study, which was followed by several phased site investiga-
tions. A longitudinal section along the selected tunnel route, showing the anticip-
ated ground conditions, served as the baseline conditions. Ground-related risks
were identiﬁed, classiﬁed, allocated and partly shared between the client and the
contractor. A New Engineering Contract (NEC) type of contract has been selected
for its ﬂexibility in terms of the level of design responsibility and pricing methods.
A partnering arrangement has been included, as well as incentives to align the
objectives of the client and the contractor. During the tunnel construction process,
the encountered ground conditions were compared with those as agreed by the
baselines. All of the cost savings that resulted from risk mitigation were shared on
an agreed basis between the two parties. This entirely risk-driven project proved
to be very successful, with a 20 per cent faster completion than scheduled and
10 per cent cost savings. In my view, this case clearly demonstrates the bene-
ﬁts of a GeoQ-like approach, including its contractual consequences by the GBR
application, for a project with a relatively modest size.
The Netherlands and contractual ground risk allocation
Since its introduction, the GBR has been applied in some ten projects in the
period 2000–2005 in The Netherlands. Besides the cases presented in the Boxes 11.2
and 11.3, a bored tunnel with deep stations and a railway project, the Dutch exper-
iences include a number of highway extension projects and some waterworks.
These projects varied in size, from rather small to very large. In addition, Jansen
(2001) reveals the implicit application of GBR-alike approaches in a few major
D&C projects over the last years. All of the clients of these projects were publicly
owned.
A few Dutch workshops in the period 2001–2003 revealed optimism about the
opportunities and beneﬁts of the GBR. A DSC is standard in most Dutch contracts,
which allows application of the GBR concept for both conventional and modern
types of contract. However, some hesitation for a real GBR breakthrough is still
there and a number of barriers may be heard of:
•
The GBR concept is still rather unknown in large parts of the Dutch construction
industry
•
The advantages of the GBR are not yet made explicit by the Dutch practice
•
The GBR is not yet completely ﬁt-for-purpose towards the Dutch design, con-
tracting and construction practice.

GeoQ in the contracting phase
243
To raise more attention, for ground risk management in general and the applica-
tion of the GBR in the contracting phase in particular, a number of papers, courses
and lectures have been provided (van Staveren, 2001a, 2004; van Staveren and
Peters, 2004; van Staveren and Knoeff, 2004; Herbschleb et al., 2001; van Staveren
and Litjens, 2001). A major step was the start of an industry-wide technical com-
mittee in 2004, chaired by the Dutch Ministry of Public Works. The ultimate task
of the committee is to prepare a guideline for the application of the GBR in the
Dutch contracting and construction practice. The awaited beneﬁts of the GBR in
the Dutch construction practice are mainly similar to those pursued in the USA
and the UK:
•
Reduction and more cost-effective resolution of differing site conditions claims
•
Providing more objective and uniform insight into the project’s ground condi-
tions
•
Improving communication between the project parties about ground-related
risks
•
Supporting innovative and cost-effective engineering and construction within
a reasonable risk proﬁle for the parties involved
•
Supporting value engineering practices for delivering cost-optimizations
•
Supporting the life cycle cost approach for reducing total cost of ownership.
By being thoroughly embedded in the GeoQ ground risk management process,
the GBR contributes to the increasing risk-aware climate in the Dutch construction
industry. The Dutch GBR guideline will be available in 2006. From that moment
it is entirely up to the willingness and dedication of the change agents in the
Dutch industry to apply the GeoQ-GBR combination in their practices, in order
to materialize the anticipated and appreciated beneﬁts.
Summary
Still, there is no construction without a contract. This chapter demonstrated the
application of the GeoQ process in the contracting phase of construction. The
willingness to allocate each identiﬁed and classiﬁed ground-related risk to one
of the parties involved is a key factor during contracting. This contractual risk
allocation serves the last three GeoQ steps of risk remediation, risk evaluation and
risk mobilization. As a matter of fact, effective risk remediation can only start after
a clear risk allocation, because only the party explicitly responsible for a risk will
be dedicated to control that risk effectively.

244
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
With regard to ground-related risk allocation, the concept of differing site con-
ditions (DSC) has been compared with its opposite, the so-called common law
approach. The DSC appears to be the favourite with regard to the anticipated
beneﬁts, for both the client and the contractor, in either conventional or modern
types of contracts. The DSC needs a contractual speciﬁcation by the Geotechnical
Baseline Report (GBR). By making an explicit relationship between geotechnical
risk, its risk driver and the baseline of that risk driver, each identiﬁed and classiﬁed
ground risk can be clearly allocated to a party, within well-deﬁned boundaries.
In other words, the GBR makes explicit whether ground conditions are materially
different from the anticipated ground conditions, or not. The inclusion of the GBR
in a structured risk management framework, such as the GeoQ process, appears
to be rather new.
Three proven risk remediating approaches have been introduced: the Dispute
Review Board (DRB), construction project insurance and the concept of partnering.
These approaches both ﬁt and strengthen the GeoQ ground risk management
framework.
Experiences with the application of ground risk allocation by the GBR within
GeoQ-like risk management processes have been presented by a number of cases
from the USA, the UK and The Netherlands. These cases demonstrated promising
results in terms of savings in cost and time.

12
GeoQ in the construction
phase
Introduction
In construction, the proof of the pudding is in the eating. After occasionally several
years of preparation, the core of the construction process will start: construction
itself. During this phase the ﬁt-for-purpose of design, with all risk remediating
measures taken, will be tested in practice. In spite of all preparations that have
been made, surprises during construction remain inevitable. We will encounter
pleasant surprises, like ground pollution that demonstrates to be less severe during
the clean-up process at a brownﬁeld site, as well as unpleasant surprises, such as
hitting a buried water pipeline at a greyﬁeld site, which was clearly not indicated
on the drawings. However rigorous our preparations have been, uncertainty will
accompany us during the construction process.
The same applies for the GeoQ ground risk management process. While more
and earlier attention to ground risk management importantly reduces the number
and severity of foreseeable risk, a residual uncertainty remains. In my view,
effective ground risk management is more about dealing with ground uncertainty,
in full awareness, than totally eliminating ground uncertainty. The latter is an
unrealistic dream scenario, in particular during construction. Figure 12.1 presents
the construction phase in the entire GeoQ process.
In the case of a conventional type of construction project, construction follows
after the contracting phase. Otherwise, construction succeeds the design phase.
By building on the examples in the introduction of the previous chapters: now the
bored tunnel actually has to be bored. GeoQ aims to provide structured ground
risk management during the entire construction process, helping to realize the
most favourable construction result, within the project speciﬁcations, the agreed

246
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
risk proﬁles and the ground conditions to be encountered. Ideally, also in this
phase all of the six GeoQ steps are performed.
Maintenance
Phase
Pre-Design
Phase
Design
Phase
Contracting
Phase
Construction
Phase
Feasibility
Phase
TIME
GEOQ PROCESS
Figure 12.1: The construction phase within the six GeoQ phases.
The result of the con-
struction phase is a well-
completed
construction
project.
Both
the
con-
struction process and the
construction
result
will
have either a positive or
a negative impact on the
reputation of the contractor
from the viewpoint of the
many project’s stakehold-
ers. For instance, regarding
a
greyﬁeld
project
in
a
city
centre,
the
level
to
which the contractor is able
to
reduce
the
hindrance
for
the
public
can
have
a massive impact on the
contractor’s
reputation
with the public and the
(government) client.
This
chapter
starts
by
introducing and discussing two methods to support ground risk management in
this particular construction phase. These methods belong to the fourth and ﬁfth
GeoQ process steps of risk remediation and risk evaluation. These steps are vital
during construction to arrive at an as smooth as possible construction process.
The ﬁrst method revisits the observational method from a risk management
perspective during construction. I predict a revival of this approach, because of
today’s wealth of possibilities for on-line monitoring and almost real-time back-
analyses. This concept of back-analysis, the evaluation of design calculations by the
application of monitoring data is considered an integral part of the observational
method in this book.
The second method for ground risk remediation during construction covers
the role of the GeoQ process, including the concept of the Geotechnical Baseline
Report (GBR), when construction faces differing site conditions. A number of
proven ground dispute resolution options are presented, because the GeoQ process
may highly facilitate them. Finally, two case studies will be presented in which
the GeoQ process played a dominant role. As usual, the chapter ends with a
summary.

GeoQ in the construction phase
247
Ground risk remediation during construction
The observational method revisited
While Ralph Peck made the observational method widely known by his Ninth
Rankine Lecture in 1969, the founding father of soil mechanics, Karl Terzaghi
(Figure 12.2), introduced and used the method during the 1930s.
The following words of Peck (1969) concerning the observational method during
the Rankine Lecture remain relevant:
In spite of the limitations, the potential for savings of time and money without sacriﬁce of
safety is so great that every engineer who deals with applied soil mechanics needs to be
informed of its principal features.
Figure 12.2: Karl Terza-
ghi: (1883–1963) found-
ing
father
of
soil
mechanics.
In addition, I expect a revival of the observational method
in the years to come, due to the following three developments
over the last few years:
1
The increasing tendency to integrate design and construc-
tion into one contract
2
The increasing availability of cost-effective monitoring
techniques, in combination with on-line information and
communications technology (ICT)
3
The increasing demand for effective ground risk manage-
ment.
These trends are favourable to a bright future for the concept of the observational
method as one of the main risk remediation measures during construction. Basic-
ally, the observational method monitors ground behaviour during construction.
Appropriate fall-back scenarios can challenge the apparent limits of ground beha-
viour within an acceptable risk proﬁle. The core value of the observational method
is to use the real in-situ present ground conditions, as can only be encountered
during construction. Its application will thus reduce the inherent ground uncer-
tainty during construction, because the design assumptions of ground conditions
and behaviour are proven and, where necessary, adapted by the observations of
the actual ground conditions and behaviour.
There is, nevertheless, one ultimate prerequisite for the application of the obser-
vational method during construction: the design needs a certain degree of built-in
ﬂexibility to respond to the inherent differences in ground conditions that will be
encountered during construction. If this design ﬂexibility is not there, the observa-
tional method is simply not applicable (Peck, 1969). A close relationship between

248
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
design and construction is thus required. For this reason I introduced the obser-
vational method in Chapter 10, as a construction risk remediation measure to be
acknowledged already in the design phase. Design and construction are tradition-
ally often different worlds about predicting and providing (Blockley and Godfrey,
2000). Modern Design and Construct (D&C) contracts are favourable in this respect,
with design and construction being the responsibility of one sole party. That party
may beneﬁt from the observational method when reducing the sum of the design
and construction costs, within the pre-set safety and quality standards, by a smart
use of the observational method.
A characteristic disadvantage of the observational method was the relatively
large and time-consuming workload, by interpreting the observations made and
back-analysing the likely effects on the project. Today’s modern and cost-effective
information and communications technology (ITC) dramatically reduces this disad-
vantage. Large data sets of monitored ground behaviour are simply sent to data-
bases by just a cell-phone, from many places all over the world. Nearly real-time
interpretation and back-analysis of these data are possible with an increasing
number of software packages. An SMS-message can act as an alert to a geotech-
nical expert, who just has to plug in his or her laptop computer to the Internet,
to be able to check what could be wrong and how to act accordingly. This pro-
fessional may very well be located on the other side of the world. In summary,
today’s ground-related monitoring data can easily be made accessible, anytime,
anywhere and to anyone involved. Additionally, developments in modern sensor
technology produce abundant sorts of multi-purpose sensors, some as small as a
pin’s head, which can be installed in the ground or just mixed within the concrete.
Finally, remote sensing technology and satellite images have become ever more
available at lower cost. Figure 12.3 summarizes these favourable developments
and technologies for applying the observational method.
Because of all these developments, I expect a revival of the observational
method, particularly within the GeoQ risk management framework. The combina-
tion of improved ICT-facilities, sensor technology and remote-sensing techniques
may trigger some kind of digital revolution in the way we currently deal with
ground-related design and construction. I predict a major shift towards much
more ﬂexible and integrated design and construction methods. With papers like
those of Soudain (2000) I do not feel isolated with my statements. He presents
cost-saving assessments between 5 and 25 per cent by a rigorous application of
ICT in the construction industry. It is a challenge to realize these savings, and
ground-related risk management by the observational method during construction
may become one of the main drivers.
In short, the application of the observational methods within a risk manage-
ment framework pursues cost-effective ground risk remediation, while chasing
hidden opportunities as well. In particular, for the less serious ground-related

GeoQ in the construction phase
249
The Observational Method
ICT
Ground risk
management
Fallback
scenarios
D&C
contracts
Sensor
technology
Remote
sensing
technology
Figure 12.3: Developments and technologies for the revival of
the observational method.
risks,
reducing
the
risk
effect
can
be
attractive.
Contrary
to
the
concept
of
risk
cause
reduction,
which is typically applied
during design, risk effect
reduction
will
only
cost
money when the risk indeed
occurs,
besides
the
costs
for the (additional) monitor-
ing and fall-back scenarios.
Also,
hidden
opportunit-
ies of better ground beha-
viour than expected, which
are
revealed
during
con-
struction,
may
be
used.
An example is the saving
of 4900 tonnes of tempor-
ary supporting steelworks
for a London based cut-
and-cover highway tunnel,
which represented 91 per
cent of the original design (Glass and Powderham, 1994). Other promising savings
are presented in the case studies at the end of this chapter. Apart from geotech-
nical and geohydrological aspects, the observational method also proved to be
effective and efﬁcient for the geoenvironmental type of projects (van Meurs et al.,
2001). This will be further explored in Chapter 13 about the maintenance phase.
Additionally, the observational method is not restricted to risk management
purposes only. Also quality management and quality assurance of a project, in par-
ticular on greyﬁeld sites with a lot of interaction with adjacent structures, may
demand rigorous monitoring during construction, as for instance presented by
Savadis and Rackwitz (2004). They describe an extensive monitoring system dur-
ing the redevelopment of the transportation infrastructure in the city of Berlin,
after the union of East and West Germany. Berlin became Europe’s biggest con-
struction site in the mid-1990s. The impact of this infrastructure project on Berlin’s
urban life and environment could only be managed by the application of the
observational method. This is where the concepts of risk management and qual-
ity management meet each other. In order to satisfy both the demands for risk
management and quality management, the observational method can be exten-
ded to a Building Risk Assessment (BRA) method, as proposed by Burland (1995).
First, the potential surface movements, as induced by excavations for instance,
are analysed by this type of method. Then, the possible consequences of these

250
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
construction activities on adjacent structures are classiﬁed in terms of the severity
of expected damages (Portugal et al., 2005). In other words, a number of potential
damage scenarios are identiﬁed and for each scenario a number of risk remediation
measures or fall-back scenarios will be provided.
Finally, in (recent) history the observational method has occasionally been used
as an instrument for crisis management, something went wrong in the ground and
only the observational method could save the project. From now on we can give
the observational method a positive boost in the direction of becoming a major
ground risk management supporting approach.
Avoiding the pitfalls
By now we know about the many beneﬁts of the observational method. However,
as with most, if not all, methods in and outside construction, besides advant-
ages there are inevitable limitations and pitfalls. The observational method is no
exception and we have to acknowledge these to guarantee effective ground risk
management. The following issues of concern were recognized by Peck (1969) and
are still relevant:
1
Fall-back scenarios should be available for every unfavourable situation that
may be disclosed by the observations during construction
2
The observations must be reliable, reveal the signiﬁcant mechanisms and must
be reported in such a way that immediate action is possible, when required
3
The mechanism of progressive failure must be recognized as being very difﬁcult
to observe before it actually takes place.
The ﬁrst pitfall, an absence of a complete set of fall-back scenarios, has been pre-
viously explored in Chapter 10 about the design phase, because these scenarios
need to be developed and planned during design. The GeoQ process facilitates
the process of scenario analysis, including fall-back scenarios, by the structured
identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of ground-related risk. If sufﬁcient attention is
paid to ground risk management during all project phases, it must be feasible to
avoid the ﬁrst pitfall.
With regard to the second pitfall, the need for reliable observations, we again
approach the soft and hard systems in construction, the interaction between
the subjective people factor and the objective technical reality. A wealth of
sophisticated technical systems can provide measured ground data of a high reli-
ability and many sorts of monitoring equipment, such as earth pressure gauges,
inclinometers and all sorts of devices to measure groundwater pressures, are
available worldwide. However, certain mechanisms may be not measured but only
observed by the human eye of an experienced geotechnical engineer or engineering

GeoQ in the construction phase
251
geologist. The inspection of dikes in The Netherlands is an example. The detec-
tion of local small ground movements and cracks, which may trigger dike failure
during high water conditions, is not yet sufﬁciently reliable detected with only
technical systems. These dikes are also visually inspected by professionals on a
regular basis and with an increase in intensity during expected high water. How-
ever, human observations and the resulting interpretations embed an inherent
subjectivity in the conclusions that will be drawn from the ground data observed.
I recall the differences in (risk) perception and often we only see what we are used
to seeing, as demonstrated by a few of my overseas experiences in Box 12.1.
Box 12.1 demonstrates the need for reliable observations and just two brief
examples from practice demonstrate the difﬁculties. This teaches the value of a
thorough preparation with regard to the speciﬁc regional site conditions, before
entering the construction site.
However, this may still be insufﬁcient. The pitfall of the unaware and biased
individual professional can be even better avoided by appointing a (small) team
of two or more professionals for providing the observation and interpretation,
with the team members preferably having different experiences and backgrounds.
In addition, these teams of professionals do also increase the probability that all
most important (failure) mechanisms will be recognized. A professional project
organization, with clear responsibilities, should furthermore guarantee appropri-
ate actions being taken immediately, if freshly observed monitoring data reveal
unexpected deviations.
Finally, it should be realized that so-called progressive failure may be missed
by monitoring and observation (Peck 1969). For instance, stiff clay layers in a
cohesive soil or relatively hard layers in a tropical residual soil may develop high
resistance at small strain. If their limit strength is reached, these layers suddenly
fail and transfer their load to other less resistant layers. This can trigger a number
of subsequent failures, which may result in a slope failure. Unfortunately, such
failure starts before actual movements can be observed. Therefore, if the risk of
progressive failure is identiﬁed, which typically demands a detailed risk analysis
during design, appropriate risk cause or effect remediation measures should be
taken, instead of relying on an, in this respect, inadequate observational method.
Appropriate monitoring programmes further avoid the pitfalls of the observational
method as a risk remediation tool during construction. As mentioned, in today’s
modern world the observational method will be largely facilitated by all kinds
of technical monitoring systems and programmes. As with any programmes,
monitoring programmes should be driven by clear objectives. By the application
of the observational method, within the open framework of GeoQ ground risk
management, the ultimate goal of monitoring is to facilitate controlling ground-
related risk. As a major beneﬁt the monitoring programme becomes risk driven,

252
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 12.1
The art of reliable observations on sites in the desert and the tropics
My profession as an engineering geologist brought me to several places in the
world, with entirely different ground conditions. My ﬁrst overseas project site
was located in the Middle East. It was a large construction site, where an airbase
was under construction. I was responsible for the engineering geological site
characterization. One of the main challenges was to determine the required
excavation level of a number of large construction pits. Most of the typical
desert site conditions were available, including the so-called collapsible ground.
An experienced engineering geologist, Ard, being my supervisor and visiting
the site on a regular basis, made me aware of this fact. This type of ground has
soft rock properties when in dry conditions, which is obviously the common
situation in a desert. However, when this ground material becomes saturated
with water, it transforms quickly to a soft soil, which results in an easy collapse
of the soil, when loaded.
This collapsible ground behaves fuzzy from a contractual point of view. At
ﬁrst observation it behaves like rock, allowing the subcontractor to be paid for
rock excavation. A more thorough observation of this material, when wetted,
raised the conclusion that there are also arguments to pay the excavation of
this material on the basis of the lower soil excavation rates. In particular, if
the subcontractor applies water during his excavation activities. It is a typical
source of a dispute during construction.
One of my next missions brought me to Malaysia, where I encountered typical
tropical ground conditions. Severe and particularly chemical weathering of
rock masses is an occasional phenomenon that is typically encountered in these
areas. Drilled samples revealed stiff clay and, coming from The Netherlands, I
was familiar with stiff clay, caused by over-consolidation during the Pleistocene
ice ages. Only after careful observation of the samples, which revealed also
the presence of small rock fragments, I realized that this stiff clay was the end
product of serious weathering. I remembered the highly variable weathering
proﬁles, which implies the risk of large variations in sound bedrock levels at
relatively short distances. Furthermore, boulder-like elements of less severely
weathered rock might cause problems during pile driving. These are some
examples of typical triggers for ground-related risk that need to be identiﬁed
during a site investigation, by careful observation.
which might convince sceptical clients or contractors about its necessity and value
for money. By linking monitoring to risk, it is possible to deﬁne programmes
with the optimum beneﬁt-to-cost ratio, in view of the risk tolerance of the parties
involved. In other words, monitoring can be tailor-made to risk remediation.

GeoQ in the construction phase
253
Therefore, any monitoring programme should be based on the answers to two
questions (van Staveren, 2003):
1
What to monitor?
2
How to monitor?
The ﬁrst question is a strategic one: what to monitor depends on which risks to
control during construction. The identiﬁed and classiﬁed ground-related risks, as a
result of the previous GeoQ steps, should serve as a basis to answer this question.
Ground-related risk to be controlled depends obviously largely, if not totally,
on the contractual risk allocation, as can be agreed in the Geotechnical Baseline
Report. With regard to the initial ground assumptions on which the monitoring
programme will be based, several approaches are possible:
1
The most likely ground conditions (dream scenario)
2
The worst case ground conditions (doom scenario)
3
Several likely ground conditions (several scenarios)
4
A probabilistic approach of several ground condition scenarios.
The ﬁrst option is obviously over-optimistic and can better be omitted. The second
option is much safer, however, perhaps too negative. The third choice is probably
more expensive, because more than one scenario requires probably more instru-
mentation and observation. However, monitoring focused on a few scenarios will
increase the number of opportunities that can be caught as well, such as stronger
ground than expected. The last choice, the probabilistic approach, will involve
some more investment in the preparation of the monitoring programme. This can
be an excellent investment for the rather complicated and large projects, because
the costs of the monitoring programme can be balanced with the probable beneﬁts
of it. What type of approach to adopt depends entirely on the type, complexity
and accepted risk proﬁle of the construction project.
The second question about the monitoring programme is of a more operational
or tactical nature. Once it is clear what needs to be monitored, in terms of ground-
related risk and associated ground behaviour, the question about how to monitor
most efﬁciently demands an answer. In this respect it is good to remember the
words of Dunniclif and Green (1988): ‘Every instrument on a project should be
selected and placed to assist with answering a speciﬁc question: if there is no
question, there should be no instrumentation.’
The required accuracy, reliability and usability of the monitoring programme, in
view of the expected ground conditions, need to balance the unavoidable budget
and time constraints. It is considered beyond the scope of this book to answer

254
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
this important but also rather complicated question about how to monitor and
additional specialist advice will often be available. Books like the one of Dunniclif
and Green (1988) provide a lot of information about all sorts of ground monitoring
equipment. Dunniclif and Powderham (2001) stress the importance of considering
monitoring and its geotechnical instrumentation as a professional service, rather
than a lowest price construction necessity. They highlight as well the importance
of a team environment to ensure best value for money.
To conclude, we explored the observational method in combination with mon-
itoring as an effective tool for remediating risk effects, which supports the GeoQ
ground risk management process during construction. The inherent pitfalls of
the method can be largely avoided with due care. However, due to the inherent
ground uncertainty, no doubt a certain degree of residual risk remains. Unfa-
vourable differing ground conditions may still surface during construction. How
can we deal effectively with the required ground dispute resolutions, in these
cases?
Differing ground conditions during construction: what
we can do
Construction proves the reliability of the forecasts about ground conditions. Dif-
fering site or ground conditions typically arise in the construction phase, when the
actual ground conditions and behaviour are encountered during activities such as
excavation, boring, and injecting. In other words, differing ground conditions are
an inherent part of construction. Consequently, also differing ground condition
claims are normal occurrences in the construction phase (Poulos, 1998). Therefore,
in this section I will not answer the question how to minimize the probability
of a differing ground condition claim, because the remaining part of the book
concerns this item. In this section I will introduce some ways for dealing with
a differing ground conditions situation during construction, within the frame-
work of the GeoQ ground risk management process. As the reader would expect,
this section builds further on Chapter 11, where the concept of the Geotechnical
Baseline Report (GBR), together with the Differing Site Conditions (DSC) clause
and Dispute Review Board (DRB) were introduced, discussed and illustrated by
a number of cases from several countries.
First, I brieﬂy discuss the situation where a differing ground condition occurs
and is solved in mutual agreement, without a dispute, by the joint application
of the DSC, GBR and DRB, which reﬂects the ideal project situation. Second, I
discuss those common situations in which a dispute does arise about a differing
ground conditions claim, either because the construction project does not apply
the combination of a DSC, GBR and DRB, or because these supporting acts do not
result in an acceptable agreement between the parties involved.

GeoQ in the construction phase
255
Differing ground conditions in agreement
Even if the GeoQ process has been applied throughout the entire construction
project, differing site or ground conditions are to be expected during construction.
That should not necessarily be considered as a risk management failure, because
the application of the GeoQ process will have prepared us well for these differing
conditions. A DSC will be part of the construction contract, which means that
agreed differing site conditions are to be compensated by the client. The GBR will
be of great help in deciding whether the ground conditions are indeed differing
or not. The contractual baselines, as provided by the GBR, will act as a basis
to appraise and judge any differing ground conditions. Normally, the contractor
has to prove the actual ground conditions encountered are different, with regard
to the agreed baselines, for which the contractor has to apply similar ground
investigation techniques as has been used for establishing the baselines in the
GBR.
For example, during an excavation a sandstone rock tends to be strong, with
unconﬁned compressive strength (UCS) values over 50 MPa, while the baseline for
the UCS was set at 30 MPa, representing moderately weak to moderately strong
rock. In addition, the discontinuity pattern of the rock mass is less favourable to
excavation. Therefore the excavation activities are much more difﬁcult as well as
slower than scheduled. Based on the GBR, it is fairly straightforward to judge
this situation: a differing ground condition is there, based on the agreed baselines
in the GBR. The contractor will be compensated, either by a pre-set ﬁnancial
arrangement or by a reasonable change order.
In a lot of cases the representatives of the client and contractor can agree on
differing ground conditions just by comparing the additional ground investigation
data with the baselines of the GBR. If not, then the DRB has to decide whether
the ground conditions are differing in an unfavourable way from the baselines
or not. The application of the Geotechnical Baseline Report should also prove its
added value in this situation, because it helps to make explicit and measurable to
the DRB whether ground conditions actually differ or not.
By following this procedure, as an integral part of the GeoQ ground risk
management process, the majority of situations with differing ground conditions
should be arranged between the parties in a satisfying way. Consequently, a lot
of common confusion, as well as disputes about the contractual consequences of
unforeseen ground conditions, may be reduced or avoided, although I recognize
that the GBR concept is still subject to a lot of discussion in our industry, as earlier
disclosed. The prevailing reality is often not so favourable to us.
Ground dispute resolution
In our ideal project, the combination of the DSC, GBR and, when required, the DRB
should be adequate to agree about any differing site or ground conditions in a cost-
effective and efﬁcient way. Both parties should be conﬁdent with the agreement

256
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
and continue the project on pleasantly speaking terms. How different reality often
turns out to be. A ground dispute arises when the contractor encounters a differing
ground condition, either a Type I or Type II situation, which is not agreed by the
client. Normally, a contractor will only raise a differing ground condition when
that condition has an unfavourable effect on his activities. I recall the previous
rock excavation example. The contractor may have to mobilize another more
suitable excavation equipment at additional cost. Also a delay may occur, because
of the harder excavation activities. Most contractors will claim compensation for
additional costs from the client in order to return a reasonable proﬁt from the
project. The contractor may also ask for some relaxation of the time schedule. If
the client does not agree, a ground-related dispute has been born. Obviously, the
probability of this situation is much higher when there have been no GBR and
DRB established for the project.
As an ultimate consequence, both parties see each other in court. On the other
side of the dispute continuum, just a single meeting between representatives of
both parties dissolves the entire dispute, resulting in a mutual acceptable solution
for both parties.
The good news is a rising awareness, as well as willingness, to solve ground-
related disputes with less rigorous means than bringing the case into court. This
development started some years ago. In 1988, the Association of Engineering
Firms Practising in the Geosciences (ASFE) in the USA published a manual which
included a whole spectrum of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) techniques
(Caspe, 1998). The manual starts with negotiation and moves via mediation, arbit-
ration, mini-trials and private litigation towards ofﬁcial litigation, just to mention
the most signiﬁcant techniques (Association of Engineering Firms Practising in the
Geosciences, 1988). Obviously, combinations of these methods are also possible.
In addition, the ASFE manual suggests resolution through experts, which seems
comparable with the DRB. In the UK there is also an awareness that litigation
and arbitration, as well as mediation, in order to solve disputes on ground-related
matters are often not satisfactory (Turner and Turner, 1999). Therefore, in view of
modern ground dispute resolution within the GeoQ process during construction,
I have selected two alternative dispute resolution techniques for more detailed
consideration: mediation and arbitration. I compare these techniques with the ulti-
mate litigation solution in court. Figure 12.4 presents the three ground dispute
resolution options with their main characteristics.
In the following concise discussion of these ground dispute resolution options,
the presence of a Differing Site Conditions clause, as presented and discussed in
Chapter 11, has been assumed to be a pre-condition. If a DSC is not applicable,
it is likely that the common law rules. This implies it is the single contractor’s
responsibility for dealing with differing ground conditions, independent of its
seriousness and effects on the project. Therefore, in my strict interpretation of the

GeoQ in the construction phase
257
common law, a dispute about differing site conditions is by deﬁnition no issue in
this situation.
Ground Dispute
Resolution 
Mediation
•    at project level
•    involvement of independent mediators
•    non-binding
Arbitration
•    at industry level
•    involvement of professional arbiters
•    binding 
Litigation
•    at society level
•    involvement of court and judges
•    binding 
Figure 12.4: Three options supporting ground dispute resolution.
The
three
ground
dis-
pute resolutions options of
mediation, arbitration and
litigation to be discussed
assume a DRB is either not
available,
or
not
able
to
solve the dispute to the full
satisfaction of the project
parties. How can the applic-
ation of the GeoQ process
during construction, prefer-
ably together with the GBR
and all ground-related risk
knowledge of the preceding
project phases, assist these
three ground dispute resol-
ution options?
Let
us
start
with
the
option of mediation, which is
deﬁned here to be a non-binding and conﬁdential process. A neutral mediator
assists the parties in reaching an agreement about how to solve the dispute (Caspe,
1998). The mediator should understand the interests as well as the personalities of
the individual representatives involved in the dispute. The latter typically reﬂects
the soft systems approach, with due attention to the people factor. The results
of the GeoQ process, as available when the mediation takes place, may largely
facilitate the mediation process. As a result of the GeoQ process, clear ground-
related risk registers, including risk remediation measures, are available and can
be used. Perhaps even a GBR is present. All this information may help to create
more insight into the effects of the differing ground conditions to the contractor
and the client, in view of their likely different risk perceptions. This may serve as
a basis for mutual understanding and result in an acceptable agreement for both
parties. In that case the mediation has succeeded.
If the mediation does not give an acceptable dispute resolution, the next step
may be so-called arbitration. Contrary to mediation, arbitration is a binding and
formal process, following a speciﬁc set of procedures, such as for instance pre-
pared by the Construction Industry Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration
Association (Caspe, 1998). The involved arbiter should be an acknowledged expert
in the ﬁeld of ground-related disputes. However, unlike a trial, the strict rules
of evidence do not apply. Obviously, as in the case of mediation, also during

258
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
arbitration, results of the GeoQ process may signiﬁcantly help to arrive at a fair
and acceptable solution. The end-result of an arbitration is generally not subject
to appeal. However, if there are extraordinary circumstances, so that the outcome
is subject to appeal, the next and ﬁnal step is to start a process of litigation. Obvi-
ously, the decision to litigate can also be made directly, without the intermediate
steps of mediation and arbitration.
The impact of litigation on all parties involved should not be underestimated.
They can be major and should raise serious awareness and concern, preferably
well before starting any litigation process preparations. Besides the cost involved
to hire the necessary lawyers and technical experts, as well as for research and
testimony, considerable time should also be reserved. For complex situations,
procedures of several years are no exception. In addition, the relationships of the
project parties are often highly disturbed and may even result in a ‘pathological
situation’ (Caspe, 1998). Contrary to arbiters, judges and juries are seldom experts
of differing ground conditions and construction. Therefore, both parties have to
mobilize their (hired) experts. These are likely to be biased to the perspectives of
their respective clients, which does not make life easy for the judges and juries
involved. Moreover, most countries operate largely different court systems, which
can raise additional complexity if an international consortium starts litigation
for an overseas construction project with an overseas client. As a result of the
presented drawbacks, for most cases it is expected to be much more constructive
to avoid litigation. However, if litigation becomes really unavoidable, it is hoped
that the data from the GeoQ process may have a positive effect on the duration and
outcome of the litigation process. Box 12.2 provides an example of a consideration
of bringing a case into court or not.
It is clearly up to the reader to judge the most appropriate ground dispute
resolution method for the project. General rules for their application would create
a false certainty, except the only one I have: it depends. Obviously, it can also
be very effective to use alternatives or combinations of the alternative resolution
methods, as presented for instance by the ASFE. What I would recommend, how-
ever, is at least to consider the sequence of mediation, arbitration and litigation.
Simply because costs, time, energy and also frustration with all parties involved
are expected to increase in the same order. In other words, a lot of these pre-
cious resources may be saved by reaching an acceptable ground dispute solution,
without meeting at court and may be even without arbitration and mediation.
Nevertheless, unforeseen ground conditions remain a fact of construction life.
Our challenge is thus twofold by avoidance and curing: to minimize occurrence
of any differing ground conditions by operating a thorough ground risk manage-
ment process and to settle them effectively and efﬁciently, once they are there. The
application of the GeoQ process may serve as a catalyst to meet this double chal-
lenge. In this respect, Martin (1987) and Gould (1995) suggest the observational

GeoQ in the construction phase
259
Box 12.2
Going to court or not: that is the question
The ﬁrst bored tunnel in The Netherlands, the Westerschelde Tunnel, has a
length of 6.6 km. The tunnel consists of two tubes, each more than 11 m in
diameter. Its deepest point is at some 60 m below sea level and the tunnel
crosses geologically highly complex ground conditions, varying from rather
soft and loose deposits to very hard and over-consolidated so-called Boom clay.
When the tunnel boring machines reached their deepest point, the shields of
both became distorted in the highly over-consolidated and stiff clay layers and
the boring process had to be stopped. A typical situation of unforeseen ground
behaviour.
The Design, Construct and Maintenance contract (DCM) included a penalty
for delay of 136 000 euros per day, for a maximum of 100 days. However, the ser-
ious boring problems took some 8 months in total to be solved. Consequently,
the 100 days of penalty were exceeded and the contractor’s consortium lost a
fee of 13.6 million euros. The client seriously feared that the contractor would
continue the project rather cost- than time-driven, to minimize the unfavour-
able ﬁnancial consequences of the lost fee, by cost-savings of cutting overtime
and other measures increasing the total contraction time of the project. This
situation was highly worrying for the client, who would loss toll income with
a later project completion. Therefore, the client had to decide whether to go to
court or not, to force the contractor to speed up the project.
The client decided to negotiate ﬁrst, before going to court. It resulted in a
so-called ‘package deal’ with the contractors, in which the completion date has
been shifted and the penalty would be waived. In addition, a bonus system
was agreed, in which the contractors earned 68 000 euros for every day of
completion before the agreed date. This positive incentive worked quite well,
the tunnel was completed 8 months before the newly agreed date. This fast
completion was particularly the result of optimized logistics and organizational
improvements (Heijboer et al., 2004). In the mean time, no further problematic
differing ground conditions occurred. The ﬁnal costs were only slightly higher
than budgeted. Apparently, it appeared to be a good decision to start with
negotiations instead of going straight to court in order to resolve the problems
resulting from seriously differing ground conditions.
method to support disputes, which has been used since its ﬁrst time in 1984 in
Washington with marked success on several rock tunnels with complex ground
conditions in the USA. Figure 12.5 demonstrates the ultimate GeoQ objective
within the dispute resolution process: spending of less costs and less time to solve
the dispute, for all parties involved.

260
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
TRANSACTION COST
GROUND DISPUTE RESOLUTION TIME
negotiation
DRB
mediation
litigation 
arbitration
less cost
less time
Figure 12.5: The GeoQ objective in ground dispute resolution.
Munfah
et
al.
(2004)
provide a number of increa-
singly
used
construction
management
policies
for
delivering
additional
con-
tributions to the differing
ground
conditions
chal-
lenge. These include pre-
qualiﬁcation of contractors,
full
disclosure
of
all
available
ground-related
information, the inclusion of
partnering, the stimulation
of value engineering, and
last but not least, the provi-
sion of an owner controlled
insurance programme.
Case studies
The purpose of the two cases
to be presented in the fol-
lowing is to demonstrate a few ways for applying the GeoQ process in the
construction phase of a project. In the ﬁrst case we revisit the Betuweroute rail-
way project of Chapter 10. Embankments, with a perceived severe risk of slope
instability and failure, needed to be constructed within a minimum of time on
very soft soil. The application of the observational method in combination with a
rigorous on-line monitoring programme proved to be highly successful. As will
be described, a similar approach proved to be successful in Australia. The second
case describes how the GeoQ approach supported the recovery of a project in
crisis during construction.
Stability risk control by the observational method
This is where we recall the Betuweroute railway project, the second case study of
Chapter 10. This Design, Construct and Maintenance (DCM) project with an alli-
ance or partnering contract has entered the construction phase. We consider again
the section between the cities of Sliedrecht and Gorinchem. This most complicated
part of the new railway passes through low-lying areas with very unfavourable
ground conditions with very soft peat and organic clays. The thickness of the soft
layers is approximately between 10 and 12 m. Some typical ﬁgures for the ground

GeoQ in the construction phase
261
experts among the readers, volumetric weights range between 10.5 and 14kN/m3
and the undrained shear strength of these layers varies between 5 and 15kN/m2
(Molendijk, Van and Dykstra, 2003).
With regard to the ﬁrst GeoQ step of gathering information, we classiﬁed this
section already as a typical greyﬁeld project, while running parallel to sensitive
existing infrastructure, the existing railway and the busy motorway A15. Con-
sequently, in addition to the bad ground conditions, minimizing the disturbance
of many thousands of daily users of the railway and motorway provided an extra
challenge for the construction team of the alliance.
In view of the second and third GeoQ steps of ground risk identiﬁcation and risk
classiﬁcation at the start of construction, the team encountered, among others, a
serious soft soil-related embankment stability risk, particularly in view of adverse
effects on the adjacent infrastructure. The team had already decided to go beyond
the conventional design standards during design because reducing the stability
risks simply by a conservative design would cost several million euros extra, in
advance. The ground professionals in the consortium trusted their combination of
experience and engineering judgement to reduce the stability risk to an acceptable
level during the construction phase.
All identiﬁed and classiﬁed ground-related risks were allocated and presented
in a Geotechnical Baseline Report. The consortium shared the responsibility for the
majority of ground-related risk and a risk contingency budget has been reserved,
in which all consortium partners got a share. Any ﬁnancial consequences of risk
remediation would be paid from the contingency budget, while any cost savings
by optimizations would ﬂow back to it. At the end of the project, the remaining
contingency budget would be shared between the consortium of the client and
the contractors. The entire construction team was therefore highly motivated to
ground risk management, with a mutual interest for a maximum of risk reduction
and construction optimizations, at a minimum cost. This willingness resulted in
innovative solutions during construction.
This case will now focus on a 9 km long embankment section, where the
Betuweroute runs just a few metres from the existing railway. Two ground related-
risks, classiﬁed as serious, were of particular importance:
1
Slope instability and collapse of the new embankment adjacent to the existing
railway, caused by the poor strength of the underlying soft ground layers
2
Unacceptable horizontal and vertical deformations of the existing infrastruc-
ture, as a result of the loads of the embankment of the new railway.
For the embankment slope instability a risk cause reduction measure was selected
during design. The embankment would be built up rather slowly, in layers of
about 1 m thick. Then a period without construction activities was planned, in

262
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
which the groundwater overpressures in the underlying soft layers caused by
the embankment could dissipate. If a height of 2.5 m was constructed at once,
instability and failure of the embankment was expected. However, additional
calculations with strength parameters from a regional data set, based on routine
laboratory investigations, showed that even the ﬁrst sand deposit of 1 m could
already lead to embankment failure. In other words, the risk cause reduction
according to the design appeared to be not appropriate during construction.
For the second risk of unacceptable deformations of the existing railway, a 9 km
long sheet pile wall has been designed in the most critical area in between the
existing and new embankment. This measure can be considered as a risk effect
reduction.
After this fourth GeoQ step of risk remediation, the next step of risk evaluation
followed. In view of their actual situation, the geotechnical experts of the consor-
tium’s team considered the ground characterization as not realistic and too pessim-
istic. To prove their engineering judgement, they decided to apply the observational
method in combination with a rigorous monitoring programme in two stages.
First, a test embankment was constructed and carefully monitored during its con-
struction. The embankment was constructed by 0.5 m layers of sand. Horizontal and
vertical deformations, as well as changes in groundwater pressures, were measured
by porewater pressure meters, settlement plates and inclinometers.
The results were considered as very promising and conﬁrmed the engineering
judgement of the team. In fact, failure of the embankment occurred after only
a height of 5 m was reached. The ground was locally considerably stronger than
had previously been assumed during design. Also the horizontal and vertical
deformations near the embankment were much smaller than initially expected.
Therefore, it was decided two perform two optimizations during construction
and the results of the test embankment served as a basis for adapted strength
and stiffness parameters. First, the embankment could be constructed much faster
by the revised approach. Second, and in addition, the team decided to omit the
planned protective sheet pile wall between the new and existing embankment. As
an additional risk remediation measure, to monitor the risks of these modiﬁcations,
the observational method continued during the entire embankment construction
by the operation of a rigorous on-line monitoring system.
A large number of instruments were installed to measure changes in porewater
pressures, as well as horizontal and vertical deformations. At geologically relevant
cross-sections, where a large degree of geological heterogeneity could be expected,
advanced so-called vibration wire piezometers were used. The ‘on-line’ availability
of all of the monitoring results proved to be a very successful aspect of this
detailed and advanced ground characterization by monitoring. All monitored data
were immediately sent to a database, which was accessible via the Internet for
all authorized professionals of the parties (Molendijk and van den Berg, 2003).

GeoQ in the construction phase
263
The database also served as a basis for the ﬁnal GeoQ step of mobilizing, in which
all relevant ground-related risk data needed to be prepared for the next phase
of maintenance, which was part of the consortium’s DCM contract. Figure 12.6
shows the concept of on-line monitoring, including the storage of all data in the
database.
The presented risk-driven observational method supported extensive monitor-
ing, deleted the initial requirement of 9 km of sheet pile, which saved the alliance
some 4 million euros. The additional monitoring cost was approximately 0.2 mil-
lion euros, which gives a cost:beneﬁt ratio of 1:20 for this design optimization.
The net savings of 3.8 million euros were shared by the consortium partners,
according the alliance contract (Molendijk and Aantjes, 2003). It is remarkable that
the contractors earned money by not installing a sheet pile wall. In addition, the
much faster construction of the embankment, without standing time, provided a
Internet acces
anytime, anywhere
Database
GeoDelft
Figure 12.6: The concept of on-line monitoring (© with permission of GeoDelft).

264
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
welcome effect to the project’s schedule. Any potential dispute about differing site
conditions was negotiated and agreed on site, by the directly involved represent-
atives of the partnership. The Dispute Review Board did not need to undertake
any serious action. The entire Sliedrecht–Gorinchem part of the Betuwe railway
project was completed well within planning, while the total project costs savings
summed up to some 25 million euros, which is approximately 10 per cent of the
original project budget.
Ameratunga et al. (2005) present a similar GeoQ-like and risk-driven approach
on the other side of the world, for a seawall construction project in Brisbane,
Australia. Box 12.3 presents a number of remarkable similarities of the Australian
and Dutch approach.
Box 12.3 supports the viability of a GeoQ-like ground risk management
approach for a nearshore construction project. Like Australia and The Netherlands,
there are many other countries and regions facing similar challenging ground
conditions and project constraints in which a GeoQ approach during construction
is expected to add value in terms of ground risk and opportunity management.
A tunnel in geohydrological crisis conditions
In view of the second case study, I would like to start with some other words of
Peck (1969):
Whenever construction has already started and some unexpected development has occurred,
or whenever a failure or accident threatens or has already taken place, an observational
procedure may offer the only satisfactory way out of the difﬁculties.
How true these words appeared for a design and construct tunnel project in the
political capital of The Netherlands, the city of The Hague. During construction
of this cut-and-cover tunnel, on a typical greyﬁeld site in the middle of the main
shopping area, a number of serious and acute groundwater problems forced the
entire construction process to stop. In total there were ﬁve subsequent and serious
water leakage problems, mainly resulting from a failing grouted sand layer. This
project, named Tramtunnel, became known by the public as the Tramtanic.
Eventually, measures to remediate the surplus of groundwater appeared
remarkably to result in an unacceptably low groundwater ﬂow, which created a
new and major risk. This latter issue is the subject of this case, in which I present
a few highlights to demonstrate the possible role of the GeoQ process in a crisis
situation. At that time, the GeoQ process could not have been applied as explicitly
as presented in this book, due to its early development stage in the early 2000s.
What type of crisis are we talking about? During construction of one of the
tunnel’s deep stations, the contractor’s consortium faced a problem. The drainage
system in the building pit was not working well. This resulted in unacceptably
high groundwater pressures in the strata underlying the excavation. Without

GeoQ in the construction phase
265
Box 12.3
An Australian approach to stability risk management
The Moreton Bay project involves design and construction of a 4.6 km long sea-
wall near the port of Brisbane. The project applied a risk-driven observational
method with an extensive monitoring programme. The following striking sim-
ilarities of this project with the Betuwe railway project I retrieved from the
paper by Ameratunga et al. (2005):
•
Operating a design and construct alliance between the client and team of
consultants and contractors
•
Facing considerable project constraints, for instance by the close proximity
of the Moreton Bay Marine Park
•
Presence of very soft soil conditions, with undrained shear strengths as low
as 3 to 5 kPa, and clay layers extending over 30 m below the seabed
•
Soft soil bearing capacity and embankment stability as a critical issue
•
Serious time pressure which did not allow a staged construction of the
embankment
•
Applying rather low factors of safety during construction, typically between
1.15 and 1.25, despite high consequences of failure
•
Using instrumented trial embankments to obtain better understanding of the
feasibility of the proposed construction methods
•
Performing back-analysis of calculations with the monitoring results of the
trial embankments
•
Using a Geotechnical Work Method Statement (GWMS) jointly prepared by
the design and construction teams to manage risk during construction
•
Operating an extensive monitoring programme during construction for mon-
itoring ground and construction behaviour, of which the results were stored
in a database
•
Allowing ﬂexibility during construction to apply any remedial measures
when required.
relief, the pit-bottom would burst open, which would result in large deformations
of the diaphragm walls and subsequent intolerable damage to the adjacent multi-
storey-buildings that are part of the shopping centre of The Hague. Consequently,
the excavation process and construction were put on hold.

266
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Also in this type of a rather critical situation, the ﬁrst GeoQ step would have
been that of gathering information. A lot of ground data were available during
construction and risk identiﬁcation and risk classiﬁcation would conﬁrm the collapse
risk of the deep station bottom as very serious, acute and to be avoided at any cost.
However, the problem became even more serious in view of the next GeoQ step
of selecting risk remediation measures. Neither fall-back scenarios, nor appropriate
risk cause or risk effect measures were available. Even worse, the risk cause was
not at all clear: why did the groundwater drainage system not work as expected
and required?
In order to get out of this highly unfavourable situation for all parties involved –
a construction on hold, without a solution how to proceed – a number of
external experts were consulted, including the Delft University of Technology and
GeoDelft. A careful risk-cause analysis was performed and Box 12.4 presents a few
more details, for those readers interested in the geohydrological and geochemical
details.
Box 12.4
Some details of a geohydrological risk-cause analysis
A detailed risk-cause analysis of the malfunctioning of the groundwater drain-
age system related clogging of the extraction drains to a gel layer, which had
been injected into sand layers underlying the excavated deep station’s bottom.
The purpose of the gel was to make these sand layers impermeable, to pre-
vent excessive groundwater inﬂow in the tunnel during construction. Well,
that objective clearly has been reached, however, together with an unforeseen
side-effect: impermeable drains to relieve excessive groundwater pressures in
the underlying layers. As became clear by a geochemical analysis, the harden-
ing process of the gel layer released caustic soda into the soil. A rather high
caustic soda concentration would dissolve the locally present organic material
of peat lenses in sand layers. A groundwater ﬂow removed this material and,
at a certain distance from the gel layer, the organic material ﬂocculated. This
caused the clogging of the ground surrounding the drains. Extensive labor-
atory tests were carried out to test the validity of this hypothesis and these
experiments conﬁrmed the theory. At least the main risk cause appeared to be
known (Luger et al., 2003).
This knowledge about the risk cause provided an opening towards an effect-
ive risk remediation measure: to re-operate the dewatering system. Installation of
sand piles with a valve system was selected as the most appropriate risk remedi-
ation measure. The observational method, by operating a rigorous monitoring
programme, was the only possible way to continue the deep station excavation

GeoQ in the construction phase
267
and to complete construction within an acceptable residual risk proﬁle. The on-
line monitoring system enabled continuous information about any changes in
the groundwater pressures, as a way of risk evaluation, representing GeoQ step
ﬁve. The monitoring data were stored in a database and could be mobilized when
required (GeoQ step six) during the operation and maintenance phase of the tun-
nel. The newly installed groundwater drainage could be regulated, as well as the
excavation process of the deep station, when necessary. By using this approach, it
was possible to continue the excavation safely, about two years later, and to ﬁnish
construction without facing similar problems.
The observational method, in combination with on-line monitoring, was essen-
tial to get out of the crisis and to complete this rather unfortunate construction
project. Additional project costs have risen to over some 50 per cent of the ori-
ginal contract price and the construction time has been doubled. This second case
demonstrates the actual validity of Peck’s statement of 1969.
Summary
The proof of the pudding remains in the eating. This chapter has demonstrated the
application of the GeoQ process in the construction phase. Two main approaches,
contributing to the fourth and ﬁfth GeoQ process steps of risk remediation and risk
evaluation, are presented and discussed.
The ﬁrst method revisits the observational method, from a risk management
perspective during construction. This method is appraised as a promising risk
remediation tool during construction within the GeoQ process, in particular to
reduce the risk effects. In combination with today’s modern design and con-
struct contracts, widely available sensor technology, remote-sensing techniques
and modern ICT-facilities, the application of risk management will be highly facil-
itated by adopting the observational method in an early stage of the project. Three
main pitfalls of the observational method are the absence of fall-back scenarios,
a lack of reliable observations, as a result of biased perceptions and inexperience
with particular regional site conditions, and the mechanism of progressive failure.
The latter cannot be effectively observed before it actually takes place. Apart from
due attention to these pitfalls, their bypassing will be provided by the design and
installation of an appropriate monitoring programme.
The second method of ground risk remediation during construction covers the
role of the GeoQ process, including the concept of the Geotechnical Baseline Report
(GBR), when differing site or ground conditions occur. These differing conditions
will remain happening, even while applying the entire GeoQ process, as a result of
inherent ground uncertainty. Therefore, in addition to applying the GeoQ process,
it is better to be prepared with a number of ground dispute resolution options
as well.

268
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Finally, two case studies are presented, in which the GeoQ process played a
dominant role. In the ﬁrst case we revisited the Dutch railway project with a severe
risk of embankment slope instability, which threatened adjacent infrastructure. An
Australian nearshore seawall project reveals striking similarities, with regard to
the project challenges and applied risk-driven approach. The second case demon-
strated how the structured approach of the GeoQ process may facilitate a project
in crisis during construction. Contrary to the ﬁrst case, which concerned mainly
geotechnical risks, the latter faced major risks of geohydrological origin. For this
case applying the observational method in combination with on-line monitoring
proved to be the only effective and efﬁcient way out of the crisis.

13
GeoQ in the maintenance
phase
Introduction
After probably years of feasibility studies, pre-design, design, contracting and
construction we arrive ﬁnally in the very last phase of the GeoQ ground risk man-
agement process: maintenance during the project’s operational lifetime. Finally,
we are there: the precious construction project has been realized. Likely, we battled
a lot of ground-related risks during the preceding project phases. The quality
of design has been tested during construction, as well as the type, quantity and
quality of probably more than one ground investigation. Perhaps we encountered
differing site conditions that had to be resolved, by negotiation, applying a Dis-
pute Review Board, mediation, arbitration or even litigation. In the latter case we
even may still be involved in a court case.
Anyhow, to build forward on the examples in the introduction of the preceding
chapters: the bored tunnel has been completed and is ready for operation over
the years to come. Ideally, the result of the preceding construction phase is a
well-completed construction project, within budget, planning, and risk proﬁle,
and according to the pre-set safety and quality standards. Figure 13.1 presents the
maintenance phase in the entire GeoQ process.
By the application of the GeoQ process in the earlier project phases we
reduced the number of ground-related surprises for the current maintenance
phase to a minimum. Nevertheless, however rigorously risk-driven and adapt-
ive the project has been, some uncertainty will remain to accompany us dur-
ing the project’s operation. We are still dealing with ground and its inherent
uncertainty and some ground risk remediation measures have to prove they are
ﬁt-for-purpose during operation. A typical example is the risk of unacceptable

270
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
settlements for infrastructure projects, which may involve safety concerns for its
end-users.
Maintenance
Phase
Pre-design
Phase
Design
Phase
Contracting
Phase
Construction
Phase
Feasibility
Phase
TIME
GEOQ PROCESS
Figure 13.1: The maintenance phase within the six GeoQ phases.
In this last phase, the
GeoQ
ground
risk
man-
agement process is applied
for
risk-driven
and
cost-
effective maintenance dur-
ing the operational life time
of the project, within the
project’s
operational
spe-
ciﬁcations and the risk tol-
erance of those parties still
involved. Preferably, also in
this ﬁnal phase, all of the
six GeoQ steps are taken to
identify, classify and man-
age
any
changes
in
the
residual project risks.
We
will
revisit
a
few
ground
risk
management
methods that are of par-
ticular importance in the
maintenance phase and a
new method is introduced
as well. We will start with
the life cycle concept, as introduced already in Chapter 8, with a focus on cost-
effective and ﬁt-for-purpose maintenance. Then a new and risk-driven approach
for appraising the maintenance and reinforcement needs of existing dikes will be
introduced. These issues are a major safety concern in many areas in the world.
Next, we will revisit the baseline approach for risk allocation, as presented
in Chapter 11, and we will concentrate on its role in dispute resolution about
differing site conditions after project completion. These differing conditions may
have an adverse effect on the project’s anticipated maintenance programme. Obvi-
ously, monitoring remains important to obtain information on (different) ground
behaviour in these situations. These three ground risk management tools can be
related to the ﬁfth GeoQ step of risk evaluation. Finally, attention is given to the
sixth GeoQ step of risk mobilization, by a concise introduction of the main forms of
information and communications technology (ICT) that can be used for this last
step. After the discussion of these four ground risk management methods, two
case studies, with the GeoQ process in a supporting role, are presented. As usual,
the chapter ﬁnishes with a summary.

GeoQ in the maintenance phase
271
Ground risk management during operation and
maintenance
Life cycle concepts for cost-effective maintenance
A large part of the construction industry attention goes to constructing and build-
ing new projects. However, the end of construction is the start of the project’s
operational life and sometimes the enormous costs involved with the operation
and maintenance of existing projects seems to be a bit undervalued. With regard to
domestic housing in The Netherlands, the yearly costs of maintenance and renova-
tion are more or less the same as the total yearly budget spent on new construction
projects. In the infrastructure segment, the total budget spent on maintenance and
renovation is even some 70 per cent of the total budget spent on new projects
(van Staveren, 2001b). In addition, we should realize that the end-users of the
constructed object add far greater value to it than the value represented by the
total construction costs (Blockley and Godfrey, 2000). Let us consider the use of
a bridge. Many thousands of people may cross that bridge every day during its
entire life time of 50 or perhaps even 100 years. Imagine the value of that activity,
by summing up the hourly rates of those people during these 50 or 100 years.
Two conclusions can be drawn. First, given the enormous cost of maintenance
and operation, it would probably pay to reduce this cost by maintenance-effective
design and construction. Second, given the enormous value that is represented
by the end-users of construction projects, the life cycle value should not only be
dominated by its costs, but also by its purpose. Blockley and Godfrey (2000) suggest
expanding the life cycle costs approach to some form of life cycle purpose approach.
This may require a detailed analysis of the future use and users of projects, in
which the concept of scenario analysis plays a key role. Obviously, this analysis
needs to be started in the early phases of the project to catch the most beneﬁts.
By returning to ground-related risks in construction and its industry, we would
make a major step forward by reducing the life cycle costs of construction pro-
jects. While this type of awareness appears to get ever more wide attention, a
main obstacle to apply it in practice remains. It is the simple fact that, like design
and construction, construction and maintenance are occasionally strictly separated
responsibilities, at least with many public owned clients and government agencies.
Several departments, with most of the time entirely different interests and object-
ives, are not directly driven by a life cycle approach, because they do not gain
any ﬁnancial beneﬁts from it. The increase in the application of modern design,
construct and maintenance contracts, which include maintenance activities over
10 years, 20 years or even 30 years, is expected to give an enormous boost to life
cycle thinking. Within such contractual arrangements the contractor can improve
his long-term proﬁts by pursuing the lowest total cost. With the right contractual
incentives, a maximum ﬁt-for-purpose can be achieved as well.

272
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
The GeoQ ground risks management approach may largely support further
implementation of the life cycle approach in the construction industry. By its
application we are able to concentrate on ground-related risk from the very begin-
ning of the project, when we start in the feasibility phase. In the early stages we
will identify the ground-related risk adversely affecting the life cycle costs and
ﬁt-for-purpose of the project. Typically, settlement of infrastructure is such a risk
type. Let us imagine the effects on the operation and maintenance costs of a high-
speed railway if, shortly after completion, unacceptable differential settlements
surface, which do not allow a safe operation. It would be a nightmare for the
involved parties.
Most likely many of us were not yet able to apply an entire life cycle manage-
ment approach in recently completed projects. Still, we can create an opportunity
to gain some of the ﬁnancial beneﬁts of the life cycle approach by looking forward
through the project’s entire operational life time and expected maintenance. It is
possible to repeat the GeoQ steps of gathering project information, risk identiﬁcation
and risk classiﬁcation, but now from a cost-effective operations and maintenance
perspective. Next we can analyse the role of the ground conditions within these
risks, for instance by a risk cause and effect analysis. I recall the tools as presented
in Chapter 7, such as the fault tree analysis (FTA) and failure mode and effect
analysis (FMEA). Based on the results, we would be able to schedule a ground-
driven maintenance programme for the next 10 or 20 years. Preferably, we would
consider a few scenarios, for instance with regard to the anticipated trafﬁc intens-
ity. An ongoing monitoring programme greatly assists the appraisal of long-term
expected (ground) behaviour of the construction. Any deviations from the expec-
ted behaviour can be interpreted and may result in a cost-effective modiﬁcation
of the maintenance programme.
There is a lot of knowledge available about optimizing operations and main-
tenance programmes in the literature and in other sectors, such as the oil and
gas industry. The life cycle management approach has, for instance, been largely
developed and exploited in the energy sector.
In summary, the GeoQ process seems to be well-applicable in the maintenance
phase of operation of realized construction projects. This may contribute to any
party who is responsible for these activities or just using the project result. It
facilitates cost-effective operation and maintenance by the structured and risk-
driven consideration of the relevant ground data. These data need to be made
available in a structured format, by risk registers and supporting databases. In
the many projects where GeoQ could not yet have been applied before, it is still
possible to start it in the maintenance phase.
Box 13.1 presents an example of a road renovation project, where GeoQ has been
applied in a risk-driven contracting process, in search for a suitable maintenance
contractor.

GeoQ in the maintenance phase
273
Box 13.1
Starting ground risk management in a road renovation project
An existing and busy road with daily trafﬁc jams in the north-western part
of The Netherlands urgently needed maintenance by renovation. The govern-
ment client of the road decided to bring this renovation project in design and
construct contract to the market, in order to gain the cost, time and quality
beneﬁts of a design that is well-integrated in the reconstruction works. A clear
allocation of ground-related risk has been considered as necessary to meet these
objectives. During construction of the road, many years ago, the GeoQ ground
risk management process has not been available. Therefore, the client decided
to start with the GeoQ process, right at the road’s maintenance phase.
The ﬁrst GeoQ step involved gathering project information on the three main
objects of the project: embankments, viaducts and road-crossings by a sunken
construction. Existing site investigation data have been interpreted, including
an existing but rather generic risk register. Based on the available information,
ground-relatedriskswereidentiﬁedinGeoQsteptwoandsubdividedingeotech-
nical risks, geohydrological risks, geoenvironmental risks, and risks because of
man-made obstructions in the ground. For the classiﬁcation of all identiﬁed risks,
GeoQ step three, the semi-qualititative method facilitated by the Electronic Board
Room (EBR) has been used. Representatives of the client, the engineer and geo-
technical consultants participated in this team-based risk session.
In total 19 geotechnical risks, 10 geohydrological risks, 5 geoenvironmental
risks and 5 man-made obstruction risks were identiﬁed, classiﬁed and allocated
to the client, the contractor or shared. The risk of deforming adjacent structures
appeared to be one of the most serious ground-related risks of this typical
greyﬁeld project. As part of GeoQ step 4, four remediation measures were
proposed for each ground-related risk. The preparation of a GBR, with clear
baselines, was one of the recommendations to the client, while evaluating the
risk proﬁle by GeoQ step ﬁve. The results of the GeoQ process were stored in
a risk register, concisely reported and presented to the client, which involved
GeoQ step six of this project (GeoDelft, 2004).
The brief case study in Box 13.1 demonstrates it should never be too late to start
a structured ground-related risk management process.
Rational risk management for existing dikes
In many areas of the world, cost-effective maintenance of dikes is of major safety
concern for the people living behind them. This is particularly the case when the
ﬁt-for-purpose of a dike alters. Box 13.2 presents an example.

274
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Box 13.2
Dike failure as a result of drought
To everyone’s surprise in the very dry summer of 2003 in The Netherlands,
two secondary dikes failed. Thousands of cubic metres of water ﬂooded into
domestic areas, creating property damage. The scale and effects of these two
events were rather small, however, the conditions of these events raised large
concern in society, as well as in the geotechnical community.
Thorough joint research by a number of Dutch parties resulted in a remark-
able conclusion. It was not an extreme wet period that triggered the failure of
these dikes, as is normally anticipated in dike design and construction, but an
extreme dry period. This has been dramatically changing the strength properties
of the dike material. These two dikes were typically not ﬁt-for-purpose for such
climatic conditions during their life time. This raised major public concern about
the safety of the some remaining 17 000 km of secondary dikes that surround
the many polder areas in the low lying parts of The Netherlands. What would
happen if the dry period were succeeded by a serious wet period, with a lot of
rain and consequently high water levels?
Because there will always be limits to maintenance budgets, a risk-driven
approach may help to establish cost-effective dike maintenance programmes.
Ideally, dike maintenance and reinforcement are restricted to those parts of the
dike demanding it. As demonstrated by the example in Box 13.2, the conventional
process approach of visual dike inspection, appraising the main failure mech-
anisms, providing strength and stability calculations and executing the resulting
maintenance and reinforcement programmes may need support. Therefore, a new
approach, to consider the failure risk of existing dikes throughout their entire life
time, has been developed. This method, Rational Risk management for Dikes (RRD)
calculates the failure risk of a particular dike section for a number of scenarios
(Beetstra and Stoutjesdijk, 2005).
In The Netherlands and in many parts of the world, dikes are generally char-
acterized by rather limited available ground data, which is logical because of the
considerable lengths of these structures. The RRD method uses several scenarios to
deal with this inherent incompleteness of ground information. These scenarios are
established by combining a few geotechnical ground models, including ground
layers and strength properties, with a number of geohydrological conditions, such
as groundwater levels and external high-water conditions. In addition, cultural-
historical information about the region and its inhabitants may help to assess the
dike material properties. For instance, in The Netherlands, large areas have been
exploited by the excavation of peat over the ages to use that material for heating.

GeoQ in the maintenance phase
275
As a result, dikes in those areas typically contain a lot of peaty material. The geo-
metrical proﬁle of the dike is also included in the scenarios. Figure 13.2 presents
the development of eight scenarios for a dike.
4 geotechnical
ground models 
2 sets of
geohydrological
conditions 
1 dike
profile 
8 dike
scenarios
ground layers,
strength
properties
groundwater
levels, high
water loads 
dike
geometry
Figure 13.2: Scenarios for rational risk management of an existing
dike.
The
RRD
approach
determines
a
factor
of
safety against dike failure
for each scenario by using
conventional dike stability
calculations.
By
apprais-
ing the regional geological
heterogeneity and using geo-
statistics, the probability of
occurrence of each scenario
is calculated as well. This
exercise
results
in
the
probability
of
occurrence
of each scenario with its
safety factor against dike failure for the dike sections of concern (Beetstra and
Stoutjesdijk, 2005).
If the scenario with the highest probability of occurrence provides an unaccept-
ably low safety factor against failure, according to the prevailing standards and
codes for dike design, then there is reason for additional action. There is even
more reason for concern if the majority of scenarios provide low safety factors.
These situations clearly demand speciﬁc attention to that particular dike section,
probably by performing a detailed and advanced ground investigation, to verify
the ground properties as assessed in the scenarios. Based on this new information,
decisions about the urgency for dike maintenance and reinforcement can be made
on a largely rational basis, to assure an acceptable degree of dike safety during
the remaining part of its life time. Obviously, it is recommended to repeat this
procedure on a regular basis, for instance once every 5 or 10 years, to allow for
any changes in external circumstances which may affect the pre-set dike safety.
The expected main advantages of the application of the RRD method are:
•
Speed: in a short period of time, within weeks or even a number of days, there is
information available about the high risk parts of the dike; with a conventional
approach, including ﬁeld and laboratory investigations, this would have taken
months at least
•
Cost-effectiveness: identifying and improving the sections with the highest
risk will result in a more cost-effective reduction of the overall risk of dike
failure

276
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
•
Focus of risk-driven ground investigations: detailed and advanced ﬁeld and labor-
atory investigations are directed to the most vulnerable sections of the dikes,
as a result of the RRD exercise
•
Presence of risk maps: the RRD approach delivers risk maps that can be applied
as a basis for crisis management in situation with extreme high water con-
ditions. Because the weak spots are known, any risk effect measures, such
as dike repair after (partial) failure and evacuation schemes, can be planned
accordingly.
Obviously, this method can also be used to check the stability of many other
structures, regarding probably most failure mechanisms of concern. We should,
however, realize that this rather objective method of dike failure risk assessment
includes some inherent subjectivity at the input side. For instance, the assessment
of the probabilities of geological heterogeneity within the scenarios requires geolo-
gical judgement and interpretation that stretches beyond the application of solely
factual data. Also this rather quantitative risk assessment of dike safety tends to
be a combination of hard or factual and soft or interpretative data. Nevertheless,
the RRD approach is typically a member of the family of GeoQ-tools. It serves
the maintenance of (very) long structures over large distance during their entire
life time. Any foreseen changes in external conditions, which may challenge the
ﬁt-for-purpose of these structures over the years, can be incorporated into the
scenarios. The ﬁrst case study, later in this chapter, explains the application of the
RRD method in more detail.
Ground dispute resolution after project completion
Despite the degree of ground risk management in all the preceding project stages,
as well as during the maintenance phase itself, some inherent uncertainty of
ground conditions remains. Therefore, also in the maintenance phase, the problem
of differing site or ground conditions may rise (again). Figure 13.3 presents three
main causes that may challenge the ﬁt-for-purpose of a realized construction
project during its operational life time.
A typical example of different ground behaviour is the often mentioned problem
of unacceptable (differential) settlements. Even if settlement criteria are met at
the moment of completing construction, unacceptable settlements may arise in
the years to come. A much slower consolidation process caused by lower ground
permeability than expected may for instance cause this problem. Also creep effects
may be higher than anticipated.
If the trafﬁc intensity on a road is signiﬁcantly higher than expected during
its life time, a change of loading conditions occurs. Or, in the case of an airport, if
a new and larger type of aeroplane is operated. Loading conditions of ofﬁces or

GeoQ in the maintenance phase
277
houses may increase, as part of a renovation programme. The latter is typically
the case for historic buildings in a number of cities in The Netherlands, such as
Amsterdam. These buildings, often several hundreds of years old, are typically
founded on wooden piles. These gain a very low safety factor because the effect
of negative skin friction, caused by ground settlement, was not been incorporated
into pile design in those early days. As a result, even a minor change in the loading
conditions may have an adverse effect on the critically loaded pile foundation.
Serious damage is not unknown in these circumstances.
Realised Project
Fit-For-Purpose  
Different ground
behaviour 
Changing
loading conditions  
Changing
external circumstances
Figure 13.3: Challenges to the ﬁt-for-purpose of realized projects.
With regard to the third
change
that
may
reveal
different site conditions, a
change
of
external
circum-
stances,
I
build
forward
on
the
example
of
the
wooden pile foundations.
In many cities, groundwa-
ter
levels
ﬂuctuate
over
time, for all kind of reas-
ons like industrial activit-
ies, construction, excessive
rain, or the opposite, excess-
ive drought. However, if
the top of a wooden pile
becomes free of groundwa-
ter, due to a lowering of the groundwater level, fast deterioration of the pile
occurs, with a serious risk for settlement damage or worse.
Obviously, also the combined effects of these three causes may become visible,
which will signiﬁcantly increase the problem’s complexity. When encountering
these types of problems during the life time of any kind of object, it will help to ﬁnd
appropriate solutions by distinguishing these causes of the adverse construction
behaviour. It is always easy, but not always right, to point to the inherently
uncertain ground, as the ultimate main source of the problem. Obviously, the
ground could be the main cause, but not necessarily.
The main beneﬁt of any available ground-related risk register, preferably with
some supporting databases with ground information, is allowing rather objective
veriﬁcation of the role of any differing ground conditions. By comparing the actual
ground conditions or behaviour with the available ground information and risk
history, the existence of any differing ground conditions is likely to become clear.
The continuation of at least some monitoring of ground behaviour after completion
of construction supports any judgement about the actual ground conditions. If a
GBR is available, it is, furthermore, much easier to check whether the differing site

278
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
conditions are the responsibility of the client owner or (still) of the contractor. This
approach will facilitate relatively fast and cost-effective, ground dispute resolution,
according to the procedures as set out in Chapter 12. Obviously, the application of
all these GeoQ ground risk management tools provides no guarantee that differing
ground conditions can be totally avoided, nor their disputes.
Risk ﬁling and mobilization by modern ICT tools
The sixth and ﬁnal step of the GeoQ process has been deﬁned earlier as the
storage of all relevant ground risk information in risk registers, to be followed
by its mobilization or transfer to the next project phase. Obviously, it is wise to
keep a copy of the entire risk register, in order to beneﬁt from it, perhaps even
after several years, when some kind of liability may arise because of an adverse
behaviour of the realized construction project .
There are numerous ways of presenting risk, on paper or digitally. Again, I
advocate the KISS principle here; try to Keep It Simple and Short. The successors
of our risk registers will be grateful to us when they receive any ground risk
information in a decent and easily accessible way.
Modern ICT tools highly facilitate a structured storage of ground risk inform-
ation. The results of a 1998-survey, as presented by Clayton (2001), about the
availability of risk management software, presents more than thirty software
packages, including their proposed applications and the addresses of their web-
sites. Figure 13.4 presents these software packages covering, largely, four main
categories.
Risk Management Software
Risk identification and
management software
Risk assessment software
Decision making software
Data management systems
Figure 13.4: Four categories of risk management software.
Data
management
sys-
tems will be most suitable
for risk ﬁling in registers
and its transfer. No doubt
today a lot of updates and
new software are available,
compared
with
the
1998
search. A quick Internet sur-
vey will typically reveal a
lot of up-to-date risk man-
agement software providers
with
their
services.
Any
further attempt to present
today’s fast software devel-
opments in a book is obsol-
ete before the book is printed.
Any available Enterprise Resources Planning (ERP) tools or software that is being
used for Knowledge Management purposes may be used for risk management

GeoQ in the maintenance phase
279
purposes as well, possibly with some modiﬁcations. In addition, experience
teaches that the use of simple spreadsheet programmes largely support structured
storage and use of ground risk management information, in particular for the
smaller and less complicated types of construction projects. It will depend entirely
on the type and size of the project, the software already available, as well as
the taste of those involved in the ground risk management process, as to which
software will be most cost-effective and efﬁcient in its use.
Finally, once in the last GeoQ phase of maintenance in the operational life of
the project, we might be able to beneﬁt from these accumulated and software-
supported risk registers, for instance, in the discussed case of perceived differing
ground conditions, as ground uncertainty remains.
Case studies
This section presents two case studies in a rather brief format, because we approach
the end of this book. These cases concern ground risk remediation during some
sort of maintenance during the operational lifetime of realized projects. The purpose
of these cases is to demonstrate how the GeoQ process may work in practice
during the life time of construction projects. The ﬁrst case describes the application
of the RRD method for the safety assessment of an existing dike. The second case
demonstrates the way GeoQ supports operational risk management at a waste
disposal site. This latter case has a typical geoenvironmental focus and deals with
the control of polluted groundwater.
Rational risk management approach for dike safety
assessments
As part of a pilot project, the RRD method has been applied for some 80 km of
dike in the low-lying and densely populated province of North-Holland in The
Netherlands. The main objective was to obtain indicative risk-based information
about the stability of the dike under wet loading conditions. A too low safety
factor might result in dike failure and consequently a ﬂood when a high water
condition rules.
According to the ﬁrst GeoQ step of gathering information, all existing ground-
related data of the dike under consideration were collected. Next, as part of the
risk identiﬁcation step, the safety risk of the existing dike is considered in view
of the prevailing codes and standards. This pilot project focused on the risk of
slope instability of the dike under high-water loading conditions. Different from
all other risk classiﬁcation methods discussed in this book so far, next the risk of
dike instability is assessed by a mainly quantitative approach. The dike has been

280
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
subdivided into sections of 100 m length, which resulted in 800 sections, given the
80 km of dike. Based on the anticipated geological heterogeneity and the required
degree of detail of the assessment, the length of these sections can typically be
adapted for other projects.
For each dike section a number of scenarios has been deﬁned, based on the
expected geotechnical and geohydrological conditions, as discussed earlier. Any
existing site investigation data proved to be of great help to assess the geotechnical
and geohydrological properties for each scenario. Next, for each of the 800 dike
sections and the related scenarios, the safety factors against slope instability were
calculated, which was a highly automated process. Normally, some 3000 dike
slope stability calculations can be easily performed in one night.
Figure 13.5: Safety factors of 800 dike cross
sections (© with permission of GeoDelft).
By geostatistical methods, which account
for the expected geological heterogeneity,
the calculated safety factors have been
related to a probability of dike failure in
each section. The resulting safety factors and
their probabilities were grouped into three
classes and plotted on a map. This was
simply done by using red, yellow and green
colours, indicating areas with an unsafe,
moderately safe and safe situation against
slope instability of the dike. This data set
can be considered as the GeoQ risk classiﬁca-
tion of the slope instability of existing dikes.
Figure 13.5 presents an example of a dike
safety risk map. The dots should be con-
sidered as coloured red, yellow and green.
Based on these results, largely rationally-based recommendations can be made
for the next GeoQ step: the remediation of the slope instability risk of the most
unfavourable parts of the existing dike. Strengthening of these unsafe parts by an
extra embankment can be one of the risk cause remediation measures. Another
option is to reﬁne the risk assessment by additional ground information of the
critical areas. A focused ground investigation can be performed in those areas
that have been assessed as critical. As a result, boundaries of certain geological
formations become known in more detail, ground properties can be up-dated and
applied in revised scenarios. This may serve as input into a new cycle of stability
calculations.
As part of the next GeoQ step of risk evaluation, the updated safety factor, as
a result of the applied risk remediation measures, needs evaluation in view of
the risk tolerance of the dike’s stakeholders. Obviously, the risk perception of the
people living around the dike is a factor of concern.

GeoQ in the maintenance phase
281
Because all data are digitally available, they can be easily mobilized as part
of the last GeoQ step, towards any other stakeholders, such as a contractor, to
assist the dike reinforcement activities or the government authority, who bears
responsibility for the dike safety.
This case conﬁrmed the foreseen advantages of the RRD-method, such as speed,
cost-effectiveness and insight in the location of critical parts of the dike on access-
ible and easy to adapt risk maps (Pereboom et al., 2005).
While considering the inherent subjective element of the people factor, the
RRD-approach is likely to become a welcome additional GeoQ tool. The applied
software is available on the market and may also be achieved by linking existing
databases and geotechnical calculation models. Finally, innovative readers may
identify several other useful applications for this method, well beyond the dikes
in this case.
Operational risk management at a waste disposal site
All together we create a lot of waste in our modern societies. In many areas of
the world, waste is not only burned but also deposited. There is an increasing
awareness that adverse chemicals may seep from the waste deposits into the
underlying ground layers. Pollution of precious drinking water reserves may
become a serious risk in domestic areas surrounding these waste deposit sites.
During the late 1990s, the concept of Flexible Emission Control (FEC) has been
developed as a risk driven and dynamic approach to dealing with ground and
groundwater pollution. Based upon the understanding of the ground and ground-
water conditions, together with the characteristics of the pollutant, the pollution
is controlled by the application of a monitoring system. Only if required, remedial
actions are taken and the FEC-concept proved to be a cost-effective and efﬁcient
approach for managing risk caused by pollution (van Meurs et al., 2001). This
implies the application of the observational method, in combination with mon-
itoring, during the operational life time of any project or industrial activity that
may cause some kind of environmental pollution.
The following case describes a risk-driven intervention during the operation
of a waste disposal site in the northern part of The Netherlands. In the 1990s, a
groundwater management system was installed on the site. In line with the FEC-
concept, the main objective of this groundwater management system was to serve
as a risk remediation measure. At that time, the identiﬁed risk of groundwater
pollution, as a result of the leakage of contaminated materials from the waste
deposit, was classiﬁed as serious. The site is underlain by permeable sand layers
to a depth of about 80 m and drinking water is pumped from water-bearing layers
in the neighbourhood of the site. Based on a sound groundwater management
system, the waste disposal site was certiﬁed and was able to operate according to
the Dutch government regulations.

282
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
The proper functioning of the groundwater management system is checked
regularly by taking water samples from observation wells that have been installed
around the waste disposal site.
At a certain moment, an increased chloride level was found in one observa-
tion well during regular monitoring. This situation might indicate the presence of
so-called density currents in the subsoil, a phenomenon where the chloride con-
tamination’s own weight causes it to sink within the ground towards much deeper
layers. Due to a groundwater ﬂow in these deep layers, the chloride contamination
could move towards the drinking water aquifer.
According to the GeoQ steps one to three, based on the monitoring and other
relevant (ground) data, this risk was identiﬁed and classiﬁed as serious. In coopera-
tion with the authorities, the manager of the waste disposal site decided to initiate
an additional ground investigation, in order to map the presence and direction
of movement of any chloride below and around the site. These data would be
used as a basis to modify, where relevant, the groundwater management sys-
tem, as a risk remediation measure by GeoQ step four. There was a high sense of
urgency to this ground investigation, because adequate functioning of the ground-
water system was an integral part of the licence to operate the waste deposit
site. In practical terms, if the groundwater management system proved to be not
working effectively, the authorities would be obligated to restrict dramatically
or even to shut down the operation of the waste disposal site. Therefore, from
a commercial point of view of the site manager, it was of utmost importance
to adapt the system as soon as possible. As presented in Box 13.3, this situ-
ation demanded an innovative approach for a detailed ground investigation with
advanced tools.
Because of the urgency of remediating the chloride contamination risk, the need
for the advanced and dynamic ground investigation was of paramount import-
ance and therefore widely accepted by all stakeholders. The applied procedures
agreed well with the recommendations of the Network for Contaminated Land
in Europe (NICOLE) (Network for Contaminated Land in Europe, 2002). The
results of the ground investigation were applied in a geoenvironmental model
study, which resulted in the required modiﬁcation of the groundwater manage-
ment system being the risk effect remediation measure. Ongoing monitoring will
serve as the GeoQ step of risk evaluation, while the data will be reported on a
regular basis to the parties involved, which acts as the ﬁnal GeoQ step of risk
mobilization.
The applied risk-driven GeoQ approach during the operational phase of the
waste disposal site resulted in three months of time saving, which was very wel-
come in view of the site’s commercial operations. This case serves as an example of
how the GeoQ ground risk management approach may facilitate geoenvironmental
type of problems during operation and maintenance of industrial activities.

GeoQ in the maintenance phase
283
Box 13.3
The beneﬁts of an innovative environmental ground investigation
In order to gain the necessary additional ground related data as quickly as pos-
sible, innovative ground investigation tools were applied. Advanced equipment
for deep cone penetration tests (CPT), including in-situ conductivity measure-
ments were successfully applied to map the chloride contamination under and
around a waste disposal site. Groundwater samples were taking by using the
so-called multi-groundwater sampling probe, to depths of about 80 m.
This approach took considerably less time than the usual method for mapping
pollution, which requires motoring of observation wells that need ﬁrst to be
installed around the contaminated location. Boring and installing one of these
deep observation wells require at least ﬁve working days. Once in position, it
takes another week of waiting for the subsoil conditions to return to their more
or less initial in-situ conditions before a groundwater sample can be retrieved
and analysed. Therefore, at least some weeks pass before there is any insight
into the presence and ﬂow direction of the contaminant.
The deep cone penetration test with conductivity measurements and ground-
water sampling at several depths were performed in less than a day per location.
It also provided immediate qualitative information about chloride levels. This
made it possible to select the next site investigation location in order to map
the chloride contamination efﬁciently. To guarantee the measured conductivity
corresponding with the interpreted chloride levels, calibration of the ground-
water samples with their conductivity was performed at several locations and
depths. The chosen ﬂexible and dynamic site investigation approach proved
to be faster, cheaper and better than a more conventional approach by boring,
installing monitoring wells, taking samples and providing laboratory analysis
(van Meurs et al., 2001). The presented approach transformed this conventional
sequence of four steps to mainly one step on site, supported by a number of
laboratory calibrations.
Summary
This chapter has demonstrated the application of the GeoQ process in the main-
tenance phase of construction projects and even industrial operations. Smooth
operation is the proof of effective ground risk remediation during design and
construction. In this ﬁnal stage, which may take 10 years, 20 years, 50 years or
perhaps even 100 years, the ultimate GeoQ objective is to realize the project’s
most cost-effective maintenance, from a ground risk management perspective.
Preferably, all of the six GeoQ steps are performed in order to identify, classify

284
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
and manage any changes in the perceived and ground-related residual project
risks.
Four ground risk management approaches, which are of particular importance
in the maintenance phase, have been introduced and discussed. First, the life cycle
concept is extended from a mainly cost perspective to a lifelong ﬁt-for-purpose
perspective. Any project should remain ﬁt-for-purpose, even in case of unexpected
and adverse ground behaviour, which can be triggered by changes in loading
conditions or other external conditions over time.
Second, ﬂood control is of major safety concern in many areas in the world and
the ﬁt-for-purpose of existing dikes need regular checks. This may reveal the need
for maintenance or even reinforcement. The method of Rational Risk management
for Dikes (RRD) calculates the safety factor against dike failure by using several
scenarios, which proved to be a highly effective and efﬁcient GeoQ tool.
Third, some (minimal) inherent uncertainty of ground conditions remains even
during operation and maintenance. Ground dispute resolution, even after project
completion, is not unthinkable. Differing ground conditions may have an adverse
effect on the project’s anticipated maintenance programmes. Continuous monit-
oring, even after project completion, may remain important for projects with high
risk proﬁles, to obtain information on (different) ground behaviour, which can be
used in case of disputes about differing ground conditions. These three ground
risk management tools are related to the ﬁfth GeoQ step of risk evaluation.
The last and fourth ground risk management approach for the maintenance
phase concerned a quick appraisal of modern information and communications
technology (ICT). Of four main risk management supporting software types intro-
duced, data management systems will probably be the most suitable for ﬁling
risk in risk registers and its transfer, which concerns the sixth GeoQ step of risk
mobilization.
Two case studies with risks of geotechnical, gehydrological and geoenviron-
mental origin illustrated the possibilities of GeoQ ground-related risk management
in the practice of operation and maintenance.

PART FOUR
A look into the future


14
To end with a new start
Introduction
This ﬁnal chapter highlights brieﬂy some of the main opinions and conclusions
of this book. It starts with the soft systems or people aspects of ground risk
management and is followed by the process of applying the GeoQ ground risk
management framework, which combines the soft systems with the hard systems
of technology. The last section of this chapter presents a brief outlook forward
towards a prosperous construction industry, as perceived from a ground risk
management perspective. I end with some last words.
Ground risk management: the people
First of all and probably most importantly, due attention to the people factor is
considered to be the key success factor for a cost-effective and efﬁcient operation of
ground risk management. We need both individuals and teams. Representatives of
all stakeholders in any construction project should preferably reach a shared basis
of understanding of hazards, risk and risk management concepts and practices.
This understanding should stretch from the traditional reactive risk approach
towards the more modern proactive and holistic approaches, which include the
social construction of risk and its associated difﬁculties. Risk management should
not solely be perceived as an unavoidable vehicle to avoid crises, but as an overall
way of proactive management of risk and opportunities. Management of ground-
related risk calls for acknowledgement by all construction players for its short-term
and long-term bottom-line beneﬁts, which concern not only ﬁnancial, but also
social and environmental aspects.
At some time, any risk-driven change agent will probably need a substantial por-
tion of individual motivation and dedication to convince the project stakeholders

288
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
about the necessity and beneﬁts of structured ground risk management. Therefore,
we have explored the concept of the individual and our individual contribution to
construction projects. Effective ground risk management starts with an awareness
of the inherent differences in individual risk perception.
This focus on the individual is a typical aspect of the dominating cultures in
the western world. However, no individual can create any construction just solo.
We need (many) other people and we need both mono-disciplinary expert teams
and multidisciplinary teams. These project teams need a proactive risk culture,
with continuing attention to people aspects, such as organizational processes,
behaviour, culture and real participation of all involved employees. Also our
interaction with the people beyond the team, clients and the public in our society,
has been thoroughly discussed. We encountered elements of collectivism, which
is a characteristic of many cultures in the eastern part of the world.
We need both approaches, individualism and collectivism, for cost-effective
and efﬁcient risk management in today’s increasingly globalizing world. The
combined individual and collective willingness of at least the key project players
is invaluable, because these people make it happen. Our challenge is to ﬁnd the
optimum balance between both approaches.
Ground risk management: the process
Ground risk management is entering the construction arena in order to control,
reduce or even eliminate foreseeable ground-related risk. Moreover, the dark and
unknown ground is no longer only a factor of risk, ground-related opportunities
are caught as well. The GeoQ process is nothing more than a simple and adaptive
framework for facilitating this process. GeoQ is based on several existing and
widely accepted risk management approaches that can be found in many text-
books, all over the world. The cyclic character, by six generic risk management
steps that should ideally be performed in each project phase, helps to rationalize,
to structure, to minimize and to communicate potential major ground-related prob-
lems. Despite the simplicity of the concept, GeoQ is rather difﬁcult to implement
because of the inherent presence of the people factor in risk management.
To maximize the ﬁnancial beneﬁts, GeoQ should start as early as possible in any
construction project and be continued as long as possible, even including the main-
tenance phase during operation, after completion of construction. GeoQ provides
a direct relationship between major technical and ground-related project risk and
the required type, quantity and quality of ground expertise and investigations for
the risk’s remediation. Therefore, the valued ground expertise and investigations
become explicitly linked to the remediation of project risk.
The cost of good-quality ground-related services during engineering and con-
struction is usually only a fraction of the cost of a major risk event, as well as of the

To end with a new start
289
cost saving by optimizations and value engineering. In his John Mitchell Lecture
paper, Heinz Brandl (2004), professor at the University of Vienna, Austria, presents
the following quote of the British social reformer John Ruskin (1819–1900):
There exists hardly anything in this world that could not be produced in a lower quality and be
sold at a lower price – and people who orientate themselves on the price only are the natural
prey for such practices. It is not clever to pay too much, but it is even less clever to pay too little.
When you pay too much, you lose some money – that’s all. When, on the other hand, you pay
toolittle,yousometimesloseeverything,becausethepurchasedobjectcannotfulﬁlitsintended
purpose. The law of economics does not allow to obtain big value for little money. If you take
the lowest offer, you have to add something for the risk you take. And if you do that, you also
have enough money to pay for something better than the lowest offer.
The application of the GeoQ process helps to communicate and justify the need
for adequate ground investigations and related geotechnical, geohydrological and
geoenvironmental services to the sometimes less-technically-oriented decision-
makers in construction projects and society.
In addition, besides risk management, GeoQ supports several other manage-
ment approaches, such as quality management, value management and innova-
tion management. Partly as a result of this hybrid character, GeoQ applications
in a variety of large and small projects demonstrate considerable reductions of
cost and time, as well as minimised individual and team frustration. The GeoQ
process proves to reduce ground-related risk to accepted levels and to exploit
ground-related opportunities as well.
To gain (even more) ﬁnancial and other beneﬁts, I recommend at least consid-
ering the following aspects for any construction project:
•
Applying a well-structured ground risk management approach, for instance
by the proposed and proven GeoQ process
•
Establishing a proactive and risk aware culture within the project teams, by
combining the best of the individual and the team approach, with due attention
to the people factor
•
Providing an awareness, at least qualitative and preferably more quantitative,
of the cost of major risk events, as well as the cost of risk remediation measures
and their management
•
Selective use of risk management tools: adequate techniques should be selected
in each project phase in order to control, reduce or even eliminate the most
critical ground-related project risks.
Based on both individual and team-based risk awareness, as well as the willingness
to deal with risk beyond its avoidance, these recommendations provide some keys
to make a difference in our practices.

290
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
Towards a prosperous construction industry
In today’s construction industry we have to deal with a lot of change. The follow-
ing statement by Todd D. Jick (1993), who taught at Harvard Business School, may
be recognized by many readers: ‘Changing is inherently messy, confusing and
loaded with unpredictability. No one escapes it’. When investigating ground, we
are used to getting our hands dirty. Ground is inherently unpredictable and, while
constructing, we cannot escape the ground, whether we like it or not. Change and
ground have apparently a lot in common.
It will take some more years at least, perhaps even a generation, until the
presented GeoQ ground risk management framework, or similar approaches, are
fully accepted and embedded in our day-to-day engineering and construction
activities. However, I think we are in some kind of a hurry, because many problems
in the construction industry, and society as a whole, need fast relief. Given this
situation, how could and should we operate in our day-to-day practices?
Therefore, particularly related to the time factor, transformation within the con-
struction industry deserves some more attention. In my opinion, industry trans-
formation is a rather continuous process of adapting to changes in society, or
even better, anticipating the expected demands of society. Herman Wijffels (2004),
former chairman of the Dutch Social-Economic Advisory Board of the Dutch Gov-
ernment states: ‘At this moment we are in a transition process from a mechanistic
order towards an organic order’. Many consultants apply so-called evolutionary
processes in attempting to realize organizational and industry transformation. By
the evolutionary process it is expected that a transformation will take a rather long
period of time, 5 years, 10 years, perhaps even longer, before the transformation
is really completed, provided that any transformation will end at any stage. This
provides a step-by-step approach, contrary to the more revolutionary or shock and
awe way of change.
In this respect, I was rather surprised to read about organic evolution, as occur-
ring in nature, which is apparently not always a smooth and step-by-step like
process. Even periods of radical change belong to an evolutionary process (Marx
Hubbard, 2004). Box 14.1 presents a few characteristics of organic change that I
have selected, because these may help us better to understand the transformation
processes in our organizations and industry. I derived the aspects from Marx
Hubbard (2004) and interpreted them from a risk-driven construction perspective.
I added the sixth aspect myself.
Without usurping evolutionary biologists, the issues presented Box 14.1 seem
to conﬁrm that construction industry transformation is a natural process. This is
similar to many other transformation processes around us, including our own
human evolutionary development process. An evolutionary process is not neces-
sarily slow and dull, as the lessons of nature teach us, which may stimulate us

To end with a new start
291
Box 14.1
Similarities of organic and industry transformation
The following aspects of organic change may help us better to understand the
transformation processes in our organizations and industry:
1
Evolutionary transformations are in fact quantum transformations, a jump
from one condition to another, instead of a smooth step-by-step growing
process to another condition. In fact, in our modern times the Internet cre-
ated such a quantum leap in society. I foresee a similar jump in our construc-
tion industry, when modern ICT and Internet technologies become fully
exploited. If, for instance, the ICT-facilitated observational method, suppor-
ted by on-line monitoring becomes common practice, our entire design and
construction processes will radically change.
2
Real transformation is always the result of a crisis. When nature reaches its
boundaries, there is not automatically stabilization at that boundary, but a
process of innovation and transformation starts. Following the previous dis-
cussionaboutthechallengesandopportunitiesintheconstructionindustry,in
my opinion some sort of crisis is ongoing in the global construction industry.
3
Holism is part of nature and integration is part of the evolutionary progress,
which aligns with the suggested integration of the hard technological and
soft human systems, in construction in general and particularly in ground-
related risk management.
4
Evolution creates beauty and only beauty survives. In nature, beauty is
often related to strength and fertility. Its objective is to guarantee survival.
Although beauty is a very subjective topic, construction has created a lot
of beauty since ancient times. Many impressive man-made structures have
survived hundreds or even thousands of years. I like the idea of bringing the
concept of beauty, as a vehicle for quality over time, to a more prominent
position in the construction industry.
5
Evolution increases awareness and freedom, which is clearly expressed by
our own evolution in the (post-) modern era. Our awareness about the
surrounding world and our freedom of choice has dramatically increased
over the last decades. Again, the Internet and modern ICT are huge catalysts.
This increasing awareness and freedom of choice of billions of people, all
over the world, will change their expectations of the construction industry.
By working in that industry, it is our responsibility to deliver ﬁt-for-new-
purpose products and services, in order to satisfy the new needs of our
clients and to make a decent proﬁt as well.
6
Evolution is here and now, like risk, organizational change and industry
change, no one can escape it.

292
Uncertainty and Ground Conditions
to take bigger steps in our transformation processes. We should dare to make
even leaps if required in certain situations, while still remaining evolutionists
rather than revolutionists. This approach is quite different from the conventionally
advocated and well-established prudent and often reserved step-by-step-approach
of change. Let us try to act differently in order to embed the concept of structured
ground risk management as effectively as possible in our (project) organizations
and industry.
When it is difﬁcult to push forward with any change initiative, I often remember
the small dharma puppets, which I bought for my little daughters some years
ago in Tokyo. These puppets do not have arms and legs, which is apparently
not convenient. However, due to this handicap, they always come back to an
upright position, however large and different the forces on them are. We should
act as dharma puppets if we feel handicapped to bring the change we think that
is needed in our projects.
In this respect the psychologist Martin E.P. Seligman inspires me. After many
years of being a rather conventional psychologist, basically involved with the
curative aspects of psychology, he developed a new psychological approach. This
concerns mainly avoiding psychological problems, in a preventive way. Prevention
has a much more certain outcome than trying to cure. He became the pioneer of
the Positive Psychology Movement (Seligman, 2002).
Analogous to this development in psychology, I am convinced that it is our
time to develop a positive movement in the construction industry, with a leading
role for ground engineering. In my experience, ground engineering is still applied
in too much of a curative way. It has a rather negative reputation as a source of
problems with often fuzzy solutions, in which many experts have totally different
opinions. Therefore, let us apply risk management to transform ground engin-
eering and its related disciplines from a mainly curative towards a much more
preventive approach. Let us start some kind of positive movement of ground
engineering as well as a catalyst for the entire construction industry. In this book I
have presented a lot of thoughts, opinions, tools and experiences to start to make
a move in that direction. I wish you all kinds of success in making a positive
difference!
Some last words
Finally, once you have read this book, I want to recall and share some of the
thoughts and intentions I raised in the introduction of this book. My message with
this book is to always look at the bright side of risk. There is a lot of negativism about
the concept of risk, but any risk we imagine is some fruit of our own imagination.
This helps us to get at least some minor insight into the many possible futures we
might experience. By identifying a foreseeable risk, at least we realize something

To end with a new start
293
unfortunate that can happen. So long as it is a risk, it has not yet effectuated and
we are still able to do something with it, by reducing its probability, reducing its
adverse effects or a combination of both ways of action. Furthermore, often risks
hide surprising opportunities. This is what I call the bright side of risk.
I aim to create a much more positive image around the concepts of risk and risk
management in general and ground-related risk management in particular. With
this book I have tried to communicate the beneﬁts of encountering risk and acting
upon it in an effective way, rather than the conventional, very human impulse
of risk aversion. My approach is to capture foreseeable risk within our zone of
inﬂuence, or in the zones of inﬂuence of our project team, our client, our industry
and our society. The remaining risks, the ones outside our circles of inﬂuence and
the unforeseeable risks, those we have to accept. It should be possible to accept
them, if we are sure that we tackled all their foreseeable colleagues, individually or
by joint forces. This book aims to give a contribution to this innovative approach
and application of ground-related risk.
A last remark to stay alert. So long as construction is man-made and deals
with Mother Earth, ground-related risk remains in our day-to-day reality. Ground-
related problems and even crises will continue to happen. However, hopefully, an
increasing acceptance and application of structured ground risk management in
the world’s construction industry can reduce the number, intensity and impact of
these ground problems and crises. The future will teach us about the outcome of
the suggested developments and their ultimate added value, preferably expressed
in sound sums of money.

References
Abbott, E.L. (1998). Preparation of contract documents for subsurface projects. In Subsurface
Conditions: Risk Management For Design and Construction Management Professionals (D.J.
Hatem, ed.) pp. 95–128. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Abramson, L.W., Cochran, J., Handewith, H. and MacBriar, T. (2002). Predicted and actual
risks in construction of the Mercer Street Tunnel. In Proceedings of the North American
Tunneling Conference, May, Seattle, pp. 211–18. Balkema, Lisse.
Altabba, B., Einstein, H. and Hugh, C. (2004). An economic approach to risk management
for tunnels. In Proceedings North American Tunneling 2004 (Ozdemir, ed.) pp. 295–301.
Taylor & Francis Group, New York.
Ameratunga, J., Shaw, P., Beohm W.J. and Boyle, P.J. (2005). Seawall construction in More-
ton Bay, Brisbane. In Proceedings 16th International Conference on Soil Mechanics and
Geotechnical Engineering, 12–16 September, Osaka, Japan, pp. 1439–42. Millpress, Rot-
terdam.
American Society of Civil Engineers (1980). Construction Risks and Liability Sharing, Volume
II. ASCE, Reston.
Anderson, D.R., Sweeny D.J. and Williams T.A. (1999). Statistics for Business and Economics,
7th edn. South-Western College Publishing, Cincinnati.
Ansoff, H.I. (1984). Implanting Strategic Management. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs.
Association of Engineering Firms Practicing in Geosciences (1988). Alternate Dispute Resol-
ution for the Construction Industy. ASFE, Silver Springs.
Aufenhanger, J. (1985). Philosophy (Dutch edn.). Het Spectrum, Utrecht.
Australian Geomechanics Society (2000). Landslide risk management concepts and
guidelines. Australian Geomechanics Journal, 35(1), 51–92.
Barends, F.B.J. (2005). Associating with advancing insight: Terzaghi Oration 2005. In Pro-
ceedings 16th International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, 12–16
September, Osaka, Japan, pp. 217–48. Millpress, Rotterdam.
Barends, F.B.J. and Mischgofsky, F.H. (2005). European innovation programmes for
urban infrastructure. In Proceedings International Symposium on Urban Geotechnics. Geo-
cityNet2005, Lille.

References
295
Baya, D., Oluwoye, J. and Lenard, D. (1997). An analysis of contractor’s approach to risk
identiﬁcation in New South Wales, Australia. Construction Management and Economics
15, 363–9.
Beetstra, G.W. and Stoutjesdijk, T.P. (2005). First Approach to Rational Risk Management (RRD)
by the Delta Institute, 1 November. GeoDelft, Delft.
Bell, F.G. (1987). Ground Engineer’s Reference Handbook. Butterworth and Co Publishers,
London.
Bellotti, R. (1989). Shear strength of sands from CPT. In Proceedings 12th International Con-
ference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, August, Rio de Janeiro, pp. 179–84.
Balkema, Rotterdam.
Berlo, K. (1960). The Process of Communication: An Introduction to Theory and Practice. Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Bijsterveld, K. (2005) How do you come to client focussed construction? (in Dutch). Building
Business, 1, February, 62–3.
Bles, T.J. (2003). Risk During the Installation of Piled Foundations: Decision Support System by
Identifying, Classifying and Balancing Risk (in Dutch). MSc Thesis, Twente University of
Technology, Enschede.
Bles, T.J., Hemmen, B.R. and van Staveren, M.Th. (2005). Dealing with Risks using GeoQ and
GeoBrain. User Forum Risk Management in System Engineering Life-Cycle, 6 and 7
October, Gesellschaft für Systems Engineering, Bremen.
Block, P. (2002). The Answer to How is Yes: Acting on What Matters. Berret-Koehler Publishers,
San Fransisco.
Blockley, D. and Godfrey, P. (2000). Doing It Differently: Systems for Rethinking Construction.
Thomas Telford Ltd, London.
Bock, H., Blümling, P. and Konietzky, H. (2005). Common ground in engineering geology,
soil mechanics and rock mechanics: past, present and future. In Proceedings of the
Symposium New Developments in Geo Information Handling for Engineering Geology, 21
January 2005, on the occasion of the retirement of IAEG President Niek Rengers,
Synopsis p. 2. ITC, Enschede.
Boothroyd, C. and Emmet, J. (1996). Risk Management: A Practical Guide for Construction
Professionals. Witherby, London.
Brandl, H. (2004). The Civil and Geotechnical Engineer in Society: Ethical and Philosophical
Thoughts, Challenges and Recommendations. The Deep Foundations Institute, Hawthorne.
Brierly, G.S. (1998). Subsurface investigations and geotechnical report preparation. In
Subsurface Conditions: Risk Management for Design and Construction Management Profes-
sionals (D.J. Hatem, ed.) pp. 49–94. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Brierly, G.S. and Hatem, D.J. (eds) (2002). Design Build Subsurface Projects. Zeni House
Books, Phoenix.
British Tunnelling Society (2003). The Joint Code of Practice for Risk Management of Tunnel
Works in the UK. BTS, London.
Burland, J. (1995). Assessment of risk and damage to buildings due to tunnelling and excav-
ation. In Proceedings First International Conference on Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering,
November, Tokyo, pp. 1189–201. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Calle, E.O.F. (2002). Optimisation of ground investigation requires a clear probability ana-
lysis (in Dutch). Land + Water, 11, 36–9.

296
References
Cameron, K.S. and Quinn, R.E. (1998). Diagnosing and Changing Organisational Culture.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts.
Capra, F. (1983). The Turning Point: Science, Society and the Rising Culture. Bantam Books,
New York.
Carlsson, M., Hintze, S. and Stille, H. (2005). On risk management in large infrastruc-
ture projects. Proceedings 16th International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical
Engineering, 12–16 September, Osaka, Japan, pp. 2785–8. Millpress, Rotterdam.
Caspe, H.P. (1998). Dispute resolution mechanisms for differing site conditions claims. In
Subsurface Conditions: Risk Management for Design and Construction Management Profe-
sionals (D.J. Hatem, ed.) pp. 223–57. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Clayton, C.R.I. (ed.) (2001). Managing Geotechnical Risk: Improving Productivity in UK Building
and Construction. The Institute of Civil Engineers, London.
Construction Industry Institute (1994). Pre-Project Planning: Beginning the Project the Right
Way. Publication 39-1. CII, Austin.
Construction Industry Research and Information Association (1978). Tunnelling: Improved
Contract Practices. CIRIA, London.
Construction Task Force (1998). Rethinking Construction. DETR, London.
Courtney, H., Kirkland, J. and Vigueri, P. (1997). Strategy under uncertainty. Harvard Busi-
ness Review, November–December, 67–79.
Covello, V.T., McCallum, D.B. and Pavlova, M.T. (eds) (1989). Effective Risk Communication:
The Role and Responsibility of Government and Non-Government Organizations. Plenum
Press, New York.
Covey, S.R. (1992). The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. Simon and Schuster, New
York.
Cummings, D. and Kenton, F.J. (2004). Eleven case studies of failures in geotechnical
engineering, engineering geology, and geophysics: how they could have been avoided.
In Proceedings: Fifth International Conference on Case Histories in Geotechnical Engineering,
13–17 April, New York (S. Prakash, ed.) Paper No. 7.01, pp. 1–12. University of Missouri-
Rolla, Rolla.
CUR (2003). Determination of Geotechnical Parameters: Publication 2003–7 (in Dutch). CUR
Foundation, Gouda.
CUR (1997). Probabilites in Civil Engineering,: Part 1 – Probabilistic Design in Theories (in
Dutch). CUR Foundation, Gouda.
Daft, R.L. (1998). Organisation Theory and Behaviour, 6th edn. South Western College Pub-
lishing, Cincinnati.
Dean, E.B. (1998). Total Quality Management from the Perspective of Competitive Advantage,
URL: http://mijuno.larc.nasa.gov/dfc/tqm.html.
de Bono, E. (1998). Simplicity. Penguin Books, New York.
de Gitirana, G.F.N. and Fredlund, D.G. (2005). The application of unsaturated soil mechan-
ics to the assessment of weather-related geo-hazards. In Proceedings 16th International
Conference on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, 12–16 September, Osaka,
Japan, pp. 2515–20. Millpress, Rotterdam.
de Ridder, H.A.J. (1998). Dealing with risks in foundation engineering (in Dutch) Geotech-
niek, October, 49–51.
Den Haan, E.J. (1994). A Simple Compression Model for Non-Brittle Soft Clays and Peat. PhD
Thesis. Delft University Press, Delft.

References
297
Dewey, J. (1927). Human Nature and Conduct: An Introduction to Social psychology. H. Holt
and Co., New York.
Dibb, S., Simkin, L., Pride, W.M. and Ferrel, O.C. (1997). Marketing: Concepts and Strategies,
3rd European edn. Houghton Mifﬂin Company, Boston.
Douglas, W.S. (1974). Role of speciﬁcations in foundation construction. In ASCE Journal of
the Construction Division, 100, 199–201.
Dunniclif, J. and Green, G.E. (1988). Geotechnical Instrumentation for Monitoring Field Per-
formance. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Dunniclif, J. and Powderham, A. (2001). Recommendations for procurement of geotechnical
instruments and ﬁeld instrumentation services. Geotechnical Views, 19(3), 30–5.
Dutch Construction Steering Committee (2005). Annual Report 2004: From Preparation To
Execution (in Dutch). De Vries, Zierikzee.
Dykstra, C.J. and Joling, A.G. (2001). Practical value of coefﬁcient of consolidation determ-
ined by Asaoka Method (in Dutch). Geotechniek, 5(2), 104–10.
Edwards, L. (1995). Practical Risk Management in the Construction Industry. Thomas Telford,
London.
Edwards, P.J. and Bowen, P.A. (2005). Risk Management in Project Organisations. Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford.
Elliot, D., Letza S.R., McGuiness, M. and Smallman, C. (2000). Governance, control and
operational risk: the Turnbill effect. Syllabus Crisis Management, NIMBAS University,
Utrecht.
ENV 1997-1 (1994) Eurocode 7: Geotechnical design Part 1: General rules. CEN, European
Committee for Standardisation, Brussels.
Essex, R.J. (2003). Design-bid-build contracting: climbing out of a paradigm sinkhole. In
Proceedings Rapid Excavation and Tunneling Conference. Society of Mining, Metallurgy
and Exploration, New Orleans.
Essex R.J. (ed). (1997). Geotechnical Baseline Reports for Underground Construction. Technical
Committee on Geotechnical Reports of the Underground Technology Research Council,
ASCE, Danvers.
European Construction Technology Platform (2005). Challenges and Developments for the Built
Environment in Europe: The Harmonised Vision for 2030 for a Sustainable and Competitive
Construction Sector. ECTP, Brussels.
Finch, A.P. and Patterson, R.L. (2003). Recent trends in procurement of tunnel projects in
the United Kingdom. In Proceedings Rapid Excavation and Tunneling Conference. Society
of Mining, Metallurgy and Exploration, New Orleans.
Flanagan, R. and Norman, G. (1993). Risk Management and Construction. Blackwell Scientiﬁc
Publications, Oxford.
Fookes P.G., Baynes, F.J. and Hutchinson, J.N. (2000). Total geological history: a model
approach to the anticipation, observation and understanding of site conditions. In Pro-
ceedings International Conference on Geotechnical and Geological Engineering, EngGeo2000,
19–24 November, Melbourne, Australia, Vol. 1, pp. 370–460. Technomic, Basel.
GeoDelft (2004). Reconstruction of Motorway N242 Around the City of Alkmaar: Risk Identiﬁca-
tion from a Ground Perspective (in Dutch). GeoDelft, Delft.
GeoDelft (2000). Strategic Plan 2001–2004. GeoDelft, Delft.

298
References
Gilmartin, T.F. (1998). Insurance for subsurface projects. In Subsurface Conditions: Risk
Management for Design and Construction Management Professionals (D.J. Hatem, ed.)
pp. 417–44. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Glass, P.R. and Powderham, A.J. (1994). Application of the observational method at the
limehouse link. Géotechnique, 44(4), 665–97.
Godfrey, P.S. (1996). Control of Risk: A Guide to the Systematic Management of Risk from
Construction. CIRIA Special Publication 125. CIRIA, London.
Goffee, R. and Jones, G. (2005). Managing authenticity: the paradox of great leadership.
Harvard Business Review, December, 86–94.
Goleman, D. (1996). Emotional Intelligence (Dutch edn). Pandora Pockets, Amsterdam.
Gould, J.P. (1995). Geotechnology in dispute resolution – the twenty-sixth Karl Terzaghi
lecture. Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, 121(7), 523–34.
Grant, R.M. (1998). Contemporary Strategy Analysis. Blackwell, Oxford.
Gratton, L. (2004). The Democratic Enterprise. Prentice Hall, London.
Greeuw, G. and Van, M.A. (2003). Local data sets provide realistic strength parameters (in
Dutch). Land + Water, 6, 38–9.
Hamel, G. and Prahalad, C.K. (1994). Competing for the Future. Harvard Business School
Press, Boston.
Handy, C. (2002). The Elephant and the Flea. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Hannink, G., Vrouwenvelder, A.C.W.M., Lindenberg J. and Calle, E.O.F. (2004). From
uncertainty towards reliability: between code and practice (in Dutch). Geotechniek, 5,
14–21.
Hatem, D.J. (1998). Professional liability and risk allocation – management considerations
for design and construction management professionals involved in subsurface pro-
jects. In Subsurface Conditions: Risk Management for Design and Construction Management
Professionals (D.J. Hatem, ed.) pp. 223–57. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Hatem, D.J. (1996). Geotechnical baselines and geotechnical reality; one and the same,
similar or not very close – professional liability implications. The CA/T Professional
Liability Reporter, 2(2), 1–8.
Hawkins, D.R. (1995). Power vs. Force. Hay House, Sydney.
Hedges, A. (1985). Group interviewing. In Applied Qualitative Research (R. Walker, ed.).
Gower Publishers, Aldershot.
Heijboer, J., Makkinga, L.C., Smid, L. and Bredenoord, J. (2004). The contract and project
managment. In The Westerschelde Tunnel: Approaching Limits (J. Heijboer, J. van den
Hoonaard and F.W.J. van de Linde, eds) pp. 261–78. A.A. Balkema, Lisse.
Heijbrock, F. (2005). Construction worldwide in transition (in Dutch). Cobouw, 23 March, 1.
Herbschleb J., van Staveren M.Th. and Teunissen E. (2001). The North-South Metroline:
geotechnical risk allocation by the Geotechnical Baseline Report (in Dutch). Geotechniek,
2, 83–9.
Hertz, N. (2001). The Silent Takeover: Global Capitalism and the Death of Democracy. William
Heinemann, London.
Hicks, M.A. and Samy, K. (2002). Reliability-based characteristic values: a stochastic
approach to Eurocode 7. Ground Engineering, December, 30–4.
Hillson, D. (2002). Risk Management Maturity Level Development. Risk Management Speciﬁc
Interest Group, Project Management Institute. Newton Square, Pennsylvania.

References
299
Ho, K., Leroi, E. and Roberds, B. (2000). Quantitative Risk Assessments: application, myths
and future direction. In Proceedings International Conference on Geotechnical and Geological
Engineering, EngGeo2000, 19–24 November, Melbourne, Australia, Vol. 1, pp. 269–312.
Technomic, Basel.
Hoek, E. and Palmieri, A. (1998). Geotechnical risks on large civil engineering projects. In
Proceedings 8th Congres IAEG, Vol 1, pp. 79–88. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Hölscher, P. (2003). Inﬂuence of Monitoring on Reliability of Settlements Predictions: the Applic-
ation of the Isotache model (in Dutch). Delft Cluster Report 01.01.07-07. Delft Cluster,
Delft.
Hounjet, M.W.A. (2005). GeoCheck: Urban Development for the Almere Pampus Project (in
Dutch). GeoDelft, Delft.
Imai, M. (1986). Kaizen: The Key to Japan’s Competitive Success. Random House, New York.
Jansen, C.E.C. (2001). Completion and Content of Design and Construct Contracts for Complex
Infrastructural Projects (in Dutch). Kluwer, Deventer.
Jick, T.D. (1993). Managing Change: Cases and Concepts. Irwin/McGraw-Hill, Boston.
Jobs, S. (2005). You’ve Got to Find What You Love. Stanford Report, June 14. Stanford Uni-
versity, Stanford.
Johnson, G. (1992). Managing strategic change: strategy, culture and action. Long Range
Planning, 25(1), 28–36.
Katzenbach, J.R. and Smith, D.K. (1994). The Wisdom of Teams: Creating the High-Performance
Organisation. Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Keizer, J.A., Halman, J.I.M. and Song, M. (2002). From experience: applying the Risk Dia-
gnosing Methodology. The Journal of Product Innovation Management, 19, 213–32.
Kelly, K. (1996). The new biology of business. In Rethinking the Future (R. Gibson, ed.)
pp. 250–68. Nicholas Brealy, London.
Kets de Vries, M.F.R. (2000). Happiness: A Guideline (in Dutch). Nieuwerzijds, Amsterdam.
Kets de Vries, M.F.R. (2002). The Happiness Equation. Vermilion, London.
Kitching, R. (2005). Giving the water of life. New Civil Engineer International. April, 19–20.
Klein, N. (2002). No Logo. Picador, New York.
Knill J. (2003). Core values: the ﬁrst Hans Cloos lecture. Bulletin of Engineering Geology and
the Environment, 62(1), 1–34.
Knights, M. (2005). Risk Management of Tunneling Works. Presentation to Advisory Board,
23 November. Hogeschool Zeeland, Vlissingen.
Koelewijn, A.R. (2002). The practical value of slope stability models. In Learned and Applied
Soil Mechanics out of Delft (F.B.J Barends and P.M.P.C.Steijger, eds) pp. 107–14. A.A.
Balkema, Lisse.
Koenen, I. (2004). Large project disappointments are not necessary: effective risk allocation
by model contracts (in Dutch). Cobouw, 15 November, 1.
Korff, M. (2003). Crossing of bored tunnel with existing railway: risk for liquefaction
controlled. In Proceedings Young Geotechnical Engineers Conference, September, Romania.
Kort, D.A. (2002). Sheet Pile Walls in Soft Soil. PhD Thesis, Delft University Press, Delft.
Lacasse, S. and Nadim, F. (1998). Risk and reliability in geotechnical engineering. In Pro-
ceedings Fourth International Conference on Case Histories in Geotechnical Engineering, St
Louis, Missouri, March 9–12, pp. 1172–92. University of Missouri-Rolla, Rolla.
Laverman, W. (2005). It takes time to become a good client (in Dutch).Building Business, 1,
28–31.

300
References
Leifer, R. (1999). The Happiness Project. Snow Lion Publications, New York.
Letza, S.R. (2000). Syllabus Crisis Management, NIMBAS-Bradford MBA Programme, Septem-
ber 2000. NIMBAS University, Utrecht.
Lowery, C.M., Beadles, N.A. and Carpenter, J.B. (2000) TQM’s human resource component.
Quality Progress, February, 55–9.
Luger, H.J., van den Hoek, E.E., van Tol, A.F. (2003). Souterrain The Hague: clogging of
groundwater wells above a gel layer during construction of an underground tram
station. In Proceedings ITA World Tunnelling Congress, April, Amsterdam, pp. 387–93.
Balkema, Lisse.
Lunne, T., Roberston, P.K. and Powell, J.J.M. (1997). Cone Penetration Testing in Geotechnical
Practice. Spon Press, London.
Macpherson, F. (2001). Risky business. International Construction, 40(3), 41.
Marx Hubbard, B. (2004) Conscious Evolution: Awakening the Power of our Social Potential,
Dutch edn. Aionion Symbolon, Amstelveen.
Matyas, R.M., Mathews, A.A., Smith, R.J. and Sperry, P.E. (1996). Construction Dispute
Review Board Manual. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Martin, D. (1987). Dry run for Washington Metro gives NATM an American boost. Tunnels
and Tunneling, 19(5), 16–8.
Mining Communications (2004). No-Dig World News: Risk Management Code of Practice, 5
January. Mining Communications, London.
Mintzberg, H. (1998). The professional organisation. In The Strategy Process – Revised
European Edition (H. Mintzberg, J.B. Quinn and S. Goshal, eds) pp. 681–96. Pearson
Education, Harlow, Essex.
Mintzberg, H., Quinn, J.B. and Goshal, S. (1998). The Strategy Process – Revised European
Edition. Pearson Education, Harlow, Essex.
Molendijk, W.O. and Aantjes, A.T. (2003). Risk management of earthworks using GeoQ. In
Proceedings 22nd World Road Congress, October, Durban. PIARC, Paris.
Molendijk, W.O. and van den Berg, F.P.W. (2003). Well-founded risk management for
the Betuweroute freight railway by the observational method. In Proceedings of XIIIth
European Conference on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, August, Prague,
pp. 741–46. CGTS, Prague.
Molendijk, W.O., Van, M.A. and Dykstra, C.J. (2003). Improved reliability of (rest) settlement
predictions of embankments on soft soils. In Proceedings 22nd World Road Congress,
October, Durban. PIARC, Paris.
Mora, S. and Keipi, K. (2005). Incorporation of engineering geological modeling in disaster
risk management on development investment projects. In Proceedings of the Symposium
New Developments in Geo Information Handling for Engineering Geology, 21 January 2005
on the occasion of the retirement of IAEG President Niek Rengers, Abstact, p. 10. ITC,
Enschede.
Morgenstern, N.R. (2000a). Common ground. In Proceedings International Conference on Geo-
technical and Geological Engineering, 19–24 November, Melbourne, Australia, Vol. 1,
pp. 1–30. Technomic, Basel.
Morgenstern N.R. (2000b). Performance in Geotechnical Practice. The Inaugural Lumb Lecture,
10 May. Hong Kong.
Mott McDonald and Soil Mechanics (1994). Study of the Efﬁciency of Site Investigation Practices.
Project report 60. Transport Research Laboratory, Crowthorne.

References
301
Muhlemann, A.P., Oakland, J.S. and Lockyer, K.G. (1992). Production and Operations Man-
agement, 4th edn. Pitman Publishing, London.
Mulhearn, C. and Vane, H.R. (1999). Economics. Macmillian Press, London.
Munfah, N., Zlatanic, S. and Baraclough, P. (2004). Managing underground construction
risk in NewYork. In North American Tunneling 2004 (Ozdemir, ed.) pp. 163–70. Taylor
& Francis Group, London.
Naisbitt, J. (1996). From nations to networks. In Rethinking the Future (R. Gibson, ed.)
pp. 212–27. Nicholas Brealy Publishers, London.
Naisbitt, J. (1984). Megatrends: Ten New Directions Transforming our Lives. Warner Books,
New York.
Network for Contaminated Land in Europe (2002). Cost-Effective Site Characterisation: Deal-
ing with Uncertainties, Innovation, Legislation Constraints. Conclusions of the NICOLE
workshop, 18–19 April (P. Bardos, ed.). NICOLE, Pisa.
Neff, T.L. (1998). Risk management considerations for complex subsurface projects. In Sub-
surface Conditions: Risk Management for Design and Construction Management Professionals
(D.J. Hatem, ed.) pp. 129–61. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
NEN 6740 (1991). Geotechnics 1990 Basic Requirements and Loads (in Dutch). Netherlands
Standardisation Institute, Delft.
Ni, H.C. (1997). Entering the Tao. Shambala Publications, Boston.
NN (2005) Nun stops tunnel. International Construction, 44(2), 3.
Nußbaumer, M. and Nübel, K. (2005). Portfolio based approach to project risk management.
In Proceedings 16th International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering,
12–16 September, Osaka, Japan, pp. 2833–36. Millpress, Rotterdam.
Oakland, J.S. (1993). Total Quality Management, 2nd revised edn. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Oxford.
O’Connell, S. (1997). Mindreading. William Heinemann, London.
Ortoli, S. and Pharabod, J.P. (1986). The Soluble Fish and Other Paradoxes: The Debate about
Quantum Theory (Dutch edn). Van Gennip, Amsterdam.
Paine, L., Deshpandé, R., Margolis, J.D. and Bettcher, K.E. (2005). Up to code: Does your
company’s conduct meet world-class standards? Harvard Business Review, December,
122–33.
Peck, R.B. (1969). Advantages and limitations of the observational method in applied soil
mechanics. Géotechnique, 19, 171–87.
Pereboom, D.P., Tiggelman, L. and van Staveren, M.Th. (2005). Geotechnical risk manage-
ment in The Netherlands. In Proceedings 16th International Conference on Soil Mechanics
and Geotechnical Engineering, 12–16 September, Osaka, Japan, pp. 2841–4. Millpress,
Rotterdam.
Perry, P.E. (1981). Evaluation of savings for underground construction. Underground Space,
6, 29–42.
Peters, T.J. and Waterman, R.H. (1982). In Search of Excellence. Harper & Row Publishers,
New York.
Piercy, N. (1997). Market-Led Strategic Change, 2nd edn. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Portugal, J.C., Portugal A., and Santo, A. (2005). Excavation induced damage. In Proceed-
ings 16th International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, 12–16
September, Osaka, Japan, pp. 1543–6. Millpress, Rotterdam.

302
References
Poulos, S.J. (1998). Role of the professional consultant in the evaluation of differing site
condition claims. In Subsurface Conditions: Risk Management for Design and Construction
Management Profesionals (D.J. Hatem, ed.) pp. 211–22. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Press, F. and Siever, R. (1982). Earth, 3rd edn. W.H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco.
Priemus, H. (2005) Murphy’s law – design and construct at the high speed railway link (in
Dutch). Building Business, February, 42–9.
Process and System Innovation in Building and Construction (2004). Inventory of Interna-
tional Reforms in Building and Construction. Report PSIB017_S_04_2341, June. PSIBouw,
Gouda.
Quint, M. (2005). Talking point: so what exactly is ‘contaminated land’ then? Ground
Engineering, November, 7.
Reason, J. (1990). Human Error. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Rigby, P. (1999). Identifying and managing ground risks. Tunnels and Tunneling International,
October, 39–43.
Rohrmann, B. (1998). The risk notion: epistomological and empirical consideration. In
Integrated Risk Assessment (M.G. Stewart and R.E. Melchers, eds) pp. 39–46. Balkema,
Rotterdam.
Roobeek, A., Mandersloot, E. and du Marchie Servaas, C. (1998). Organizational trans-
formation through strategic dialogue: The Schiphol case. Concepts and Transformation:
International Journal of Action Research and Organizational Renewal, 3, 53–77.
Sassen, S. (2004). The New Intermediate Economy: Between Uncertainty and the Client. Third
Ernst Heijmans Lecture, 18 November. www.ernstheijmanslezing.nl, Utrecht.
Savadis, S.A. and Rackwitz, F. (2004). Geotechnics and environment: A consideration by
planning and construction of the transport infrastructure in the centre of Berlin. In
Proceedings: Fifth International Conference on Case Histories in Geotechnical Engineering,
13–17 April, New York (S. Prakash, ed.). University of Missouri-Rolla, Rolla.
SBR (2000). Risk Management is Proﬁt Management: A Guideline for Small and Medium Enter-
prises (in Dutch). Stichting Bouw Research, Rotterdam.
Schaberg, J. (2005). Infrastructure and ﬁnancial returns (in Dutch). NRC, 21 July, 9.
Schein, E.H. (1984). Coming to a new awareness of organisational culture. Sloan Management
Review, Winter, 3–16.
Schon, D. (1983). The Reﬂective Practioner. Basic Books, New York.
Seligman, M.E.P. (2002). Authentic Happiness: Using the New Positive Psychology to Realize
your Potential for Lasting Fulﬁllment. Free Press, London.
Senge, P.M. (1990). The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organisation.
Doubleday, New York.
Shrivastava, P., Mitroff, I.I., Miller, D. and Miglani, A. (1988). Understanding industrial
crises. Journal of Management Studies, 25, 283–303.
Skipp B.O. (ed.) (1993). Risk and Reliability in Ground Engineering. Thomas Telford, London.
Sleight, C. (ed.) (2005a). Construction growth expected to increase. International Construction,
January-February, 12–4.
Sleight C. (ed.) (2005b). IC comment. International Construction, July-August, 3.
Slovic, P., Fischoff, B. and Lichtenstein S. (1982). Why study risk perception? Risk Analysis,
2, 83–93.
Smallman, C. (2000). Crisis and Risk Management. Lecture Presentation, NIMBAS-Bradford
MBA Programme, September 2000. NIMBAS University, Utrecht.

References
303
Smallman, C. (1999). The Risk Factor. Financial Times, 30 December, 42–5.
Smallman, C. (1998). Risk Perception: State of the Art. University of Bradford Management
Centre Working Paper No. 9820. University of Bradford Management Centre, Bradford.
Smallman, C. (1996). Challenging the orthodoxy in risk management. Safety Science, 22(1–3),
245–62.
Smith, N. (2003). Appraisal, Risk and Uncertainty. Thomas Telford, London.
Smith, N. (ed.) (1998). Managing Risk in Construction Projects. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Smith, R. (1996). Allocation of risk: the case for manageability. The International Construction
Law Review, 4, 549–69.
Smith, R.J. (1999). Identifying and allocating risk. In Construction Law Handbook (R.F. Cush-
man, ed.) pp. 459–97. Aspen Publising, New York.
Soudain, M. (2000). Talking about a revolution. Ground Engineering, September, 12–3.
Sperry, P.E. (1981). Evaluation of savings for underground construction. Underground Space,
6, 29–42.
Tani, K. (2001). Allocation of Risk Associated with Ground Conditions in Privatised Iinfrastruc-
ture Contracts. MSc Thesis. Department of Construction Management & Engineering,
University of Reading, Reading.
Thompson, J.L. (1997). Strategic Management: Awareness and Change, 3rd edn. International
Thomson Business Press, London.
Thompson, P. and Perry, J. (1992). Engineering Construction Risks. Thomas Telford, London.
Toft, B. (1993). Behavioural aspects of risk management. In Proceedings Annual Conference of
Association of Risk Managers in Industry and Commerce, 1–4 April, University of Warwick,
Warwick.
Toft, B. (1996) Limits to the mathematical models of disasters. In Accident and Design:
Contemporary Debates in Risk Management (C. Hood and D. Jones, eds.) pp. 99–110. UCL
Press, London.
Transparency International (2005). Global Corruption Report 2005. T.I. Pluto Press, London.
Trout, J. and Rivkin, S. (2000). Differentiate or Die: Survival in our Era of Killer Competition.
John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Turner, C. (1995). The Eureka Principle. Element Books, Shaftesbury.
Turner, D.F. and Turner, A. (1999). Building Contract Claims and Disputes, 2nd edn. Longman,
London.
Uhlfelder, H.F. (2000). It’s all about improving performance. Quality Progress, February,
47–52.
US Army Corps Of Engineers (1989). Partnering – Alternative Dispute Resolutions Series
Pamphlet. No. #4/TWR Pamphlet-91ADR-P-4. COE, Washington DC.
US Subcommittee on Geotechnical Site Investigations (1984). Geotechnical Site Investigations
for Underground Projects – Volume 1: Overview of Practice and Legal Issues, Evaluation of
Cases, Conclusions and Recommendations. US National Academic Press, Washington DC.
van Meurs, G.A.M., de Cleen, M.P.T.M. Taat, J. and Schurink, E. (2001). Flexible emission
control: a process-like approach. In Proceedings Seminar on Analysis, Methodology of
Treatment and Remediation of Contaminated Soils and Groundwater, 13–15 March. United
Nations, Economic Commission for Europe, Paris.
van Meurs, G.A.M., van Ree, C.C.D.F., van de Velde, J.L. and Oosterom, W. (2001). Flexible
and dynamic site investigation: faster, better and cheaper. In Field Screening Europe
2001 (W. Breh et al., eds.) pp. 113–7. Kluwer Academic Publisers, Deventer.

304
References
van Oirschot, R. (2003). Future Management: The Paradox of Future Control (in Dutch). Business
Contact, Amsterdam.
van Staveren, M.Th. (2005). Willingness to see, be and change. In Change Management:
Current Visions on Management (in Dutch), pp. 215–32. SDU, The Hague.
van Staveren, M.Th. (2004). Soil investigations and contractual risk alllocation. In Syllabus
of the International Site Investigation Course. GeoDelft Academy, Delft.
van Staveren, M.Th. (2001a). The relation between monitoring, risk allocation and geotech-
nical baseline reports. In Syllabus International Course on Geotechnical Instrumentation for
Field Measurements. GeoDelft, Delft.
van Staveren, M.Th. (2001b). Divestment or Leadership? MBA Thesis of NIMBAS-Bradford
MBA Programme. NIMBAS University, Utrecht.
van Staveren, M.Th. and Bolijn, J. (2003). Early attention to geotechnical risk provides
interesting options (in Dutch). Geotechniek, 7(2), 12–7.
van Staveren, M.Th. and van Deen, J.K. (1998). The need for cone penetration test accuracy
classes. In Proceedings Eighth International Congress International Association for Engineer-
ing Geology and the Environment, 21–25 September, Vancouver, Canada (D. Moore and
O. Hungr, eds) pp. 259–65. Balkema, Rotterdam.
van Staveren, M.Th. and Knoeff J.G. (2004). The Geotechnical Baseline Report as risk
allocation tool. In Proceedings EurEnGeo 2004, May, Liege, pp. 777–85. Springer Verlag,
Berlin.
van Staveren, M.Th. and Litjens, P.P.T. (2001). Risk allocation by the Geotechnical Baseline
Report (in Dutch). Land en Water, 41(1/2), 46–7.
van Staveren, M.Th. and Peters T.J.M. (2004). Matching monitoring, risk allocation and
Geotechnical Baseline Reports. In Proceedings EurEnGeo 2004, May, Liege, pp. 786–91,
Springer Verlag, Berlin.
van Staveren, M.Th. and van Seters A. (2004). Smart site investigations save money! In
Proceedings EurEnGeo 2004, May, Liege, pp. 792–800. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Vattimo, G. (1992). The Transparent Society. Polity Press, Cambridge.
Versluis, J. (1995). Better innovations by risk diagnosing (in Dutch). De Ingenieur, 12, 33–5.
Versteegen, J. and van Staveren, M.Th. (2004). Missed opportunities by neglecting uncer-
tainty (in Dutch). Cobouw, 17 December, 3.
Viehöfer, Th.C. (2002). Tools and Methods for Geotechnical Risk Analysis as Part of Risk Man-
agement within the RISMAN Rramework (in Dutch). Report 510160.0001. GeoDelft, Delft.
Waring, A.E. (1996). Safety Management Systems. Chapman & Hall/ITBP, London.
Waring A.E. and Glendon, A.I. (1998), Managing Risk. International Thomson Business
Press, London.
Watzlawick, P., Beavin, J.H. and Jackson, D.D. (1967). Pragmatics of Human Communications.
W.W. Norton & Company, New York.
Weatherhead, M., Owen, K. and Hall, C. (2005). Integrating Value and Risk in Construction.
CIRIA, London.
Wentink, J.J. (2001). Building E-visualisations (in Dutch). Systeem Drukkers, Delft.
Wijffels, H. (2004). Foreword. In Conscious Evolution: Awakening the Power of our Social
Potential, Dutch edn. (B. Marx Hubbard, ed.) pp. 12–4. Aionion Symbolon, Amstelveen.
Wildavsky, A. and Dake, K. (1990). Theories of risk perception: who fears what and why?
Daedalus, 199(4), 41–60.

References
305
Wildman, W.R. (2004). Risk allocation in tunnel construction contracts. In North American
Tunneling (Ozdemir, ed.) pp. 171–6. Taylor & Francis Group, London.
Witten. D. and Tulku Rinpoche, A. (1998). Enlightened management. Random House,
London.
Wuite, M. (2005). Alliance contract deserves follow-up (in Dutch). Cobouw, 26 October, 7.
Yin, J.H. and Graham, J. (1999). Elastic viscoplastic modelling of time-dependent stress-
strain behaviour of soils. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 36, 736–45.
Zohar, D. and Marshall, I. (2004). Spiritual Capital. Bloomsbury, London.


Index
Advanced ground data, 193, 203
Advanced ground interpretation and
correlation, 215
Aerial photographs, 156
Agreed model ground conditions, 225
Agreed Model Conditions Report
(AMCR), 225
Alternate futures scenarios, 161
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
methods, 232, 256
Ambiguous lady, 66
American Arbitration Association, 257
American Institute of Architects
(AIA), 223
American Society of Civil Engineers
(ASCE), 228
American Standards of Testing and
Materials (ASTM) for ground
classiﬁcation, 30
Antithetic pairs, 67
Applied geosciences, 51
Arbiter, 257
Arbitration, 258
Aristotle, 66,
Asaoka’s method for consolidation, 214
As Low As Reasonable Practicable
(ALARP) risk level, 143
Associated General Contractors (AGC) of
America, 41
Association of British Insurers (ABI),
231, 241
Association of Engineering Firms
Practising in the Geosciences
(ASFE), 256
Authenticity, 64
Authentic guilt, 64
Authentozoic organization, 65
Awareness, 291
Back-analysis, concept, 246
Barends, Frans, 68, 123, 239–40
Baselines:
behavioural type, 226
contractual implications, 230
deﬁnition, 225
dilemma, 228
physical type, 226
technical implications, 230
Bayesian (Belief) Theory, 32–3
Bearing capacity of piles and fuzziness, 31
Beauty, concept, 291
Begemann soil sampling system, 210
Benchmark parameters, 225
Benchmarks for risk identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation, 171
Beneﬁts, sharing of, 113
Biological systems, 12, 290
Blame and claim behaviour, 77
Blockley, David, 16, 161
Bohr, Niels, 27
Brandl, Heinz, 15, 158, 222
Bright side of risk, 292–93

308
Index
British Standards (BS) for ground
classiﬁcation, 30
British Tunnelling Society (BTS), 231, 241
Brownﬁeld project site, 155, 157
Building Risk Assessment (BRA)
method, 249
Built environment, 158
Capra, Fritjof, 18
Ceteris paribus principle, 199
Change agent, 183, 287
Change management, 150, 290
Channel deposits and piping risk, 204
Chaplin, Charlie, 116
Characteristic values:
concept, 199
of ground properties, 199
Chloride contamination, 282
Clear enough future scenario, 161
Clients and risk, 105
Client controlled insurance policy, 234
Closed questions, 133
Collapsible ground and reliable
observations, 252
Collectivism, 288
Common law rule, 223
Communication:
content, 91
context, 91
deﬁnition, 90
emotional aspects, 93
pragmatic, 91
rational aspects, 93
of risk, see Risk communication
Competing values framework, 89
Competitive advantage, 100
Complementarity principle, 27
Concept, deﬁnition, 26
Conceptual ground model, 183, 203
Conductivity measurements, in-situ, 283
Cone Penetration Testing (CPT), 30, 56,
92, 182
Cone Pressumeter Testing (CPM), 187
Confrontation model, 112
Confucius, 63, 84
Consequential Risk Analyses (CRA), 194
Consolitest, 187
Constant Rate of Strain (CRS) test, 187
Construction:
phase, 148
phase, case studies, 260
project ﬂexibility, 120
process, 53
Construction industry:
challenges, 12, 13
change initiatives, worldwide, 19
change initiatives in:
Australia, 20
Hong Kong, 19–20
Norway, 19
Singapore, 20
The Netherlands, 20
UK, 20
complexity, 12–4
corruption, 14
crisis, 18–9
integrity, 12–6
failure costs, 12, 13, 16–8
fraud, 14–5
global market size, 9
inspiration, renewed, 24
markets in:
Brazil, 10
Canada, 10
China, 10
France, 10
Germany, 10
India, 10
Italy, 10
Japan, 10
Russia, 10
Spain, 10
The Netherlands, 10, 16
UK, 10
USA, 10
opportunities, 19–21
prosperity, 290
transformation, 291
Construction Industry Arbitration
Rules, 257

Index
309
Construction Industry Institute (CII),
39, 222
Construction Industry Research and
Information Association (CIRIA), 241
Construction Industry Review
Committee, Hong Kong, 20
Construction management policies, 260
Construction Manpower 21 Study,
Singapore, 20
Contaminated land, deﬁnition, 158
Contingencies in bids, 221
Contingency budget, 229, 235
Continuity of ground data, 48
Contracting phase, 145, 147, 217
case studies, 239
Contracts, types:
alliance, 237
conventional, 217
Design-Bid-Build (DBB), 217
Design-Build (DB), 217
Design-Build-Finance-Maintenance
(DBFM), 218
Design-Build-Maintenance (DBM), 217
Design & Construct (D&C), 217
modern, 217
partnering, 237
relationship-based, 237
Contractual:
allocation of risk, 219
evolution, 237
Conventional factor of safety, 199
Co-operation model, 112–13, 118, 123
Core values, 91
Cost-effective maintenance, 271
of dikes, 273
Covey, Stephen R., 77
Creative construction, 122
Creative destruction, 122
Creep settlement risk, 212
Crisis, 18, 264, 291
Crisis management, 250, 267, 276
Crosby, Philip W., 55
Cross-contamination of environmental
sampling, 30
Cross-functional market teams, 102
Damage scenarios, 250
Deconstruction, concept, 29
Deming, W. Edwards, 55
Democratic organization, 83
Derrida, Jacques, 29
Design:
ﬂexibility, 247
phase, 147
phase, case studies, 207
optimisations, 199
Detailed:
design phase, 147, 193
ground data, 193, 203
ground investigations, 184, 275
Deterministic geotechnical design
approach, 197, 199
Different contractual perceptions, 236
Differing ground conditions see Differing
site conditions
Differing site conditions:
agreement, 255
clause (DSC), 223
clause and site ownership, 223
concept, 222
during construction, 254
effects, 222
going to court or not, 259
Type I, 224
Type II, 224
Digital thinking, 53
Dike failure:
and drought, 274
risk, 274
scenarios, 274–75
Dike safety assessment, GeoQ case, 279
Discontinuities:
individual, 64
rock, 64
Dispute resolution, 232, 237
Dispute Review Board (DRB), 232
beneﬁts, 232
during construction, 255
Dissipation tests, 206
Doom scenario, 132, 161
Double loop learning, 100

310
Index
Douglas, Walter S., 220
Dream scenario, 132, 161
Economic theory of risk perception, 71
Effect risk score, 174
Effective risk management, 72
Egan Report of Rethinking Construction,
United Kingdom, 20
Einstein, Albert, 27, 63
Elasticity constant, E-value, and
fuzziness, 31
Electrical density measurements, in-situ,
209–10
Electromagnetic measurements for
ground investigation, 182
Electronic Board Room (EBR):
programme, 177
risk identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation, 176
sessions, 177
Emotion, 78–9
Emotional Quotient (EQ), 81, 91
Empathy, deﬁnition, 68
Employee exchange programmes, 102
End-users, 271
Engineering Advancement Association of
Japan (ENAA), 233
Engineering geology, 51–2
Engineering judgement, 98
Engineers Joint Contract Committee
(EJCC), 223
Enterprise Resources Planning (ERP)
tools, 278
Environmental:
clean-up programmes, 157
engineering, 51
innovative ground investigation, 283
pollution control, 281
sampling, 30
Eurocode 7, 199
European Construction Technology
Platform (ECTP), 10
Evolutionary processes, 290
Existing structures, 158
Experience databases, 59
Expert:
judgement, 68
team approach, 98
Externalities, 118, 121
Factual data, 160
Fall-back scenarios, 162, 202, 247, 250
Failure costs:
ground-related, 17
see also Construction industry
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis
(FMEA), 138, 194, 197, 272
Failure Mode, Effect and Criticality
Analysis (FMECA), 138, 197
Fatal ﬂaw, 153
Fatalistic risk management, 40
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA), 137, 197, 272
Fear, 78–80
appeal, 78–9
awareness, 79
factory, 78
Feasibility phase, 146
case studies, 162
Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR), 223
Fédération Internationale Des Ingénieurs
Conseils (FIDIC), 223, 233
Fit-for-new-purpose, 291
Fit-for-purpose, 271
challenges, 276–77
Flexible Emission Control (FEC),
concept, 281
Flood risk, 11, 195
cause reduction 195
effect reduction, 195–96
Fokkema, Jacob, 117
Foreseen risk, 36
Freud, Sigmund, 65
Future management, 161
Fuzziness:
deﬁnition, 28
in ground engineering, 31
and ground sampling, 30
General risk types, 44
GeoBrain Foundations, 58

Index
311
Geocentrifuges, 207
Geoenvironmental engineering, 51–2
Geo-gambling, 41
Geographic Information Systems (GIS),
168
Geological:
engineering, 51
heterogeneity, 204, 230
history, 28
maps, 156
Geo-poker, 41
GeoQ:
beneﬁts, 49
characteristics, 48
communication vehicle, 52
concept, 47–8
continuation, 288
core objective, 49
and crisis, 264
deﬁnition, 4, 48
effect, anticipated, 145
ground dispute resolution, 260
ground-related disciplines, 50
implementation, 149
and industrial operations, 283
and nearshore construction, 264
phases, 144
positioning, 50
process, 163
and project stakeholders, 49
for road renovation, 273
start, 288
start in the maintenance phase, 272
steps, 128
tools, 49
and tender preparation, 185
GeoQ case studies:
dike safety assessment, 279
horizontal boring project, 188
light-rail project, 162
liquefaction risk control, 207
settlement risk control, 211
stability risk control by observational
method, 260
tunnel project, 185
tunnel in geohydrological crisis, 264
urban development project, 165
waste disposal site, 281
Geotechnical Baseline Report (GBR), 148,
224, 241
beneﬁts, 243
concept, 224
costs, 231
during construction, 255
experiences in The Netherlands, 242
experiences in the UK, 241
experiences in the USA, 240
guidelines, 228
preparation, 228
Geotechnical Benchmark Report, 225
Geotechnical Data Report (GDR),
228, 241
Geotechnical Design Summary Report
(GDSR), 228
Geotechnical Interpretative Report (GIR),
228, 241
Geotechnical engineering, 51
choices, 98
margins, 97
Global construction industry, 9
Global Insight, 9–10
Globalization, 34, 116
Godfrey, Patrick, 16, 161
Gravel nightmare, 189
Greenﬁeld project site, 154–55, 156
Greyﬁeld project site, 155–56, 158
Gould, James P., 236
Ground:
behaviour forecast, 43
deﬁnition, 41
differences in perceptions, 97–8
engineering, 51–2
parameter variation, 197
Ground and risk:
concept, 41
hybrid character, 43
Ground data:
degree of disclosure, 229
full disclosure, 230, 241
legal status, 229

312
Index
Ground dispute(s):
arbitration, 258
deﬁnition, 256
litigation, 257
mediation, 257
resolution, 255
resolution options, 257
Ground conditions:
deﬁnition, 41
contractual deﬁnition, 225
Ground investigation(s):
balancing with risk proﬁle, 178
added value, 181
cheapest price criterion, 181
costs, 179–80
deﬁnition, risk driven, by six steps, 204
in design phase, 203
detailed and advanced, 203
in feasibility phase, 156
general, 203
generic questions, 183
medical perspective, 182
optimum scope, 179
in pre-design phase, 178, 183
preliminary, 203
quality, 184
quality management, 56
quantity, 184, 204
risk-driven, 183,
risk-driven scope, 178
risk proﬁles, 178–79
scope, 178
suitable scope, 179
six steps, 204
techniques (advanced), 203
tools, see Ground investigation
techniques
types, 184
Ground reference conditions, 224
Ground Reference Report, 225
Ground risk management:
concept, 46
deﬁnition, 52
open source framework, 49
and people, in summary, 287
and processes, in summary, 288
state-of-the-art, 5–6
Ground risk premium, 225
Ground-driven maintenance
programme, 272
Groundwater, 41
Groundwater management system, 282
Group:
deﬁnition, 86
discussions, 94
Groupthink, 94–5
Handy, Charles, 65
Hard project:
information, 130
objectives, 129
Hard system(s):
deﬁnition, 22
information, 129
and mathematics, 29
and risk management, 39
type of problems, 120
see also Systems thinking
Hatem, David, 219
Hazard:
awareness, 54
deﬁnition, 33
management, 54
maps, 156
zone mapping, 55
Heisenberg, Werner, 27
Heraclitus, 37, 73
Hertz, Noreena, 116
Heterogeniety:
geological, 42
in human perceptions, 42
Heuristic risk management, 39
Higher order cross-functional
capabilities, 100
High tech approach, 6–7, 22
High touch approach, 6–7, 22
Holism, 291
Holistic risk management, 40
Hollywood model, 13

Index
313
Horizontal boring project, GeoQ case
study, 188
Horizontal deformation of piles and
fuzziness, 31
Human factor, 7
See also People factor
ICT in construction and cost savings, 248
ICT tools for ground risk information
storage, 278
ICT-supported risk identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation, 176
advantages, 178
Incompleteness, deﬁnition, 32
Independence, 65
Individual(s):
deﬁnition, 64
dependence, 77–8
change agent, 83, 287
concept, 63
fear, 78–80
independence, 77–8
interdependence 77–8
perception, 67
professionals, 68
responsibilities, 75
stages of dependency, 77–8
willingness, 231
Individual risk perception, 70
ambiguity, 90
complexity, 71
differences, 90
Individualism, 288
Industrial areas, 157
Industry transformation, 290
Information risk, 36
Innovation(s):
risk management as facilitator, 151
opportunities by contracts, 236
types, 122–23
Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE), UK,
233
Insurance, 233
Integration, 291
Integrity, 12–6
Intelligence:
emotional, 81
inspiring, 81
hard systems, 82
logical, 81
Quotient (IQ), 81, 91
rational, 81
soft systems, 82
types, 81
Inter-American Development Bank, 54
International Chamber of Commerce
(ICC), 233
Internet, the, 291
Intermediate economy, 34
Interpretation:
differences, 98
risk, 36, 98
Interpretative data, 160
ISO 9001 standards, 56–7
Isotache creep-settlement model, 213
It depends, 53, 133, 200, 258
Jick, Todd D., 290
Joint Contracts Tribunal (JCT), 235
Jobs, Steve, 84
Judged (risk) opinion, 174
Judgement, from different stakeholder
perspectives, 121
Judges and juries, 258
Juran, Joseph M., 55
Just in time availability of ground data, 48
Kaizen quality management, 57
Katrina, hurricane, 11
Kelly, Kevin, 12
Key risk drivers, deﬁnition, 225
KISS principle, 34, 143, 278
Klein, Naomi, 116
Knill, Sir John, 241
Knowing-not knowing continuum, 59
Knowledge:
management, 58, 278
theory of risk perception, 71
teams, 102
Koppejan settlement model, 213

314
Index
Learning organization, 21
Leifer, Ron, 67
Life cycle:
concepts, 271
costs, 271
management approach, 272
purpose, 271
thinking, 271
value, 271
Life Cycle Costing (LCC):
approach, 19
and private clients, 111–12
and public clients, 110–11
Light-rail project, GeoQ case study, 162
Liquefaction risk in soil, 92, 206, 207
Liquefaction risk control, GeoQ case
study, 207
Literature study, 132
Litigation, 257
Local data sets, 212
Lowest price procurement criterion, 110
Macpherson, Findlay, 149
Maintenance phase, 148
case studies, 279
Management of:
expectations, 39
hazards, 54
knowledge, 58, 278
natural hazards, 54
quality, 55
risk, see Risk management
Man-made structures in ground, 41
MARIUN, UK, 53
Market teams, cross-functional, 102
Mathematics, 29
Mediation, 257
Mediator, 257
Meditation, 81, 83
Millennium-bug, 78
Milgram experiments, 94
Mobilising risk information, 143
Modern time, 116
Morgenstern, Norbert, 12
Monitoring programmes:
accuracy, reliability and usability, 253
during operation for maintenance, 272
how to monitor, 253
initial ground assumptions, 253
observational method, 251
pollution control, 281
scenarios, 253
what to monitor, 253
Monte Carlo simulation, 213–14
MOSTAP soil sampling system, 210
Mother Earth, 293
Müller, Leopold, 51
Multi-groundwater sampling probe, 283
Multiple Risk Causation (MRA), 139
Murphy’s Law, 41, 114
Naisbitt, John, 6
National design codes, 205
Natural hazard(s):
awareness, 54
effects, 54–5
impact on society, 54
management, 54
types, 54
Negative (risk) statements, 172
Network for Contaminated Land in
Europe (NICOLE), 282
Neurotic guilt, 64
New Engineering Contract (NEC),
235, 242
Non-geotechnical project decision
makers, 49
Nußbaumer, Manfred, 151
Nübel, Konrad, 151
Objective risk classiﬁcation, 136
Objectivity, 116
Observational method, 200
beneﬁts, 249
concept, 247
dispute resolution, 258–59
former disadvantages, 248
limitations and pitfalls, 250
monitoring programmes, 251
new developments, 248–49
pollution control, 281

Index
315
prerequisite, 247
quality assurance, 249
quality management, 249
reliability, 250
revival, 247
and teams, 251, 254
Observations on site, 252
On-line:
access of monitored ground data, 262
Information and Communication
Technology (ICT), 247–48, 262, 267
monitoring concept, 263
Open questions, 133
Open source ground risk management
framework, 49
Operational risk management, 281
Organic:
evolution, 290
transformation, 291
Organizational:
change, 88
change initiatives, 88
transformation, 101, 290
Organizational culture:
change, 102
concept, 88
levels, 88
realised change, 102
Organizations, types:
authentozoic, 65
democratic, 83
learning, 21
professional, 98
risk-driven, 101
Ostrich:
behaviour, 105
game, 105, 231
Owner see Client
Pan-company marketing, 102
Pantha rhei, 37, 73
Partial factor of safety, 198–99
Partnering:
concept, 239
deﬁnitions, 237–38
Patterns in populations of data, 27
Peck, Ralph, 247
People factor, 3–4, 22, 66, 91, 94, 172
and partnering, 238
See also Human factor
Perception(s):
deﬁnition, 66
change with distance, 73
change with time, 72
concept, 65–6
individual, 67
multiple, 67
objective, 66
sharing, 113
shifting, 67
subjective, 66
Personal self, 64
Personality theory of risk perception, 71
Piezo Cone Penetration Test (PCPT), 206
Piles and different perceptions, 95
Piping, dike failure mechanism of,
195, 204
Plato, 65
Physics, 27
Pollution of ground and groundwater
41, 157
Positive (risk) statements, 172
Post-modernity, 116
Potential Problem Analysis (PPA),
133, 194
Pre-design phase, 146
case studies, 185
Private clients, 111
Proactive risk management, 40
Probabilistic:
approach for deﬁnition of ground
investigations, 204
calculation methods, 200
geotechnical design approach 197–99
methods for ground-related aspects, 198
Probability:
concept, 197
deﬁnition, 197
Probability-density function, 28
Probability risk score, 174

316
Index
Process and System Innovation in
Building and Construction, The
Netherlands, 19
Procurement system, 231
Professional:
organization, 98
self, 64
Project:
complexity, 154
ﬂexibility during construction,
120, 202
functional speciﬁcations, 154
information gathering, 129
hard objectives, 129
location(s), 154
safety, 75
size, 154
site types, 155
soft objectives, 129
speciﬁcations, 130
type, 154
Progressive failure, 250, 251
Prospects theory, 172
Prototypes, construction projects, 13
Public clients, 109–110
Pure risk, 34
Qualitative risk:
classiﬁcation, 134
management, 39
Quality:
deﬁnition, 55
management, 55
Quantiﬁed Risk Assessment
(QRA), 136
Quantitative risk:
assessments for dikes, 276
classiﬁcation, 135
Quantum:
physics, 27
transformations, 291
Randomness, deﬁnition, 27
Range of futures scenarios, 161
Rational Risk management for Dikes
(RRD), 274
advantages, 276
GeoQ case study, 279
Rational thinking, 78–9, 91
Reactive risk management, 40
Reality-fragmentation, 116
Reﬂective practice, 121
Regional data sets, 205
Remote areas, 156
Remote sensing technology, 248
Residual soils and fuzziness, 206
Risk:
adverse attitude, 236
analysis, 136
avoidance, 40, 141, 196
awareness of individuals, 74–5
brainstorm sessions, 133, 171
bright side of, 41
calculation, 135
causation, 138–39
cause and effect reduction, combined,
194–96
cause and effect relationships, 137
cause reduction, 140, 194–96, 197–200
checklists, 132
and clients, 105
completely shared, 220
concept, 33–4
consequences, 134
content, 91
context, 91
controllability, 137
coordinator, 151, 172
criticality, 138
deﬁnition, 33
dominance, 94
drowning, 134
dynamic character of, 37
effect(s), 138
effect criteria, 173
effect reduction, 140, 194–96, 200–203
effect reduction, prerequisites for, 202
elimination, 141
environmental, 44

Index
317
event accelerators, 139
event initiators, 139
external, 43
factors, 135
factual and objective factors of, 38
ﬁling, 278
ﬁlter, 134, 226–27
foreseen type of, 36
geohydrological, 44
geotechnical, 44
groups, 134, 172, see also Risk types
groupthink, 94–6
ignorance, 140, 141
information type of, 36
initial, 142
interpretation type of, 36, 98
interpretative and subjective factors
of, 38
interviews, 133
legal, 43
level, 143
litigation, 220
macro-economic, 122
manageability, 220
manager, 149
man-made obstruction, 44
maps, 168, 276
matrix see Risk classiﬁcation
matrix
maturity, 83
mobilisation, 143
objective, 36
organisational, 43
outside-inﬂuence, 221
ownership, 140
performance-related, 221
premium, 229
prevention, 40
probability, 134
probability criteria, 173
pure type of, 34
questionnaires, 133
real, 116
really managed, 148
reduction, 40, 140,
reduction, during design phase, 194
registers, 45, 132, 143
residual, 140, 176
response, 142
response strategies, see Risk
remediation
responsibility, 75–6, 140
retention, 40, 140
score criteria, 174
seriousness, 134
space, 50
speculative type of, 34, 199
static, 37
structure, 171
structuring, 136
structuring methods, 137
subjective, 36
technical, 43
tolerance, 105, 130, 142, 218, 226
transfer, 40, 140
types, 36
unforeseen type of, 36
unshared, 220–21
virtual, 116
zones, 176
Risk allocation, 137, 140,
advantages for clients, 221
advantages for contractors, 221
concept, 219
contractual, 219, 222,
controllable, 222
deﬁnition, 219
principles, 220
types, 220–21
Risk analysis, 136
methods, 138
Risk classiﬁcation:
criteria, 173
deﬁnition, 134
matrix, 173–74, 176
methods, 134
qualitative, 134
quantitative, 135
semi-qualitative, 135
semi-quantitative, 135
tools, 134

318
Index
Risk communication:
deﬁnition, 90
effectiveness, 90
key factors, 91
Risk evaluation:
objective, 142
description, 142
sub-steps, 142
Risk identiﬁcation:
deﬁnition, 131
methods, 131
tools, 131
Risk management:
beneﬁts, 38–9
client focus, 108
communication vehicle, 23
cost-beneﬁt ratio, 222
cyclic, 38, 62
deﬁnition, 38
opportunity side, 79
paradox, 79
problem side, 79
software categories, 278
Risk management approaches:
fatalistic, 40
heuristic, 39
holistic, 40
proactive, 40
qualitative, 39
reactive, 40
rule of thumb, 39
scientiﬁc, 39
Risk mobilisation, deﬁnition, 143
Risk perception:
of clients, 105, 108
of contractors, 108
change over distance, 73
change over time, 72
and complexity, 71
of individuals, 70
of public clients, 109–10
of private clients, 111–12
in society, 117
in teams, 90
variety of, 69
Risk remediation,
cause or effect approach, 194
cause reduction, 194–96, 197–200
in the contracting phase, 232
deﬁnition, 136
effect reduction, 194–96, 200–203
geoenvironmental, 206
by insurance, 233
measures, 137
methods, see Risk remediation
strategies
strategies, 141,
strategies during design phase, 194
Risk response strategies, see Risk
remediation strategies
Risk structuring:
deﬁnition, 136
methods, 137
Risk types:
foreseen risk, 36
information risk, 36
interpretation risk, 36, 98
pure risk, 34
speculative risk, 34, 199
unforeseen risk, 36
Risk-driven:
domestic development planning, 165
organization, 101
urban development planning, 165
RISMAN, The Netherlands, 53
Rock:
discontinuity shear strength, variation
of, 197
engineering, 51–2
mass and perception, 73
material and perception, 73
mechanics, 51
Rock-fall, risk example, 137–40
Roobeek, Annemieke, 122
Rule of thumb risk management, 39
Ruskin, John, 289
Safe uncertainty, 97
Safety factor, 198–99
Sample disturbance and fuzziness, 30

Index
319
Sassen, Saskia, 34
Satellite pictures, 156
Scenario analysis, 132
in the feasibility phase, 160
in the maintenance phase, 272
types, 161
Scientiﬁc risk management, 39
Schein, Edgar, 88
Schumpeter, Joseph, 122
Second opinions, 98
Self-awareness, 81
Seligman, Martin E.P., 292
Semi-qualitative risk
classiﬁcation, 135
Semi-quantitative risk
classiﬁcation, 135
Senge, Peter M., 21, 24,
Sensor technology, 248
Settlement risk control, GeoQ case
study, 211
Silo management, 99
Single loop learning, 100
Singularity, 93–4
Site:
characteristics, 154
classiﬁcation, 154
investigations see Ground investigations
ownership, 223
Slope stability calculations, safety factor
for, 205
Social context and risk perception, 71
Social framework, 91
Social-cognitive conﬁguration theory,
91–2
Socially constructed:
situations, 94
risk dominance, 94
Soft rock and fuzziness, 29
Soft soil and fuzziness, 30
Soft project:
information, 130
objectives, 129
Soft systems:
deﬁnition, 22
information, 129
mathematics, 29
partnering, 238
risk management, 39
Soil:
engineering, 51–2
liquefaction risk, 92, 206
mechanics, 51
permeability, variation of, 197
Speculative risk, 34, 199
Spiritual Quotient (SQ), 81
Spreadsheet programmes, 279
Stability risk control by observational
method,
GeoQ case study, 260
Stakeholder management, 13
Standard Penetration Test (SPT),
92, 181
Statistics, 28, 200
Strategic:
dialogues, 83
shift, 101
thinking, 134
Subjective risk classiﬁcation, 136
Subjectivity, 116
Sympathy, deﬁnition, 68
Systems approach, 129
Systems thinking:
concept, 21–2
hard systems, 21–3
soft systems, 21–3
Tao philosophy, 69
Target price contract, 236
Target readership, 5
Team(s):
as change agents, 100–102
code of conduct, 87
cross-functional, 99
culture, 88
deﬁnition, 86
dynamics, 86–7
effectiveness, 90
forming process, 86
of ground-related experts,
97–8

320
Index
Team(s): (Continued)
interdependence, 87
multidisciplinary, 98–100
paradox, 102
willingness, 231
Team-based:
risk identiﬁcation, 172
classiﬁcation, 173
risk brainstorming, 178, 238
Technical Committee on Geotechnical
Reports of the Underground
Technology Research Council, 224
Technical rationality, 120
Terzaghi, Karl, 51, 247
Theories of individual risk
perception, 71
Thinking differently, 21
Total Quality Control (TQC), 56
Total Quality Management (TQM), 56
Transparency, 15
Transparency International, 14
Triple tube core drilling, 206
Triaxial tests and increased safety
factors, 205
True ambiguity scenario, 161
Trust, 64
Truth:
absolute, 121
context dependent, 121
scientiﬁc, 121
the, 93, 97
Tsunami, 11
Tunnel project, GeoQ case study, 185
Tunnel in geohydrological crisis, GeoQ
case study, 264
Tunnel vision, 95
Twilight zone, 22
UAV-gc2005, 223
Uncertainty:
concept, 26
deﬁnition, 26
foreseeable, 28
fuzzy, 32
incomplete, 32
incorrect, 37
geoenvironmental, 160
geological, 160
of ground and costs, 42
by interaction between structures, 160
principle, 27
random, 27
types, 27
unforeseeable, 32
Unconﬁned compressive strength:
and baselines, 255
and fuzziness, 29
Undisturbed sampling and fuzziness, 30
Undrained shear strength, variation
of, 197
Uniﬁed Soil Classiﬁcation System for
ground classiﬁcation, 30
Unforeseen risk, 36
United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law
(UNICITRAL), 233
United States Federal Differing Site
Conditions Clause of 1984, 224
Unsafe certainty, 97
Urban development project, GeoQ case
study, 165
US Army Corps of Engineers
(COE), 237
US National Committee on Tunnelling
Technology, 17, 224
US Subcommittee on Geotechnical Site
Investigations, 180
Unrealistic (project)
speciﬁcations, 107
Value engineering, 205, 207
challenges, 238
risk driven, 210
Vattimo, Gianni, 116
Warusa-kagen, 57
Waste disposal site, GeoQ case
study, 281
Water and construction, 10–11
Weak signals, 39

Index
321
Weathered rock:
and fuzziness, 30
and reliable observations, 252
and sampling, 206
Wentink, Joost, 66
White spots, 203
Wijffels, Herman, 290
World Bank, 17, 233
Zero, the, 69
Zones of discomfort, 79–80


