So what is this method about ???
1. Steam
2. Steam
3. Steam
4. Selling Steam accounts
Basicly this method is so easy as hell i dont even think it will reach 2 pages
first start off by making a new msn, make it something like
steamstore@hotmail.com <<< in your language
now find some supplier of hacked accounts on hackforums, someone that has been in the steam 
selling game for some time and sell them at a good price
either find someone or advertise that you will be buying steam accounts for a little higher price
than they have been usully sold but they have to be secured for more than 1 week or 2 weeks or so
and must be unverified
Okay find some good site in your country and advertise your msn saying
“selling legit steam accounts cheap!”
“how do we get our accounts?”
we get them through a company that helps people sell their accounts or say you are that company
or something
 
use some nice SE
it is better to have a CC when you are doing this because then you can always pay for accounts
but not neccesary.
You then set up your msn and wait for the adds to flow in
you decide if you take paypal and what currency not
the reason why you set it up for your country is because your fellow people
will trust you more and once you gain some rep in this business you will have a good flow
of customers coming in, and people refering to your msn
so basicly i use my bank account payment method.
But you can also accept paypal or anything you want.
Ok lets say you just got an steam account worth 900$ then sell it for 450$ or so

always aim to sell it for around 50% of the original price
and people will think its the BOMB that they get these accounts with a 50% off
and will refer many many people to come to shop with you
this is my method of making hundreds of dollars per day (no joke)
people deposit to my bank (i only accept that) and after they transfer i immediatly log in  to my 
bank and move it to another account (so the transfer isnt taken back)
the reason for you having accounts that have been secured for 1-2 weeks is because it decreases the 
chances by alot that they are ever retreived and if you have the email address with it
then there is very little chances (like 0.01%)
i have now been getting a constant flow of customers from this and they all leave happy
Also i did not say this was an super duper method but it works! And its simple as hell!
So go on try this money doesnt have to be complicated, we only make it that way because it seems 
like money is on a stall for us who have not made much.
But truth is be creative make up something thats easy as hell and make $$$ of it
Your sincerely TheKid from hackforums.net

