HUNGER
STEFAN VUCAK
Author of the Award Nominee Shadow Gods Saga
CHAPTER 1
It was one of those bars you end up in after a movie or a do it yourself dinner.
 Inside, they played thin reedy music, the kind of stuff that used to be popular in
the sixties - favored by the oldies and the sentimental at heart.  Half the time you
couldn't hear anything anyway above the blanket of noise and anonymous chatter.
  There was a little open square among the tables where you  could  dance  if you
wanted  to,  or  just  cling  to  someone.   The  drinks  weren't  watered  and  the
bartender would talk to you if he wasn't busy.  It was cheaper than a session with
my shrink and delivered the same kind of service.
Maybe it was the slow pace or the square atmosphere, but there were always a lot
of young people hanging around.  Some came to enjoy the novelty, liked the mood
and the dated sounds and many of them became regulars.
That's how I met Dan.
We were checking out the scenery after ordering; mine was a scotch and dry, no
ice.  When the drinks arrived, he appeared to  scrutinize the amber fluid, gave me a
sidelong glance and shrugged.
"If I wanted a decent drink, I wouldn't be here," he decided and raised his tumbler
in a salute.
He wore a gray corduroy blazer and black trousers.  Clear blue eyes regarded me
with amused cynicism.  His hair was light brown that sat on his head in a thick mop.
 It was streaked with strands of white.  He had the kind of rugged exterior that made
women fall at his feet and men take orders from.
I tried to suppress my jealousy and returned the salute.
"Check,"  I  said  with  a  grin  and  glanced  briefly  at  the  crowd.   "It's  only  a
diversion."
The bar was a very good place to get picked up - by either sex.
His laugh was deep and lit up his eyes.  No pretense there and I began to warm to
him.  The eyes can tell you a lot about a person.  He leaned back against the bar and
scanned the room.
"The name is Dan," he said and stuck out a meaty a hand.
"Frank," I said and nodded.  His hand was cool and dry and we maneuvered for a
knuckle crusher.  He had  the height and  reach,  but  I only smiled as  his expression
changed from a confident smirk into a surprised grimace of pain.  I let him go before
he was reduced to squirming.
"Damn!"  he  grunted  massaging  his  hand.   "It's  been  a  while  since  I  came  off
second best."
"I'll be around whenever you want a reminder."  We had a hearty chuckle at that.
Looking around, he suddenly pointed with his head.  "Frank!  Take a look at that

chassis, man."
I followed his glance and almost missed her.
She wasn't all that tall, but there was something about the way she stood, a power
held in check  that radiated from  her and  made me stare.   I could  swear  that  for  a
second  every  male  eye  in  the  room  was  turned  on  her.   Must  have  been  my
imagination.
Her black hair spilled across her shoulders and hung straight above a slim waist. 
She  had  a  long  oval  face  that  framed  large  ebony  eyes,  a  thin  delicate  nose  and
generous  red  lips.   I  couldn't  see  any  makeup.   She  wore  a  velvety  brown-black
dress that clung without being tight.
She was attractive, but I had seen better.
"Not bad," I said offhandedly.
Dan shook his head and gave me a cold grin.
"You happen to leave your eyeballs at home or  something?  Step  aside.   This  is
man's work, sonny."  Without taking his eyes off the woman, he absently placed the
tumbler on the bar top and stood up.
Amused, I watched as he walked up to her and said something.  She  gave him a
quizzical look,  nodded  and  smiled.  I took  a sip  and  when I looked  up  they  were
gone.
I didn't  think much  of  it  then,  but  I  remember  the  angry  scowl  hanging  on  the
bartender's face when he gave me a refill.  To hell with him.  I wasn't Dan's keeper,
and a man was free to run his own life.

CHAPTER 2
It was a few weeks later that I bumped into Dan again - and didn't recognize him.
I was  hanging  against  the  bar  for  emotional  support  when  this  old  guy  quietly
slipped in beside me.  He had peppery gray hair worn kind of long and skin hanging
off  his  jowls.   He  must  have  been  powerful  once.   Now,  he  was  just  another
old-timer trying to recapture something he happened to leave behind in his youth.
"Pops," I said pleasantly and nodded.
His clear blue eyes sparkled as he grinned.  "How you doing, Frank?"
The voice was kind of familiar and I frowned as I studied him.  Then my jaw fell
as I took in the gray corduroy blazer and the dark trousers.
"Dan?" I asked, not believing my eyes.
"I always knew you were a pretty sharp boy, Frank," he wheezed, nodding.
"What the hell happened  to  you?   You look..."   I  trailed  off,  but  deep  down  I
knew.  The knowledge sent my skin crawling.
"Yeah, I know.   I look  like hell."  He  raised  a  finger  and  ordered  a  drink.   He
didn't say anything, just stared into space as he waited for that drink.  I let him have
the moment.
The bartender shook his head as he slid the tumbler across the top.
"On  the  house,"  he  growled  and  stomped  away,  but  not  before  giving  me  an
accusing glare.  I glared back.  Screw him!  Everyone was entitled to ruin their own
life.
"Don't mind him," I told Dan.
"Let's  find a quiet  place,"  Dan  grunted  and  we  carried  our  drinks  to  an  empty
table tucked into a dark corner.  The music followed us, but I didn't mind.  Looking
at him, I still couldn't believe it.  It had been awhile...
"Dan?"
"I know, I know," he said tiredly.  "I'm dying."
"Dying?  From what?"
He smiled and his eyes lit up.  "Would you believe love?"
"Come on, Dan.  I'm serious."
"So am I."
When he looked at me, there was no pretense, no regrets.  "It was her."
He didn't have to explain.  I knew.  "How?"  But I knew that too.  He shook  his
head and shrugged.
"I don't know.  There was something about her that made her different from  any
other woman I ever knew.  And she made herself like that for me.  She wanted me."
"What're you talking about?"
There was a wistful smile on his face and some of the years seemed  to  fall away
and I could see his old face.  Then he looked at me, an old and angry man.
"When I picked her up, or maybe she did the picking.  It doesn't matter.  Anyway,
we both knew where it would lead to.  She had me captivated, or bewitched.  I don't
know."
"Yeah, you were taken in by her, all right."
He snorted  and  took  a quick  gulp.  "It's  not  that.  She  was  pretty,  but  nothing
spectacular.  What I mean is, when she looked at me, I knew that I was the only man

in the world for her.  And that's a powerful weapon, my boy.  I was hers and I knew
it and  something in the back  of  my mind told  me to  get  the  hell  out  of  there  in  a
hurry.  But it was too late.  My hormones were doing my thinking for me."
"So you were swept off your feet.  A one-night stand."
"Sure,  except  that it lasted  for  three weeks.   Then one  morning, I looked  in the
mirror and saw a stranger.  She was gone and her things with her.  And in those three
weeks, I lived a lifetime."
He looked at me, eyes glistening and a shiver ran down my spine.  Obviously she
has gone rogue.  That wasn't good.
"And you know something?  I didn't care.  I didn't!  Who knows?  Maybe she left
that with me as some kind of compensation."
I twirled my tumbler, brooding.  "You still haven't told me what happened, Dan."
"I don't know what happened!  All I know, as I grew weaker, she grew stronger,
more radiant, more compelling.  When we made love, I could feel my strength
draining from me.  Frank, making love to that woman was like losing yourself."
"You did," I said dryly.  "But, Dan, you know what you're saying?  How do you
know that she  made you  old?   You could  have caught something..."   I  trailed  off
feebly,  somehow  believing  him  as  suppressed  memories  returned.   It  wasn't
supposed to happen like this!
"I can see it in your eyes, Frank," he said gently and I looked away, surprised that
the pain was still there.  "All women take something from you when you love.  This
one just took a bit more than most."
Yeah, his life.

CHAPTER 3
A week later he was dead.
And I was beginning to have doubts.  When you  strip  away the fog  of  emotion,
what he said began to seem pretty far fetched.  Sure, he had looked old and now he
was  dead,  but  there  were  a  lot  of  other  plausible  explanations  for  that.   Weren't
there?  But I wasn't really fooling myself.
I sighed in disgust.  Something would have to be done.
It was a cool evening and the wind keened softly  through the alleys.  A thin fog
was beginning to settle, shrouding the city lights in a soft blanket.  I never meant to
drop in for a drink that night, but I'd had a long day and the thought of  making my
own dinner didn't hold much appeal.
I was just finishing my drink when there was  a moment of  silence as  she  slid on
the bar stool next to me.  She ordered something in a low contralto voice.  Our eyes
met and I could feel my face drain.
She wore that same brown-black dress and her large ebony eyes seemed to widen
as  I  looked  into  them.   They  were  completely  opaque  and  I  couldn't  see  any
reflection in them.  Her hair was tied in a knot above her head, extenuating her long
face.  She  touched  the corner  of  her mouth with the tip of  a small pointed  tongue
and smiled slowly.
"Hi," she husked, revealing even white teeth, not recognizing me for what I was.  
"You look like you've seen a ghost."
"You reminded me of someone," I said after a moment, drinking in her face.  Yep,
the power was there, all right.
"It must have been a painful reminder.  Perhaps I should leave."
"No," I said  firmly, afraid that I would lose  her.  "It  was  something a long time
ago."  I couldn't believe I was saying that.  She had captivated me with a glance and
something at the back  of  my mind was  screaming at me to  run.  For  a moment,  I
wanted to ask her about Dan.  Luckily I had enough sense to keep my mouth shut. 
For what I was about to do, I had to keep my wits about  me or  it was  likely that I
would end up like Dan.  And that just wouldn't do.
With a smile that didn't touch her eyes, she placed a small hand on my arm.
"I'll make you forget her."
I believed her.  I slipped some notes on the bar and stood up.  We made our way
between the tables and walked out.
I had a fairly large apartment not far from downtown.  It was a ten-minute drive. 
While  the  car  hummed  to  itself,  she  didn't  say  anything.   She  just  sat  there,  the
silence  broken  by  the  whisper  of  tires  and  the  traffic  around  us.   I  felt  strangely
content and at peace, warm in her presence.  I didn't want to spoil it with words.
She  touched  my  arm  and  I  glanced  at  her  outline,  her  face  in  shadow.   On
impulse, I pulled over and for a moment we listened to the throb of the engine.
"I don't even know your name," I said softly, trying to make out her face.
She seemed to hesitate, then turned her head, her hair swaying.
"Kaneel."
The air seemed to tremble as I savored the sound.
"Mine's-"

"Frank, I know."
I was pleased that she knew that.
I pulled into the curb  and  helped her out.   We  walked  up  the  steps  and  into  a
smoky foyer.  The elevator sighed to a stop and the doors slid away.  Our footsteps
were soundless in the thick pile as we walked slowly down the corridor.  I gave her a
brief smile as I fitted the key into the lock of my apartment.
I hung my jacket and found her in the lounge, eyeing the rows of books that lined
the dark shelves and the little trinkets that cluttered  the rest  of  the furniture.  I kept
the place neat.  That always went down well with the ladies.
"You have a very nice place, Frank."  She flashed me a smile and opened one of
the two bedroom doors.  She didn't turn on the lights.
I walked slowly toward her.  She had her back to me, outlined in black against the
backdrop of outside lights.  Slowly, I placed my hands on her shoulders and felt her
stiffen.  Then she turned and melted against me.
Her lips were soft and cool against mine.  Fire ran down my back as our tongues
touched.  I looked into her eyes, black pools, cold and unblinking.
The zipper  hardly made a sound  as  I moved  it down  her back.   I  pulled  at  her
shoulder straps and the dress caught at the swell of her breasts.  She was breathing
rapidly, her chest straining against me, fingers working on the buttons of my shirt.
This was madness!  My head was whirling and I couldn't do anything to stop it.
Dan!
Then her cool, satin flesh was against mine, her hair spilling across her shoulders,
arms around my neck.
"You're  mine," she  whispered  against my ear as  I picked  her  up,  desire  welling
within me even as part of me screamed.

CHAPTER 4
I figured I had about five days.
At least I had  none  of  that crap  that goes  with old  age - rheumatism, stiff joints
and constant pain.  I was just old, senile maybe.  But that wasn't an affliction of only
the old.
I'd get over it.
She had stayed for three days,  then left suddenly.   One  morning I woke up  and
she was gone, leaving only the memories.  I knew what Dan must have gone through,
suspecting the truth, but still willing to pay the price.  For what she had to give, any
man would.  I did.
I took some time off work and waited.  She came back on the fourth day.
Her hair was white, streaked with gray and her face had gone all wrinkly and dry. 
The eyes were still deep black, but something had gone out of them.
I knew how she felt.
"You bastard!" she croaked as I opened the door.
"Come in, Kaneel," I said easily.
"You knew what I was and you still did it!  Why?"
The smile slipped off my face as I looked at her.  "You took too much."
"I gave them a lifetime!"
"You  took  too  much!  We  need  what they have to  survive, but  you  turned  that
need into a sport.  I couldn't let that continue."
"And who are you to set yourself up as my judge?"
"How many men have you  taken, Kaleen, and  discarded?   No,  you  brought  this
on yourself."
She broke then, dry sobs racking her body as she buried her face  in her hands.  
The power was still in her and it touched me.  For  a moment,  I felt sorry  for  her. 
Those tears would have worked on anyone else, but I wasn't just anyone.
Finally, she looked at me, her face wet.
"I really cared for you, Frank.  You weren't like the others.  I couldn't go through
with it."
"Is that why you left me after only three days?"
She nodded, her eyes swimming.
I shook my head,  smiling.  "I  wish I could  believe that, Kaneel.  But I felt your
unease, your doubts.  You were beginning to suspect what I was.  You left to  save
yourself."
"I don't want to die!"
I knew she meant that, but it was too late.
I felt better the next day.  My hair was getting some of its color back and my skin
tone was firmer.  It would take some time before I was my old self again.  But that
was all right.  I could wait.
They found her body behind some bar two days later, a wistful smile on her face.

