WILLA
Stephen King
You don’t  see  what’s  right in front of your eyes,  she’d  said,  but sometimes he did.  He  supposed  he
wasn’t entirely undeserving of her scorn, but he wasn’t entirely blind, either. And as the dregs of sunset
faded to bitter orange over the Wind River Range, David looked around the station and saw that Willa
was gone.  He  told  himself he wasn’t  sure,  but that  was  only his head—his  sinking stomach  was  sure
enough.
He went to find Lander, who liked her a bit. Who called her spunky when Willa said Amtrak was full of
shit for leaving them stranded like this. A lot of them didn’t care for her at all, stranded by Amtrak or not.
“It smells like wet crackers in here!” Helen Palmer shouted at him as David walked past. She had found
her way to the bench in the corner, as she always did, eventually. The Rhinehart woman was minding her
for the time being, giving the husband a little break, and she gave David a smile.
“Have you seen Willa?” David asked.
The Rhinehart woman shook her head, still smiling.
“We got fish for supper!” Mrs. Palmer burst out furiously. A knuckle of blue veins beat in the hollow of
her temple. A few people looked around. “First one t’ing an’ den anudder!”
“Hush, Helen,” the Rhinehart woman said. Maybe her first name was Sally, but David thought he would
have remembered a name like that; there were so few Sallys these days. Now the world belonged to the
Ambers, Ashleys and Tiffanys. Willa was  another  endangered  species,  and  just thinking that  made  his
stomach sink down again.
“Like crackers!” Helen spat. “Them dirty old crackers up to camp!”
Henry Lander was sitting on a bench under the clock. He had his arm around  his wife. He  glanced  up

and shook his head  before  David could  ask.  “She’s  not here.  Sorry.  Gone  into town  if you’re  lucky.
Bugged out for good if you’re not.” And he made a hitchhiking gesture.
David didn’t believe his fiancée would hitchhike west on her own—the idea was crazy—but he believed
she wasn’t here. Had known even before counting heads,  actually, and  a  snatch  of some  old book  or
poem about winter occurred to him: A cry of absence, absence in the heart.
The station was a narrow wooden throat. Down its length, people either strolled aimlessly or simply sat
on benches under the fluorescent lights. The shoulders of the ones  who sat  had  that  special  slump you
saw only in places like this, where people waited for whatever had gone wrong to be made right so the
broken  journey could  be  mended.  Few  people  came  to  places  like Crowheart  Springs,  Wyoming  on
purpose.
“Don’t you go haring after her, David,” Ruth Lander said. “It’s getting dark, and there’s plenty of critters
out there. Not just coyotes, either. That book salesman with the limp says he saw a couple of wolves on
the other side of the tracks, where the freight depot is.”
“Biggers,” Henry said. “That’s his name.”
“I don’t care if his name is Jack  D.  Ripper,”  Ruth said.  “The point is, you’re  not in Kansas  anymore,
David.”
“But if she went—”
“She went while it was still daylight,” Henry Lander said, as if daylight would stop a wolf (or a bear) from
attacking a woman on her own. For all David knew, it might. He was an investment banker, not a wildlife
expert. A young investment banker, at that.
“If the pick-up train comes and she’s gone, she’ll miss it.” He couldn’t seem to get this simple fact  into
their heads. It wasn’t getting traction, in the current lingo of his office back in Chicago.
Henry raised his eyebrows. “Are you telling me that both of you missing it will improve things somehow?”
If they both missed it, they’d either catch a bus or wait for the next train together. Surely Henry and Ruth
Lander saw that. Or maybe not. What David mostly saw  when he looked  at  them—what was  right in
front of his eyes—was that special  weariness  reserved  for people  temporarily stuck  in West  Overalls.
And  who  else  cared  for  Willa?  If  she  dropped  out  of  sight  in  the  High  Plains,  who  besides  David
Sanderson would spare a thought? There was even some active dislike for her. That bitch Ursula Davis
had told him once that if Willa’s mother had left the a off the end of her name, “it would have been just
about perfect.”
“I’m going to town and look for her,” he said.
Henry sighed. “Son, that’s very foolish.”
“We can’t be married in San Francisco if she gets left behind in Crowheart Springs,”  he said,  trying to
make a joke of it.
Dudley was walking by. David didn’t know if Dudley was the man’s first or last name, only that he was
an executive with Staples office supply and had been on his way to Missoula for some  sort  of regional
meeting. He was ordinarily very quiet, so  the donkey  heehaw  of laughter he expelled  into the growing
shadows was beyond surprising; it was shocking. “If the train comes and you miss it,” he said, “you can

hunt up a justice of the peace and get married right here. When you get back east, tell all your friends you
had a real Western shotgun wedding. Yeehaw, partner.”
“Don’t do this,” Henry said. “We won’t be here much longer.”
“So I should leave her? That’s nuts.”
He walked on before Lander or his wife could reply.  Georgia  Andreeson  was  sitting on nearby  bench
and watching her daughter  caper  up and  down  the dirty  tile  floor  in  her  red  traveling  dress.  Pammy
Andreeson never seemed to get tired. David tried to remember if he had seen her asleep since the train
derailed at the Wind River junction point and they had wound up here like someone’s forgotten package
in the dead  letter  office. Once,  maybe,  with her head  in  her  mother’s  lap.  But  that  might  be  a  false
memory, created out of his belief that five-year-olds were supposed to sleep a lot.
Pammy hopped  from tile to  tile, a  prank  in motion, seeming to  use  the squares  as  a  giant  hopscotch
board. Her red dress jumped around her plump knees.
“I knew  a  man, his name was  Danny,” she  chanted  in monotonous  one-note  holler.  It  made  David’s
fillings ache. “He tripped and fell, on his fanny. I knew a man, his name was David. He tripped and fell,
on his bavid.” She giggled and pointed at David.
“Pammy, stop,” Georgia Andreeson said. She smiled at David and brushed her hair from the side of her
face.  He  thought  the  gesture  unutterably  weary,  and  thought  she  had  a  long  road  ahead  with  the
high-spirited Pammy, especially with no Mr. Andreeson in evidence.
“Did you see Willa?” he asked.
“Gone,” she  said,  and  pointed  to  the door  with the sign over  it reading TO  SHUTTLE,  TO  TAXIS,
CALL AHEAD FROM COURTESY PHONE FOR HOTEL VACANCIES.
Here was Biggers, limping toward him. “I’d avoid the great outdoors, unless armed with a high-powered
rifle. There are wolves. I’ve seen them.”
“I knew  a  girl, her name was  Willa,” Pammy chanted.  “She had  a  headache,  and  took  a  pilla.”  She
collapsed to the floor, shouting with laughter.
Biggers, the salesman, hadn’t waited for a reply. He was limping back down the length of the station. His
shadow grew long, shortened in the glow of the hanging fluorescents, then grew long again.
Phil Palmer was leaning in the doorway beneath the sign about the shuttle and the taxis. He was a retired
insurance man. He and his wife were on their way to Portland. The plan was to stay with their oldest son
and his wife for a while, but Palmer had confided to David and Willa that Helen would probably never be
coming back east. She had cancer as well as Alzheimer’s. Willa called it a two-fer. When David told her
that was a little cruel, Willa had looked at him, started to say  something and  then had  only shaken  her
head.
Now Palmer asked, as he always did: “Hey, mutt—got a butt?”
To which David answered, as he always did: “I don’t smoke, Mr. Palmer.”
And Palmer finished: “Just testing you, kiddo.”

As David stepped out onto the concrete platform where detraining passengers waited for the shuttle to
Crowheart Springs, Palmer frowned. “Not a good idea, my young friend.”
Something—it might have been a large dog but probably wasn’t—lifted a howl from the other side of the
railway station,  where  the sage  and  broom  grew  almost  up  to  the  tracks.  A  second  voice  joined  it,
creating harmony. They trailed off together.
“See what I mean, jellybean?” And Palmer smiled as if he’d conjured those howls just to prove his point.
David turned, his light jacket  rippling around  him in the keen  breeze,  and  started  down  the steps.  He
went fast,  before  he could  change his mind, and  only the first step  was  really hard.  After that  he just
thought about Willa.
“David,” Palmer said, not joshing now, not joking around. “Don’t.”
“Why not? She did. Besides, the wolves are over there.” He jerked a thumb back over his shoulder. “If
that’s what they are.”
“Course that’s what they are. And no,  they probably  won’t  come  at  you—I  doubt  if they’re  specially
hungry this time of year. But there’s no need for both of you to spend another God-knows-how-long in
the middle of nowhere just because she got to missing the bright lights.”
“You don’t seem to understand—she’s my girl.”
“I’m going to tell you a hard truth, my friend: If she really considered herself your girl, she wouldn’t have
done what she did. You think?”
At first David said nothing, because he wasn’t sure what he thought. Possibly because he often didn’t see
what was right in front of his eyes. Willa had said so. Finally he turned back to look at Phil Palmer leaning
in the doorway  above  him. “I think you don’t  leave your fiancée stranded  in the  middle  of  nowhere.
That’s what I think.”
Palmer sighed. “I almost hope one of those trash-pine lobos does decide to put the bite on your city ass.
It might smarten you up. Little Willa Stuart cares for nobody but herself, and everyone sees it but you.”
“If I pass a Nite Owl store or a 7-Eleven, you want me to pick you up a pack of cigarettes?”
“Why the fuck not?” Palmer said. Then, just as David was walking across NO PARKING TAXI ZONE
painted on the empty curbless street: “David!”
David turned back.
“The shuttle won’t be back until tomorrow, and it’s three miles to town. Says so, right on the back wall
of the information booth.  That’s  six  miles,  round-trip.  On  foot.  Take  you  two  hours,  and  that’s  not
counting the time it might take you track her down.”
David raised his hand to indicate he heard, but kept going. The wind was off the mountains, and cold, but
he liked the way it rippled his clothes and combed back his hair. At first he watched for wolves, scanning
one side of the road and then the other, but when he saw none, his thoughts returned to Willa. And really,
his mind had been fixed on little else since the second or third time he had been with her.
She’d gotten to missing the bright lights; Palmer was  almost certainly right about  that  much, but David

didn’t believe she cared for nobody but herself. The truth was she’d just gotten tired of waiting around
with a bunch of sad old sacks moaning about how they were going to be late for this, that and the other.
The town over yonder probably didn’t amount to much, but in her mind it must have held some possibility
for fun, and that had outweighed the possibility of Amtrak sending a special  to  pick  them up while she
was gone.
And where, exactly, would she have gone looking for fun?
He was sure there were no what you’d call nightclubs in Crowheart Springs, where the passenger station
was just a long green shed with WYOMING  and  “THE EQUALITY  STATE” painted  on the side  in
red, white and blue. No nightclubs, no discos, but there  were  undoubtedly  bars,  and  he thought she’d
settle for one of those. If she couldn’t go clubbin’, she’d go jukin’.
Night came on and the stars unrolled across the sky from east to west like a rug with spangles  in it. A
half-moon rose  between  two  peaks  and  sat  there,  casting  a  sickroom  glow  over  this  stretch  of  the
highway and the open land on both sides of it. The wind whistled beneath the eaves of the station, but out
here  it  made  a  strange  open  humming  that  was  not  quite  a  vibration.  It  made  him  think  of  Pammy
Andreeson’s hopscotch chant.
He walked listening for the sound of an oncoming train behind him. He didn’t hear  that;  what he heard
when the wind dropped was a minute but perfectly audible click-click-click. He turned and saw a  wolf
standing about 20 paces behind him on the broken passing line of Route 26. It was  almost as  big as  a
calf, its coat as shaggy as a Russian hat. In the star shine its fur looked black, its eyes a dark urine yellow.
It saw David looking and stopped. Its mouth dropped open in a grin, and it began to pant, the sound of a
small engine.
There was no time to be afraid. He took a step toward it, clapped his hands and  shouted,  “Get out of
here! Go on, now!”
The wolf turned tail and fled, leaving a pile of steaming droppings behind on Route 26. David grinned but
managed to keep from laughing out loud; he thought that would be tempting the gods. He felt both scared
and absurdly, totally cool. He thought of changing his name from David Sanderson  to  Wolf Frightener.
That would be quite the name for an investment banker.
Then he did laugh a little—he couldn’t help it—and turned toward Crowheart Springs again. This time he
walked looking over his shoulder as well as from side to side, but the wolf didn’t come back. What came
was a certainty that he would hear the shriek of the special coming to pick up the others; the part of their
train that was still on the tracks would have been cleared away from the junction, and  soon  the people
waiting in the station  back  there  would be  on their way again—the Palmers,  the Landers,  the limping
Biggers, the dancing Pammy and all the rest.
Well, so what? Amtrak would hold their luggage in San Francisco; surely they could be trusted to get that
much right. He and Willa could find the local bus station. Greyhound must have discovered Wyoming.
He came upon a Budweiser can and kicked it awhile. Then he kicked it crooked, off into the scrub, and
as he was debating whether or not to go after it, he heard faint music: a bass line and the cry of a pedal
steel guitar, which always sounded to him like chrome teardrops. Even in happy songs.
She was there, listening to that music. Not because it was  the closest  place  with music, but because  it
was the right place.  He  knew  it. So  he left the beer  can  and  walked  on  toward  the  pedal  steel,  his
sneakers scuffing up dust that the wind whipped away. The sound of the drum kit came next, then a red

neon arrow below a sign that just read 26. Well, why not? This was Route 26, after all. It was a perfectly
logical name for a honky-tonk.
It had two parking lots, the one in front paved and packed with pickup trucks and cars, most American
and most at least five years old. The lot on the left was gravel. In that one, ranks of long-haul semis stood
under brilliant blue-white arc sodiums. By now David could also hear  the rhythm and  lead  guitars, and
read the marquee over the door: ONE NIGHT ONLY THE DERAILERS $5 COVER SORRY.
The Derailers, he thought. Well, she certainly found the right group.
David had a five in his wallet, but the foyer of 26 was empty. Beyond it, a big hardwood dance floor was
crammed with slow-dancing couples, most wearing jeans and cowboy boots and clutching each other’s
butts  as  the  band  worked  its  way  deeper  into  “Wasted  Days  and  Wasted  Nights.”  It  was  loud,
lachrymose and—as far as David Sanderson could  tell—note  perfect.  The smells of beer,  sweat,  Brut
and Wal-Mart perfume hit him like a punch in the nose. The laughter and conversation—even a footloose
yeehaw cry from the far side of the dance floor—were like sounds heard in a dream you have again and
again at certain critical turns of life: the dream of being unprepared for a  big exam, the dream  of being
naked in public, the dream of falling, the dream in which you hurry toward a corner in some strange city,
sure your fate lies on the far side.
David considered putting his five back in his wallet, then leaned into the ticket booth and dropped it on
the  desk  in  there,  which  was  bare  except  for  a  pack  of  Lucky  Strikes  sitting  on  a  Danielle  Steel
paperback. Then he went into the crowded main room.
The Derailers swung their way into something upbeat and the younger dancers began to pogo like kids at
a punk show. To David’s left, two dozen or so  older  couples  began  a  pair  of line dances.  He  looked
again and realized there was only one line-dancing group, after all. The far wall was a mirror, making the
dance floor look twice as big as it really was.
A glass shattered. “You pay, partner!” the lead singer called as The Derailers hit the instrumental break,
and the dancers applauded his wit, which probably seemed fairly sparkling, David thought, if you were
running hot on the tequila highway.
The bar was a horseshoe with a  neon replica  of the Wind River Range floating overhead.  It  was  red,
white and blue; in Wyoming, they did seem to love their red, white and blue. A neon sign in similar colors
proclaimed YOU ARE IN GOD’S COUNTRY PARTNER. It was flanked by the Budweiser logo on
the left and  the Coors  logo on the  right.  The  crowd  waiting  to  be  served  was  four-deep.  A  trio  of
bar-tenders in white shirts and red vests flashed cocktail shakers like six-guns.
It was a barn of a place—there had to be 500 people whooping it up—but he had  no concerns  about
finding Willa. My mojo’s  working,  he thought as  he cut a  corner  of  the  dance  floor,  almost  dancing
himself as he avoided various gyrating cowboys and cowgirls.
Beyond the bar and  the dance  floor was  a  dark  little lounge with high-backed  booths.  Quartets  were
crammed into most of these, usually with a pitcher or two for sustenance, their reflections in the mirrored
wall turning each party of four into eight. Only one of the booths wasn’t full up. Willa sat by herself, her
high-necked  flower-print  dress  looking out of place  among  the  Levi’s,  denim  skirts  and  pearl-button
shirts. Nor had she bought herself a drink or anything to eat—the table was bare.
She didn’t see  him at  first. She  was  watching the dancers.  Her  color  was  high, and  there  were  deep
dimples at  the corners  of her mouth. She  looked  nine miles out of place,  but he had  never  loved  her

more. This was Willa on the edge of a smile.
“Hi, David,” she said as he slid in beside her. “I was hoping you’d come. I thought you would. Isn’t the
band great? They’re so loud!” She almost had to yell to be heard, but he could see she liked that, too.
And after her initial glance at him, she went back to looking at the dancers.
“They’re good, all right,” he said. They were, too. He could feel himself responding in spite of his anxiety,
which had returned. Now that he’d actually found her, he was worried all over again about missing that
damned pick-up train. “The lead singer sounds like Buck Owens.”
“Does he?” She looked at him, smiling. “Who’s Buck Owens?”
“It doesn’t matter. We ought to go back to the station. Unless you want to be stranded here another day,
that is.”
“That might not be so bad. I kind of like this pla—whoa, look out!”
A glass arched across the dance floor, sparkling briefly green and gold in the stage  gels, and  shattered
somewhere out of sight. There were cheers and some applause—Willa was also applauding—but David
saw a couple of beefcakes with the words SECURITY and SERENITY printed on their T-shirts moving
in on the approximate site of the missile launch.
“This is the kind of place where you can count on four fistfights in the parking lot before 11,” David said,
“and often one free-for-all inside just before last call.”
She laughed, pointed her forefingers at him like guns. “Good! I want to see!”
“And I want us to go back,” he said. “If you want to go honky-tonking in San Francisco, I’ll take you.
It’s a promise.”
She stuck out her lower lip and shook back her sandy-blond hair. “It wouldn’t be the same. It wouldn’t,
and you know it. In San Francisco they probably drink… I don’t know… macrobiotic beer.”
That made  him laugh. As  with the idea  of an investment  banker  named  Wolf  Frightener,  the  idea  of
macrobiotic beer was just too rich. But the anxiety was there, under the laughter; in fact, wasn’t it fueling
the laughter?
“We’re gonna take a short break and be right back,” the lead singer said, wiping his brow. “Y’all drink
up, now, and remember—I’m Tony Villanueva, and we are The Derailers.”
“That’s our cue to put on our diamond shoes and depart,” David said, and took her hand. He slid out of
the booth,  but she  didn’t come.  She  didn’t let go of his hand,  either,  though, and  he sat  down  again
feeling a touch of panic. Thinking he now knew how a fish felt when it realized it couldn’t throw the hook,
that old hook was in good and tight and Mr. Trout was bound for the bank, where he would flop his final
flop. She was looking at him with those same killer blue eyes and deep dimples: Willa on the edge of a
smile, his wife-to-be,  who read  novels in the morning  and  poetry  at  night  and  thought  the  TV  news
was… what did she call it? Ephemera.
“Look at us,” she said, and turned her head away from him.
He looked at the mirrored  wall on their left. There  he saw  a  nice young couple  from the East  Coast,
stranded in Wyoming. In her print dress she looked better than he did, but he guessed that was always

going to be the case. He looked from the mirror-Willa to the real thing with his eyebrows raised.
“No, look again,” she said.  The dimples were  still there,  but she  was  serious  now—as  serious  as  she
could be in this party atmosphere, anyway. “And think about what I told you.”
It was on his lips to say, You’ve told me many things, and I think about all of them, but that was a lover’s
reply, pretty and essentially meaningless. And because he knew what thing she  meant,  he looked  again
without saying anything. This time he really looked, and there was no one in the mirror. He was looking at
the only empty booth in 26. He turned to Willa, flabbergasted… yet somehow not surprised.
“Didn’t you even wonder how a presentable female could be sitting here all by herself when the place is
juiced and jumping?” she asked.
He shook his head. He hadn’t. There were  quite a  few things he hadn’t  wondered,  at  least  until now.
When he’d last had something to eat or drink, for instance. Or what time it was, or when it had last been
daylight. He didn’t even know exactly what had happened to them. Only that the Northern Flyer had left
the tracks and now they were by some coincidence here listening to a country-western group called—
“I kicked a can,” he said. “Coming here I kicked a can.”
“Yes,” she said, “and you saw  us in the mirror the first time you looked,  didn’t you? Perception  isn’t
everything, but perception and expectation together?” She winked, then leaned toward him. Her  breast
pressed against his upper arm as she kissed his cheek, and the sensation was lovely—surely the feel of
living flesh. “Poor David. I’m sorry. But you were brave to come. I really didn’t think you would, that’s
the truth.”
“We need to go back and tell the others.”
Her lips pressed together. “Why?”
“Because—”
Two men in cowboy hats led two  laughing women in jeans,  Western  shirts and  ponytails toward  their
booth. As they neared it, an identical expression of puzzlement—not quite fear—touched their faces, and
they headed  back  toward  the  bar  instead.  They  feel  us,  David  thought.  Like  cold  air  pushing  them
away—that’s what we are now.
“Because it’s the right thing to do.”
Willa laughed. It was a weary sound. “You remind me of the old guy who used  to  sell the oatmeal  on
TV.”
“Hon, they think they’re waiting for a train to come and pick them up!”
“Well, maybe there is!” He was almost frightened by her sudden ferocity. “Maybe the one they’re always
singing  about,  the  gospel  train,  the  train  to  glory,  the  one  that  don’t  carry  no  gamblers  or  midnight
ramblers…”
“I don’t think Amtrak runs to heaven,” David said. He was  hoping to  make  her laugh, but she  looked
down at her hands almost sullenly, and he had  a  sudden  intuition. “Is there  something else  you know?
Something we should tell them? There is, isn’t there?”

“I don’t know why we should bother when we can just stay here,” she said, and was  that  petulance  in
her voice?  He  thought it was.  This was  a  Willa  he  had  never  even  suspected.  “You  may  be  a  little
nearsighted, David, but at least you came. I love you for that.” And she kissed him again.
“There was a wolf, too,” he said. “I clapped  my hands  and  scared  it off. I’m thinking of changing my
name to Wolf Frightener.”
She stared at him for a moment with her mouth open, and David had time to think: I had to wait until we
were dead to really surprise the woman I love. Then she dropped against the padded back of the booth,
roaring with laughter. A waitress who happened to be passing dropped a full tray of beers with a crash
and swore colorfully.
“Wolf Frightener!” Willa cried. “I want to call you that in bed! ‘Oh, oh, Wolf Frightener, you so big! You
so hairy!’”
The waitress was staring down at the foaming mess, still cursing like a sailor on shore leave. All the while
keeping well away from that one empty booth.
David said, “Do you think we still can? Make love, I mean?”
Willa wiped at her streaming eyes and said, “Perception and expectation, remember? Together they can
move mountains.” She took his hand again. “I still love you, and you still love me. Don’t you?”
“Am I not Wolf Frightener?” he asked. He could joke, because his nerves didn’t believe he was  dead.
He looked past her, into the mirror, and saw them. Then just himself, his hand holding nothing. Then they
were both gone. And still… he breathed, he smelled beer and whiskey and perfume.
A busboy had come from somewhere and was helping the waitress mop up the mess. “Felt like I stepped
down,” David heard her saying. Was that the kind of thing you heard in the afterlife?
“I guess I’ll go back  with you,” she  said,  “but I’m not staying in that  boring station  with those  boring
people when this place is around.”
“Okay,” he said.
“Who’s Buck Owens?”
“I’ll tell you all about him,” David said. “Roy Clark, too. But first tell me what else you know.”
“Most of them I don’t even care about,” she said, “but Henry Lander’s nice. So’s his wife.”
“Phil Palmer’s not bad, either.” She wrinkled her nose. “Phil the Pill.”
“What do you know, Willa?”
“You’ll see for yourself, if you really look.”
“Wouldn’t it be simpler if you just—”
Apparently not. She rose until her thighs pressed against the edge of the table, and pointed. “Look! The
band is coming back!”

The moon was high when he and Willa walked back to the road, holding hands. David didn’t see  how
that could be—they had stayed for only the first two songs of the next set—but there it was, floating all
the way up there in the spangled black. That was troubling, but something else troubled him even more.
“Willa,” he said, “what year is it?”
She thought it over. The wind rippled her dress as it would the dress of any live woman. “I don’t exactly
remember,” she said at last. “Isn’t that odd?”
“Considering I can’t remember the last time I ate a meal or drank a glass of water? Not too odd. If you
had to guess, what would you say? Quick, without thinking.”
“Nineteen… eighty-eight?”
He nodded.  He  would have said  1987  himself. “There was  a  girl in there  wearing a  T-shirt  that  said
CROWHEART SPRINGS HIGH SCHOOL, CLASS OF ‘03. And if she was old enough to  be  in a
roadhouse—”
“Then ’03 must have been at least three years ago.”
“That’s what I was thinking.” He stopped. “It can’t be 2006, Willa, can it? I mean, the 21st century?”
Before she could reply, they heard the click-click-click of toenails on asphalt.  This time more  than just
one set; this time there were four wolves behind them on the highway. The biggest, standing in front of the
others, was the one that had come up behind David on his walk toward Crowheart Springs. He  would
have known that shaggy black pelt anywhere. Its eyes were brighter now. A half-moon floated  in each
like a drowned lamp.
“They see us!” Willa cried in a kind of ecstasy.  “David, they see  us!” She  dropped  to  one  knee  on a
white dash of the broken passing line and held out her right hand. She made a clucking noise and  said,
“Here, boy! Come on!”
“Willa, I don’t think that’s such good idea.”
She paid no attention, a very Willa thing to do. Willa had her own ideas about things. It was she who had
wanted to go from Chicago to San Francisco by rail—because, she said, she wanted to know what it felt
like to fuck on a train. Especially one that was going fast and rocking a little.
“Come on, big boy, come to your mama!”
The big lobo came, trailed by its mate and their two…  did you call them yearlings? As  it stretched  its
muzzle (and all those shining teeth) toward the slim outstretched hand, the moon filled its eyes  perfectly
for a moment, turning them silver. Then, just before its long snout could touch her skin, the wolf uttered a
series of piercing yips and flung itself backward so sharply that for a moment rose on its rear legs, front
paws  boxing  the  air  and  the  white  plush  on  its  belly  exposed.  The  others  scattered.  The  big  lobo
executed  a  midair twist and  ran into the scrubland  to  the  right  of  the  road,  still  yipping,  with  his  tail
tucked. The rest followed.
Willa rose and looked at David with an expression of hard grief that was too much to bear. He dropped
his eyes to his feet instead. “Is this why you brought me out into the dark when I was listening to music?”
she asked. “To show me what I am now? As if I didn’t know!”

“Willa, I’m sorry.”
“Not yet, but you will be.” She took his hand again. “Come on, David.”
Now he risked a glance. “You’re not mad at me?”
“Oh, a little—but you’re all I’ve got now, and I’m not letting you go.”
Shortly after seeing the wolves, David spied a Budweiser can lying on the shoulder of the road. He was
almost positive it was the one he had kicked along ahead of him until he’d kicked it crooked, out into the
sage.  Here  it  was  again,  in  its  original  position…  because  he  had  never  kicked  it  at  all,  of  course.
Perception isn’t everything, Willa had said, but perception and expectation together? Put  them together
and you had a Reese’s peanut butter cup of the mind.
He kicked the can out into the scrubland, and when they were past that spot, he looked back and there it
lay, right where it had been since some  cowboy—maybe  on his way to  26—had  chucked  it from the
window of his pickup truck. He  remembered  that  on Hee  Haw—that  old show  starring Buck  Owens
and Roy Clark—they used to call pickup trucks cowboy Cadillacs.
“What are you smiling about?” Willa asked him.
“Tell you later. Looks like we’re going to have plenty of time.”
They stood outside the Crowheart Springs railway station, holding hands in the moonlight like Hansel and
Gretel  outside  the  candy  house.  To  David  the  long  building’s  green  paint  looked  ashy  gray  in  the
moonlight, and  although he knew  WYOMING  and  “THE EQUALITY  STATE” were  printed  in red,
white and blue, they could have been any colors at all. He noticed a sheet of paper, protected from the
elements by plastic, stapled to one of the posts flanking the wide steps leading up to the double  doors.
Phil Palmer still leaned there.
“Hey, mutt!” Palmer called down. “Got a butt?”
“Sorry, Mr. Palmer,” David said.
“Thought you were going to bring me back a pack.”
“I didn’t pass a store,” David said.
“They didn’t sell cigarettes where you were, doll?” Palmer asked. He was the kind of man who called all
women of a certain age doll; you knew that just looking at him, as you knew that if you happened to pass
the time of day with him on a steamy August afternoon,  he’d  tip his hat back  on his head  to  wipe his
brow and tell you it wasn’t the heat, it was the humidity.
“I’m sure they did,” Willa said, “but I would have had trouble buying them.”
“Want to tell me why, sugarpie?”
“Why do you think?”
But Palmer crossed his arms over his narrow chest and said nothing. From  somewhere  inside, his wife
cried, “We got fish for supper! First one t’ing an’ den anudder! I hate the smell of this place! Crackers!”

“We’re dead, Phil,” David said. “That’s why. Ghosts can’t buy cigarettes.”
Palmer looked  at  him for several  seconds,  and  before  he laughed, David saw  that  Palmer  more  than
believed him: Palmer had known all along. “I’ve heard plenty of reasons for not bringing someone what
he asked for,” he said, “but I have to think that takes the prize.”
“Phil—”
From inside: “Fish for supper! Oh, gah-dammit!”
“Excuse me, kiddies,” Palmer said. “Duty calls.” And he was gone. David turned to Willa, thinking she’d
ask him what else he had expected, but Willa was looking at the notice posted beside the stairs.
“Look at that,” she said. “Tell me what you see.”
At first he saw nothing, because the moon was shining on the protective plastic. He took a step  closer,
then one to the left, moving Willa aside to do it.
“At the top it says NO SOLICITING BY ORDER OF SUBLETTE COUNTY SHERIFF, then some
fine print—blah-blah-blah—and at the bottom—”
She gave him an elbow. Not gently, either. “Stop shitting around and look at it, David. I don’t want to be
here all night.”
You don’t see what’s right in front of your eyes.
He turned away from the station and stared at the railroad tracks shining in the moonlight. Beyond them
was a thick white neck of stone with a flat top—that thar’s a mesa, pardner, jest like in them old John
Ford movies.
He looked back at the posted notice, and wondered how he ever could have mistaken TRESPASSING
for SOLICITING, a big bad investment banker like Wolf Frightener Sanderson.
“It says NO TRESPASSING BY ORDER OF SUBLETTE COUNTY SHERIFF,” he said.
“Very good. And under the blah-blah-blah, what about there?”
At  first  he  couldn’t  read  the  two  lines  at  the  bottom  at  all;  at  first  those  two  lines  were  just
incomprehensible symbols, possibly because his mind, which wanted to believe none of this, could  find
no  innocuous  translation.  So  he  looked  away  to  the  railroad  tracks  once  more  and  wasn’t  exactly
surprised to see that they no longer gleamed in the moonlight; now the steel was rusty, and weeds were
growing between the ties. When he looked back again, the railway station was a slumped derelict with its
windows boarded  up and  most of the shingles on  its  roof  gone.  NO  PARKING  TAXI  ZONE  had
disappeared from the asphalt, which was crumbling and full of potholes. He could still read WYOMING
and “THE EQUALITY STATE” on the side of the building, but now the words were ghosts. Like us, he
thought.
“Go on,” Willa said—Willa, who had her own ideas about things, Willa who saw what was in front of her
eyes and wanted you to see too, even when seeing was cruel. “That’s your final exam. Read those two
lines at the bottom and then we can get this show on the road.”
He sighed. “It says THIS PROPERTY IS CONDEMNED. And then DEMOLITION  SCHEDULED

JUNE 2007.”
“You get an A. Now  let’s  go see  if anyone else  wants  to  go to  town  and  hear  The Derailers.  I’ll tell
Palmer to look on the bright side—we can’t buy cigarettes, but for people like us there’s never a cover
charge.”
Only nobody wanted to go to town.
“What does she mean, we’re dead? Why does she want to say an awful thing like that?” Ruth Lander
asked David, and what killed him (so to speak) wasn’t the reproach in her voice but the look in her eyes
before she pressed her face against the shoulder of Henry’s corduroy jacket. Because she knew too.
“Ruth,” he said, “I’m not telling you this to upset you—”
“Then stop!” she cried, her voice muffled.
David saw that all of them but Helen Palmer were  looking at  him with anger  and  hostility. Helen was
nodding and muttering between her husband and the Rhinehart woman, whose first name was probably
Sally. They were standing under the fluorescents in little groups… only when he blinked, the fluorescents
were gone. Then the stranded passengers were just dim figures standing in the shattered  moonlight that
managed to find its way in through the boarded-up  windows.  The Landers  weren’t  sitting on a  bench;
they were sitting on a dusty floor near a little cluster of empty crack vials—yes, it seemed that crack had
managed to find its way even out here to John Ford country—and there was a faded circle on one wall
not far from the corner where Helen Palmer squatted and muttered.  Then David blinked again and  the
fluorescents were back. So was the big clock, hiding that faded circle.
Henry Lander said, “Think you better go along now, David.”
“Listen a minute, Henry,” Willa said.
Henry switched his gaze to her, and David had no trouble reading the distaste that was there. Any liking
Henry might once have had for Willa Stuart was gone now.
“I don’t want to listen,” Henry said. “You’re upsetting my wife.”
“Yeah,”  a  fat  young  man  in  a  Seattle  Mariners  cap  said.  David  thought  his  name  was  O’Casey.
Something Irish with an apostrophe in it, anyway. “Zip it, baby girl!”
Willa bent  toward  Henry,  and  Henry recoiled  from her slightly, as  if her breath  were  bad.  “The  only
reason I let David drag  me back  here  is because  they are  going to  demolish this place!  Can  you say
wrecking ball, Henry? Surely you’re bright enough to get your head around that concept.”
“Make her stop!” Ruth cried, her voice muffled.
Willa leaned even closer, eyes bright in her narrow, pretty face. “And when the wrecking ball leaves and
the dump trucks haul away the crap that used to be this railway station—this old railway station—where
will you be?”
“Leave us alone, please,” Henry said.

“Henry—as the chorus girl said to the archbishop, denial is not a river in Egypt.”
Ursula Davis, who had disliked Willa from the first, stepped forward,  leading with her chin. “Fuck  off,
you troublesome bitch.”
Willa swung around. “Don’t any of you get it? You’re dead, we’re all dead, and the longer you stay  in
one place, the harder it’s going to be to ever go anywhere else!”
“She’s right,” David said.
“Yeah,  and  if  she  said  the  moon  was  cheese,  you’d  say  provolone,”  Ursula  said.  She  was  a  tall,
forbiddingly handsome woman of about 40. “Pardon my French, but she’s got you so pussy-whipped it
isn’t funny.”
Dudley let out that startling donkey bray again, and the Rhinehart woman began to sniffle.
“You’re upsetting the passengers,  you two.”  This was  Rattner,  the little conductor  with the apologetic
face.  He  hardly  ever  spoke.  David  blinked,  the  station  lensed  dark  and  moonlit  again  for  another
moment, and he saw that half of Rattner’s head was gone. The rest of his face had been burned black.
“They’re  going  to  demolish  this  place  and  you’ll  have  nowhere  to  go!”  Willa  cried.  “Fucking…
nowhere!” She dashed angry tears from her cheeks with both fists. “Why don’t you come to town with
us? We’ll show you the way. At least there are people… and lights… and music.”
“Mumma, I want to hear some music,” Pammy Andreeson said.
“Hush,” her mother said.
“If we were dead, we’d know it,” Bigger said.
“He’s got you there, son,” Dudley said, and dropped David a wink. “What happened to us? How did we
get dead?”
“I… don’t know,” David said. He looked at Willa. Willa shrugged her shoulders and shook her head.
“You see?” Rattner said. “It was a derailment. Happens… well, I was going to say all the time, but that’s
not true, even out here where the rail system needs a fair amount of work, but every  now and  then,  at
one of the junction points—”
“We faw down,” Pammy Andreeson said. David looked at her, really looked, and for a moment saw a
corpse,  burned  bald,  in a  rotting rag of a  dress.  “Down and  down  and  down.  Then—”  She  made  a
growling, rattling sound in her throat, put her small, grimy hands  together  and  tossed  them apart:  every
child’s sign language for explosion.
She seemed about to say something more, but before she could, her mother suddenly slapped her across
the face hard enough to  expose  her teeth  in a  momentary sneer  and  drive spit from the corner  of her
mouth. Pammy stared up for a  moment in shocked  disbelief, then broke  into a  strident,  one-note  wail
even more painful than her hopscotch chant.
“What do we know about lying, Pamela?” Georgia Andreeson  yelled, grabbing the child by her upper
arm. Her fingers sank in almost out of sight.

“She’s not lying!” Willa said. “We went off the tracks and into the gorge! Now I remember, and you do
too! Don’t you? Don’t you? It’s on your face! It’s on your fucking face!”
Without  looking  in  her  direction,  Georgia  Andreeson  flipped  Willa  the  bird.  Her  other  hand  shook
Pammy back and forth. David saw a child flop in one direction, a charred corpse in the other. What had
caught fire? Now  he remembered  the drop,  but what had  caught fire? He  didn’t  remember,  perhaps
because he didn’t want to remember.
“What do we know about lying?” Georgia Andreeson shouted.
“It’s wrong, Mama!” the child blubbered.
The woman dragged her off into the darkness, the child still screaming that one monotonous note.
There  was  a  moment  of  silence  in  their  wake—all  of  them  listening  to  Pammy  being  dragged  into
exile—and then Willa turned to David. “Had enough?”
“Yes,” he said. “Let’s go.”
“Don’t let the doorknob hitcha where the good Lord splitcha!” Biggers advised,  madly exuberant,  and
Dudley yodeled laughter.
David let Willa lead  him  toward  the  double  doors,  where  Phil  was  leaning  just  inside,  his  arms  still
crossed  on his chest.  Then David pulled free  of Willa’s hand and  went to  Helen Palmer sitting in the
corner,  rocking back  and  forth.  She  looked  up at  him with dark,  bewildered  eyes.  “We  got  fish  for
supper,” she said in what was little more than a whisper.
“I don’t know about that,” he said, “but you were right about the smell of the place. Old dirty crackers.”
He looked back and saw the rest of them staring at him and Willa in the moonlit dimness that could be
fluorescent light if you wanted it to be badly enough. “It’s the smell places get when they’ve been closed
up along time, I guess,” he said.
“Better buzz, cuz,” Phil Palmer said. “No one wants to buy what you’re selling.”
“Don’t I know it,” David said, and followed Willa into the moonlit dark. Behind him, like a rueful whisper
of wind, he heard Helen Palmer say, “First one t’ing an’ den anudder.”
The miles back  to  26  made  their score  nine for the night, but David wasn’t  a  bit tired.  He  supposed
ghosts didn’t get tired, just as they didn’t get hungry or thirsty. Besides, it was a different night. The moon
was full now, shining like a silver dollar high in the sky, and 26’s front parking was empty. In the gravel
lot around to the side, a few semis stood silent, and one rumbled sleepily with its running lights glowing.
The marquee  sign now  read:  COMING  THIS  WEEKEND  THE  NIGHTHAWKS  BRING  YOUR
HONEY SPEND YOUR MONEY.
“That’s cute,” Willa said. “Will you bring me, Wolf Frightener? Am I not your honey?”
“You are  and  I will,” David said.  “The question  is what do  we  do  now?  Because  the  honky-tonk  is
closed.”
“We go in anyway, of course,” she said.

“It’ll be locked up.”
“Not if we don’t want it to be. Perception, remember? Perception and expectation.”
He remembered, and when he tried the door, it opened. The barroom smells were still there, now mixed
with the pleasant odor of some pine-scented cleaner. The stage was empty and the stools  were  on the
bar with their legs sticking up, but the neon replica of the Wind River Range was still on, either because
the management left it that way after closing or because that was the way he and Willa wanted  it. That
seemed more likely. The dance floor seemed very big now that it was empty, especially with the mirror
wall to double it. The neon mountains shimmered upside down in its polished depths.
Willa breathed deep. “I smell beer and perfume,” she said. “A hot rod smell. It’s lovely.”
“You’re lovely,” he said.
She turned to him. “Then kiss me, cowboy.”
He kissed her there on the edge  of the dance  floor,  and  judging by what he was  feeling, love-making
wasn’t out of the question. Not at all.
She kissed both corners of his mouth, then stepped back. “Put a quarter in the jukebox,  would you? I
want to dance.”
David went over to the juke at the end of the bar, dropped a quarter and played D19—“Wasted Days
and Wasted  Nights,” the Freddy  Fender  version.  Out  in  the  parking  lot,  Chester  Dawson,  who  had
decided to lay over here a few hours before resuming his journey to Seattle  with a  load  of electronics,
raised his head, thinking he heard music, decided it was part of a dream he’d been having and went back
to sleep.
David  and  Willa  moved  slowly  around  the  empty  floor,  sometimes  reflected  in  the  mirror  wall  and
sometimes not.
“Willa—”
“Hush a little, David. Baby wants to dance.”
David hushed. He put his face in her hair and let the music take  him. He  thought they would stay  here
now,  and  that  from  time  to  time  people  would  see  them.  26  might  even  get  a  reputation  for  being
haunted, but probably not; people didn’t think of ghosts much while they were drinking, unless they were
drinking alone. Sometimes when they were closing up, the bartender and the last waitress (the one with
the most seniority, the one responsible for splitting the tips) might have an uneasy sense of being watched.
Sometimes they’d hear music even after the music had stopped, or catch movement in the mirror next to
the dance floor or the one in the lounge. Usually just from the tail of the eye.  David thought they could
have finished up in better places, but on the whole, 26 wasn’t bad. Until closing there were people. And
there would always be music.
He did wonder what would become of the others when the wrecking ball tore apart their illusion—and it
would. Soon. He thought of Phil Palmer trying to shield his terrified, howling wife from falling debris that
couldn’t hurt her because she was not, properly speaking, even there. He thought of Pammy Andreeson
cowering in her shrieking mother’s arms. Rattner, the soft-spoken conductor, saying, Just be calm, folks,
in a  voice that couldn’t  be  heard  over  the roar  of the  big  yellow  machines.  He  thought  of  the  book
salesman, Biggers, trying to run away on his bad leg, lurching and  finally falling while the wrecking ball

swung and the dozers snarled and bit and the world came down.
He liked to  think their train would come  before  then—that  their combined  expectation  would make  it
come—but he didn’t really believe it. He even considered the idea that the shock might extinguish them
and they’d simply whiff out like candle flames in a strong gust of wind, but he didn’t believe that, either.
He could see them too clearly after the bulldozers and dump trucks  and  back-end  loaders  were  gone,
standing by the rusty disused railway tracks in the moonlight while a wind blew down from the foothills,
whining around the mesa and beating at the broomgrass.  He  could  see  them huddled  together  under  a
billion High Country stars, still waiting for their train.
“Are you cold?” Willa asked him.
“No—why?”
“You shivered.”
“Maybe a goose walked over my grave,” he said. He closed his eyes, and they danced together on the
empty floor.  Sometimes they were  in the mirror, and  when they slipped  from  view  there  was  only  a
country song playing in an empty room lit by a neon mountain range.

