DR. COUNEY’S
ISLAND
 
Steven Popkes
 
 
“Dr. Couney ‘s Island” was purchased by Gardner Dozois, and appeared
in the December 1994 issue of Asimov’s, with an illustration by Laurie
Harden. Steven Popkes is not a prolific writer by the high-production
standards of the genre, but he has contributed a number of memorable
stories for the magazine, including “The Color Winter,” a Nebula finalist,
and his popular no-vella, “The Egg. “ His well-received first novel Caliban
Landing appeared in 1987, and was followed by an expansion to
novel-length of “The Egg,” called Slow Lightning. He was also part of the
Cambridge Writers’ Workshop project to produce science fiction
scenarios about the future of Boston, Massachusetts, that cumulated in
the 1994 anthology Future Boston.
 
Here he shows us that wherever the real Camelot might have been,
Camelot is also in our hearts.
 
* * * *
 
It was damned cold that morning. You never thought Coney Island would
ever be that cold. All you ever thought about the Island were the lights,
bright like Fourth of July sparklers, and the smell of crowds and spilled
beer, hot dogs and sau-erkraut. And it was funny, he mused for a long
minute, lying on his side on the frozen sand. Funny, you never remembered
the smell of the ocean but here it is, as sudden and surprising as
flashpowder: salt and the ripe stink of dirty water. What was the ocean more
than that?
 
Merlin rolled himself up and leaned back against the clap-board wall
of Dreamland—No it wasn’t. Dreamland burned down years ago, burned
down, oh the bright lights of that fire!, and was rebuilt by somebody new,
died a financial death and was buried in the middle of Steeplechase.
Where was he? He’d been nearly fifty when that happened. How old was
he now?—and looked out over the water. His stomach hurt, a hard,
unyielding knot. The flat land and calm sea looked as if they were drawn on

paper. It was early morning just before the sun rose and the sun’s breezes
bit, as small and sharp as small dogs. Merlin huddled in his torn coat at their
expecta-tion.
 
* * * *
 
(The beach on the Normandy coast was always cold. A hard wet sandy
beach that matched him, hardness for hardness, when he stepped off the
boat. A hardness in me at leaving. A hardness in me at being forced to
leave. Arthur, I thought. You’re on your own.)
 
He shook his head. He was trying to remember something. The
beach. He was somewhere on the beach—near Nathan’s down from the
boardwalk. They came here last night—who?
 
* * * *
 
Jimmy the Pinhead was lying next to where Merlin had been sleeping.
Merlin slapped him on the rump. “Wake up,” he said. Then coughed up a
fluid mess, spit it on the sand and eyed it curiously. He shivered as the sun
flared over the sea. Baths, he thought. I remember the baths—was that
ten?
 
Twenty years ago? Before John McKane died. Warm, they were. Hot.
Steamy.
 
“Wake up, damn it.” He kicked Jimmy viciously in the foot.
 
“Leave a sick man alone,” Jimmy groaned and pushed him away.
 
“We stay here much longer and we won’t be sick.” Merlin leaned over
him and shouted in his ear. “We’ll be dead!”
 
Jimmy put both hands over his ears and sat up. “You’re a filthy old
man.”
 
“You’re right about that.”
 
“You hurt my foot.”
 
“Stop whining or I’ll break your head.” Merlin shivered again. “We got
to get somewhere warm.”
 
“There any more liquor?”

 
Merlin stood and stretched, coughed again. “Yeah. French
champagne. Come on.”
 
He half led, half pushed Jimmy back up over the boardwalk and down
the alley towards Asa’s place. As the breeze rose Merlin felt even colder
and there were moments of sharp panic when he couldn’t seem to
remember how to breathe— leaning against the closed storefronts.
 
Jimmy waited for him, patient as a drafthorse. Finally, Mer-lin brought
them into the warm crook created by the space between Asa Moore’s
flower shop and Bond’s Nickel Beer.
 
“This is warm, Merle,” said Jimmy, sniffing the air. “Smells nice, too.”
 
Merlin didn’t answer. He huddled with his back against the brick wall of
the flower shop, feeling the warmth of the coal furnace seep slowly into
him. It loosened some glutinous sub-stances deep in his chest and he was
wracked with deep, painful coughs. Blackness edged his vision and
everything he saw had showers of colors. Merlin had a sudden image of
himself turned inside out. Then, the coughing passed and he felt the cold
mentholated air filling his lungs.
 
* * * *
 
(The air in Salem had been sweet, each breath like a labored symphony as
I struggled to lift my chest one more time. Trapped with a mountain lying
across me. I wanted to cry out that I was no witch. Cry out that I was, after
all—just for a clean death. Either admission would destroy my children.
Instead, I stayed silent, trying to breathe, wishing I could just die. I heard a
voice ask me to confess—to what? Ravings? Had I breath and inclination I
might have laughed. Had my body less strength I might have died right
then. Neither happened. Only my breath, sucked in against too much weight
and leaving too quickly.) 
 
What was it he was trying to remember?
 
* * * *
 
Someone took his arm, placed it across his shoulder and hoisted him to his
feet.
 
“Stupid,” Asa Moore said as he helped Merlin into his shop. “You
were always stupid. Now no better than when you were a kid.”

 
The sunlight seemed brighter in the greenhouse in the back of Asa’s
shop, reflected from rows of lilies and camellias, budding now but not yet
bloomed. And it was steamy warm as when John McKane had taken Merlin
and other ballot box enforcers to the baths on the night of the Coolidge
election as a reward for faithfulness.
 
* * * *
 
(Steamy, as when I’d sat with the Emperor and we’d been talking about
what to do with the Senate. “They’d be useful as goats. Not otherwise,” he’d
said, and I had agreed.)
 
Asa took Merlin’s head in his hands and brought his face close.
 
“It’s me, George. Asa Moore.”
 
“I know you. I was just thinking.”
 
Asa let him go. “Good. You get crazier every year.”
 
Merlin shook his head. “I’m not crazy.”
 
“Of course not.” Asa spun around and grabbed Jimmy by the neck.
“Damn you, don’t touch the flowers!”
 
Jimmy snatched his hands back and held them under his arms. “I’m
sorry. I was just trying to smell them.”
 
“Go sit over there, next to the furnace.”
 
Jimmy sat on the bench in the comer and in a few moments was
asleep.
 
Asa snorted. “At least, he’s easy.”
 
Merlin nodded, sleepy himself. The smell of the budding camellias
had a hypnotic effect on him. “Best pinhead act on the island.”
 
Asa smiled sourly. “Such a great achievement.” He rubbed his chest.
“It’s too much work carrying you in here. My heart isn’t what it used to be. I
have to work too hard as it is— two thousand carnations. Three hundred
lilies. A hundred ca-mellias. Them, I have to take care of. Otherwise, I don’t
make it through the year. You, I leave to freeze next time.”

 
“Guinevere loved camellias. I did, too, for that matter.”
 
“Shut up with that crap. You can stay here and keep warm but I don’t
have to listen to that King Arthur crap.”
 
“He’s Merlin,” said Jimmy, suddenly awake. “He told me.”
 
“Crap!” Asa stood up, short and furious. “His name is George
Thomas and he grew up in Gravesend the same as I did, before it had
hotels or amusement parks. We fought over the same girl. We worked for
McKane together, keeping his tax collectors and prostitutes in line.
George’s been drinking himself dead since before you were born. I’ve
seen it for forty years right into the middle of this goddamned depression.
You think I don’t know who he is now!”
 
Chastened, Jimmy huddled back down on the bench.
 
“And you,” Asa said, turning to Merlin. “Don’t tell me flowers. You
know how I know you’re crazy? ‘Cause there were no camellias in King
Arthur’s time—not there. Camel-lias aren’t native to England. A goddamned
florist knows these things. They were brought to Europe. Long, long after
your great king!”
 
* * * *
 
(Short, like Keaton is short, standing on the field when the house fell down,
so convinced of his own skills, of his plan-ning, that when he stood there,
serene as a saint, I had to look away. I’ve seen the last of him, I thought.
He’s dead, sure. And we all turned away—even his wife, a slight and pretty
thing—and heard the crash and turned back and he was stand-ing, looking
at us. And in that moment, we could all read his mind as sure as if he’d
shouted at us: “Did you get it? Was the camera rolling?” And all we could
think was, “How did you do that?”)
 
That’s not it. It was something else.
 
* * * *
 
“Some other flower, then. Something like camellias. Asa, you don’t
understand.” Merlin rubbed his face with his hands, suddenly aware of the
smell of his clothes, the ancient sea smell of his skin. How much could Asa
know? Merlin re-membered listening to pronouncements and whimperings
across the night wind when he was a child. Listening, rapt, to everyone still

living, to those that had died. Was there any wonder he was confused? “It’s
like,” he groped for words, feeling the leftover remains of alcohol like wool
in his thoughts. “It’s like we can all remember each other. Like
remembering dreams.”
 
“Crap!” shouted Asa, beating the air with his hands. “You started this
crap when McKane went to jail and we had to hide out in Jersey. It was crap
then and crap now.”
 
“He’s all the time, fulla’ crap,” came a thin voice behind Asa.
 
Asa turned around and let his arms fall, rubbed his chest with one
hand and nodded. “Yeah. Hi, Joe.”
 
Joe Littlefinger stepped down into the greenhouse, smoking a cigar
as thick as his wrist. Joe’s wrist, like the rest of him, was diminutive. He was
slightly over three feet tall, but every inch of him was dressed impeccably:
vest, jacket and pants, gold watch chain and derby. He knocked ash off the
end of his cigar into one of the lily pots.
 
Asa reached down and gently plucked the cigar from his hands.
“Later, when you go outside. I have enough problems without you killing my
flowers.” He reached through the door and placed the cigar outside.
 
Joe nodded, imperturbable. “Sure, Asa. I’m going up to Doctor
Couney’s place to look at the kids. Any of you guys want to go along?’’
 
Merlin looked at him. “They’re closed up. No tours until spring.”
 
Joe shrugged. “I’m feeling generous today. One of the nurses will let
us look at them for a half a buck each.”
 
“I don’t even have that.”
 
“I’ll spring for everybody.” Joe waved his hand at them.
 
Asa had flowers to take care of and Jimmy had fallen asleep again.
As Merlin followed Joe out the door, Asa grabbed his arm.
 
“Don’t make me bring you in again, George,” he said. “You come on
in and sleep next to the furnace. You’ll die if you stay out there.”
 
“Thanks, Asa.”
 

Asa looked deep into his face, grimaced. “You won’t do it. I’ll find you
huddled next to the wall outside, dead, one day.”
 
Outside, the cold had sharpened but with the sun stronger now, it
didn’t feel quite so close. Joe retrieved his cigar care-fully from the stoop
and lit it, puffed it in glorious satisfac-tion.
 
“Life’s worth living if y’got a good cigar, eh?” Joe tried to blow a
smoke ring. The light breeze defeated him and he shrugged.
 
Doctor Martin Couney’s Premature Baby Incubators had once been a
featured attraction of Dreamland. But Dreamland was gone and the babies
remained, now down the Bowery from Asa’s shop. Joe and Merlin walked
quickly to get out of the cold.
 
“Say, Merle,” said Joe matter-of-factly as they walked. “Jimmy tells
me there’s something to this magic stuff of yours.”
 
“There is no such thing as magic,” said Merlin shortly. A sudden
breeze down the street made him shiver. “I know.”
 
“Not the way he tells it.”
 
“Jimmy’s a pinhead.”
 
Joe nodded. “What’s the truth, then?”
 
Merlin shrugged. “I don’t know.”
 
“Come on. Don’t clam up on me.”
 
“I don’t know what it is. We remember each other. That’s all. That’s all
I’ve ever said. Asa thinks I’m crazy.” Merlin stopped in the middle of the
road and stared down at Joe. “Do you think I’m crazy?”
 
Joe inspected the end of his cigar. “I think you were smart when you
were with McKane and then you started drinking too much and talking too
much. Now you’re a bum.”
 
Merlin laughed. “That’s honest.” He stood up straight and looked
around him. The sky was a light turquoise and there were gulls flying
overhead on sun-gilded wings. He held his arms wide. “I remember Arthur
as a child—when the Ro-mans left England, running off when the King fell.
People dying—a thousand men in an hour. Can you imagine that? I ran. I

remember the Romans, marching up big, wide roads-better roads than we
got here, f’Christ’s sake—into France. But we didn’t call it France then. I
don’t remember what we called it. But I remember watching them. I
remember march-ing with them. I remember marching with the Redcoats
through Concord—I remember a lot of marching. I think I remember the
Pharaohs—but it gets hazy that far back. Like remembering when you were
three. I remember—”
 
“Right, Merle. Come on.” Joe took the edge of his coat and started to
pull him down the street. “Let’s get out of the damned cold.”
 
“I remember it all.”
 
“Yeah.” Joe spit on the ground. “Right. I should have known. Asa said
you grew up together as kids. He says he should have known it then: you’re
crazy as they come.” He strode ahead quickly, his feet striking the ground
like small hammers.
 
“I said I remember it.”
 
“Just like I remember being that son-of-a-bitch Charlie Stratton, too,”
said Joe viciously. “And his bitch Lavinia. I’m thirty-eight inches. Four too
many inches and fifty years too damned late. I could have made meat out
of him. He was so genteel. I can sing. I can dance. I can play the fucking
piano. You know how hard that is with these fingers?” He held up his stubby
hand.
 
Merlin stared at him, bewildered. “What are you talking about?”
 
“I’m talking about show business, knucklehead.” Joe slapped his arm.
“’Tom Thumb is my stage name,’ he said. Like there was something else. I
had my name changed. I don’t give a cobbler’s piss I was born John
Quincy Armont. I’m Joseph Littlefinger now.”
 
“What—”
 
Joe stopped in front of him and in a sudden unexpected display of
strength grabbed his jacket and pulled Merlin to his knees. “I’m talking
movies! Jimmy said one of these ghosts of yours makes fucking movies!
In California!”
 
“Christ,” moaned Merlin, and started laughing. He fell backwards into
the street, sat down heavily. “You want an introduction.”
 

“Yes, goddamn it. Stop laughing.”
 
But Merlin was coughing and spitting and laughing on the ground.
 
“Stop laughing,” Joe said again, took a long pull on his cigar and
breathed out a great cloud of smoke. “It’s a stupid idea.”
 
Merlin gasped for breath and sat up. “Not really. It just doesn’t work
that way. I don’t know any of these people. I just remember them—as if
things happened to me. I don’t even know their names.”
 
“Right. You’re a bum and a drunk and an ancient magi-cian.” Joe
chuckled wryly. “But even a blind pig in shit will find an acorn sometime.
And like the hedgehog said to the hairbrush, you can try anything once. Get
up. Let’s go see the babies.”
 
Merlin felt obscurely stung to be so blithely cast aside. “Maybe I can
figure out who he is. He works with Buster Keaton.”
 
“Never mind.”
 
“We’re all related somehow—maybe we had the same an-cestor
somewhere.”
 
“Adam No-navel, no doubt.”
 
“Look, I didn’t ask to have this happen to me,” Merlin shouted at him.
“Did I? I liked John McKane. I was happy working for him. This stuff eats
away at you. It’s not my fault.”
 
Joe gently took his arms. “‘Suffer the fools,’ they say. Come on,
Merle. John McKane’s been dead for thirty years. Coney’s answer to Boss
Tweed died before I was born. And Midget City was never what it was
cracked up to be. It’s been a whole new world for forty years.”
 
“You think I’m crazy.”
 
“Who isn’t? I come up to your waist. Makes me a little crazy, too.”
 
Merlin still felt sore. “Then, how come you’re always in-viting me
along?”
 
Joe grinned at him. “How tall am I?”
 

“How the hell should I know?”
 
“Exactly,” said Joe. “Come on. Let’s go see the babies.”
 
* * * *
 
(A baby is always small. The hand cradles the child’s head easily. Perhaps
God shaped men’s hands for this purpose and this purpose alone, I
thought, holding my son in my arms. All other possible uses for them are
but happy accidents. Lie still, little one, I croon. Lie still and sleep. Perhaps
some day you will be a great carpenter.) 
 
What was it he was trying to remember?
 
* * * *
 
There were six incubators in the room, large white enamel and glass
cabinets, each with its impossibly small infant con-tents. Here was a little
girl, her hands the size of thumbnails. Next to her was a bluish boy, his
chest no bigger around than a cup, struggling for breath. The breath goes
in, the breath goes out.
 
The nurse smiled at Joe and looked dubiously at Merlin, but let them
both in when Joe gave her an additional quarter. They walked past the
different children until Joe stopped be-fore one small, swollen-eyed child.
 
“You have to meet Billy,” he whispered. “Billy Watterson, meet Merlin
the Magician. Merle, meet Billy.”
 
“Hello, Billy,” whispered Merlin. Billy was no more than skin covering
cords and veins. He was smaller than the others, no bigger than a Nathan
frank. Merlin pressed his face against the glass so he could hear the boy’s
tiny breath. Straining, he heard the faintest rustle of leaves, the mere ghost
of breathing.
 
“I like the tyke,” said Joe softly. “He’s less than two pounds—but
Couney says you can’t tell what he really weighed when he was born. They
lose weight so fast, he said.”
 
“Mister Billy Watterson, welcome to Coney Island.”
 
They stood together in silence for a long time.
 
“You know,” Joe said slowly. “This is his island.”

 
“Billy?”
 
“No. This is Doctor Couney’s island.” Joe put his hand on the glass
and leaned forward to see if the baby would respond. The baby seemed
too intent on breathing to pay at-tention. “You and I are just so much air.
McKane died. Tweed died. Dreamland died. Luna Park’s dying.
Steeple-chase will die someday. And no one will remember them or us. But
they’ll remember Martin Couney and these little in-cubators. And the babies
that live here and grow up, strong and tall. People will remember them and
forget us.”
 
Merlin shook his head. “No. It won’t be like that. They’ll remember the
lights and the rides and the spectacles and the fat ladies and the strong
men and the beaches and the crowds and Nathan’s hot dogs and the freak
shows. But Couney and his babies they’ll forget.”
 
“You’re a drunken bum,” Joe snarled at him softly. “What the hell do
you know?”
 
Merlin grinned and tapped his skull. “Crazy, too. Merlin has second
sight, doesn’t he?”
 
The nurse came in suddenly. She pointed at Merlin. “You have to
leave. Doctor Couney knows Joe, but he doesn’t know you. He doesn’t like
to have his nursery cluttered with smelly, drunken bums. Now get out of
here.”
 
“Who’s smelly?” chuckled Merlin.
 
“Go on,” Joe pushed him. “I’ll catch up to you later.”
 
Outside, the air had warmed and it was almost noon. He wandered
over behind Nathan’s to rummage in the backalley cans for lunch. He was
lucky. There was a half pound of moldy cheese and some buns only partly
soggy. Sometimes he wondered if the cooks at Nathan’s were leaving food
out on purpose. He walked back up Twelfth Street and back under the
boardwalk to eat. Merlin scraped the cheese against the corner of a brick
piling and tossed the wet portion of the bread out to the gulls. In a small
protected area, the sun shone on him and reflected from the walls and he
was almost cozily warm. He savored the cheese and the bread and the
resulting full stomach, and drowsily asked the air for a bottle of wine. The air
was unmoved and he fell asleep.
 

Some long time later, he felt a rough hand shaking him rudely awake.
Merlin sat up, blinked several times and rubbed the gum from his eyes. It
was Joe, sitting on the sand. Word-lessly, Joe handed a bottle of cheap
brandy over to him.
 
“What’s the occasion?” asked Merlin. “Not that there needs to be
one.”
 
“We are drinking,” said Joe ponderously, “to the late Wil-liam
Watterson.”
 
It was a moment before Merlin knew who Joe was talking about. “Oh,
no,” he said when he understood.
 
Joe nodded. His clothes were dirty from walking under the boardwalk
and there were deep gouges in the leather of his shoes. Joe did not seem
to notice. “Mister Watterson, after a valiant effort at the very basics of living,
quit this mortal coil about an hour ago. Doctor Couney tried to persuade the
young man to stay but to no avail. Mister Watterson was adamant. This was
no world for him.”
 
All Merlin could think of was the tiny sound of the baby’s breathing,
imagining the faint, almost imperceptible cough, the deepening strain and
then a deep sigh and silence. He rubbed his face with his hand, then tipped
the bottle up and drank. “To young Billy.”
 
“To young Billy. We hardly knew you,” echoed Joe as he took back
the bottle. “Christ, Merle. He was so little and he tried so hard. I never knew
anything so small could work so hard just at breathing.” Joe looked as if he
was going to weep, as if, for a moment, he was a child himself. “The kid
deserved a rattle, or a ball—or at least a tit, like a normal kid. Not a glass
box and a little coffin. The best we can give him is a good drunk.”
 
* * * *
 
(As I lay on the bed, each breath was life bubbling to me through the fluid in
my lungs. I was drowning—hadn’t I heard once that drowning was an easy
way to die? The man who wrote that was lost in an opium dream. “Gladly
live, gladly die...” Did I write that? I never dreamed the last moments would
be so hard. The body doesn’t die easily. It dies hard—-it fights for every
breath, every heartbeat. Until, like coal burning, the ashes overwhelm it.) 
 
That was almost it.
 

* * * *
 
Merlin found tears on his own cheeks and wiped them away. He sniffed and
that brought on another coughing attack, each building from within to an
explosive climax, like nitroglyc-erin in his lungs, priming the next until there
was no breath at all, just one long ragged wheeze.
 
Joe held him as he fought for breath. “Don’t die on me now, Merle,”
Joe moaned. “I just couldn’t take it. I swear, I just couldn’t take it.”
 
The cold air finally filled his lungs and he breathed care-fully, as a
thirsty man is careful with water. When he could, Merlin sat up and drank
some of the brandy, feeling the warmth in his throat soothe his lungs, put a
fire in his belly and a rubbery strength in his arms and legs.
 
“I left Jimmy over at Asa’s shop. I got to go over and check on him.
Asa’s always scared he’ll break something.” Merlin stood up and dizzily
leaned against the piling.
 
“Yeah.” Joe drained the bottle and threw it viciously against the piling.
The glass exploded and Joe stared at the wet spot. “Poor little
son-of-a-bitch. I’m going to go home and get so drunk I can’t sit in a chair.”
He looked up to Merlin. “You come on by if you don’t want to sleep under
the boardwalk. You always were good drinking company. Good company all
around.”
 
Merlin looked down at the sudden compliment. “Yeah. We’ll see. I
don’t know where I’ll end up.”
 
“You think about it. It gets damned cold out here.” Joe straightened
his suit, pulled a cigar out of his pocket and lit it. The fetid smell almost
made Merlin throw up.
 
Joe tipped his hat to Merlin and started walking down the beach
towards Steeplechase. Merlin watched him for a mo-ment, then ducked
back under the boardwalk to Twelfth Street towards Asa’s shop.
 
* * * *
 
(It was a measure of my stature as a physician that I would be called to treat
someone such as Harry Houdini. The escape artist had proven difficult to
treat not because of the injury— which was, in fact, terminal—but because
of Houdini’s per-sonality, which I found abrasive and made worse by his
great pain. Still, it was hard not to feel pity as the man was pulled inexorably

towards death. Houdini’s pact with his wife, to come back after death, struck
me as pitiful.
 
“There is no magic,” Houdini whispered when we were alone. He
looked about the room as if his wife would hear him.
 
“I know,” I said, remembering everyone who remembered me. “More
than you do.”)
 
I know I’m looking for something. I know that. Desper-ately,
completely. I want to know what it is.
 
* * * *
 
He met Jimmy on the Bowery next to where the corner of Dreamland used
to be.
 
“Hi, Merle,” Jimmy said affably. He jerked his head to-wards Asa’s
flower shop. “He didn’t look too good, so I thought I’d go home.”
 
Merlin stared for a moment towards the shop, then searched Jimmy’s
slack face. “How’d he look?”
 
“Real tired, Merle.” Jimmy shrugged. “I thought Gunther’d give me
some wine if I came back on my own. He was real pissed the last time he
found me under the boardwalk with you.”
 
“Okay. You go on.” He pushed Jimmy up the street. “I was just
coming to get you.”
 
“You have any wine?’’ asked Jimmy wistfully.
 
“Not a drop. But Joe does.”
 
Jimmy nodded. “I’ll go see him.”
 
With that, he turned and walked steadily up the street, plac-ing his feet
with careful exactness. Merlin, watching him, was reminded of the time he
and Jimmy had gotten drunk and the pinhead had fallen and broken his
knee. Jimmy must have decided to be more careful from that, or had it
pointed out to him. It wasn’t clear if Jimmy was smart enough to figure it out
for himself.
 
Asa had fallen asleep in his chair in the shop. His broad face lay on

his chest like a deflated child’s ball and snored faintly through his nose. His
face was gray and chalky and he looked shrunken in his sleep, as if pulling
away from a deep and abiding pain. Asa’s heart had been troubling him for
over ten years and Merlin knelt next to him and peered closely, trying to see
if Asa’s heart had begun to fail at last.
 
* * * *
 
(Arthur had already heard the songs being sung about him as he lay on the
bed. The King looked bad. His face was white and the continual, constant
pain had given his voice a whim-pering quaver that I hated. He hated it more
than I, especially the craven sound that lurked in it when he asked for drugs.
 
“I never wanted to die,” he said through clenched teeth. “Always, I
feared it.”
 
“No man is different,” I said and leaned close to him, cradled his head
against my breast. Once he had taken plea-sure in that touch but now it was
mere consolation.
 
“You cannot cure me, eh? Not even of the pain?” He tried to chuckle
but it sounded bitter. “You are not much of a witch.”
 
“No, my love,” I said, looking down into his eyes. “I never was.”
 
“Give me another damned potion then.”
 
I held his head as he sipped it.
 
“It is spring,” he said after a moment, as if that were some great
surprise. “Can you smell the camellias?”
 
He did not speak again and soon after we laid him amidst the flowers
he loved.)
 
* * * *
 
“Maybe they weren’t camellias,” Merlin muttered under his breath. “Just
because I remember them there doesn’t mean they weren’t there, does it?”
Or did it? He remembered the smell strongly, as strongly as he could smell
it here, now, in the greenhouse. A mistake in memory, maybe? Did that turn
the whole tapestry of mind into rotting cloth?
 
The flower smell in the greenhouse was overpowering. Asa did not

rouse as Merlin watched him. For the space of a hundred breaths, Merlin
remembered his own life, not the others. Remembered he and Asa
growing up in Gravesend, growing corn and squash, watching as the first
hotels were built down on the beach, watching Norton build his bar and
gambling den and begin the building of Coney Island. He remembered the
whores on Sheepshead Bay and the night John Y. McKane tried to keep his
empire against the entire state of New York by protecting the ballot boxes
with a mob of Irish thugs. Merlin had been there, had wielded a club against
the state-appointed voting supervisors. So had Asa. And hiding up in
Harlem for two months waiting to get caught as McKane’s trial dragged on
and on. Impatient, run-ning from New York into New Jersey, waiting again,
follow-ing the trial, following the hearsay up and down the coast, trying to
find out if it was safe to go home. He remembered working with Asa
bucking hay on a horse farm, telling him one day in a moment of weakness
about the voices and flinch-ing away at the confusion in Asa’s voice. Then,
later, when they were both drunk, trying to explain. He’d been trying ever
since.
 
His memories since McKane were faded like old cotton, the past
bright as flowers. Even so, Asa was always there. Asa and his carnations,
caught up in the idea down in Jersey and coming home to make it happen.
Marrying, birthing, dy-ing, all those things mixed together in Asa’s life and
Merlin watched it from under the boardwalk, like some ancient
bridge-confined troll, watching people glitter through the planks, the light of
the world reduced to slits. Asa slept. His breathing was labored. Stealthily,
Merlin unbuttoned Asa’s shirt and rested his hand on the bare skin. A warm
smell compounded of earth and sweat escaped from the cloth.
 
Now, he prayed. If there is no magic, there can be no harm done in
this. But if there is—and my life says there might be—heal this heart. Take
my own heart for his. I never thought there was a God as the priests told
me. Prove me wrong this once.
 
Out beyond him, residing in the ether like small eddies in a great river,
he felt them there, dead and living. He listened to them for a sign, a hint of
what to do. All he heard was the sound of the sea. It was as if he were
standing in the water with high tide rushing past him, eyes closed, hands in
the ocean, overwhelmed, and when the tide had turned, he looked down in
his hands to see what had been left him.
 
* * * *
 
(At last, I felt something give inside of me. The breath went out, the last of
the good Salem air, and did not come back. And for a long, suspended

moment, as I waited for it to re-turn, knowing it would not, I realized that
which had given way was life, and with the life the pain. There was no pain in
dying. There was only the pain of holding onto life. I must remember this, I
thought in sudden fever. I must remember.) 
 
I remembered now.
 
* * * *
 
Merlin pulled his hand away from Asa’s chest and carefully and gently
replaced the cloth. He sat back and watched him for a long time.
 
Asa roused and Wearily looked around the room. His gaze fell on
Merlin. “Hey there.” He straightened up. “I wasn’t feeling too good so I sat
down. I didn’t mean to take a nap. What time is it?”
 
Merlin shrugged. “I don’t know. It’s late. It’ll be dark soon. How do you
feel now?”
 
Asa stretched experimentally. “Better, I think. I don’t feel any pain,
anyway. For me that’s good news. But then, it comes and goes. You don’t
look so good.”
 
Merlin shrugged again. “There’s nothing new in that.” He stood up and
swayed a moment, felt his heart stab with a sudden pain.
 
“Are you okay?” Asa stood up and steadied him.
 
Merlin nodded. Smiled. “Yeah. I’m fine. I think I’ll go down to the
beach. I like the water.”
 
Asa scowled. “You’ll end up getting drunk down there and freezing to
death. If it doesn’t happen tonight, it’ll happen later. Come on back here.
Where it’s warm.”
 
Merlin shook his head.
 
“Christ! All those famous people you say you remember. Isn’t there
one ordinary person that has some sense?”
 
He chuckled, suddenly weary. “I’m a bum at Coney Island, Asa. What
do you want me to do? What the hell else have I got?”
 
Asa softened. “Come on back. It’s cold out there.”

 
He looked at Asa, watched the small face as wrinkled as an old apple.
“Maybe you’re right, Asa.”
 
Asa took him by the arms. “You aren’t a young man, George. Come
back here and stay warm.”
 
George. He tasted the word. It had been a long time since he had
thought of himself with that name. “Maybe I will. But I still want to go down to
the beach for a while.”
 
“You wouldn’t disappoint an old man, would you?”
 
“Not if I can help it.”
 
The wind died as the sun faded behind Steeplechase. The longest
shadow was that of the parachute drop, two hundred feet tall, a long,
skeletal umbrella. Dark now against the light. Lit again, Merlin knew, in only a
few months.
 
He stood in the middle of the beach and watched the board-walk turn
charcoal black until there were only the silhouettes of things: the roller
coaster, the shuttered freak shows, the Ferris wheel. Behind them, he could
see at that moment, the lost towers, minarets and battlements of Luna Park
and Dreamland, and behind them, again, the lost palaces and cas-tles of
Africa and Araby. Behind them, at last, he could see the memories of his
own life, all of them, and adding to them now his own.
 
Pain shot through him, lancing his life like a scalpel across a boil. He
coughed so long and hard that there was thunder in his ears and he forgot
how to breathe.
 
There is no pain in dying, he remembered, proud that this salient fact
had stayed with him. And he held this thought as the dark came toward him.
 
That night, across the cold ether of the world, there were the faint and
intermittent sounds of mourning and remem-bered death. And, if one were
quick, the smell of camellias.
 
* * * *

