The Story
of Medieval England:
From King Arthur
to the Tudor Conquest
Jennifer Paxton, Ph.D.

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westﬁ elds Boulevard, Suite 500
Chantilly, Virginia 20151-2299
Phone: 1-800-832-2412
Fax: 703-378-3819
www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2010
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of
The Teaching Company.

i
Jennifer Paxton, Ph.D. 
Professorial Lecturer in History
Georgetown University
P
rofessor Jennifer Paxton received her 
undergraduate training at Yale University, 
where she earned honors in History and 
received the Henry Ellsworth Prize for her senior 
essay. She graduated summa cum laude and Phi 
Beta Kappa in 1987 and was awarded a Mellon 
Fellowship in the Humanities to pursue her 
doctorate at Harvard University, where she worked under the supervision 
of Professor Thomas N. Bisson. She did her dissertation research at the 
University of Cambridge under the support of a Frank Knox Memorial 
Traveling Fellowship. She taught at Harvard University and at The Catholic 
University of America before completing her Ph.D. in 1999. For over a 
decade, she has been a Professorial Lecturer in History at Georgetown 
University. She is currently a Visiting Assistant Professor at the Catholic 
University of America as well.
At Georgetown, Professor Paxton has taught both halves of the medieval 
European survey, and she designed a course on medieval Irish history that 
regularly draws high enrollments. She also teaches the history of Western 
monasticism from the 3rd to the 13th centuries, and she lectures regularly in 
both the freshman research seminar program and the core humanities course 
for the doctorate in Liberal Studies. At Catholic University, she teaches both 
graduate and undergraduate courses in medieval English and Irish history.
Professor Paxton’s research focuses on England in the period between the 
reign of King Alfred and the late 12th century, particularly the intersection 
between the authority of church and state and the representation of the past 
in historical texts, especially those produced by religious communities. She 
is currently completing a book entitled Chronicle and Community in Twelfth-
Century England (under contract to Oxford University Press), a study of 
how monastic historians shaped their narratives to project present polemical 
concerns onto the past. She has published articles in various edited volumes 

ii
and journals, including The Haskins Society Journal (for one of which she 
was co-winner of the Dennis Bethell Memorial Prize for best article) and 
Anglo-Norman Studies.
In addition to her teaching responsibilities, Professor Paxton is past 
conference director for the Charles Homer Haskins Society, a scholarly 
society dedicated to the study of the Anglo-Norman realms in the central 
Middle Ages. She lectures regularly on medieval history at the Foreign 
Service Institute in Arlington, Virginia, and has been invited to speak on 
British history at the Smithsonian Institution and the Shakespeare Theatre in 
Washington DC. Ŷ

iii
Table of Contents
LECTURE GUIDES
INTRODUCTION
Professor Biography ............................................................................i
Course Scope .....................................................................................1
LECTURE 1
From Britannia to Britain .....................................................................5
LECTURE 2
Roman Britain and the Origins of King Arthur.....................................9
LECTURE 3
The Early Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms ....................................................13
LECTURE 4
The Conversion of the Anglo-Saxons ...............................................17
LECTURE 5
Work and Faith in Anglo-Saxon England ..........................................21
LECTURE 6
The Viking Invasions ........................................................................26
LECTURE 7
Alfred the Great ................................................................................30
LECTURE 8
The Government of Anglo-Saxon England .......................................35
LECTURE 9
The Golden Age of the Anglo-Saxons ..............................................40
LECTURE 10
The Second Viking Conquest ...........................................................44

Table of Contents
iv
LECTURE 11
The Norman Conquest  ....................................................................48
LECTURE 12
The Reign of William the Conqueror ................................................53
LECTURE 13
ConÀ ict and Assimilation...................................................................58
LECTURE 14
Henry I—The Lion of Justice ............................................................63
LECTURE 15
The Anarchy of Stephen’s Reign ......................................................67
LECTURE 16
Henry II—Law and Order..................................................................71
LECTURE 17
Henry II—The Expansion of Empire .................................................76
LECTURE 18
Courtly Love .....................................................................................80
LECTURE 19
Richard the Lionheart and the Third Crusade ..................................84
LECTURE 20
King John and the Magna Carta .......................................................89
LECTURE 21
Daily Life in the 13th Century .............................................................94
LECTURE 22
The Disastrous Reign of Henry III ....................................................98
LECTURE 23
The Conquests of Edward I ............................................................103

Table of Contents
v
LECTURE 24
Edward II—Defeat and Deposition .................................................108
LECTURE 25
Edward III and the Hundred Years’ War .........................................113
LECTURE 26
The Flowering of Chivalry ...............................................................118
LECTURE 27
The Black Death .............................................................................123
LECTURE 28
The Peasants’ Revolt of 1381 ........................................................127
LECTURE 29
Chaucer and the Rise of English ....................................................132
LECTURE 30
The Deposition of Richard II ...........................................................137
LECTURE 31
Daily Life in the 15th Century ...........................................................142
LECTURE 32
Henry V and the Victory at Agincourt ..............................................147
LECTURE 33
Henry VI—Defeat and Division .......................................................152
LECTURE 34
The Wars of the Roses ...................................................................157
LECTURE 35
Richard III—Betrayal and Defeat ....................................................162
LECTURE 36
England in 1485..............................................................................167

Table of Contents
vi
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Timeline ..........................................................................................172
Glossary .........................................................................................183
Bibliography ....................................................................................193

1
The Story of Medieval England:
From King Arthur to the Tudor Conquest
Scope:
D
uring the 1,000 years between the end of the Roman occupation of 
Britain and the Wars of the Roses, England emerged as the dominant 
political entity on the island of Britain, aided largely by geography, 
which favored the broad, fertile plains of the south and east over the more 
rugged terrain of the so-called Celtic fringe in the north and west. The 
development of the English government produced a country that was more 
orderly and more responsive to public opinion than any other state in Europe. 
The achievements of England’s monarchy and of its critics, who continually 
spurred it toward acknowledging the will of the people, laid the foundation 
for the powerful state that would found the American colonies in the 17th 
century and dominate the globe in the 18th and 19th. But the achievement did 
not belong to rulers and barons alone. As we follow the birth and growth of 
the English state, we will meet not just the kings and queens of the central 
political narrative but also the ordinary men and women who lived through 
this millennium of change.
As unlikely as it may seem, a uni¿ ed English kingdom was the product of 
the chaos of repeated barbarian invasions. The ¿ rst invaders were Germanic 
tribes from the European mainland in the 5th century. These were followed 
by Vikings from Scandinavia in the 9th century, and ¿ nally in 1066 by the 
most successful conquerors of all, the Normans, under their duke, William. 
After the Norman Conquest, two main questions in English political life 
remained constant for the next several centuries, and they often overlapped: 
Who would be the king (or queen), and how would he (or she) get along with 
the great lords of the realm? Strong rulers such as William the Conqueror 
(1066–1087) and his son, Henry I (1100—1135), were able to rule without 
challenge, but weaker kings, particularly those with shaky claims to the 
throne, often had to face challenges by rival claimants or by groups of barons 
who were critical of the way the realm was being governed. King Stephen 
(1135–1154) was nearly unseated by his cousin, Matilda, and the misrule 

2
Scope
by King John (1199–1216) drove a coalition of his barons to invite a French 
prince to take the throne in his stead.
The fact is, English kings often provoked their barons to rebellion. Kings 
were notoriously short of money, and the best source of money was the 
barons. When demands for taxation became excessive or were perceived 
as arbitrary, the barons fought back. Their aims were to restrict the king’s 
abilities to extract money from them, as well as his ability to prosecute them 
if they refused to comply. Beginning with the Magna Carta, signed by King 
John in 1215, two principles were enshrined in English law: The king could 
not raise taxes without the consent of the leading men of the realm, and those 
accused of crimes had the right to trial by their peers. These provisions led 
directly to the creation of Parliament. At ¿ rst, under Henry III, Parliament 
was a very informal body; when Henry’s excesses provoked his barons to 
rebellion in 1258, their leader, Simon de Montfort, summoned the ¿ rst formal 
Parliament, comprising not only the barons but elected representatives 
from every region of England. From this time forward, Parliament was an 
increasingly important ¿ xture in the political life of England. 
The series of violent clashes between kings and their barons did not cease 
with the creation of Parliament, however. In the 14th century, two English 
kings, Edward II (1307–1327) and Richard II (1377–1399), were deposed 
and met horrible deaths at the hands of their rivals. But the most spectacular 
conÀ ict over who would rule England unfolded over a 30-year period in 
the 15th century (1455–1485), when two rival branches of the royal house, 
divided by personal interest (and to a certain extent by policy), fought for the 
throne in Wars of the Roses. When the conÀ ict ended with the death of King 
Richard III’s at Bosworth Field, the Middle Ages ended, and the modern 
age of English politics began, in which the monarch was truly beholden to 
the people.
This shift in English politics was the fruit of social and economic 
developments throughout the Middle Ages. Life in England in the period 
of the early Anglo-Saxon settlements was indeed nasty, brutish, and short, 
and for many people, it remained so during all of the Middle Ages. But for 
others, the slow but steady growth of the English economy after about A.D. 
1000 provided increased prosperity. Agricultural yields increased and trade 

3
expanded. New markets were created and new towns founded. An active 
market in land allowed some peasants to become richer than their neighbors, 
and ultimately, over several generations, if they were very fortunate, to 
climb into ranks of the gentry or even the nobility. The same was true of 
successful merchants. Of course, this growth did not occur without setbacks, 
the greatest of which was the terrible mortality of the Black Death in 
1348, during which a third of the English population may have perished. 
Paradoxically, however, the lot of those who remained slowly improved, as 
the decrease in population drove wages higher and rents lower, leading to a 
golden age for English farmers in the 15th century.
Increased prosperity also led to increased literacy and to a broadening of 
access to cultural production of all kinds. We will therefore examine how 
the arts evolved during this period in tandem with—and as a result of—
political, social, and economic forces. We will look at the evolution of some 
of the enduring legends of English history and trace how they changed in 
response to shifting circumstances. We will focus especially on the evolution 
of the legend of King Arthur, from its shadowy beginnings in the period 
of Germanic invasion, to its À owering under the aristocratic Anglo-French 
court poets of 12th century, and ¿ nally to the popular 15th-century English 
prose of Sir Thomas Malory. We will not neglect the visual arts, of course, 
from the glorious illuminated manuscripts of the 8th-century Northumbrian 
renaissance to splendors of the late English Gothic cathedrals. In every 
case, though, we will discuss these works of art as products of particular 
historical circumstances. 
Illuminated manuscripts and cathedrals were extraordinarily costly 
expressions of religious sentiment and could only be created with the 
patronage of the wealthy. But the course will also address the religious 
experience of ordinary men and women. England’s religious majority went 
from paganism to Christianity under the Romans, returned to paganism 
under the earliest Anglo-Saxon invaders, and through the process of re-
conversion, this time from two directions: Rome and Ireland. Ordinary 
believers experienced the medieval church not as a distant abstraction but 
as a part of their everyday lives; its calendar regulated their lives, its courts 
settled their disputes, and its wealthiest members owned their lands and 

4
Scope
even acted as entrepreneurs in the new industries that developed in the later 
Middle Ages.
The story of England in the Middle Ages is fascinating and varied, full of 
colorful characters. But it is also inherently important to a Western—even 
global—audience, because we are all heirs of medieval England in one 
way or another, whatever our own ethnic heritage may be. The distinctive 
development of the English state as a representative democracy, the 
distinctive shape of the English language, and the legendary English heroes 
like King Arthur and Robin Hood who have captured people’s imaginations 
all over the world have their origins in this 1,000-year period in one corner 
of a small island in northern Europe. The story of medieval England is a 
wonderful story that continues to shape the world we live in. Ŷ

5
From Britannia to Britain
Lecture 1
Does medieval England matter for any other reason besides the fact 
that it’s full of exciting battles and colorful personalities? Well, I would 
argue strongly that it does, especially if you live in an English-speaking 
society. … Many countries, not just the United States, owe a profound 
debt to medieval England.
I
n the early 5th century, a relatively unimportant province in the far 
northwest of the Roman Empire called Britannia was attacked by 
barbarians. The Roman authorities, who had their hands full elsewhere, 
essentially told the people of Britannia that they were on their own, and 
the province fell to the Angles and Saxons. The newcomers founded a 
network of kingdoms concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the 
island; the native Britons were pushed to the north and west. In turn, the 
Anglo-Saxon kingdoms were invaded by Vikings in the 9th century, with 
only Wessex escaping complete conquest. Wessex became the springboard 
for the Anglo-Saxon revival that ousted the Vikings and created the 
uni¿ ed 
kingdom 
that 
would 
come to be known as England. 
This English kingdom was then 
conquered twice during the 11th 
century, ¿ rst by the Danes and 
then, famously, by the Normans 
in 1066. Throughout the next four 
centuries, the English struggled 
with the French, politically and 
culturally, while pressing north 
and west into Wales, Ireland, and 
the borders of Scotland. By the 
year 1485 and the ascension of 
the Tudor dynasty, the inhabitants 
of that once-insigni¿ cant province 
were poised to create an empire 
that would span the entire world.
Britain—or Britannia, as the Romans 
called it—refers to the island 
comprising England, Scotland, 
and Wales.

6
Lecture 1: From Britannia to Britain
The story of medieval England is full of exciting events and colorful 
personalities, but it is also our story—that is, the story of the English-
speaking world. We owe a profound debt to the medieval English for the 
foundations of our legal systems and forms of government. England was 
one of the ¿ rst nations in the Western world to establish that the monarch’s 
rule was not arbitrary and absolute. England has one of the world’s oldest 
representative legislatures in the world, and its common law includes some 
of the world’s ¿ rst declarations of 
human rights.
In a very basic way, all of us who 
speak English bear witness to 
England’s medieval history in every 
word we say and write. English is 
a mongrel language whose very 
grammar and vocabulary are the legacies of the island’s many invaders. Very 
little of English is actually British—that is, derived from the Celtic language 
spoken by the inhabitants of Britain before the Romans arrived around the 1st 
century A.D; its history really begins with the Germanic language the Angles 
and Saxons brought to Britain from Europe, which replaced the British 
tongue wholesale through assimilating or exiling its speakers. The Viking 
invaders, primarily the Danes, altered some of the language’s most basic 
elements; English pronouns that begin with a th- such as “this” and “they” 
and “their,” for example, are all derived from Old Norse. 
The greatest change to English, of course, resulted from the Norman 
Conquest of 1066. English, that hybrid of two Germanic language families, 
remained the language of the peasantry, while the conquerors’ French 
became the language of the elite. French vocabulary permeated English, so 
that to this day, English speakers can often choose between Germanic and 
French synonyms—such as Germanic “clothes” and French “garments”—
with the latter implying a touch of social elevation. This massive borrowing 
of French prestige words into English is one of the reasons English is such an 
expressive language. We’ve got a lot of shades of meaning to choose from.
Besides the language itself, the stories derived from medieval England still 
form a part of the popular culture to this day. The legends of King Arthur and 
Continuity in the face of great 
change is one of the distinctive 
features of English culture.

7
Robin Hood were born in medieval England, and each generation since has 
reinvented these stories for itself. Their creation and transformations during 
this period were the result of changing political and social conditions. This 
continuity in the face of great change is one of the distinctive features of 
English culture, and it raises another interesting topic we will discuss in this 
course: How did the mass of English men and women persevere through 
war, famine, and plague to build a society that would ultimately spread 
its inÀ uence around the globe? We will answer this question by paying 
particular attention to what daily life was like for all the people in England. 
English history in the Middle Ages is the story of the successful creation of a 
sense of nationhood among a diverse group of peoples. That process did not 
unfold without tremendous conÀ ict. Early on, different individuals struggled 
to establish themselves as ruler of England, and small kingdoms competed 
for English hegemony. But even after the creation of a more or less uni¿ ed 
English kingdom in the 10th century, there was often violent conÀ ict at the 
top. Kings rarely succeeded to the throne without having to ¿ ght for it. And 
“This Blessed Plot … This England”
“E
ngland” is not synonymous with “Britain.” Britain is the island 
comprising England, Scotland, and Wales, and the relationship 
among these entities is a very complicated one. The English felt from 
very early in their history that they had a natural right to lordship over 
the whole island and set about establishing it rather vigorously. England 
had subdued Wales by the late 13th century; Scotland eluded its grasp 
(at the cost of many lives, both English and Scottish) until 1603, thanks 
in part to the “auld alliance” between Scotland and France. In the end, 
it was the Scottish kings (albeit ones descended from England’s Henry 
VII) who came to rule France when James VI of Scotland became 
James I of England. After the Act of Union in 1707, the English began 
a conscious attempt to create a “British” identity that was supposed to 
forge an overarching sense of belonging to all of the island’s citizens, 
with varying levels of success. But for our period, there is no such 
political entity as Britain. 

8
Lecture 1: From Britannia to Britain
kings often had very complicated relationships with their noble followers, 
who on the one hand were the backbone of royal rule and on the other could 
often be notoriously unreliable, even rebellious. We will look at how the 
nature of noble rebellion changed over time, with self-interest giving way 
to political, even philosophical (if not entirely selÀ ess) goals. Of course, not 
all rebellions were led by nobility; events like the Peasants’ Revolt of 1381 
will help us examine how much power the ordinary person held in medieval 
English society. We will see how these ordinary citizens responded to the 
political, religious, economic and social developments of the period, but 
we’ll also see them shaping these trends in their turn. By 1485, the powerful 
could not ignore the less powerful without serious risk of political turmoil. 
The Venerable Bede, in his 8th-century work Ecclesiastical History of the 
English People, described the island of Britain as “rich in grain and timber; 
it has good pasturage for cattle and draught animals, and vines are cultivated 
in various localities. There are many land and sea birds of various species, 
and it is well known for its plentiful springs and rivers abounding in ¿ sh.” 
These geographical facts would be very important for the development of 
England: The mild climate allowed reliable harvests. Its navigable rivers 
aided travel and trade. Its forests—now long gone—offered not only building 
materials and fuel but game, medicinal herbs, and the like. What Bede does 
not mention is that most of these advantages are limited to the southeastern 
portion of Britain, the area that would become England. The rockier, harsher 
north and east were mostly suited to grazing. This division of the island into 
a wealthy lowland and a poorer “Celtic fringe” on its borders would have 
important long-term consequences for English history, as we will see. Ŷ

9
Roman Britain and the Origins of King Arthur
Lecture 2
Gildas … records a very plaintive request for help that the authorities 
in Britain sent to a Roman commander in Gaul in the middle of the 5th
century. The letter reads: “The barbarians push us back to the sea, the 
sea pushes us back to the barbarians; between these two kinds of death, 
we are either drowned or slaughtered.” Gildas notes that Britain got no 
help in return.
I
n 55 B.C., Julius Caesar led a perfunctory Roman invasion of Britain 
as a part of his campaign to subdue Gaul. It took him a year and several 
reinforcements to do so, but he eventually gained the submission 
of several British tribes, and there his adventure ended. He was far more 
interested in advancing his position in Rome than in expanding its borders. 
It was the Emperor Claudius who, in A.D. 43, decided to bring Britain into 
the imperial fold.
Over the course of the next 20 years or so, the Romans began collecting 
tribute from British tribes and established legions at several important 
strongholds, including Londinium (now London) and Eboracum (now York). 
They built roads, or paved existing roads, to connect their many forts and 
settlements. Many of the British accepted their new rulers, but not all. The 
rebellion of the Iceni in A.D. 60, triggered by the Romans’ brutal abuse of the 
Iceni queen, Boudicca, and her daughters, led to a full-scale rebellion of the 
southern British tribes, which nearly ended the Romans’ hold on the island 
for good. Boudicca was captured and killed, and the Romans reestablished 
control, but it had been a close contest, and the Romans began to take the 
threat of British rebellion more seriously. 
One of the consequences of this rebellion was the construction of Hadrian’s 
Wall in the early 2nd century A.D. This forti¿ cation, which stretched across 
the narrowest part of Britain from modern-day Wallsend to Bowness, 
separated Romanized, “civilized” Britain from the barbarian tribes to the 
north, particularly the Picts and Scots. The wall became the northwestern 
limes, or boundary, of the Roman Empire for the next three centuries.

10
Lecture 2: Roman Britain and the Origins of King Arthur
But even in the south, Roman Britain was divided into two broad zones. In 
the À at, fertile southeast, about 40 major urban centers had all the trappings 
of a Roman colony, such as forums, baths, and villas. Their inhabitants, 
Roman and Briton alike, wore Roman dress and spoke Latin. Christianity 
arrived in the 3rd century, and many Britons converted, although many 
more still worshiped their old gods and goddesses—sometimes overlain 
with a patina of Roman-ness. In fact, the town of Aquae Sulis—today 
known as Bath—drew pilgrims from all around the empire to its healing 
hot springs. But to the north and west, the hilly, rocky land was less suited 
to Roman settlement and Roman-style agriculture, and the tribes were 
less cooperative. Here, the settlements were mainly fortresses, the Roman 
inhabitants mostly soldiers. The majority of Roman Britain’s inhabitants, 
however, were subsistence farmers, whose lives changed little during the 
years of Roman rule.
For a variety of reasons, the Roman military and administrative machine 
was weakening throughout the empire during the 3rd century; economic 
depression, succession crises, population decline, and foreign invasion all 
took their toll. Britain had its own problem with invaders. Scotti raiders 
(members of a tribe who would later settle in Scotland and give it its 
name) invaded from Ireland, while Germanic tribes invaded from the 
Low Countries and Germany. Most of these were smash-and-grab raids 
for treasure and slaves. But meanwhile on the continent, Rome itself was 
spiraling toward its fall, and in A.D. 406, Emperor Honorius withdrew the 
Roman legions from Britain.
Here the historical record becomes murky. We know that 5th-century Britain 
was laid open to large-scale raiding. Yet the archaeological remains don’t 
show much evidence of warfare; rather, they suggest a mostly peaceful 
barbarian in¿ ltration. We start to see permanent barbarian settlements in 
Britain, especially German settlements in the south and east. They settled 
in small bands of a few dozen people—men, women, and children—and 
seemingly intermarried with the native Britons. Over time, the Britons 
adopted the newcomers’ language, which we now call Anglo-Saxon, or 
Old English.

11
But this assimilation, important as it was, was only part of the story. In the 
late 5th and early 6th centuries, there may have been some sort of concerted 
effort to push back against the new settlers. Gildas, a British monk of the 6th 
century, wrote of an unnamed warlord who fought 12 great battles against 
the barbarians. The last of these battles, 
at Mount Badon, halted the advance 
of the barbarians for 50 years (that is, 
right up until Gildas’s time). This is the 
earliest evidence we have for the ¿ gure 
later known as King Arthur. Gildas’s 
tales of Arthur are not a lot to go on; he 
makes it clear that this man was a military leader, not a king. He doesn’t give 
him the name Arthur or any other name. And we don’t even know where 
Mount Badon was, although historians and archaeologists have suggested 
many candidates over the years. But intriguingly, there is some evidence 
in the archeological record of a 50-year halt in the advance of Germanic 
settlement in Britain.
Gildas’s work is not the only written evidence of Arthur’s existence. A 7th-
century poem written in Old Welsh describes a raid by Gwawrddur, the 
leader of the Gododdin (a tribe that lived around Edinburgh). Amidst the 
over-the-top praise of Gwawrddur’s prowess, we ¿ nd the eye-catching aside, 
“though he was no Arthur.” In the 9th century, a Welsh writer named Nennius 
connected Gildas’s warlord to a leader named Arthur that appeared in his 
own poems; Nennius may have had access to an oral tradition that justi¿ ed 
this connection. 
On the other hand, we cannot be sure that the Gododdin-poem Arthur is 
an allusion to Gildas’s warrior, nor that Nennius did not simply make up 
the link between Arthur and the leader Gildas describes. And we can’t be 
certain there weren’t other reasons for the 50-year halt in German migration 
to Britain—not to mention there is no evidence of Gildas’s 12 great battles. 
On balance, we simply cannot know whether or not Arthur existed. But the 
stories do capture a real phenomenon, the fading of the remnants of Roman 
Britain in the face of the German foe. Ŷ
Gildas’s work is not the 
only written evidence of 
Arthur’s existence.

12
Lecture 2: Roman Britain and the Origins of King Arthur
matter of Britain: Literary corpus comprising stories of King Arthur and 
his knights.
Fleming, Britain after Rome.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

13
The Early Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms
Lecture 3
These groups that settled in Britain were illiterate, and they were 
pagans, and that’s actually quite important, because it probably 
determined a lot about how the transition from Roman rule unfolded. 
The new settlers simply had no stake in preserving very much of the 
Romanized culture and administration that they found in Britain.
N
ow we turn from the Britons and the Romans to the Anglo-Saxons—
the collective name given to the various Germanic peoples who 
settled Britain after the Romans withdrew. They came from lots of 
different places, as near as the Netherlands and as far as Sweden and Saxony. 
All of these peoples came from seafaring cultures, and all spoke Germanic 
languages. They were also all from stateless societies—that is, there was 
no central authority directing the migration to Britain but rather a mass of 
individual tribes acting on their own initiative. 
The tribes’ lack of central authority had a number of important consequences. 
First, in contrast to Rome’s formal regulated legal system, law in Germanic 
society was sort of a self-help process. Laws were aimed at regulating 
relationships—whether between individuals or families—and allowed 
individuals to enforce the laws themselves through a system of wergild, 
meaning “man money.” Every person in society had a monetary value based 
on status and importance; if a person was injured or killed, the guilty party 
would pay the victim (or his or her survivors) a certain amount based on the 
severity of the damage. 
Paying the wergild was the responsibility of the perpetrator’s entire family 
or kin group. One of the strongest checks on criminal behavior was the 
ability of a kin group to oust troublesome members; a habitual criminal 
might ¿ nd himself with no one to help him pay wergild or to defend and 
protect him. Germanic law codes also distinguished between spontaneous 
and premeditated crime. The wergild system seems to have developed as 
a way to prevent family feuding. Most importantly from our perspective, 
it was a system enforced not by the state but by the people. That said, a 

14
Lecture 3: The Early Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms
stateless society is not inherently a simple or unsophisticated one. German 
society was organized vertically, by economic status, and horizontally, by 
kin group—two factors that largely determined your options in life. 
Much of what we know about life in these Germanic societies comes from 
its poetry, and most of that is concerned with the lives of the elite. War is the 
main subject of most of this poetry and was the most prestigious activity one 
could engage in. Yet the vast majority of Germanic people were peaceful 
farmers. They arrived in Britain with their families and livestock in tow and 
readily adapted British farming practices for their own needs. They had no 
interest, however, in Britain’s Romanized culture and administration. Unlike 
the Germanic tribes who conquered the Continent, the Anglo-Saxons were 
mostly pagan and mostly illiterate; Roman values were simply alien to them. 
Men like Gildas—educated, Romanized Christians—were swept to the 
Celtic fringes.
As to how the process of Anglo-Saxon settlement went, written sources and 
the archaeological record disagree. Most scholars today think lots of little 
bands of settlers came to Britain on their own initiative because they’d heard 
that conditions there were favorable. But that is not at all the picture we get 
from our best written source about this period, Bede’s Ecclesiastical History 
of the English People. Bede says the newcomers are from “the three most 
formidable races of Germany”—the Saxons, Jutes, and Angles. Remember, 
though, Bede is about the 5th century from the perspective of the 8th, by 
which time the Anglo-Saxons had coalesced into several large kingdoms; he 
seems to be trying to backdate that development. The Saxons, he said, settled 
southern England and founded the kingdoms of the West Saxons (Wessex), 
the South Saxons (Sussex), and the East Saxons (Essex). The Angles settled 
to the north, giving rise to East Anglia (now Norfolk and Suffolk), Mercia, 
and Northumbria. The Jutes supposedly had to content themselves with 
the Isle of Wight and the relatively small kingdom of Kent in the extreme 
southeast of Britain. But Kent was economically powerful because it was 
so close to the Continent. These are the seven kingdoms that some modern 
scholars call the Anglo-Saxon heptarchy—that is, the rule of seven.
Bede’s description of events has an appealing simplicity, and it seems to 
¿ t the map of Britain that had developed by the year 600. But the physical 

15
evidence indicates that none of the kingdoms was purely Angle or Jute; in 
fact, the Jutes did not seem to exist as a coherent society before settling in 
Britain. The Saxon kingdoms were a little more homogenous, but they only 
acquired a sense of being Saxons in the course of the 6th century. The earliest 
Germanic artifacts in Britain show a lot of cultural diversity, whereas the later 
show more uniformity as the 6th century goes on. In short, the archeologists 
are probably right, and Bede is probably wrong. Bede may have made this 
mistake out of simple ignorance, but it’s also likely that he had an agenda—
namely, to give his society a more ancient, impressive, and formidable past. 
Bede’s version of events after the year 600 is more reliable; at this point, 
although the people living in Britain thought of themselves as many 
different kingdoms, it is reasonable 
to start using the terms “English” and 
“England.” The formerly stateless, 
tribal 
societies 
had 
evolved 
into 
strati¿ ed 
societies 
with 
dynastic 
leadership, all of whom clamed descent 
from the god Woden. In actual fact, the 
dynastic picture was very, very complicated. Rarely did sons follow fathers 
peacefully to the throne. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, a contemporary 
document that contains a year-by-year history of major events in England, 
demonstrates that in the 7th century, politics in the heptarchy boiled down 
to a perpetual series of succession disputes. As a result, no one kingdom 
had the time and resources to dominate the others.
One area in which the new English kingdoms were completely successful 
was in wiping out virtually all traces of the people who lived in Britain 
before them. Slowly but surely, Wessex extended its rule southwest into 
the British-controlled territory of Devon and Somerset. The Mercians made 
gains at the expense of the Welsh. The Northumbrians pushed north all the 
way to Lowland Scotland (in fact, the dialect of English known as Scots is 
descended from the Northumbrian dialect). But they came to more or less 
the same stopping point as the Romans did, those natural borders where the 
land became less hospitable.
The archeologists are 
probably right, and Bede is 
probably wrong.

16
Lecture 3: The Early Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms
Meanwhile, the British who were pushed back into Wales and Scotland 
formed powerful kingdoms of their own. The Welsh king Cadwallon, 
for example, allied with the Mercian king Penda against King Edwin of 
Northumbria, defeating him in 632. Interestingly, these British kingdoms 
retained their Christianity, but they would not be the ones to convert the 
Anglo-Saxons. Ŷ
Anglo-Saxon heptarchy: Modern historical term for the seven most 
signi¿ cant Anglo-Saxon kingdoms: Wessex, Sussex, and Essex (settled by 
Saxons); Northumbria, Mercia, and East Anglia (settled by Angles); and 
Kent (possibly settled by Jutes, though this is uncertain).
wergild: Literally, “man money”; the value assessed in Anglo-Saxon law 
for the death or injury of a speci¿ c individual, intended to forestall family 
feuding. The amount of the wergild varied according to the age, gender, and 
social status of the individual concerned. All members of one’s close kin 
were obligated to contribute to the payment of a wergild ¿ ne.
Fleming, Britain after Rome.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

17
The Conversion of the Anglo-Saxons
Lecture 4
The important point to stress is that Anglo-Saxon paganism was a 
pretty vital concern. There was a network of houses of worship, the 
calendar was organized around festivals celebrating the gods, and we 
have evidence that individuals were personally devoted to the gods. 
So now we have to explain how all of that was transformed in less 
than a century.
A
t the end of the 6th century, all the English kingdoms were pagan. 
By the end of the 7th, they were all Christian. The conversion of 
the English was largely a top-down process: If the king converted, 
his people followed almost without question—such was the psychology of a 
culture based on the comitatus, or war band. But this meant that if the king 
changed his mind and returned to paganism, the whole kingdom relapsed 
along with him. Thus it took time for the Christian church to establish a 
power base in England; by the time they did, the kings had mostly converted 
for good. Conversion was also a multicultural enterprise. Missionaries came 
from two directions: Rome and Ireland. Each set of missionaries brought 
different cultural assumptions and practices, which would ultimately cause 
some conÀ ict. 
It’s important to remember that the earliest Anglo-Saxon settlers essentially 
wiped out the remnants of Roman Christianity in southeastern Britain. They 
seemed to have worshiped a pantheon we’re most familiar with from German 
and Norse mythology, including ¿ gures like Woden and Thor, although 
many people paid particular devotion to one god above the others. They had 
seasonal festivals for speci¿ c deities, as well as local shrines to individual 
gods or groups of gods; at least 43 place-names in southern England today 
can be traced to these worship sites. We have a wonderful description of the 
temple used by an early king of East Anglia, Raedwald. It was a huge round 
building, with niches, sort of like chapels, all around the perimeter where 
different gods could be worshiped. Raedwald was one of the early converts 
to Christianity, but rather than abandon the gods of his ancestors (and risk his 
wife’s wrath), he simply gave the Christian god a niche in the temple. Like 

18
Lecture 4: The Conversion of the Anglo-Saxons
a lot of polytheists, the Anglo-Saxons 
were broad minded, and they were ¿ ne 
with a new god as long as they didn’t 
have to give up the old ones.
The ¿ rst of¿ cial mission of the Roman 
church to the Anglo-Saxons arrived 
in Kent in 597. Perhaps motivated 
by political concerns as much as 
spiritual ones, Pope Gregory the 
Great commissioned the head of his 
own private monastery in Rome, a 
monk named Augustine, to lead the 
mission, and he sent him with an 
extensive entourage. Augustine set up 
his mission in the city of Canterbury, 
likely choosing the spot not only for 
its proximity to mainland Europe 
but its cultural familiarity with the 
Christian Franks. In fact, the queen of 
Kent, Bertha, was a Frankish princess 
already practicing Christianity.
Augustine’s initial reception was fairly skeptical. At ¿ rst, King Aethelbert 
gave him grudging permission to found a monastery in the city; it took 
three years of effort to convert Aethelbert. With this royal backing at last, 
Augustine founded three more episcopal sees and managed to convert the 
neighboring kingdom of Essex. One of the keys to Augustine’s success was 
his decision, based on Gregory’s advice, to reconsecrate the pagan temples 
as churches and retro¿ t the pagan festivals to make them Christian. (This is 
very much the way Christianity had gone about converting Roman Empire’s 
pagans in earlier centuries.) 
Despite Augustine’s early success with Aethelbert, he failed to convert 
Aethelbert’s sons, and on Aethelbert’s death in 616, Kent relapsed into 
paganism. In fact, a wave of pagan reaction seems to have washed over all 
of southern England at this point. Our strongest evidence for this reaction 
Pope Gregory the Great sent 
missionaries to Britain for both 
spiritual and political reasons.
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division, LC-USZ62-106737.

19
comes from the Sutton Hoo archaeological site in East Anglia, where we ¿ nd 
a king’s ship burial (possibly Raedwald’s) with a mixture of Christian and 
pagan articles among the grave goods. 
On the other hand, Aethelbert’s Christian daughter, Aethelburh, married 
King Edwin of Northumbria and brought a chaplain named Paulinus with 
her to the north. According to Bede, Edwin did something very interesting 
at this point: He decided that he would not convert to Christianity without 
the approval of his warriors. Edwin’s chief priest, Coi¿ , said he was 
ready to give up on the old gods 
and try something new, because 
his years of zealous worship had 
not brought him much material 
success. Another follower made 
a striking analogy: A man’s life 
is like a sparrow sheltering from 
winter’s storms inside the king’s 
banqueting hall. What comes 
before and after that comfortable 
time is like the storm, dark and impenetrable, and if the new faith could 
help them understand it, it was worth a try. The Northumbrians converted, 
but once again, when the king died (killed by Cadwallon and Penda in 
632), the kingdom relapsed too. 
A few years later, a Christian named Oswald would ascend the 
Northumbrian throne, and the kingdom would convert for good. Oswald 
had been converted not by the Roman missionaries but by the Irish monks 
at Iona, in the Inner Hebrides. He looked north for help in setting up the 
church in his own kingdom. Oswald invited monks from Iona to found 
a new monastery at Lindisfarne, off the Northumbrian coast, and it was 
from Lindisfarne that the rest of the kingdoms of England were converted. 
This was a period of great artistic accomplishment in the monasteries of 
northern England, producing beautiful manuscripts such as the Book of 
Durrow and the Lindisfarne Gospel.
The kingdoms converted from Lindisfarne followed the Celtic church 
calendar, whereas those converted from Kent followed the Roman one. In 
Edwin did something very 
interesting at this point: He 
decided that he would not 
convert to Christianity without 
the approval of his warriors.

20
Lecture 4: The Conversion of the Anglo-Saxons
particular, the way to calculate the date of Easter each year was different 
in each tradition. This caused disharmony between and even within courts, 
such as when Oswald’s successor, Oswiu, and his southern princess 
celebrated Easter at different times in the same court. King Oswiu decided 
for the good of the kingdom, the Easter question needed to be settled once 
and for all. The nobles and churchmen met at the monastery of Whitby to 
debate the point. Saint Colman, a monk from Lindisfarne, argued for the 
Celtic side, saying their tradition was older and thus more proper. Saint 
Wilfrid, an Anglo-Saxon cleric, argued for the Roman side, saying that the 
pope was the successor of Saint Peter, so even if his method of calculating 
Easter was new, his source of authority was older and more venerable. The 
king sided with Wilfrid and brought his kingdom in line with Rome. This 
would be one of England’s ¿ rst decisive steps toward cultural allegiance 
with continental Europe, but at ¿ rst it mainly affected men like Bede, 
who led sheltered, luxurious lives of study and thought. Life for the vast 
majority of Anglo-Saxons was very different. Ŷ
comitatus: From the Latin for “retinue”; the war band of a Germanic 
tribal leader. It formed the chief ¿ ghting unit defending the early Anglo-
Saxon settlers.
Fleming, Britain after Rome.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

21
Work and Faith in Anglo-Saxon England
Lecture 5
To call someone “churlish” is not a compliment. It can mean coarse, 
rude, inappropriate, that sort of thing. The word “churl” in modern 
English is a kind of fossilized record of [Anglo-Saxon] social snobbery, 
because people at the top of society tended to associate everything 
negative with people at the bottom.
D
aily life could be very different across 7th- and 8th-century Anglo-
Saxon England depending on a number of factors. Obviously, 
socioeconomic class could make a big difference, but so did 
geography—not only which kingdom you lived in, but which village. 
Lifestyles could vary enormously even in neighboring villages, which is 
important to keep in mind as we examine the details of ordinary English 
people’s lives.
What was it like to be an Anglo-Saxon king? More than anything else, it 
was dangerous. While a king’s son (not necessarily the eldest) was often the 
presumed heir, his succession was by no means guaranteed. For example, in 
the ruling house of Wessex, there were ¿ ve 8th-century kings in a row who 
had no clear claims to the throne that we can ¿ nd. The overwhelming fact 
of life for a king was that he might have to ¿ ght to stay in power. Death in 
battle and assassination were common; enemies abounded both within and 
without the court. 
There seems to have been an informal pecking order within the Anglo-
Saxon heptarchy. The top dog at any one time was called the bretwalda, 
meaning “Britain ruler,” But bretwalda was not an of¿ cial title per se; it 
was used more as a compliment or term of deference among leaders. Being 
considered a bretwalda meant you might have less to fear from your rivals, 
and they would have more to fear from you. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
lists the bretwaldas from the late 6th century to the early 9th, and the list 
roughly matches other evidence about the center of political gravity shifting 
in England during the period: In the early 7th century, King Ethelbert of Kent, 
the ¿ rst royal convert to Christianity, was bretwalda; in the mid 7th century, 

22
Lecture 5: Work and Faith in Anglo-Saxon England
the honor shifted to the kings of Northumbria. Later, as later lectures will 
support, Mercia and then Wessex took prominence. 
Materially speaking, the lives of kings could be pretty comfortable. Most 
construction, including royal halls and forts, was of timber, so we don’t really 
have many surviving structures. Old Yeavering, in the north of England, is 
one of the few exceptions; it was probably the Northumbrian royal palace. 
The palace complex contained four 
great halls, each about 300 square 
meters in area. We know that kings’ 
halls hosted great feasts, which 
demonstrated the kings’ wealth 
and power. Anglo-Saxon poems 
often praise queens as cupbearers, 
dispensers of mead, and we know 
the king’s followers were forbidden 
to draw weapons where drinking was going on. Anglo-Saxon culture took 
drinking extremely seriously. The kings paid for all this feasting by collecting 
tribute from the territories they ruled. Each territory had a tribute center 
where produce was collected; one such site, called Higham Ferrers, has been 
excavated in Mercia. It had various storage buildings, a cattle enclosure, 
ovens, a mill, and a few residences for permanent staff. So there was quite an 
elaborate infrastructure supporting the lifestyle of these Anglo-Saxon kings. 
The king’s closest followers, or thegns, were the core of his military 
entourage. They were prosperous men, but since their power depended on 
the king’s, they had many of the same worries and enemies. Originally, 
the thegns lived at court full time; later in the period, they acquired landed 
estates from the king and might be absent from court for long periods. When 
at court, they had to worry about what was going on back at their estates, and 
while at their estates, they had to worry about what was going on at court. 
So it could be a little nerve-wracking to be a thegn. But the basic similarity 
between kings and thegns was that they were supported by the people at the 
bottom of the social hierarchy.
Anglo-Saxon England was a hierarchical society and was a society very 
comfortable with the institution of slavery. Many estates were worked by 
We have good reason to 
wonder how “Christian” were 
the people who had of¿ cially 
embraced Christianity.

23
slaves under the supervision of a reeve, or overseer. Almost anyone could 
wind up a slave; for example, you could be taken as the spoils of war, or 
you might sell yourself or family members into service when you had no 
other means of support. Most people were free farmers known as ceorls, 
from which we get the word “churl.” These farmers lived in small villages of 
no more than a few hundred souls. They mostly lived in timber longhouses 
waterproofed with wattle and daub—essentially, mud and sticks. Farming 
technology was very primitive—plows were inef¿ cient, fertilizer was scarce, 
livestock was expensive to maintain, and productivity was low. 
Analysis of Anglo-Saxon cemetery remains tells us a lot about the health of 
the general population. In some regions, teeth and bones show evidence of 
poor nutrition, overwork, and disease. In others, a cemetery indicates a lot 
of the locals lived healthy lives to a ripe old age. But while there were some 
fortunate exceptions, it’s fair to say that life for the vast majority of Anglo-
Saxons was “nasty, brutish, and short.” 
While the thegns often followed their kings quickly in converting to 
Christianity, it took longer for the faith to trickle down to the working 
populace and we have good reason to wonder how “Christian” were the 
people who had of¿ cially embraced Christianity. The spectacular warlord’s 
ship burial at Sutton Hoo was probably one of the last of its kind; as 
Christian Faith, Pagan Charms
A 
mid-10th-century medical manuscript called Bald’s Leechbook 
suggests two different ways to cure a horse or cow who has been 
shot by an elf—no doubt a common and vexing condition. First it says, 
“If a horse or other cattle is [elf]shot, take dock seed and Scottish wax 
and let a man sing twelve masses over [them]; and put holy water on the 
horse or cattle.” Option two is to “take an eye of a broken needle, give 
the horse a prick with in the ribs; no harm shall come.” This wonderful 
mixture of pagan magic and reverence for Christian symbols like masses 
and holy water paints a clear picture of the ways the Anglo-Saxons 
adapted Christianity to their own culture.

24
Lecture 5: Work and Faith in Anglo-Saxon England
Christianity spread, the burial of elaborate grave goods declined. Yet we ¿ nd 
individuals buried wearing Thor’s hammer amulets well into the supposedly 
Christian period. Does this mean there were still a lot of Thor supporters 
around, or were these objects considered traditional, and people didn’t want 
to stop wearing them? We cannot know for certain.
One reason the Anglo-Saxons were comfortable mixing paganism and 
Christianity may have been that they didn’t see them as all that different. 
Take, for example, the Franks Casket (named for its 19th-century owner, 
Augustus Franks, not the Frankish people). This small ivory box from the 
early 8th century may have been a saint’s reliquary, but one side is carved with 
scenes from the brutal, violent German myth of Weland the Smith, while the 
other shows the baby Jesus being visited by the Magi. On the surface, that 
would seem a startling juxtaposition. On the other, both are stories about 
lordship—Christ the good king and Weland’s master the terrible one. Perhaps 
the message is about which sort deserved obedience, a very Germanic ethic 
grafted onto Roman stock. 
One signi¿ cant reason why the Christian faith did not make faster progress 
in England was how dif¿ cult it was to create a Christian infrastructure in 
a largely rural area, where the villages were spread so far apart and the 
population density was so low, compared with, say, Italy, which was more 
urbanized and interconnected. In England, a bishop was in charge of a 
huge territory, and it was hard for him to oversee all of it. Rather than 
attempt to build a church in every tiny village, English bishops encouraged 
the building of minsters, which served a larger area. The minster’s clergy 
usually took turns making a circuit of the surrounding area to minister to 
the people. But even still, coverage of rural areas was uneven. But England 
produced its share of saints, who were well-regarded by the people. 
Monasteries, which by de¿ nition were supported by laymen, noble patrons 
and humble pilgrims alike, were numerous. There was a distinctive form 
of monastery in England called the double monastery, which was for both 
monks and nuns and was ruled by an abbess, such as Abbess Hild who 
presided over Whitby Abbey. The success of Anglo-Saxon monasticism is 
proof that the Christian faith, in whatever form, had struck deep roots in 
England by the end of the 7th century. Ŷ

25
bretwalda: Anglo-Saxon title that may have designated the preeminent king 
among the kingdoms of the heptarchy between the 5th and 9th centuries. The 
rights of the bretwalda seem to have included tribute, military service, and 
appearance at his court, but the details of how these rights were exercised 
are unclear.
ceorl: Anglo-Saxon peasant farmer.
thegn: Important Anglo-Saxon landholder who owed the king military service, 
attendance at court, and help with administrative tasks. The thegns were the 
backbone of the royal government on the local level, but their position was 
undermined in the 11th century by the advent of the housecarles.
Fleming, Britain after Rome.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

26
Lecture 6: The Viking Invasions
The Viking Invasions
Lecture 6
The ¿ rst really effective effort to cope with the Vikings … led directly 
to the unifying of all the English kingdoms under one dynasty. So the 
Vikings are really responsible in the end for the creation of the single 
kingdom called England.
W
hen we talked about the conversion of England to Christianity, we 
focused on Northumbria, which in the 7th and early 8th centuries 
was the most powerful kingdom in England. But a series of 
ineffectual kings led Northumbria into decline in the early 8th century, and 
the torch passed to Mercia and a king named Offa. 
During Offa’s rule, which lasted nearly four decades, Mercia was 
unquestionably the most important and most powerful of all the Anglo-
Saxon kingdoms. One of the ways we measure the power of Anglo-Saxon 
leadership was the amount of tribute they commanded—tribute in all honesty 
being a form of protection money. Offa of Mercia was very good at exacting 
tribute. His military renown attracted the best soldiers, which enhanced his 
prestige and power among the kingdoms, and so on. If Offa showed up in 
your kingdom with these very able soldiers, you’d probably be quite willing 
to pay him tribute. The Tribal Hidage recorded what the different kingdoms 
in southern and central England had to pay Offa in tribute. A hide was a unit 
of land—notionally the amount of land that could sustain one family. The 
hide could vary in size depending on the part of the country you were in and 
the relative land fertility.
Offa seems to have been the ¿ rst king in English history to invest massively 
in public infrastructure. He used his wealth to build a huge earthwork, 
called Offa’s Dyke, on the western border of Mercia, near what is now 
the border of England and Wales. At 70 miles, it was the longest defensive 
structure built in Britain since Hadrian’s Wall and the Antonine Wall, and 
was clearly carefully planned: Its route takes advantage of the natural 
contours of the land to offer clear views of the west (and any potential 
Welsh encroachment) at every point along its length. Impressive as the 

27
dyke was, it is irrefutable evidence that, for all his power over the Anglo-
Saxons, Offa was unable to subdue the Welsh.
Offa was also the only Anglo-Saxon king who corresponded with the 
Emperor Charlemagne. They corresponded over a church controversy about 
the veneration of images, and there was even serious talk about arranging a 
marriage alliance between their two families. 
Alas, Offa’s successors did not live up to his example, and after his death, 
the locus of power in England shifted to Wessex. At that time, Wessex 
was still expanding its boundaries to the southwest, gathering power and 
wealth. By the early 9th century, the kingdom stretched from near modern 
Reading to the southwestern tip of Cornwall. But the crucial factor again 
was leadership. King Egbert, who ruled from 802 to 839, completed the 
conquest of Cornwall, defeated the Mercian army, and for a time even 
controlled London. Finally, unlike 
Offa and many of the other kings we 
have discussed, his successors were 
equally competent. 
Meanwhile, in the late 8th century, 
Britain began suffering from a 
series of attacks by raiders from 
Scandinavia 
whom 
the 
Anglo-
Saxons called the Northmen and we call the Vikings. No one is sure why the 
raids began; scholars’ best guess is a scarcity of resources in their homelands. 
The attacks began off the Dorset coast in Wessex in 787, but the most famous 
raid of the period happened in 793. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle entry for that 
year records terrible portents in Northumbria, including ¿ ery dragons À ying 
through the air, followed by a famine; and then, to top it all off, “the raiding 
of the heathen miserably devastated God’s church in Lindisfarne Island by 
looting and slaughter.” 
The Lindisfarne Stone, a carving that may have been erected at Lindisfarne to 
commemorate the dead, shows what looks like a Viking raid on one side and 
the biblical Last Judgment on the other. This attack on the heart of English 
Christianity seemed to witnesses like the end of the world. There has been a 
This attack on the heart of 
English Christianity seemed 
to witnesses like the end of 
the world.

28
Lecture 6: The Viking Invasions
recent scholarly effort to rehabilitate the Vikings’ image. The argument runs 
that we have a distorted picture of how devastating the Vikings were because 
they tended to target churches, and most of the contemporary texts we have 
describing the raids were written by churchmen. These scholars point out that 
many Vikings engaged in peaceful trading as well as raiding. But we should 
not minimize the psychological impact of raids like the one on Lindisfarne.
At ¿ rst, the Vikings raided in a scattershot fashion, working in small bands of 
about three boats and 50 men, grabbing what loot and slaves they could ¿ nd, 
and departing quickly. Starting in the 840s, the Vikings began to consolidate 
their forces into much larger À eets carrying a thousand men or more. What 
had changed, once again, was leadership, men who could attract and hold the 
loyalty of many bands of raiders at once. On the one hand, an enemy like this 
is a bigger target. It can’t sneak up on you the way a small band can. On the 
other hand, you can do virtually nothing to stop it.
In 850, a large group of Danish Vikings spent the winter on the island of 
Thanet, off the coast of Kent, rather than dispersing to their homes in the 
usual manner. In the spring, that band raided Canterbury; they raided London 
and drove the king of Mercia out of the city. The Wessex army ¿ nally beat 
them back. Then in 865, the micel, or Great Army, invaded, intent not on 
plunder but on conquest. Starting near York, one by one, they conquered 
all the English kingdoms except for Wessex. Then the men of the Great 
Army sent for their wives, children, and retainers in Denmark. They were 
settling down. Yorkshire and East Anglia were swamped by Danish settlers; 
Mercia’s king, Ceolwulf, gave up lands now known as the Five Boroughs, 
including the towns of Lincoln, Stamford, Nottingham, Leicester and Derby, 
to the Vikings in order to keep his crown. The cultural impact of Danish 
settlement was tremendous, touching everything from language to political 
and legal customs; in fact, the English called these Scandinavian territories 
the Danelaw. After a time, the new settlers integrated themselves peacefully 
among the Anglo-Saxons in the Danelaw, but the warfare was not over yet. 
Wessex still remained out of the Vikings’ grasp. Ŷ

29
Danelaw: The areas of northern, central, and eastern England that were 
heavily settled by the Danes beginning in the 9th century. In these areas, 
Danish law was followed rather than English law, and Danish units of land 
measurement were in use.
hide: An Anglo-Saxon unit of land, originally consisting of enough land to 
support a single peasant family; the size of the hide varied by region. Hides 
were used to assess taxes and military obligations.
Fleming, Britain after Rome.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

30
Lecture 7: Alfred the Great
Alfred the Great
Lecture 7
Alfred was a complicated man; he was perhaps not ideally suited to 
being a king by temperament, at least. He was a very religious man 
who struggled a lot with the baser parts of his human nature. … But 
despite all this, Alfred took the throne, and it’s probably a good thing 
for Wessex that he did.
A
lfred of Wessex is the only English king to have earned the 
byname “the Great.” King of Wessex from 871 to 899, he led the 
Anglo-Saxon resurgence against the Vikings, uni¿ ed the Anglo-
Saxon kingdoms, created the ¿ rst English law code, and fostered a revival 
in literacy and learning among the English monasteries. But no one
could have predicted any of these accomplishments when Alfred took
the throne.
In the early 9th century, Wessex came to dominate the entire southern 
coast of England, with hegemony over Sussex, Essex, and Kent. They had 
fought Mercia to a standstill and an uneasy peace. Despite their strength, 
when the Viking raids began in the 840s, Wessex suffered as much as any 
other kingdom. King Aethelwulf undertook a pilgrimage to Rome in 855 
speci¿ cally to ask God for assistance against the Vikings. This in itself was 
not surprising; what was odd was that he sent his sickly youngest son, the 
¿ ve-year-old Alfred, on the arduous journey to Rome with an advance party. 
Alfred was con¿ rmed by the pope personally, and in retrospect many would 
see this as the pope’s consecration of Alfred as England’s future king—
which, given his three older brothers, would have seemed unlikely to come 
to pass. In any event, Alfred’s time in Rome surely affected his later devotion 
to the church and to education. 
While Alfred and Aethelwulf were in Rome, Aethelwulf’s oldest son, 
Aethelbald, was in charge of Wessex. When they returned, Aethelbald 
refused to step aside. Aethelwulf had to engineer a face-saving compromise: 
He left Aethelbald in charge of the original western core of Wessex while 
retaining Sussex, Kent, and the newer territories for himself until his death in 

31
858. Alfred, young as he was, would remember these incidents when he had 
grown sons of his own and would not repeat his father’s mistakes.
Alfred grew to manhood and became a soldier, as was expected of a royal 
son, helping to defend Wessex against worsening Viking raids. Over the next 
13 years, one by one, all three of Alfred’s older brothers died. The last of the 
brothers, Ethelred, had left two young sons, but Alfred, despite any qualms 
he might have had, shunted them aside and seized the throne. Arguably, he 
was justi¿ ed; he was probably the most experienced military leader Wessex 
had, and the Anglo-Saxons had no hard and fast rules about royal succession. 
But it was still a controversial move.
Once the crown was his, Alfred immediately faced a military crisis: the 
advance of the Great Army. He immediately set out to meet them and 
achieved a strategic stalemate at the Battle of Wilton. In effect, he fought 
them to a standstill, and then paid them to go away—actually a fairly 
standard thing to do when you faced a Viking force. This move bought him a 
little time; for the next ¿ ve years, the Great Army was busy in Northumbria 
and Mercia. Alfred could watch and wait. When the Great Army returned, 
they were led by Guthrum, who eventually scattered Alfred’s forces. The 
king À ed to the Isle of Athelney, a marshy part of western Wessex, where he 
spent the winter of 877–878. Slowly but surely, he reconstituted his army. He 
sent a message to all of Wessex, asking the ¿ ghting men who had survived 
the previous two years to assemble at Egbert’s Stone. No one knows exactly 
where Egbert’s Stone was, but it may have been somewhere on the border 
between Wiltshire and Somerset. The men came, and they assembled into an 
army big enough to take on Guthrum.
Guthrum was encamped near Selwood in western Wiltshire at Edington. 
Alfred marched to meet him and assembled his men in the classic German 
shield wall formation. The battle became a hand-to-hand contest of brute 
strength and morale, and this time, Alfred won. He pursued Guthrum’s 
À eeing army and laid siege to them in their encampment. Finally, Guthrum 
surrendered, agreed to withdraw from Wessex, and accepted Christian 
baptism with Alfred as his godfather. Alfred probably had no illusions 
about Guthrum’s spiritual sincerity, but the concession was of great 
symbolic importance.

32
Lecture 7: Alfred the Great
Alfred did not rest after Eddington. He reorganized his army, built 
fortresses, and created the ¿ rst-ever royal English À eet to try to beat the 
enemy at their own game. The army of Wessex, the fyrd, was composed 
of levies of free men from all of Wessex; these 
men were usually substantial landowners with 
signi¿ cant duties at home, so Alfred divided 
the fyrd into two halves that each served for 
six months of the year. He built his fortresses, 
or burhs, at strategic points throughout his 
territories. The streets in the burhs were laid 
out in a careful grid pattern, making it easy to 
transport troops and materials within the burh. Incidentally, as part of this 
process, Alfred rebuilt the city of London practically from scratch. Alfred 
kept excellent planning and accounting records, which come down to us 
in a document called the Burghal Hidage. It spells out, for example, how 
many men are required to defend a given length of wall, and then uses this 
formula to assign the required number of hides to each burh depending on 
its size. 
Although the Anglo-Saxon settlers had been seafaring folk, they had 
taken root rather quickly in England and by Alfred’s day more or less 
avoided the sea except for trading vessels. Alfred drew the obvious 
conclusion, however, that an enemy that arrived by sea could be 
intercepted at sea. Unfortunately, the ships Alfred designed weren’t 
all that effective, and overall this navy was the least successful of all 
his defensive efforts. Still, he set an important precedent for defense 
of the realm.
Alfred made progress on the political front as well. Mercia had become 
essentially a Danish client kingdom, but after Edington, helped a Mercian 
ealdorman named Aethelred to claim the Mercian throne, giving 
Aethelred his daughter AethelÀ eda in marriage. AethelÀ eda seems to have 
inherited her father’s political savvy and continued to rule Mercia after her
husband’s death for several years. So Mercia effectively became a client 
state of Wessex.
Alfred rebuilt the city
of London practically
from scratch.

33
Alfred is known for his cultural accomplishments as well. He was one of the 
most literate kings of his age and wanted other people to have access to the 
riches of classical and Christian texts. At the end of the 9th century, there was 
hardly a Latin-literate churchman, much less any laymen, left in England. So 
Alfred commissioned a great project to translate the great works of antiquity 
into English vernacular. Remarkably, Alfred translated many works himself. 
This period also saw the beginning of year-by-year compilation of the 
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, although it is unclear what role, if any, Alfred had in 
this development.
Alfred also decided to gather all old laws of his realm, choose the best 
ones, and make a new law code. In essence, he invented the role of king as 
lawgiver, rather than law interpreter. This was a decisive move away from 
the self-governing Anglo-Saxon society that ¿ rst settled Britain toward a 
modern notion of statehood.
After Alfred died in 899, his son Edward the Elder and his grandson 
Athelstan slowly but surely reconquered the English kingdoms lost to the 
Danes. Wessex had created the ¿ rst-ever united English kingdom. Ŷ
burh: Anglo-Saxon term for a forti¿ ed town or settlement. Alfred 
systematically strengthened existing burhs and founded new ones to defend 
Wessex from Viking attack. The taxes required to pay for these burhs were 
enumerated in the Burghal Hidage. 
ealdorman: Anglo-Saxon royal of¿ cial in charge of a shire, responsible for 
summoning the fyrd. The ealdorman was replaced by the earl in the Danish 
regions of England and then throughout the kingdom under Cnut. 
fyrd: Anglo-Saxon military force consisting of all free men of the shire, who 
were obligated to serve as requested for 60 days. 
    Important Terms

34
Lecture 7: Alfred the Great
Fleming, Britain after Rome.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Suggested Reading

35
The Government of Anglo-Saxon England
Lecture 8
The economy is very much tied to how effective the government is. If the 
government succeeds in its main job of providing peace and security, 
prosperity will tend to follow.
O
ver the course of the 10th century, the kingdom of Wessex created 
a new English kingdom. But what did that mean on the ground? 
How was this kingdom actually governed? What was this new state 
like? In fact, the uni¿ ed England was probably the best-governed country 
in Europe in the 10th century. In this lecture, we’ll examine the hierarchy of 
early English government, the role of the king, and the English system of 
justice. We’ll end by talking about the Anglo-Saxon monetary system and 
how it ¿ t into the economy of this prosperous new nation. 
The average citizen never saw the king but had a lot of direct interaction with 
local of¿ cials and bureaucracies. The most important administrative unit in 
Anglo-Saxon England was the shire, or county, a term that originally referred 
to the local war band. In fact, in the 10th century, the army was still organized 
shire by shire. Shires were typically named after the most important town in 
the area: Cambridgeshire, Lincolnshire, Warwickshire, and so forth. Shires 
were under the control of of¿ cials called ealdormen, whose main job was 
to lead the shire’s army. Ealdormen typically had large local landholdings. 
Originally, there was one ealdormen to one shire, but as the 10th century went 
on, kings gave important followers more than one shire to rule. Importantly, 
being an ealdorman was a life appointment; the son of an ealdorman was 
not guaranteed to inherit his father’s power. When an ealdorman had too 
much land to manage by himself, he would appoint a shire reeve, or sheriff. 
Sheriffs would be the bedrock for English royal administration for many, 
many centuries, to come.
Below the level of the shire was unit called the hundred. The number of 
hundreds in a shire varied, but each hundred was made up of about a hundred 
hides of land. They were run by hundredmen, usually local landowners with 
social or economic clout in the neighborhood. Each hundred was further 

36
Lecture 8: The Government of Anglo-Saxon England
divided into tithings, groups of 10 able-bodied men whose military readiness 
was periodically inspected by their leaders, the tithingmen. The tithingmen 
reported to the hundredmen, and the 
hundredmen reported to the sheriff, and 
on up the line, in theory all the way to 
the king.
So what was the point of all this 
organization? Mainly, defense: This 
was how manpower in England was 
mobilized. If you put all the ¿ ghting 
men from all the tithings and hundreds and shires together, you had the fyrd, 
which was more or less what today we would call a militia. The real core 
of the king’s army was his own close followers, the thegns—the substantial 
landowners who spent a lot of time at court. Their role is even more 
important now that England has become a larger, more uni¿ ed state. Finally, 
if necessary, the king could supplement the army with mercenaries from the 
Low Countries.
Besides defense, the early government of England was responsible for 
various public works. As we saw with the old Anglo-Saxon justice system, 
public works were a community obligation. Each citizen was expected to 
support the trinoda necessitas, or threefold necessity: fortresses (burhs), 
bridges, and ships. Support might be given in the form of money or goods, or 
it might be given as labor, but everyone was expected to contribute to these 
public goods. 
The king probably spent quite a bit of his time on questions relating to land; 
ownership and control of land was really the only solid basis for wealth in 
English society. But ownership was sometimes hard to determine. Physical 
records were scarce; most records were kept by memory, with boundaries 
agreed on verbally and a symbolic transfer of ownership performed in 
church in front of witnesses. 
If ownership of a piece of land was in dispute, the problem was brought to 
the king. His decision was issued as a diploma, which was a general term 
for a formal, written royal ruling. Less formal royal documents were called 
Anglo-Saxon kings controlled the 
economy by controlling coinage.
© 2010 JupiterImages
Corporation, A Getty Images 
Company.

37
writs. Primarily they were verbal orders recorded on scraps of parchment; 
they were like modern memos—immediate orders not meant to be preserved, 
so we are lucky that we have any at all. Writs were written in Old English, 
rather than Latin. 
Like all rulers, the king had an inner circle of trusted advisers to help him 
with major decisions. These were called the witan, meaning “wise men.” 
They were usually thegns and churchmen, but there was no ¿ xed or 
formal membership unless there was an unusually great matter to discuss, 
such as the choice of a new king. Then the wise men of the realm met as 
the witanagemot.
Unlike their tribal predecessors, the kings of the uni¿ ed English state were 
responsible for the administration of justice. The wergild system was still in 
place, but the state helped to run it. Also, for the ¿ rst time in Anglo-Saxon 
society, it was possible to commit a crime against the state itself—really, 
against the king. 
The court system was administered in the same way as the shire system. 
The sheriff presided over a shire court, which met twice a year to hear the 
most important cases. Below the shire courts were the hundred courts, led 
by the hundredmen, which met every four weeks to hear cases both great 
and small, although matters could be referred up to the shire courts. The 
legal system was based on ancient laws called dooms. The kings began 
to write these down around the time they converted to Christianity, when 
literacy was becoming fashionable, but the laws dated to before the Anglo-
Saxon migration. 
When accused of a crime, a person had two main ways to prove his or 
her innocence. The ¿ rst was compurgation: The accused swore an oath of 
innocence and got a lot of other people, called oath helpers, to swear to it 
as well. You needed different numbers of oath-helpers depending on the 
seriousness of the crime and the importance of the victim. The theory behind 
compurgation was that people were essentially honest—either by nature or 
from fear of retribution—though they undoubtedly lied on occasion, just like 
witnesses today.

38
Lecture 8: The Government of Anglo-Saxon England
The second method of proving your innocence was trial by ordeal. The 
ordeal is one of the most fascinating and most controversial of medieval 
phenomena, the principle behind it being that God delivered the ruling. 
There were types of ordeal: by hot 
water, by cold water, and by hot 
iron. In the case of the hot ordeals, 
how well you healed was proof of 
your guilt or innocence; in the case 
of the cold water ordeal, À oating 
was proof of guilt, and sinking was 
proof of innocence. (Unfortunately, 
the price of innocence could easily 
be drowning.) Before we dismiss 
this whole system as ridiculous, we 
need to think about how dif¿ cult delivering justice was in a society with 
no crime labs, no security cameras, and so forth. In the absence of science, 
the Anglo-Saxons turned to faith, in this as in other matters, and trial by 
ordeal was undertaken very carefully and with great reverence and awe, if 
not without personal bias.
The last major area of royal responsibility we will discuss was the monetary 
system and market regulation. This encompassed everything from coinage to 
standardizing weights and measures to enacting contract law. Coinage was 
not new to England; King Offa had struck silver pennies in the 8th century. 
But the English economy expanded considerably over the course of the 10th 
century, and more and more, people traded in coin rather than barter. The 
kings decided to provide good coins for two reasons: ¿ rst, the kings actually 
earned money on the coinage, and second, coins were very convenient for 
paying taxes. 
The coinage system was highly regimented. Every six years, the king issued 
new standard dies for striking silver pennies—the only coin in circulation. 
The dies were purchased by individual metalworkers, so while the dies 
were government issue, minting was a private concern. Coins were struck 
one at a time. Each time a new die was issued, all the coins in England 
were exchanged for new ones. It was a very sophisticated system, and 
In the absence of science, 
the Anglo-Saxons turned to 
faith … and trial by ordeal was 
undertaken very carefully and 
with great reverence and awe, 
if not without personal bias.

39
when the Normans came along in 1066, they found it dif¿ cult to keep it 
running effectively. Ŷ
hundred: Anglo-Saxon unit of local government that survived the 
Norman Conquest, consisting of groupings of perhaps a hundred hides. 
Hundred courts assessed taxes and met every four weeks to hear cases of 
local importance. 
sheriff: From “shire reeve”; beginning in the 11th century, the royal of¿ cial 
in charge of administering the shire on behalf of the king. The sheriff 
accounted for the expenses and revenues of the shire at the Exchequer and, 
from the Norman Conquest onward, presided over the shire court. 
shire: Largest unit of local government from the Anglo-Saxon England 
onward. The shire was administered by an ealdorman or later by a sheriff, 
who was responsible for judicial, ¿ nancial, and military matters within the 
shire on behalf of the king. 
witan: Anglo-Saxon royal council, consisting of the “wise men” of the 
realm. The witenagemot was a formal meeting of these advisers.
writ: Legal document recording a royal order, ¿ rst used by the Anglo-Saxon 
kings, when writs were written in English, and adopted by the Normans, 
who changed the language of the writs to Latin. Under Henry II, many forms 
of writ proliferated to streamline legal procedures and increase the prestige 
of the royal courts.
Fleming, Britain after Rome.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

40
Lecture 9: The Golden Age of the Anglo-Saxons
The Golden Age of the Anglo-Saxons
Lecture 9
[The Battle of Maldon] is saying something about whether it’s a good 
idea to pay off the Danes, and whether the king needs to support his 
commanders in the ¿ eld more effectively, hint, hint. … It suggests that 
there may have been a lively debate about current events, and people 
were using this kind of literary work to engage in it—again, evidence for 
quite a bit of sophisticated learning out there in the lay community.
T
he kind of stability the kings of Wessex had developed for the uni¿ ed 
English kingdom is exactly what you need if you want learning 
and the arts to À ourish, and that’s just what happened in England 
in the 10th and early 11th centuries. Kings and nobles now had the leisure 
and the ¿ nancial resources to patronize the arts on a large scale. Patrons 
commissioned works of art and fostered learning to glorify God and to 
bolster their own prestige. And in this period, the center of both the church 
and education was the monastery.
The monasteries had suffered greatly in the period of Viking invasions. 
Many had been completely destroyed; others dwindled from lack of 
¿ nancial support. By the early 10th century there were scarcely any 
monastic communities, for men or women, in all of England. This was a 
serious problem for England’s spiritual and intellectual life. Restoring the 
monasteries thus became a priority of England’s 10th-century kings. 
Glastonbury, in Somerset, Wessex, had long been one of England’s most 
important monastic communities, but by the 930s, all that remained was a 
small school. A young man named Dunstan who was a distant relative of the 
royal house had studied there before being called to serve at King Athelstan’s 
court. Dunstan’s fortunes rose and fell, but eventually he won the king’s favor 
and was made abbot of Glastonbury, with a promise of unlimited resources 
to restore the community. This was the beginning of about half a century of 
deliberate royal support for the monastic life in England, not to mention an 

41
illustrious career for Dunstan, who proved himself a capable administrator 
and was eventually made archbishop of Canterbury. 
Saint Aethelwold’s career was similar to Dunstan’s, from monk to abbot of 
Abingdon to bishop of Winchester. His special genius was for founding or 
refounding monasteries, such as Peterborough in Northamptonshire and Ely 
in Cambridgeshire. This job entailed acquiring monks and/or nuns; building 
or restoring a church, living quarters, workshops, storage buildings, and the 
like; and, most importantly, acquiring a landed endowment to support it. We 
have a wonderful record of how he went about this preserved by the monks 
of Ely. Aethelwold got the king to donate some of the land; some came from 
other nobles, some he bought, and some he got through nothing short of 
extortion. As a result of his skill, the monasteries Aethelwold founded were 
some of the richest in England.
Saint Oswald was an Anglo-Danish monk who rose to become bishop of 
Worcester and later archbishop of York. He founded some very important 
monasteries, including Ramsey in Huntingdonshire. He was politically well-
connected within the church, as well as handsome and talented, and like 
Aethelwold, he was a very hard-headed businessman. These men of God 
were very, very careful about the bottom line.
Why did the English kings, especially King Edgar the Peaceable, think it was 
so important to found all these monasteries? For one thing, many of these 
monasteries were founded in areas that had belonged to the Danish and were 
just coming under Wessex’s control. These communities were essentially 
royal outposts, anchors for royal rule. It did not escape the people that these 
new monasteries might be intended as a way of keeping the natives from 
getting restless, and in fact, after Edgar the Peaceable died in 975, a lot of 
monasteries came under attack. This episode has become known as the anti-
monastic reaction. Equilibrium was eventually restored, but it was a reminder 
that the church needed the support of the king if it was going to thrive.
Up to the 10th century, there had traditionally been an important distinction 
between a monastery and a cathedral: The former was a community of and 
for monks, while the latter was meant to serve the lay community. Now 

42
Lecture 9: The Golden Age of the Anglo-Saxons
the prevailing feeling among churchmen in England was that monasticism 
was the best way to serve God, and bishops began setting up monastic 
communities at their own cathedrals. These hybrid communities had to look 
outward as well as inward, and as a result, they produced something new: 
the vernacular sermon. These texts were not only preached from the pulpit; 
they were circulated in manuscript, which tells us that there was a substantial 
proportion of English-literate people among the population. Alfred’s efforts 
at broadening literacy seem to have worked.
The most famous vernacular summon was written in 1014 by a bishop 
named Wulfstan and was called “The Sermon of the Wolf to the English.” In 
it, Wulfstan blames the current sufferings of the English people (they were 
once again under attack by the Danes) on the sins of the people themselves. 
What is interesting is that he addresses people of every social class and every 
region. To Wulfstan, England was a whole, a nation. No doubt the À owering 
of English learning contributed to this sense of English unity.
Secular literature also À ourished in the 10th century. At some point in this 
period—we’re not exactly sure when—the greatest masterpiece of Old 
English literature was composed: Beowulf. This narrative poem, written in 
alliterative verse, tells the story of the hero named Beowulf and his victories 
over a series of monsters. The events in the poem are set in the distant 
past, and in fact, they don’t even take place in England, and the poem may 
preserve actual traditions that had been passed down for centuries in England. 
Linguistic analysis hints that Beowulf was composed in the 8th century, but 
it was probably the prosperity and the spread of learning in the 10th century 
that led it to be written down. Only one medieval copy of Beowulf survives; 
called the Cotton manuscript, it dates to about the year 1000 and was nearly 
destroyed in a ¿ re in 1731. Beowulf is a very complicated poem and subject 
to many interpretations, but it clearly concerns Anglo-Saxon warrior values. 
Beowulf’s own ambition and desire to prove his bravery drives most of the 
action. The duty of a follower to his lord and a lord to his followers is also an 
important theme. There are lots of ambiguities in the poem, and they hint at 
tensions within this society. 
Another important Old English poem, called The Battle of Maldon, 
engages with similar issues. It preserves the memory of a commander 

43
named Byrhtnoth, who refused to pay off the Vikings and perished in battle 
with them. Although the battle took place many years before the poem 
was written, the poem was likely intended to be read as a commentary on 
the politics and ethics of its own 
day. So the lay community was 
engaging with these issues on a 
very sophisticated level.
Other 
arts 
besides 
writing 
À ourished in this golden age of 
Anglo-Saxon culture. Many leading 
churchmen did metalwork, and 
beautiful ornaments and religious 
objects were produced in this period, although many were later melted down 
for the value of their metal, so we have few examples. Few textiles survive 
from the period because they are so fragile, but we know that the fancy 
textiles called English work had an excellent reputation throughout Europe. 
Probably the most famous artistic works of the period are the gorgeous 
illuminated manuscripts produced in the monasteries.
So Anglo-Saxon England was a prosperous society that was able to devote 
considerable resources to artistic expression. Although that expression was 
mostly centered on the church, the lay public was also eager and able to 
consume works of learning and literature. In the 10th century, a new self-
consciously English public comes into its own. Ŷ
Fleming, Britain after Rome.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
At some point in this period—
we’re not exactly sure when—
the greatest masterpiece of 
Old English literature was 
composed: Beowulf.
    Suggested Reading

44
Lecture 10: The Second Viking Conquest
The Second Viking Conquest
Lecture 10
Cnut was the man on the spot. … Cnut was already in control of large 
sections of England. He seemed up to the job; after all, he had fought 
Edmund Ironside to a stalemate. And so it proved: Cnut’s reign as king 
was largely successful, and it was mostly remembered fondly by the 
English. That may seem remarkable; he was a foreign conqueror after 
all. But the change from Aethelred seems to have been a welcome one.
E
ven during Anglo-Saxon England’s golden age, there were hints 
of trouble on the horizon. England was hit again by Scandinavian 
raiders, starting in the 990s. This second Viking conquest was 
a very different sort from the ¿ rst one; England had changed, and so had 
the Vikings. England was now a uni¿ ed nation with an organized military, 
although the north was not as securely under Wessex rule as other regions 
were. Meanwhile, uni¿ ed kingdoms had been forming in Scandinavia as 
well. At the end of the 10th century, Viking forces were led not by local leaders 
but by kings. So now you have a more uni¿ ed England going up against a 
more uni¿ ed Viking invader. These factors raised the stakes considerably; to 
capture all of England, the Vikings needed only to defeat one king.
The kingdom of Denmark coalesced and was Christianized under King 
Harold Bluetooth in the mid-10th century. Around the same time, Olaf 
Tryggvason brought Norway under control, also as a Christian king. 
Christianity didn’t change the Vikings’ attitudes toward war very much; only 
now, they have Christian sanction behind them. England was an attractive 
target to these leaders both because of its prosperity and because it was 
already home to large numbers of Danes. The Danes in Denmark ¿ gured that 
if they invaded England, these English Danes might help them. Finally, a 
succession crisis in England, and the weak king who emerged from it, made 
the country look ripe for invasion.
The succession crisis began in 975 when Edgar the Peaceable died, survived 
by two sons by two different mothers. The older son, Edward, succeeded 
the father, but the younger son, Aethelred, had a very powerful mother, 

45
Aelfthryth. Naturally, she wanted her own son on the throne. Both boys were 
underage, so the real ¿ ghting went on not between the heirs but between 
their supporters. Three years into his reign, Edward was assassinated, and 
Aethelred came to the throne. 
Almost immediately, Edward was 
being venerated as Saint Edward 
the Martyr; Aethelred’s entire reign 
was haunted by Edward’s death.
Aethelred is one of the most 
maligned of all English kings; the 
best-known thing about him is his 
nickname, 
Aethelred 
Unraed—
often translated as Aethelred the 
Unready, but more closely meaning 
Aethelred of Bad Counsel. He earned this very unÀ attering nickname by 
failing to defeat the Vikings. 
The Viking raids of England began again in 991 under Olaf Tryggvason, 
leading to the Battle of Maldon. Where Byrhtnoth had refused to pay off 
the invaders, Aethelred later agreed. This was the ¿ rst of the payments 
that would become known as Danegeld, essential tax that was collected at 
irregular intervals down to the 12th century, long after the Viking invasions 
had ceased. This payoff bought the English only a little time; in 994, King 
Swein Forkbeard led a Danish invasion. The king paid them off, and again 
in 1002, and in 1007, and in 1012, and each time the amounts got bigger and 
bigger. Unlike Alfred, Aethelred failed to take advantage of the time he had 
bought, and thus he had to keep paying. And also unlike Alfred, Aethelred 
was an ineffective military commander. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for the 
year 1010 tells us, “when the enemy were in the east, then the army was 
kept in the west; and when they were in the south, then our army was in 
the north.” When Aethelred sought the witan’s advice, “whatever was then 
decided, it did not stand for even one month.” 
One decision Aethelred made had huge implications for English history. 
Concerned about the Vikings getting support from their distant relations in 
Normandy, France, Aethelred decided to marry Duke Richard of Normandy’s 
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for 
the year 1010 tells us, “when 
the enemy were in the east, 
then the army was kept in the 
west; and when they were in 
the south, then our army was 
in the north.”

46
Lecture 10: The Second Viking Conquest
sister, Emma, in 1002. Aethelred already had sons by his earlier marriage, 
including Edmund (later Edmund Ironside); Emma bore him two more, 
Edward and Alfred. But more importantly, she had a grand-nephew named 
William who became the duke of Normandy. 
In 1013, Swein Forkbeard succeeded at last in conquering England, and 
Aethelred À ed to Normandy. But Swein died in 1014, leaving his teenage 
son, Cnut, as king of England. At that point, the English magnates decided 
to invite King Aethelred back, but according to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, 
under one condition: “If he would govern them more justly than he did 
before.” He returned to a country divided into English and Danish factions 
and died soon thereafter, in 1016. Edmund Ironside took up his father’s 
crown. Edmund successfully defended London from a Danish attack, and he 
beat Cnut’s army at the Battle of Assandun in Essex. Edmund and Cnut then 
apparently made an agreement to partition England and rule it jointly.
In the fall of 1016, Edmund Ironside died suddenly, perhaps due to foul 
play. Edmund’s infant son was obviously not ready to rule. Edmund’s half-
brothers, the sons of Aethelred and Emma of Normandy, were also very 
young. The decision fell to the witan, who offered the throne to Cnut. Cnut 
was mostly popular among the English; despite being a foreign conqueror, he 
was a capable leader, which was a welcome change, and an astute politician. 
Not only did he keep most of the familiar English mechanisms of government 
intact, he married Aethelred’s widow, Emma, as a gesture of continuity. 
When Emma bore him a son, Harthacnut, he sent his previous lover (whether 
she was his wife or his mistress is unclear) Aelfgifu of Northampton and 
her son Swein to manage his lands in Norway; in part, this was to stop the 
competition between Aelfgifu and Emma that was causing friction at court. 
Despite this colorful private life, Cnut was a committed Christian who 
patronized the most powerful churches of England. He also made a very 
public and very splendid pilgrimage to Rome in 1027, timed to coincide 
with the coronation of the German emperor. He dealt ruthlessly with 
troublemakers in his court—with deadly force when necessary. Cnut also 
created a new royal bodyguard, the housecarles, an elite ¿ ghting force who 
would become the most reliable part of the English army.

47
Perhaps most importantly, Cnut eased tension between the English and 
Danish by allowing both groups equal access to royal patronage and 
promoting marriages between their important families. One of these 
would have enormous consequences for English history: the marriage of 
his distant relative Gytha to an English nobleman named Godwine, whom 
he also appointed earl of Wessex. (Creating the of¿ ce of earl—similar to 
earldormen, but fewer in number and ruling a large number of shires—was 
one of Cnut’s few changes to English government.) Gytha and Godwine’s 
son, Harold Godwineson, would eventually become the last Anglo-Saxon 
king of England. Ŷ
Danegeld: Tax imposed on England for the ¿ rst time in 991 by Aethelred 
II to buy protection from the invading Danish armies. After the victory of 
Cnut, the tax was known as the heregeld and was used to pay for the king’s 
bodyguard, the housecarles. It later became a tax levied regularly to pay for 
the defense of the realm. It was collected for the last time in 1163. 
housecarles: Danish royal bodyguard serving in England from the time of 
Cnut, paid for by the heregeld. 
Fleming, Britain after Rome.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

48
Lecture 11: The Norman Conquest
The Norman Conquest 
Lecture 11
William had to spend his childhood and young adulthood fending off 
serious challenges to his rule. But … he was able to consolidate ducal 
control of Normandy as never before. So William had good reason to 
think he was capable of taking on a challenge as big as conquering 
England. But did he have a right to do so, and did it matter whether he 
had a right to or not?
S
o far, we’ve seen Britain fall to several waves of invaders—Roman, 
Germanic, and Scandinavian—but now we will turn to the most 
complete and lasting invasion of the island: the Norman Conquest. 
We’ll begin with the reign of the last two Anglo-Saxon kings, Edward the 
Confessor and Harold Godwineson, and then examine the succession crisis 
that unfolded early in 1066, following the main claimants to the throne as 
they try to establish power in England. 
Cnut’s son Harthacnut did not live up to his father. Dying childless in 1042 
after an unpopular reign, he left the throne to his half-brother Edward, 
known to history as the pious Edward the Confessor, the son of Emma and 
Aethelred. Unfortunately, Edward was not a whole lot readier to rule than 
his father had been. Driven into exile during the Danish invasions, he had 
spent the previous three decades at the Norman court. With few supporters in 
England, Edward had to court the approval of the existing English elite. This 
included Godwine of Wessex and his family, the Godwinesons. Godwine 
was a very able courtier, a talented politician, not initially inclined to support 
Edward. But Godwine had a large family with many sons to promote. The 
price of his loyalty was twofold: Edward was to give the earldom of East 
Anglia to Godwine’s very talented son Harold, and Edward was to marry 
Godwine’s daughter, Edith. Thus the Godwinesons directly controlled more 
than half of England and had a grip on the crown as well.
The trouble was that the marriage remained childless. No one knows why, 
but this state of affairs would have tremendous consequences for English 

49
history because it would provide the opening for William of Normandy to 
claim the English throne.
Edward and Edith’s lack of children was not the only tension between 
the king and the Godwinesons. In short, the Godwinesons’ power was 
too great for the king’s comfort, as well as for his supporters’. In 1051, 
one of Edward’s French relatives, Eustace of Boulogne, landed at Dover 
and demanded provisions from the townspeople. They de¿ ed this order 
and roughed up Eustace’s entourage. The king ordered Godwine, who 
was in charge of Dover, to punish the townspeople, but Godwine refused, 
expecting the backing of other English nobles. None was forthcoming. The 
king summoned Godwine to appear for judgment, but he refused him safe 
conduct. Godwine felt he had no option but to À ee England. But it turned out 
that Edward could not rule England without the Godwinesons. By the next 
Harold Godwineson was the ¿ rst English king to be crowned at Westminster 
Abbey, inaugurating a tradition unbroken to this day.
© Stockbyte/Thinkstock.

50
Lecture 11: The Norman Conquest
year, 1052, they were back in England and back in power. Ironically, their 
biggest problem was to come from within.
In 1053, Godwine died, and Harold became earl of Wessex. Two years later, 
Harold’s brother Tostig was named earl of Northumbria. Tensions developed 
between the powerful brothers, and in 1065, when the Northumbrians drove 
Tostig out of Northumbria, and Harold refused to back him, Tostig À ed to his 
wife’s homeland of Flanders and decided to get revenge on his brother. 
That autumn, King Edward fell ill. He spent his last days in the new abbey 
church at Westminster, and his death in January 1066 left no clear heir to 
the English throne. The ¿ rst main claimant was Harold Godwineson, the 
most powerful man in England, distant relation of Cnut, and brother-in-
law to Edward. The witan chose Harold within days of Edward’s death; he 
seemed the best able to take up the burden, and some witnesses claimed that 
Edward designated Harold as his heir on his deathbed. Harold was crowned 
at Westminster Abbey by the bishop of London. 
The second claimant was Harold Hardrada, king of Norway. He claimed 
the throne via his relationship to King Cnut, who had ruled Norway for a 
time as well as Denmark and England. Harold Hardrada also had a long 
and successful military career behind him, and he may have hoped to take 
advantage of any pro-Scandinavian sentiment that might be lingering in 
certain regions of England.
The Bayeux Tapestry chronicles the events leading up to the Norman 
Conquest—at least, the Norman version of those events.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

51
The third claimant was William, duke of Normandy, the illegitimate son of 
Robert III of Normandy. His claim was in many ways the most tenuous and 
also the most complicated. William was only about 36 years old in 1066, but 
he had already experienced a lifetime of military campaigns and political 
intrigue. His father had had to work hard to get William accepted as his heir, 
and his father’s death in the 1030s left eight-year-old William at the mercy of 
his father’s hostile nobles. William spent his childhood and young adulthood 
successfully fending off challenges to his rule, so he had good reason to 
think he was capable of taking on a challenge as big as conquering England. 
William claimed the English throne on two grounds. First, King Edward’s 
mother Emma was also William’s great-aunt. Second and more signi¿ cantly, 
William insisted that in 1064, when William had ransomed Harold out of 
imprisonment by the count of Ponthieu, Harold had promised to support 
William’s claim to England. Anglo-Saxon culture valued oaths very highly, 
so to accuse Harold of oath breaking was to hold him up to serious public 
criticism. The problem is that the sources for this story about Harold’s 
oath are all Norman. To further bolster his claim, he sent an envoy to Pope 
Alexander II, who, based on the claims of Harold’s perjury, gave his blessing 
to the invasion of England.
King Harold had another problem, besides the two men who claimed his 
throne: His brother, Tostig, chose this moment to take his revenge. In May 
1066, Tostig threw his support behind Harold Hardrada and went to Norway 
to help prepare an invasion of England. By that summer, Duke William had 
built hundreds of invasion ships and had assembled a force of 7,000–8,000 
men, including horsemen. So King Harold was facing a threat on both fronts, 
but he was more afraid of William. He assembled his forces on the southern 
coast to meet the invasion, but winds bottled up William’s À eet across 
the channel for week after frustrating week. Harold had to release some 
of his soldiers for the harvest, leaving him mainly with the housecarles. 
Almost immediately, he got word that Harold Hardrada and Tostig had 
invaded Yorkshire.
King Harold raced north to meet the threat, covering a tremendous amount 
of ground in very short order. On September 25, King Harold faced the 
invaders at Stamford Bridge and defeated them decisively; both the king of 

52
Lecture 11: The Norman Conquest
Norway and Tostig were killed in the battle. But two days later, the winds 
in the English Channel shifted, and on September 28, William’s À eet landed 
and occupied the Sussex port of Hastings. Harold rushed south again, 
meeting William’s forces at Hastings on Saturday, October 14, and changed 
the course of English history.
The battle turned out to be a very close contest. Harold had the clear 
advantage; he held the high ground and could use the traditional Anglo-
Saxon shield formation there to best advantage, while William’s job was to 
break it. Having no success breaking Harold’s line with his foot soldiers, 
William sent in the cavalry. Their ¿ rst assault on the English line failed, and 
they retreated. Then suddenly, a cry went out among the Norman soldiers that 
Duke William had been killed. William had to take swift action. He rode out 
in front of his army, across the ranks, with his helmet’s visor lifted to show 
his face. This was enough to stem the rout. Meanwhile, the English broke 
ranks and ran down the hill after the retreating cavalry, leaving themselves 
vulnerable to counterattack. Many of them were cut down. William cleverly 
saw the potential in this maneuver and faked two more retreats to lure the 
English to the lower ground. Ultimately, there were not enough soldiers 
uphill to maintain the shield wall. At last, it was Harold, not William, who 
was killed on the battle¿ eld, supposedly struck by an arrow in the eye. The 
English forces fell apart, and William took the day.
William spent the next two months maneuvering in a wide circle to the 
north and west, from Hastings to London. On Christmas Day 1066, he was 
crowned king in Westminster Abbey, less than a year after the consecration 
of his unfortunate predecessor. Ŷ
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Suggested Reading

53
The Reign of William the Conqueror
Lecture 12
The king had won by using a combination of methods. He always seemed 
to know just the right mixture of bribery and ruthlessness—who did 
you pay off, who did you crush. So that was the lesson of this great 
northern revolt. William would do what it took to maintain control of 
England. From this point on, the English mostly got the point.
W
illiam began his reign thinking he was going to be able to simply 
step into the existing system. As it turned out, he had to exert a lot 
more pressure than he expected to make the English submit. He 
spent the ¿ rst ¿ ve years of his reign responding to revolts by Englishmen; 
later, he had to deal with revolts by some of his Norman followers as well. 
How did he ultimately succeed? By making effective use of England’s 
resources and binding his supporters to him tightly.
One of William’s ¿ rst moves was to take London, but he went about it 
obliquely. He made a long arc around London to the northwest, burning and 
harrying as he went. This was not only a display of power and ruthlessness 
but a practical move to cut the capital off from supplies and reinforcements. 
At the same time, he put out feelers to prominent English leaders—lay 
and clerical—who one by one came over to William’s side. Even Edgar 
Aetheling, the great-grandson of Aethelred whom the witan had chosen 
as Harold’s aetheling, or heir, after the Battle of Hastings, submitted to 
William’s claim. 
After entering London and being crowned by the bishop of York, William’s 
¿ rst priority was to shore up his defenses. He began construction on the 
Tower of London, the ¿ rst of many castles he constructed throughout 
England. He also held talks with leading Englishmen, promising that little 
would change from the way Edward the Confessor had managed the country. 
And he kept that promise: Writs continued to be written in Old English, 
and the courts met as usual. In fact, the transition was so smooth, William’s 
position so secure, he was able to return to Normandy to deal with troubles 
there during the ¿ rst year of his reign. Of course, he didn’t do so without 

54
Lecture 12: The Reign of William the Conqueror
some insurance; he took several prominent English noblemen and high-
ranking church of¿ cials with him, as his “guests,” including the archbishop 
of Canterbury, earls Edwin and Morcar, and Edgar Aetheling. His mistake 
was letting his guests go too quickly.
Starting late in 1067, rebellions started breaking out in the west of England. 
Then, in 1068, Edwin and Morcar, with another leader named Gospatric, 
asked the Danish king, Sweyn Estrithson, if he would help them get rid of 
William in exchange for the throne. Meanwhile another group of earls were 
supporting Edgar Aetheling, who had settled himself in Scotland. William 
responded to all of these plots and rebellions with vigor, building castles and 
demanding submission wherever he went. Then a serious rebellion broke 
out in 1069 in Durham, starting with the murder of a Norman of¿ cial, and 
spread to York. Edgar was poised to strike from Scotland, but he was not fast 
enough. King Sweyn sent one of his sons to try to take England by taking a 
À eet up the Humber River. Edgar and other northern magnates joined in this 
revolt. York was retaken from the Normans. The Scottish king, Malcolm, 
The Tower of London was the ¿ rst of William I’s many castles.
© AbleStock.com/Hemera Technologies/Getty Images.

55
married Edgar’s sister Margaret as a show of solidarity. Things looked bad 
for William.
This time, as William traveled north, he took up a policy of destruction 
rather than construction. They destroyed every farm and village in their 
path, killed every male they came 
across, and killed all the livestock 
they could get their hands on. 
William retook York rather easily, 
then he ordered his troops to fan 
out across the countryside and 
continue the devastation. The revolt 
¿ nally ended with William’s winter 
attack on a group of English rebels holding out near Chester. The Danes, 
discouraged, accepted a bribe from William and sailed out of the Humber. 
William faced one more invasion in 1070, when King Sweyn invaded in 
person, with Edwin and Morcar’s support and that of the English thegn of 
Lincolnshire, Hereward. They sacked Peterborough Abbey. William simply 
bribed Sweyn into leaving and went after Hereward, who À ed to the marshes 
of Ely. Most of Hereward’s rebels surrendered after a brief siege; somehow, 
Hereward disappeared, and no one knows his fate. Edwin was betrayed and 
killed by his own followers. Morcar was imprisoned. Edgar resubmitted to 
William and settled down to a relatively quiet life. William had quelled this 
great northern revolt, the last English revolt of his reign. From here on, his 
troubles would come from the Normans. 
After all this, of course, William had to rethink his policies. He began 
putting more of his own people into positions of power, replaced English 
clergy with Normans, and began issuing writs in Latin. He carried out 
systematic con¿ scation of English lands and redistributed them to Norman 
supporters. The English were almost completely shut out of power overnight, 
but for the people living on these lands, little changed. William’s method 
of redistribution was rather haphazard, however, and one lord’s various 
holdings might be scattered throughout England. As a result, the nobility 
didn’t have secure territorial power bases that they might hold against the 
As William traveled north, he 
took up a policy of destruction 
rather than construction.

56
Lecture 12: The Reign of William the Conqueror
king. In addition, these noblemen had a stake in the welfare of the whole of 
England, not just one corner of it.
In a few places, William deliberately created one large chunk of land for 
one particular magnate to rule, including Chester near the Welsh border 
and Durham near the Scottish. He would rather have a lord with a secure 
power base than have weak borders. These compact lordships were called 
palatinates, and they were ruled over by an earl in Chester and a bishop
in Durham.
There is a big debate among historians about whether or not William 
introduced feudalism to England—and in fact about the value of feudalism 
as a formal concept at all. In essence, feudalism is the exchange of ¿ efs—
that is, pieces of land—for service, usually military service. The idea that 
an 11th-century king engaged in formal distribution of ¿ efs is a fallacy; in 
the 11th century, little about kingship was formalized. Historians are also 
divided over how important ¿ efs were before the Norman Conquest. But 
it is probably fair to say that William increased the importance of ¿ efs
in England.
That said, in 1075, William had to face a major rebellion by those very 
Norman lords he had just given land to. The earl of Hereford and the earl of 
East Anglia, both Normans, felt the king wasn’t giving them enough favor. 
This revolt never amounted to much militarily, but it shows that William 
had his problems with his Norman supporters just as much as he did with 
his English subjects, if not more so. William tried to promote the idea that in 
theory all land in England was held of the king. But he injected a new kind 
of discipline into this feudal structure. In August 1086, William gathered all 
the great landowners of the country at Salisbury and demanded they swear 
a personal oath of loyalty to him. This Salisbury Oath had an important 
implication. Normally, a feudal lord’s loyalty was to the lord immediately 
above him in the pyramid. With this oath, William made the claim that every 
landholder, from the top to the bottom of the chain, was ultimately beholden 
to the king. This is a new idea in feudal kingship.

57
When William died in 1087, the English accepted his son, William II, as 
king, without a murmur of opposition. That was quite an achievement for a 
foreign conqueror with a dubious claim to the throne. Ŷ
aetheling: Anglo-Saxon title designating the heir to the throne.
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

58
Lecture 13: ConÀ ict and Assimilation
ConÀ ict and Assimilation
Lecture 13
People came to feel that the information in Domesday Book was 
supposed to last until the end of time, hence “Domesday.” But William 
wasn’t thinking about the end of time; he was thinking about right 
now. … Essentially, the king wants to know everything he can about the 
productive capacity of England. How rich are we?
A
lthough the changes the Norman Conquest brought to England were 
slower and more subtle for most English people than they were for 
the ruling elite, the contact between English and Norman cultures 
would eventually ¿ lter down to everyone. One of the best sources we have 
for life in England shortly after the conquest is the famous Domesday 
Book. Essentially a catalog of the resources of the nation, it is an extremely 
complicated document that raises a lot of controversy among historians. 
Why did William undertake this enormous project? What did he intend to 
use this information for?
What isn’t in dispute among historians is how lucky we are to have the 
Domesday Book. In 1086, William sent his agents to gather data about how 
many hides (that is, pieces of land meant to support a single family) England 
contained; how many hides belonged to the king, the various barons, and the 
bishops; how much revenue these hides could produce; and, interestingly, 
what these lands used to produce in the time of Edward the Confessor. This 
last would tell him how the economy had changed in the 20 years since the 
Norman Conquest. 
Nothing like this survey had ever been attempted before. Hundreds, possibly 
thousands of people were involved in creating the ¿ nal product. William 
created commissions, small groups of of¿ cials who were assigned to one of 
seven circuits, or territories, made up several counties. In each county, the 
commissioners convened juries of local men from each hundred, and asked 
the jurors a series of questions about the land in that hundred: Who owns 
what land, where, and how much is it worth? They were asked about the 
land’s value now, “in the time of King William,” as well as its value “in the 

59
time of King Edward.” (The commissioners probably gathered information 
from written records as well, but none of those records survive.) The juries 
were also sometimes asked to pronounce a verdict on lands in dispute, 
although occasionally they were unable—or unwilling—to do so. 
Ironically, some of the differences in value can be directly traced to William’s 
harrying of the lands around London and the harrying of the north he 
carried out to secure his throne. However, there wasn’t a consistent pattern 
across England of how land values had changed—the economy was fairly 
localized—but in general lands that had not been crossed by any armies 
fared better than those that had. 
Finally, the commissioners recorded their information on sheets of 
parchments called briefs. The briefs were brought to a central location, where 
scribes consolidated and sometimes abbreviated the data. 
So we understand the process of creating the Domesday Book, but we 
still can’t be certain why William created it. There are several prominent 
theories. Some historians think the king wanted to impose a new kind of 
tax in England based on a unit called the ploughland. But the information in 
the Domesday Book is not ideal for collecting taxes; it is organized ¿ rst by 
county, then by landowner. If someone owns more than one piece of land, 
the government would have to levy lots of little taxes on each person. But 
the biggest problem with this argument is that William didn’t change the tax 
system when the book was complete. 
One of the most interesting theories ties the Domesday Book to the Oath 
of Salisbury: One historian has argued that the king extracted the oath in 
exchange for the Domesday Book. In other words, it’s a quid pro quo: You 
promise to serve me loyally, and I’ll ratify the titles to your land. Other 
historians have pointed out, though, that most people weren’t worried about 
how secure their title was.
At the end of some of the county records in the Domesday Book, there is a 
section called clamores, meaning “complaints,” those tricky disputes where 
the juries didn’t want to get involved. A remarkable number of these disputes 
were addressed in the royal courts in the decades after the Domesday Book 

60
Lecture 13: ConÀ ict and Assimilation
was compiled; the last of these was settled well into the 12th century. On a 
more general level, for centuries afterward, people who found themselves 
arguing over a particular piece of property would point to the information 
in the Domesday Book as evidence 
of their rights. While settling land 
disputes may not have been the 
book’s intended purpose, it was 
certainly one of its main uses.
The book has now been digitized, 
so we can learn a tremendous 
amount about the English economy 
at the time of the survey simply by 
crunching the Domesday numbers. The data points to a society where the 
social structure varied somewhat from region to region. There were large 
numbers of slaves and serfs in England in 1086; but in some areas, especially 
in eastern England, there were many free men, people who either owned their 
land outright or owed very minimal obligations for it. The overwhelming 
majority of England’s people were directly dependent on agriculture, and 
most farmers worked on manors owned by lords. Two-¿ eld crop rotation was 
being replaced by three-¿ eld crop rotation, which meant more land under 
cultivation at any one time. Major crops included wheat, rye, and legumes. 
Most farmers still plowed with teams of oxen, often communally owned by 
the village, so oxen were a particular item of interest in the Domesday Book.
The most dramatic change in the landscape was undoubtedly the creation 
of the forest law. William the Conqueror created a brand-new institution; 
certain areas of England were declared the royal forest, and special laws 
would apply there. Hunting and trapping game were restricted, and only 
the king could hunt for deer; harvesting timber was prohibited; and the 
punishments for violating these laws were severe. Given how important wild 
animals and plants were to making a living in England, these restrictions 
could be a real hardship to a community. 
Changes in the lives of those higher up the social ladder were undergoing 
signi¿ cantly more change in the early years of Norman rule. Intermarriage 
between English and Normans began almost immediately, with the king’s 
We can learn a tremendous 
amount about the English 
economy at the time of the 
survey simply by crunching the 
Domesday numbers.

61
encouragement; one of the easiest ways to transfer property was to marry 
an English heiress to a Norman lord. The children of these marriages often 
grew up bilingual in French and English. Upwardly mobile Englishmen did 
what they could to learn French, because it was both socially prestigious 
and practically advantageous. Fewer Normans learned English; the higher up 
you were, the less you had to bother with it. The English also began giving 
children Norman names—fewer Wulfrics, more Williams. Fortunately, the 
conquest stimulated a passion for English history that cut across ethnic 
lines. Many works of English history were written by historians of every 
ethnic background. They tended to write in Latin, although Geoffrey Gaimar 
translated the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle into French.
This is not to say that there was no ethnic tension. The highest of¿ ces of 
church and state were out of the reach of English men. And there are signs 
that the Normans looked down on the English, at least for a generation or 
two. For example, King Henry I, who ruled in the early 12th century, sought 
out and won the hand in marriage of the great-granddaughter of Edmund 
Ironside. Henry asked that his son, William, be known as aetheling, but some 
of his Norman subjects mocked him for this. But overall, England came 
through the conquest with less ethnic conÀ ict that one might expect. Ŷ
clamores: From the Latin for “outcries”; complaints recorded in the 
Domesday Book about unjust seizures of land following the Norman 
Conquest. The clamores were presented by juries with knowledge of the 
history of local estates.
forest law: Law applied to areas of England set aside for hunting by the king 
after the Norman Conquest. Interference with animals in areas designated as 
forest (which were not necessarily wooded) could be punished by mutilation 
or death until the granting of the Forest Charter in 1217, which accompanied 
the reissue of the Magna Carta by Henry III.
    Important Terms

62
Lecture 13: ConÀ ict and Assimilation
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Suggested Reading

63
Henry I—The Lion of Justice
Lecture 14
As soon as Henry had inspected the body and veri¿ ed that his brother 
was dead, he … hurried straight to Winchester, where he seized the 
treasury. The next morning, William Rufus was solemnly buried in 
Winchester Cathedral, with Henry in attendance. … By Saturday, 
Henry was in London, and on Sunday, he was crowned in Westminster 
Abbey. The man on the spot was now king.
I
n this lecture, we’re going to get to know King Henry I, because besides 
having this pro-English outlook that he got teased for, he was one of 
the most important kings in English history. He consolidated the gains 
William the Conqueror had made, and he presided over important advances 
in government over his long reign. But before we get to Henry on the throne, 
we need to look at how he got there.
William the Conqueror died in 1087, the year after the Salisbury Oath. He 
left behind three grown sons: Robert, William (called William Rufus for his 
ruddy complexion), and Henry. William did not leave everything to Robert; 
instead, he divided the inheritance among them. Robert, the eldest, seems 
to have been his mother’s favorite but got on his father’s bad side a lot; he 
repeatedly rebelled against William. 
William had a slow decline before his death, and he had the time to make 
careful plans for the succession. He was determined to disinherit Robert, 
but his barons persuaded him to let Robert have Normandy. The crown of 
England would go to William Rufus. All Henry got was 5,000 pounds of 
silver, but he used the money to buy land in western Normandy from Robert 
and set about building a base of support there. 
Many families by this point had lands in Normandy and lands in England 
and were unhappy that they now owed allegiance to two men. Throughout 
William Rufus’s 13 years as king, the English barons made attempts to 
secure England for Robert; conversely, William interfered with Robert’s 
barons in Normandy. Meanwhile, Henry’s loyalties À ipped back and forth 

64
Lecture 14: Henry I—The Lion of Justice
between his brothers, supporting whichever gave him a better deal at that 
moment. But Henry’s path to the crown would not be secured in England or 
in Normandy but in Jerusalem.
In 1095, Pope Urban II preached a crusade against the Turks. All over 
Europe, men took the cross; one of them was Robert. To ¿ nance his crusade, 
he mortgaged the duchy of Normandy William Rufus. Of course, he expected 
to buy it back on his return. But when he returned to reclaim his lands from 
William, he found Henry on the throne of England. What had happened? 
As a king, William Rufus was popular with everyone but the clergy; he was 
not a pious man and had a habit of con¿ scating church revenues whenever 
the death or exile of a bishop gave him a chance. It was a great shock when 
he died in a hunting accident in August 1100. The circumstances gave rise 
to many conspiracy theories, but none of them has ever been proven. But on 
his death, Henry certainly seized his opportunity with both hands. William 
died on a Thursday; by Sunday, Henry had secured the royal treasury, buried 
William, gotten himself to London, and gotten himself crowned. When 
Robert returned to Normandy in September, he discovered he had been shut 
out of the succession once again. The one saving grace for Robert was that 
William’s death had canceled his mortgage debt.
Henry made some prudent moves to shore up his position. He issued the 
Charter of Liberties to the English church pledging to respect their rights 
and had copies sent to every English shire. He also found himself a wife who 
was descended from the house of Wessex: Princess Edith of Scotland, the 
great-granddaughter of Edmund Ironside. (Once they were married, Edith 
took the French name Matilda as a gesture to the Normans.) When Robert 
made a half-hearted attempt to invade England and take the crown, Henry 
bought him off with an annuity. As it turned out, he was also buying time. 
In 1106, Henry invaded Normandy, the culmination of years of scheming, 
planning, and bribing Robert’s followers. His army attacked Robert at the 
castle of Tinchebray in southwestern Normandy. Robert was captured in 
battle and was held captive by Henry for the next 28 years, until Robert’s 
death in 1134. Henry now had no serious rival for the crown, although for 
many years he struggled to hold Normandy, particularly against Robert’s 
son, William Clito.

65
Henry is an intriguing personality, but why was he so important to English 
history? Most historians give him credit for being an administrative pioneer. 
He made a compromise with the church over the lay investiture controversy 
that satis¿ ed church of¿ cials but still gave the crown some inÀ uence over 
appointment of bishops. He also presided over church councils to help the 
church crack down on clerical marriage. He reorganized the royal household 
to make it more ef¿ cient. But his most famous advance is instituting the 
Exchequer—the auditing department 
of the Treasury—which allowed the 
English kings to keep much better 
track of their revenues than any other 
contemporary European monarch. 
We don’t know exactly who came up 
with the idea for the Exchequer, but it 
was probably the brainchild of one of 
Henry’s crack administrators. Henry 
liked talent, was good at snif¿ ng it out, and promoted some skilled but less 
socially connected men to important posts, for which he took À ack from the 
nobility. It was good for Henry that he had capable administrators, because 
like all kings in this period, Henry had to take a lot of trips and make a lot 
of appearances to keep the nobility in line. Henry seems to have issued a lot 
of writs; over 1,500 of these disposable orders survive from his reign. They 
cover an enormous range of topics, from regulating the courts to arranging 
the burial of his wife, Matilda. But many of them have to do with private 
land transactions. Adjudicating land disputes was not a systematic process, 
and there was plenty of favoritism at work. Still, this enormous mass of writs 
does testify to Henry’s appetite for administration. 
But despite all these administrative achievements, Henry was limited 
in how he could keep track of his subordinates, due to the dif¿ culties of 
transportation and communication across the realm. The most notorious 
episode of royal servants going rogue took place in 1124. Henry discovered 
that the English moneyers were debasing the silver coins (that is, using less 
silver and more base metal) and skimming off the extra for themselves. The 
king was so furious that he ordered that all the moneyers in England should 
be deprived of their right hands and their genitals. The moneyers were duly 
Henry liked talent, was 
good at snif¿ ng it out, and 
promoted some skilled but 
less socially connected men 
to important posts.

66
Lecture 14: Henry I—The Lion of Justice
summoned to Winchester and mutilated. The two lessons to be drawn here 
are that the king had a strong enough administration to carry out this brutal 
sentence on such a large scale, but he did not have the ability to forestall the 
corruption in the ¿ rst place.
Henry’s contemporaries had mixed feelings about their king. The Anglo-
Saxon Chronicle praises Henry for providing law and order. But in the 
Worcester Chronicle, we have a story of Henry being attacked in his 
nightmares by all three “orders” of society—peasants, knights, and clerics. 
Obviously, some felt that the king was something of a tyrant. Ŷ
Exchequer: Accounting branch of the medieval English treasury. By the 
reign of Henry I, sheriffs would account for their expenditures at twice-
yearly sessions at which counters representing various sums of money would 
be manipulated on a board covered by a checkered cloth. Records of the 
exchequer accounts were kept in the Pipe Rolls. 
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

67
The Anarchy of Stephen’s Reign
Lecture 15
Matilda and her husband Geoffrey were ambitious people, and Matilda 
ended up acting just like any other adult royal child who isn’t being 
given enough power or responsibility to keep her busy. … They were 
actually in rebellion against Henry I in the fall of 1135 when the king 
suddenly fell ill, so they were not “on the spot.”
C
ompared to what followed, Henry I’s reign would seem like the good 
old days to the English people. Henry died in 1135 without a clear 
heir. England needed a strong king with the right combination of 
intelligence, energy and ruthlessness to get the job done. Under England’s 
somewhat fuzzy system of inheritance, you could end up with the wrong 
man for the job on the throne—or worse, not knowing which man belonged 
there at all. And what if the “right man” for the job turned out to be a woman? 
King Henry had many illegitimate children, but only two of his legitimate 
children survived to adulthood. One was Matilda, who was married at the 
age of 10 to the Holy Roman emperor Henry V. The other was William 
Aetheling, who was raised at the English court and who grew up to be, in 
modern terms, a party animal. In November 1120, he threw a raucous party 
on board the White Ship, which was meant to carry him from Normandy 
to England that night. The ship hit a rock on its way out of the harbor and 
sank, taking William and two of his half-siblings to their deaths. One man 
who left the ship before it sailed was Stephen, count of Mortain, nephew 
of King Henry. His survival would shortly have a signi¿ cant effect on
English history.
Along with his grief, Henry was left with a serious problem. The English 
barons and clergy were no longer open to the idea of a bastard succeeding 
to the throne. At this point, Henry had been a widow for two years, so he 
married Adeliza of Louvain and tried to beget a legitimate son, to no avail. 
The next obvious choice of heir was Stephen, who was a royal favorite, 
or one of Stephen’s brothers. But in 1125, Matilda was widowed, which 
made her eligible for a politically advantageous marriage. Hoping that 

68
Lecture 15: The Anarchy of Stephen’s Reign
she could supply an acceptable grandson to be his heir, Henry summoned
Matilda home.
Henry married Matilda to Geoffrey, the son of the count of Anjou, and he 
made his barons swear to support Matilda as his heir. This was unpopular 
among both English and Norman barons; they neither cared for Matilda’s 
Angevin husband nor for the idea of a female monarch. They assumed—
probably quite wrongly, given Matilda’s personality—that Geoffrey would 
rule in his wife’s name. Matilda and Geoffrey’s marriage was in fact stormy; 
after being an empress, Matilda considered a mere count to be beneath her. 
But they were both ambitious and so overcame their differences to produce 
three sons, much to Henry’s delight. They also grew impatient, like many 
heirs before them, and were actually in rebellion against Henry when he fell 
ill and died in the fall of 1135 after dining on a “surfeit of eels.” 
Matilda was in Anjou when she heard of Henry’s death, and she moved 
immediately to seize Normandy. However, when Count Stephen got the 
news, he was in Boulogne, just across the channel from England. He set sail 
at once and made for Winchester to secure the English treasury, just as Henry 
had done. On December 22, 1135, Stephen was crowned king of England by 
the archbishop of Canterbury. The Norman nobles did not care for Matilda 
and cared even less for Geoffrey, so they accepted Stephen as their duke
as well. 
That’s how the situation stood for the next three years, while Matilda tried 
to gather enough strength to claim her legal inheritance. Her strongest 
supporter was her half-brother Robert, earl of Gloucester, who ¿ rst swore 
allegiance to Stephen, then rebelled on Matilda’s behalf in 1138. Then King 
David of Scotland, who was Matilda’s uncle, also invaded England, but the 
Scots were beaten decisively at the Battle of the Standard in Yorkshire. 
In the spring of 1139, a faction ¿ ght split Stephen’s court. One faction was 
led by Roger, bishop of Salisbury, the head of the royal administration (a 
holdover from Henry I’s reign). The other was led by the Beaumont twins—
Waleran, count of Meulan, and Robert, earl of Leicester. The Beaumonts 
provoked Roger’s followers into breaching the king’s peace, and Roger and 
several other bishops were arrested, which crippled Stephen’s administration 

69
and angered the clergy. Then, in September, Matilda’s forces invaded; 
Matilda established a base at Arundel Castle in Sussex, while Gloucester 
made his way to Bristol, in the heart of his own lands. A civil war was about 
to begin. 
Each of these two claimants to the English throne had strengths and 
weaknesses: Stephen was personally brave but a poor strategist and politician. 
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says he was “a mild man, and gentle and good, 
and did no justice.” Matilda had something of the opposite problem; she 
was haughty to the point of arrogance (she still insisted on being called 
“empress”), and this arrogance would get her into serious trouble.
The war dragged on for years, fought in minor skirmishes in disputed areas, 
particularly in the fens of eastern England and in the midlands around 
Oxford. Among the more dramatic 
battles was the Battle of Lincoln on 
February 2, 1141, which began with 
Stephen’s siege of Lincoln Castle 
but quickly turned to Stephen being 
pinned between the castle and 
Gloucester’s forces. Stephen was 
captured in the battle, so Matilda headed for London to be crowned. After 
complicated and protracted negotiations, she entered Westminster, but in her 
arrogance she offended Henry, bishop of Winchester, who was Stephen’s 
brother but had come over to her side. Worse still, Matilda offended the 
Londoners by responding to their petition for tax relief by raising their taxes. 
The enraged Londoners drove her out of the city. She À ed to Oxford, from 
which she advanced on Winchester to besiege Bishop Henry and reclaim 
his allegiance. Stephen’s supporters came up from London to attack her at 
Winchester. Matilda barely escaped, but Gloucester, her most loyal and most 
powerful supporter, was captured. Inevitably, Matilda exchanged Gloucester 
for Stephen, and the ¿ ghting continued until Matilda ¿ nally withdrew to 
France in 1148. 
Historians argue about the impact of this civil war on the people of England. 
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle calls the period “a time when Christ and his 
saints slept.” On the other hand, the functions of government seemed to 
The Norman nobles did not 
care for Matilda and cared even 
less for Geoffrey.

70
Lecture 15: The Anarchy of Stephen’s Reign
carry on more or less as normal. Things were undoubtedly worse in some 
areas of England than in others, and overall it was an unwelcome break from 
the relative peace and prosperity under the other Norman kings. It’s worth 
noting that there has never been a King Stephen II in England. And although 
she left the ¿ eld of battle, in a way Matilda won the war: Her son, Henry, 
would succeed Stephen to the throne. Ŷ
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Suggested Reading

71
Henry II—Law and Order
Lecture 16
Now that you know some of the melancholy aspects of Henry’s 
reign in advance, let me start by saying that his achievements were 
nothing short of astonishing. He managed not only to restore order 
to a kingdom recently ravaged by civil war; he also, in the process, 
presided over the birth of the English Common Law, which is the 
foundation of the legal system for not just Britain but also the many 
current and former members of the British Commonwealth and, of 
course, the United States.
T
oward the end of Stephen’s reign, Matilda gave up her claim to the 
throne in favor of her oldest son, Henry. By the 1150s, Henry I was 
being remembered quite fondly as someone who had at least kept 
order, and therefore many people were ready to welcome his grandson. 
Stephen was exhausted from the war and, in 1153, devastated by the sudden 
death of his oldest son, Eustace. Stephen agreed to make Henry his heir, and 
he took the throne peacefully as Henry II when Stephen died in 1154. 
Henry II was larger than life, and his long and complicated reign really 
deserves two full lectures. In this ¿ rst lecture, we’ll deal largely with 
Henry the law-and-order man, whose passionate efforts to concentrate legal 
authority in royal hands led directly to the epic struggle with the archbishop 
of Canterbury, Thomas Becket.  
It helps to understand a little bit about Henry’s character. He was famously 
hot-tempered and given to almost ungovernable rages. He had phenomenal 
energy, a huge asset for a ruler in this period. Henry also had a very vigorous 
notion of the rights of kings, even with regard to the church. He came to 
the throne young, at the age of 21, newly married to Eleanor of Aquitaine, 
the greatest heiress in France and the ex-wife of the French king; through 
Eleanor, Henry added southwestern France to his kingdom. 
It was now Henry’s job to restore order after nearly two decades of conÀ ict. 
Central authority in England had been severely compromised; local barons 

72
Lecture 16: Henry II—Law and Order
and lords had taken over royal castles and built many new ones that were 
in their own personal control. These “adulterine castles” were a danger to 
royal control because it was relatively easy for a baron or earl to defy the 
king from within a forti¿ ed base; medieval warfare favored defense. So one 
of Henry’s ¿ rst moves as king was to visit all the questionable castles and 
demand their surrender into royal hands. Dozens of castles reverted to royal 
control; those he didn’t want to maintain were simply razed. Henry also set 
about ruthlessly recovering ǧ3,000 worth of royal lands that had slipped out 
of royal control. In essence, 
Henry was trying to undo 
the civil war and restore the 
throne to its status under 
the rule of his grandfather, 
Henry I.
But Henry did more than 
just restore wealth and 
control to the crown; he 
fundamentally changed the 
way in which English people 
viewed the administration 
of justice. In fact, we can 
credit him, very distantly, 
with fostering acceptance 
of the rule of law, rather 
than rule of might. During 
the civil war, a kind of self-
help justice system had 
developed, leading to a lot 
of disorder in the countryside. Henry decided to make it more attractive for 
people to settle their disputes in the royal courts than with their own ¿ sts 
and swords by devising a series of standardized writs that gave people clear 
and guaranteed access to recognized procedures in the royal courts. This 
standardization lowered the cost of the writs and streamlined the whole 
process of dealing with disputes. The most important of these writs was the 
writ of novel disseisin—or “newly dispossessed.” If someone had recently 
“disseised” you of your property, you could go to the king’s court, get a writ 
Henry II (r. 1154–1189) created the legal 
institutions that are the foundation of 
modern jurisprudence.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

73
of novel disseisin, and have the sheriff eject the people who had taken your 
property. The sheriff would thus be restoring the status quo, and then the case 
could be decided on its merits, not on who held the land at the moment. Also 
popular was the writ of mort d’ancestor, which literally means “death of 
your ancestor,” which you could get if your lord had blocked you from your 
rightful inheritance. The writ asked the sheriff to convene a jury of 12 lawful 
men, who would decide who was the nearest heir, and then the sheriff would 
put that person in possession. These two writs were popular not only because 
they were cheaper and safer than ¿ ghting but because their existence made 
people with property feel more secure, and the people began to trust that the 
ultimate source of that security was the king’s law. 
Henry II was also determined to reform English criminal law. To that end, 
he set about reforming the royal approach to crime. He sent out roving 
commissions of judges called eyres speci¿ cally tasked with sweeping up 
criminals and trying their cases.  He increased the royal supervision of 
the courts run by barons on their own lands. And he went after a group 
of people whom he considered to be threats to public order because 
they tended to escape royal jurisdiction altogether: the clergy. Before 
the Norman Conquest, this would not have been a controversial issue. 
A criminous clerk would have been tried like anyone else. But William 
the Conqueror had allowed the church jurisdiction over certain cases, 
particularly those related to marriage, and certain kinds of people, namely 
anyone in the clerical orders. In practice, clerks accused of really serious 
crimes would ¿ rst be stripped of their clerical status in the church courts 
and then handed over to the royal courts, but this was merely custom, 
not law. Henry wanted this practice set in law, which brought him into 
opposition with the archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Becket. 
Becket (who called himself Thomas of London; the “à” in “Thomas à 
Becket” was a 16th-century À ourish added by others) was the son of a 
Norman merchant. He was neither rich nor well connected, and he was not 
exceptionally brilliant. But he was handsome, strong willed, and charming; 
one of those who succumbed to his charm was Henry II. They met early 
in Henry’s reign and became best friends. Henry also appointed Becket his 
chancellor, then promoted Thomas to archbishop of Canterbury in 1162 over 
his more obvious rivals, such as the bishop of London. 

74
Lecture 16: Henry II—Law and Order
Not all of Becket’s contemporaries were as enamored of Becket as Henry 
was. In fact, he was extremely controversial within his own lifetime. Even 
members of his inner circle thought he brought his problems on himself, 
and there were many people who were outright hostile to him; one Norman 
monk wrote that he was the chief villain of Henry’s reign. And shortly after 
Becket became archbishop, his friendship with the king soured. It seems that 
Henry thought he was ¿ nally going to have an archbishop who was “his” 
man; Thomas seemed to think he now had his own power base and no longer 
had to dance to the king’s tune. Thomas immediately drew a ¿ rm line in the 
sand: Whenever the rights and privileges of the church of Canterbury were 
threatened by the king in any way, he would ¿ ght back.
When Becket resisted Henry’s attempt to prosecute the criminous clerks, the 
king produced the Constitutions of Clarendon formalizing the previously 
informal process of handing them over to the secular courts—and in fact 
obliging the church to do so. Becket accepted the document under threat 
of violence, then later renounced it. This enraged both his fellow bishops, 
whom he had made accept the document against their consciences, and of 
course angered the king.
From this point on, Thomas and Henry could not stop provoking each other. 
Little disputes got magni¿ ed out of all proportion. Finally, the king decided 
to bring Becket down for good and accused him of embezzlement during 
his days as chancellor. We cannot be certain, but it is likely this was a bogus 
charge. However, the charge was serious enough that Becket À ed to the 
Continent. It would be six years before he returned to England. Ŷ
Constitutions of Clarendon: Imposed on Thomas Becket, archbishop of 
Canterbury, by Henry II in 1164, the constitutions spelled out the rights 
of the English royal courts with respect to the church courts in England, 
especially the right to try criminous clerks. Becket’s humiliating acceptance 
of the constitutions and subsequent renunciation of his oath to abide by them 
cost him support among his bishops. 
    Important Terms

75
criminous clerk: A man in one of the seven grades of the clerical order 
who has been accused of a secular crime. Ordinarily, criminous clerks 
were supposed to be turned over to the church courts for trial, but Henry II 
demanded that the worst offenders be tried by the royal courts. Treatment of 
criminous clerks was one of the salient issues in the dispute between the king 
and Thomas Becket. 
eyre: Circuit of courts under the jurisdiction of an itinerant commission 
of judges. The circuit of the justices in eyre was established on a regular 
basis by Henry II in 1176, though itinerant judges had occasionally been 
used earlier.
mort d’ancestor: Writ devised in 1176 under Henry II whereby tenants 
could be swiftly put in possession of inherited lands.
novel disseisin: Writ devised in 1166 under Henry II whereby those 
disseised (deprived) of land could purchase a writ ordering the sheriff of the 
shire in which the estate lay to restore them to possession until the case could
be adjudicated.
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Suggested Reading

76
Lecture 17: Henry II—The Expansion of Empire
Henry II—The Expansion of Empire
Lecture 17
The result of all of this inheritance, and marriage, and conquest … is 
an astonishing conglomeration of territories, especially when you think 
about trying to control all of this land under the conditions of the 12th
century. Henry had Ireland, England, and half of France under his 
control, at least in theory. In reality, the degree of royal control in each 
of these areas varied considerably. 
B
efore we examine the fate of Thomas Becket, we need to look at 
some other aspects of Henry II’s early reign and the creation of the 
so-called Angevin Empire. Henry inherited Normandy and England 
from his mother, Empress Matilda. Henry inherited the county of Anjou 
from his father, along with the counties of Maine and the Touraine. Together, 
these lands constituted an enormous, contiguous lordship that dominated 
northwestern France. Through marrying Eleanor of Aquitaine, he acquired 
Aquitaine and Poitou. Finally, Henry married his third son, Geoffrey, to the 
heiress to Brittany. Through these maneuvers, Henry ruled half of France, as 
well as England.
Henry also acquired land by conquest—namely, the “Norman” conquest 
of Ireland. In the 1160s, Ireland was divided among many warring kings, 
none of whom could control the whole island. The exiled King Diarmait of 
Leinster tracked down King Henry II, who was in Aquitaine at the time, to 
ask for help in recovering his throne. Henry put him off but gave Diarmait 
permission to see if any of Henry’s lords might be willing to help out on a 
private basis. Diarmait ¿ nally found some tough Welsh marcher (or border) 
lords interested in the adventure. Richard FitzGilbert de Clare, lord of 
Strigoil (later known as Strongbow), agreed to help Diarmait in exchange for 
the hand of Diarmait’s daughter Aoife and being made heir to the kingdom 
of Leinster. By 1171, Diarmait and Strongbow had made Diarmait more 
powerful in Ireland than ever before.
Henry hadn’t expected Diarmait’s plan to work so well, and he wasn’t 
sure he would be able to control the Welsh marcher lords once they had a 

77
secure power base in far-off Ireland. So Henry went to Ireland in person 
in 1171 establish his own authority there, essentially rebranding Diarmait’s 
rescue into an English royal venture. Thus the English lordship of Ireland 
was created, and the very long, very contentious history of England’s rule of 
Ireland was begun.
So by 1171, Henry had England, Ireland, and half of France under his 
control, although the degree of control varied considerably. Although 
historians call this the Angevin Empire, there was no integrated 
administration or institutions as in the Roman Empire, for example. Ireland 
was never completely conquered, although Henry had established a secure 
foothold there, particularly in the south and east. And Henry’s French lands 
were almost as different from one another as France was from England. 
Predictably, the various areas of the empire were ¿ ercely independent. 
Poitou and Aquitaine, in particular, were a real headache for Henry. 
So what was his plan to govern this huge mess? Basically, his goal was to 
control the whole while he was alive, then on his death a manageable chunk 
of the empire to each of his four sons—Henry, Richard, Geoffrey and John. 
Henry would get England, Normandy, and Anjou. Richard would inherit his 
mother’s lands, Poitou and Aquitaine. Geoffrey would rule Brittany through 
his marriage. The youngest, John, was at ¿ rst called John Lackland because 
this inheritance scheme was drawn up before he was born, and nothing was 
left for him. When Henry gained control of Ireland, however, he made John 
its lord—problem solved. 
This plan might have worked if it weren’t for the fact that the Angevin royal 
family was one of the most dysfunctional families in all of English royal 
history, starting with the very volatile relationship between Henry II and his 
wife, Eleanor of Aquitaine. Eleanor had married Louis VII of France at an 
early age, and they were clearly unsuited to each other. Eleanor loved music 
and poetry and parties; Louis was perhaps more suited to the cloister than the 
battle¿ eld. Because of their incompatibility (and, more importantly, because 
the marriage produced no sons), Louis divorced Eleanor on the pretext of 
consanguinity, giving up his claim to Aquitaine and Poitou in the process. 
Louis might never have divorced Eleanor if he’d realized Eleanor was about 
to deliver those lands to Henry, his bitter rival. 

78
Lecture 17: Henry II—The Expansion of Empire
At the time of their marriage, Eleanor was over a decade older than Henry; 
she was an experienced woman who had been queen of France for 15 years. 
But they were both ambitious people, and for some time the marriage seems 
to have worked well. Henry even trusted Eleanor to serve as regent while he 
campaigned. After the birth of John in 1167, however, Henry took a series of 
mistresses, and Eleanor took revenge 
by fostering her sons’ rebellions 
against their father. 
So how do these dynastic politics 
and family squabbles relate to the 
controversy 
between 
Henry 
and 
Thomas Becket? Henry and Becket 
had straightened out most of their 
differences by 1170. But then Henry wanted his oldest son (also called 
Henry) to be crowned king while he himself was still alive, mainly to ensure 
a smooth succession. Normally, the archbishop of Canterbury consecrated a 
new king, but on June 14, 1170, Prince Henry was crowned in Westminster 
Abbey with the archbishop of York presiding. Another quarrel ensued. 
Becket, with the pope’s backing, intended to punish the bishops involved 
in the crowning of Prince Henry (now called Henry the Young King). 
Henry snapped and uttered his famous question, “Will no one rid me of this 
turbulent priest?” 
Henry later claimed this question was rhetorical, but even so, four of Henry’s 
knights cut Becket down in his own cathedral at Canterbury. Overnight, 
Becket went from ¿ rst-class troublemaker to saint, and Henry was now on 
the pope’s bad side. But as it happened, this is when the Irish expedition 
cropped up. Henry thought he could redeem himself by bringing the Irish 
church into line with Rome while reining in his marcher lords and solving 
the problem of an inheritance for John all in one blow. But after Henry 
returned from Ireland, he still had to do public penance at Becket’s tomb.
From the time of Becket’s murder in 1170 pretty much until the end of his 
reign, Henry had very little peace. Blow after blow was delivered by his 
own family. The chief cause of the trouble was, once again, the frustrations 
“Will no one rid me of this 
turbulent priest?” Henry 
later claimed this question 
was rhetorical.

79
of adult sons with all of the training to rule and none of the power. To 
make matters worse, they had the backing of an angry, powerful mother 
and a French king with a grudge against Henry. Henry the Young King led 
his brothers into rebellion in 1173. When Henry II ¿ nally suppressed the 
revolt, he reconciled with his rebellious sons but not with Eleanor. He put 
her in prison, where she stayed in prison for the rest of his reign—another 
¿ fteen years. 
To make matters worse, the brothers didn’t always get along with each other. 
Richard, the second son, was his mother’s favorite. She gave him a measure 
of autonomy in Aquitaine, so he had much more scope for independent 
action than Henry the Young King, who was basically waiting around for his 
father to die. They quarreled until the Young King died in 1183. Geoffrey, 
the third brother, died in 1186, so only Richard and John remained. In 1189, 
Richard rebelled again with the help of France. To Henry’s shock, John (his 
favorite) joined his brother Richard in revolt that summer, and this seems to 
have broken King Henry’s heart. He was defeated, and shortly thereafter he 
took ill and died. 
So, all of Henry II’s careful dynastic planning was for naught. All of the 
tensions and dif¿ culties involved in ruling the diverse, far-À ung territories 
under English dominion were perpetuated into the next royal generation. Ŷ
consanguinity: A relationship that was considered too close for marriage. 
Consanguinity was often used as a pretext for dissolving royal and noble 
marriages in the 11th and 12th centuries until the church tightened up the rules 
in 1215.
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

80
Lecture 18: Courtly Love
Courtly Love
Lecture 18
If you ran across a text in a book, how would you know, aha, that’s courtly 
love? Well, you might look for some of the standard characteristics of 
courtly love. … The ¿ rst is that courtly love is supposed to be secret. … 
The secrecy is necessary because the love is almost always adulterous. 
… In contemporary terms, love in the sense of passionate, romantic 
love, that kind of love and marriage just didn’t go together.
T
he Angevin period produced two of the most important developments 
in all of literary history: the concept of courtly love and the legends 
of King Arthur. These two parallel (and related) phenomena which 
emerged in 12th-century English literature are still a signi¿ cant part of our 
storytelling world.
Love stories, whether as main plots or subplots, are such an integral part 
of our culture that it seems odd that we have to explain where they come 
from. But between the classical times and the 12th century, romantic love 
had disappeared from the literary scene. Most of Latin literature was written 
by churchmen, of course, and so spiritual or brotherly love were far more 
common themes. In vernacular literature, like Beowulf and The Song of 
Roland, the emphasis was on warrior values like loyalty and bravery. These 
are both male-oriented kinds of literature, certainly; the plots were all about 
things that men did, and there were hardly any female characters.
Around the year 1100, there was a major shift in literary sensibilities. The 
south of France was heavily inÀ uenced by Spanish culture, which in turn 
was inÀ uenced by Muslim culture via Islamic conquest of Spain in the 8th
century. Speci¿ cally, there was close contact between Aquitaine and Spain 
through trade and important marriages. A new literary fashion was born out 
of this contact, and the new kinds of poetry it inspired were romantic and 
even erotic. 
Duke William of Aquitaine, Eleanor’s grandfather, was himself a troubadour 
poet, but he was also a patron to other poets. The court of Aquitaine attracted 

81
some of the best poets in southern France, all writing in this new style. This 
is the atmosphere in which Eleanor of Aquitaine grew up. She grew up 
listening to love songs, and she brought them with her when she married 
King Louis of France, sparking a new literary fashion. She also passed 
her love of this poetry on to her children, especially Marie, countess of 
Champagne, and Richard, who would one day be king of England, both of 
whom were strong patrons of literature themselves.
So what is courtly love? The trope has three main characteristics. First, 
it is usually a secret love, a fact that usually provides the story with 
suspense. Second, it is usually 
secret because it is adulterous—
generally speaking, the woman is 
married and the man is not. Noble 
marriage in this period was more 
like a business arrangement or a 
religious duty than a passionate 
union; courtly love was not only 
passionate but freely given. Finally, 
stories of courtly love tend to 
subvert the normal gender hierarchy, which in 12th-century meant the woman 
is the one calling the shots. What did tend to vary was whether or not the 
love was physically consummated.
Poems of courtly love were often set to music. Although the music was 
rarely written down, enough survives that we can hear the inÀ uence of Arab 
music which, like the poems’ themes, arrived via Spain and possibly via the 
Crusades. These poems were performance pieces, meant to be read aloud 
in a social setting. Certain plots and characters were so well known that the 
poems could allude to them in passing and expect that the audience would 
get the reference, which also helped to knit together the cultural elite.
One of the most famous works of this period was written at the court of Marie 
de Champagne: Andreas the Chaplain’s The Art of Courtly Love. Andreas 
was a court cleric, one of a class of men who had a university education and 
was in minor orders of some kind—probably not a priest, but with some sort 
of religious profession. Andreas had a very worldly orientation; he knew the 
After spending an entire book 
describing secret, adulterous 
relationships and how to 
conduct them well … [Andreas] 
takes it all back.

82
Lecture 18: Courtly Love
court intimately and wrote about it from within. The work is modeled on 
Ovid’s Art of Love. Andreas lays out how men and women of different social 
classes 
should 
approach 
each other to try to win 
each other’s love. Class 
and power are as important 
as gender to Andreas, and 
he 
suggests 
the 
easiest 
relationships to sustain are 
between social equals. Then, 
after spending an entire 
book 
describing 
secret, 
adulterous 
relationships 
and how to conduct them 
well, at the end of the book, 
he takes it all back. We 
don’t know whether it was 
meant seriously or in jest, 
but it brings us to a larger 
question about courtly love 
in general: Did people really 
engage in these kinds of 
relationships? Or was the 
whole point of the genre the 
vicarious thrill?
Although this literary trend had its origin in France, and before that in Spain, 
the most popular stories used in these 12th century poems came from England. 
The most successful group of tales from this period, without question, was the 
legends of King Arthur and his knights. The fusion of interesting characters 
with the ethos of courtly love was a winning combination. Although, as we 
already discussed, we don’t know whether Arthur was a real historical ¿ gure 
or not, stories about him have circulated since at least the early 7th century, 
especially in the Celtic regions of Britain and France. Doubtless the stories 
got more elaborate in the telling over the centuries. 
Under the inÀ uence of Angevin court poets, the 
Romano-British stories of King Arthur took on 
a distinctly Anglo-Norman À avor.
The Teaching Company Collection.

83
Then, in the 1130s, a Welsh cleric named Geoffrey of Monmouth wrote The 
History of the Kings of Britain, claiming it was a translation into Latin of an 
ancient Welsh text. It tells the history of Britain from the time of the Trojan 
War down to the 7th century, including a section about King Arthur. Around 
1155, a Norman poet named Wace translated Geoffrey into French verse, 
and Arthur’s legends took off. The text spread wherever French was spoken, 
including the court of Marie de Champagne, where Arthur ¿ nally found his 
muse in the person of Chrétien de Troyes. 
Using Wace and other stories about Arthur that may have been circulating 
orally, he shaped Arthur into a 12th-century courtly king living in a courtly 
city called Camelot and surrounded by knights who had lives a lot like 
those of the men who were the stories’ audience. This new Arthur is still a 
brave warrior, but he enjoys the company of elegant ladies as well—maybe 
evidence of the attempt to appeal to a female audience as well. 
One of Chrétien’s most signi¿ cant contributions to the corpus of Arthurian 
literature was the creation of Lancelot. We ¿ nd it hard to imagine the legend 
without him, but before Chrétien, Guinevere’s lover was Arthur’s despicable 
nephew, Mordred. Lancelot is a courtly lover—adulterous, yes, but brave 
and skilled and noble and generous and (mostly) loyal to his king. Chrétien 
also started but didn’t ¿ nish the story of Perceval and the Holy Grail. We’re 
not sure where the seed of the story came from, but obviously this story 
became a huge part of Arthur’s legend. Chrétien’s work was translated into 
all the major European languages, and Arthur’s popularity grew and grew. 
And thus an obscure Welsh folk hero was adopted by French courtly poets 
and became one of the most famous characters in literary history. Ŷ
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Suggested Reading

84
Lecture 19: Richard the Lionheart and the Third Crusade
Richard the Lionheart and the Third Crusade
Lecture 19
Richard was a born soldier, and it was certainly still the case that kings 
were supposed to be successful soldiers. They really had to be if they 
were going to keep control of their lands; the loyalty of their nobles was 
simply too precarious for them to be able to relax for very long. Well, 
this was the part of the job of king that Richard liked the most.
I
f any English king resembles one of the heroes of medieval romantic 
literature, it’s Richard the Lionheart. Richard was very much his parents’ 
son: He had his father’s phenomenal energy and sharp temper and his 
mother’s love of music and poetry, as well as her love of Aquitaine—his 
favorite part of his realm, and the place he spent most of his time. Richard 
ruled for 10 years, of which he spent less than six months in England. Some 
historians condemn Richard for neglecting his duties as king of England. 
Others have pointed out that England came through this “neglect” pretty 
well. The modern jury is still out on Richard, but for the most part, his 
contemporaries adored him.
Two myths about Richard we should dismiss at the outset. The ¿ rst is that 
Richard was gay; there is simply no evidence for this claim, which was only 
put forth in the 20th century. In fact, we know very little about Richard’s 
private life. He made a political marriage to Berengaria of Navarre, a Spanish 
princess, but they spent little time together and produced no children. He had 
one acknowledged illegitimate son. That’s about all we know.
The second and perhaps more pervasive myth is the association of Richard’s 
reign with the activities of Robin Hood. Many books and movies give us a 
Robin who is protecting the English from the evil Prince John while Richard 
is away on Crusade, and most of them end happily with Richard’s return. But 
this was the invention of the 16th-century Scottish author John Major, who 
simply wanted to write a single story about these two great characters. But 
the truth is we don’t need Robin Hood to make Richard’s reign exciting.

85
The ¿ rst half of Richard’s reign was dominated by the Third Crusade. 
The First Crusade, called in the late 11th century, had been spectacularly 
successful. The European armies captured Jerusalem and set up four small 
Christian states. The Second 
Crusade was fought because 
one of these states, Edessa, 
had been recaptured by 
Muslim armies. It was 
unsuccessful, 
however, 
and for the next several 
decades, the other three 
states hung on in the face 
of ever-lengthening odds. 
Then, in 1187, the Egyptian 
leader Saladin recaptured 
Jerusalem. Christian Europe 
was dismayed, and many 
leaders 
across 
Europe 
immediately 
“took 
the 
cross.” Richard wanted very 
much to be one of them, but 
he was still involved in the 
struggle with his father. 
Richard’s 
coronation 
in 
1189 did not go smoothly. 
After the ceremony, the king 
held the traditional banquet 
for his most important subjects; this was a royal tradition. A delegation of the 
leading members of London’s Jewish community appeared at the banquet 
with gifts for the king, but the guards barred their entry. Things got out of 
hand, and a riot broke out across the city. Jewish businesses and homes were 
attacked, and a number of lives were lost. Over the next several months, 
anti-Jewish outbreaks spread to other towns and were especially bad in 
Lincoln and York. Unfortunately, these kinds of outbreaks often went along 
with periods of crusading fervor. 
King Richard I (r. 1189–1199) is more renowned 
as a warrior than as a king. He spent less than 
six months of his 10-year reign in England.
© Photos.com/Thinkstock.

86
Lecture 19: Richard the Lionheart and the Third Crusade
Even though these outbreaks of violence against Jews continued, King 
Richard left England just two months after his coronation. He spent the next 
year and a half in his French lands, preparing to go on Crusade. This included 
collecting money for this expensive venture, a lot of it from England, the 
richest of his dominions. In addition, King Philip of France was planning to 
go on the Third Crusade as well, which complicated Richard’s plans. Both 
men were very talented and very aggressive, and they had a history: Philip 
had supported Richard in his rebellions against Henry II, but when Richard 
became king, Philip became Richard’s enemy. Of¿ cially, Richard and Philip 
were two Christian kings trying to liberate Jerusalem. Unof¿ cially, they 
wanted to keep an eye on each other.
When these two kings arrived in the Holy Land in 1191, they faced a volatile 
situation. The town of Acre, in present-day northern Israel, was in Muslim 
hands but was under siege by the king of Jerusalem, Guy of Lusignan. (Guy 
was still called king, even though Jerusalem had fallen to the Muslims.) 
Guy was being besieged in turn by a Muslim relief force and needed to be 
rescued. And here’s where the different strengths of the two European kings 
came into play. Philip arrived in April but was mired in indecision. Richard 
arrived in July with more resources and the will to use them. He bought 
superior siege weapons, and the city soon surrendered. The capture of Acre 
Richard, King of Jerusalem?
W
hen Richard embarked on the Third Crusade, ostensibly it was 
to secure the Holy Land for Christendom and to secure himself 
a little glory in the process. But what if he secretly sought more than a 
little glory? Richard was the great-grandson of King Fulk of Jerusalem 
(r. 1131–1143). In the early 1180s, when ruling male line of Jerusalem 
died out, the city’s church leaders actually offered Richard’s father, 
Henry II, the throne. Henry declined; he had enough to worry about 
with England, Ireland, and half of France on his plate. The crown 
was given to Guy of Lusignan instead, but Guy lost Jerusalem to the 
Muslims, triggering the Third Crusade. Perhaps Richard’s real intent in 
trying to capture the holy city was to capture himself another crown. 

87
would turn out to be the greatest success of the Third Crusade. But in the 
aftermath of victory, Richard managed to insult Duke Leopold of Austria, 
who left the Holy Land in a rage. This would come back to haunt Richard 
later. Philip also left shortly after the capture of Acre, leaving Richard to 
confront Saladin alone.
Richard and Saladin had made a treaty after the fall of Acre according to 
which Saladin would pay ransom for some prisoners, but he had trouble 
raising the money. Richard, convinced the delay was a ploy, had 3,000 
Muslim prisoners massacred in cold blood. (This is one of the big stains 
on Richard’s character, and it is still remembered with anger in the Holy 
Land.) Richard then marched on Jerusalem, with Saladin’s forces harassing 
him along the way. The two leaders confronted each other in person at Arsuf, 
and Richard beat Saladin decisively by using a heavy cavalry charge. But 
Saladin’s army was light and maneuverable, able to regroup and continue to 
harass Richard’s. Richard got as far as the walls of Jerusalem, but then he had 
to fall back. The following fall, Richard got word that Philip was threatening 
Normandy and was forced to leave the Holy Land. He and Saladin made 
a three-year truce that gave Christian pilgrims the right to enter Jerusalem 
and kept Acre in Christian hands. It wasn’t all he had hoped for, but on the 
whole, Richard had a glorious record to boast of. 
Richard had to devise a quick route home that avoided the twin dangers of 
Philip and the Holy Roman Emperor, Henry VI, each of whom had grudges 
against Richard. He traveled in disguise with a small retinue, but he was 
¿ nally captured in a small village outside Vienna and taken to Duke Leopold, 
whom he had insulted all those months earlier. Leopold sold Richard to the 
emperor, who imprisoned him in the castle of Dürnstein and demanded an 
enormous ransom, 150,000 marks. To the horror of Richard’s men, Philip 
started bargaining with the emperor for a lower price. So they swallowed 
hard, raised some taxes, and raised the money. Richard also had to agree 
to surrender England to the emperor and receive it back as an imperial ¿ ef, 
although this was nearly impossible for the emperor to enforce and was 
quickly hushed up. 
What is really signi¿ cant here is that England was able to ransom its king 
because England was a wealthy, well-run kingdom, even in his absence. 

88
Lecture 19: Richard the Lionheart and the Third Crusade
While he may have been an absentee ruler, like his father, he knew how 
to plan and he knew how to hire the right people. We also have evidence 
that Richard kept an eye on England even from afar. He issued numerous 
charters that show a close interest in local administration in England. He 
made the most important ¿ nancial innovation of this period, the imposition 
of royal customs duties. 
Richard spent the last ¿ ve years of his reign, after his release from captivity, 
primarily engaged in ¿ ghting Philip in Normandy and securing his position 
in Aquitaine. He died in Aquitaine in the spring of 1199 while besieging the 
castle of Chalus-Chabrol, hit by a chance arrow. He left behind a brilliant 
reputation but—unfortunately—no direct heir. Ŷ
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Suggested Reading

89
King John and the Magna Carta
Lecture 20
One thing that did get a whole lot better under John’s reign was record 
keeping. … On the other hand, because we have such good records, it’s 
easy to see exactly where John behaved tyrannically.
R
ichard’s brother John, like Stephen, is one of only two kings in 
English history to have no successor named after him. Why? For one 
thing, John came to the throne under circumstances that were less 
than ideal. There was some doubt as to his right to succeed Richard, given 
that the brother between them in age, Geoffrey, had left behind a son, Arthur. 
John had three advantages over Arthur, however: Richard had designated 
John as his heir; John had the backing of their mother, Eleanor; and John was 
an adult, while Arthur was only 12 years old. 
Normandy and England supported John, but Anjou supported Arthur. John 
acted quickly, seizing the Angevin treasury at Chinon. Arthur took refuge 
with Philip of France, who of course backed Arthur on principle. He still 
wanted control of England’s lands in France. For the next few of years, there 
were some very complicated military and diplomatic maneuvers until ¿ nally, 
in 1202, Arthur fell into John’s hands for good and then simply disappeared. 
He was doubtless murdered, some suspected by John himself. This didn’t 
help John’s reputation. The rest of John’s reign was dominated by three 
major (and overlapping) conÀ icts with three major opponents: Pope Innocent 
III, King Philip of France, and his own barons. 
Throughout most of John’s reign, the pope was Innocent III, one of the 
most formidable popes in the history of the Catholic Church. He was a 
forceful ruler who didn’t hesitate to take on kings and emperors. In 1205, 
he intervened between John and the monks at Canterbury over which had 
the right to appoint the new archbishop. The monastic chapter at Canterbury 
theoretically had the right to the free election of the archbishop, but under 
the terms of the agreement worked out a century before under King Henry 
I, it was understood that the king was supposed to have a say in the election. 
Usually, the monks and the king came up with a workable solution. This 

90
Lecture 20: King John and the Magna Carta
time, the monks acted without royal permission, and John pushed back. 
The dispute ended up before Innocent III, who rejected both candidates and 
installed his own: an expatriate English scholar named Stephen Langton who 
had spent most of his career teaching at the University of Paris. The pope 
clearly wanted to put his own stamp on the English church.
John was outraged, and he refused to allow Stephen Langton to enter 
England. Delegations traveled frantically between England and Rome, trying 
to avert an open breach between the king and the pope, but in 1208, Innocent 
¿ nally placed England under interdict. The king’s crime was so serious, his 
whole kingdom was punished. There would be no public church services, no 
baptisms, no weddings, no funerals—even church bells could not be rung. 
This went on for six years. John refused to give in, and the interdict 
turned out to be a ¿ nancial windfall: While the church was on strike, he 
felt perfectly entitled to seize its land revenues. But when the pope began 
John’s problems with the church, like his father’s, revolved around Canterbury.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

91
encouraging Philip of France to invade England, John had to back down. 
He allowed Langton to enter England, but then he went one better: He 
surrendered England to the pope as a papal ¿ ef. Although this didn’t mean 
much in practical terms, it was a huge symbolic gesture that would matter a 
lot when John confronted his barons at the end of his reign. 
This of course leads us to John’s conÀ icts with Philip, who had now lost 
the pope’s unequivocal support. The conÀ ict between John and Philip was 
just the latest round in the rivalry between the French and English kings. 
These two kings were in a structurally awkward position: Of¿ cially, the 
English kings were the vassals of the French kings with respect to their lands 
in France. Again, this mostly had symbolic signi¿ cance, but symbols could 
have huge political impact. 
In 1200, before the papal interdict, the two kings had made a truce. And 
then, a few months later, John got married, and all hell broke loose, because 
his bride was Isabelle of Angoulême, heiress to the county of Angoulême 
in Aquitaine, who was already betrothed to Hugh of Lusignan. The other 
extraordinary thing about the marriage was that the bride was only 12 years 
old. Child marriages were not uncommon among the elite in this period, 
but generally the couple lived apart—that is, they didn’t consummate the 
marriage—until both parties were a bit older. John markedly did not observe 
this tradition—another stain on his already blemished reputation. 
Philip saw John’s outrageous behavior as the chance of a lifetime. In 1202, he 
summoned John to Paris to account for his behavior. There was no way that 
John could answer this summons without losing face; one king can’t just do 
another king’s bidding, so John refused. Philip declared John a contumacious 
vassal and thus had the legal grounds to con¿ scate John’s French ¿ efs. 
John’s supporters began to desert him, and John failed to move decisively 
to block Philip. By 1204, Philip had seized Normandy, Maine, Anjou, and 
Poitou; only Aquitaine remained—the most remote, most troublesome, least 
remunerative of all the English lands in France. The Angevin empire, if we 
can call it that, was no more. 
John spent most of the rest of his reign trying to get those lands back. To pay 
for these efforts, he needed to raise enormous sums of money, which meant 

92
Lecture 20: King John and the Magna Carta
taxing the people of England, taxing the clergy; he even imposed heavy 
¿ nes on his nobles for the smallest offenses. John could also be extremely 
capricious and cruel to his nobles, and he quite enjoyed sleeping with their 
wives and daughters. In this poisonous atmosphere, John tried one last time, 
in 1214, to get back his French lands. In alliance with his nephew, Otto of 
Germany, who was looking to become the German emperor, John planned 
to trap Philip’s forces between two armies. The plan didn’t work; Otto faced 
Philip alone on July 27, 1214, and lost. John was out of money, out of allies, 
and out of time. 
This brings us to the third of the three major conÀ icts of John’s reign, the 
one with his own barons. They neither liked nor trusted John; furthermore, 
thanks to his military failures, they had no reason to respect him. So a group 
of barons decided to get together to try to make him be a better king. In the 
spring of 1215, with the help of Archbishop Stephen Langton, these barons 
created a list of demands with regard to taxation and good governance 
generally, and they took up arms to enforce those demands. And in June, at 
the ¿ eld of Runnymede on the banks of the Thames, John agreed to this great 
charter, Magna Carta.  
Among the Magna Carta’s many provisions, three are especially important 
to the history of England—and in fact, the entire free world. Clause 39 
guarantees trial by a jury of peers to every free man in England. Of course, 
“free men” would have excluded a lot of people in 1215, such as serfs; but 
over time, this clause became the basis of the principle that everyone is 
equal under the law. Clause 12 states that extraordinary or unaccustomed 
taxes cannot be levied without the consent of the people. Clause 61, which is 
known as the security clause, was their means to do it. It created a council of 
25 barons whose duty was to ensure the king followed the charter, although 
it was vague on the how. Together, clauses 12 and 61 would be the kernel 
that grew into Parliament and, eventually, true representative government. 
But all that lay in the future. The barons in 1215 were not trying to institute a 
democracy; they just wanted rein in their capricious king. 
After swearing to the Magna Carta, John turned right around and appealed 
to Pope Innocent III to be absolved from his oath. Of course, an oath sworn 
under duress is invalid under canon law, so the pope agreed. With papal 

93
backing, John went on the offensive again, and England degenerated into 
civil war. Some barons offered the throne to Prince Louis of France. Others 
would not go so far. And then, quite suddenly, John died, leaving England at 
civil war, with foreign troops on English soil, and an heir to the throne who 
was nine years old. Most historians have found it hard to judge John’s reign 
as anything but a failure. Ŷ
interdict: Penalty imposed by the church on an entire ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction whereby public sacraments may not be performed; usually, 
interdicts are intended to force compliance with a speci¿ c church policy. 
Pope Innocent III placed England under interdict for seven years to pressure 
John to accept Stephen Langton as archbishop of Canterbury.
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

94
Lecture 21: Daily Life in the 13th Century
Daily Life in the 13th Century
Lecture 21
One central fact about life in this period is that it could be dangerous 
and even violent. This is surely not different from earlier periods. … 
But for the 13th century, we’ve got much more detailed evidence. We 
don’t have to just look at evidence of a skull fracture and try to ¿ gure 
out how it happened; we can read about how it happened.
W
e’re going to pause for a moment our narrative of political events 
to take a look at how everyday life has evolved over the centuries 
since the Norman Conquest. England is still overwhelmingly 
rural, but the population has more than doubled, from around 2 million in 
the 1080s to around 5 million in 1300. With this growth in population came a 
rise in living standards as well.
The majority of English men and women lived in small villages and rarely 
left them. Recall that villages might be attached to a manor, or you might 
have a large manor with more than one village in it, or you might even 
have a village that was divided among multiple manors. The manor was a 
legal entity; the village was a social reality. Both manor and village were 
economic entities, in that a manor was organized for the economic bene¿ t of 
the lord and the village for the economic convenience of the villagers.
Manor court rolls from the 13th century onward tell us a lot about life on 
these manors. The courts were held at regular intervals, usually every three 
weeks or so, to handle local disputes. They were presided over by the lord’s 
of¿ cials. One of the most important things we can see in the records is that 
there was an active market in land on these manors going back to the 12th
century or so. In a lot of cases, these land transfers were between the older 
and younger generations of the same family. One of the strings attached to 
these transfers was an agreement that the adult children had to support their 
parents. Historians call these transactions maintenance agreements. The 
really intriguing thing is, why were these agreements necessary? Clearly a 
lot of parents felt they had reason to worry about being left out in the cold. 
Other transfers are evidence of some economic mobility among the residents 

95
of a manor—not always upward. Families sold off part or all of their land; 
others accumulated larger and larger holdings. Over time, villages became 
economically strati¿ ed.
At the top of the village social strata were prosperous families holding 
farms of 100 acres or more. Some of them may have accumulated wealth 
by serving their lords as reeves. Rich villages also hired poorer neighbors to 
work their land. In the vast middle 
layer of society were families 
holding 40 acres or so—enough to 
feed themselves and employ one or 
two servants. Beneath them were 
the cottagers, who held small plots 
of land too small for subsistence. 
These are the villagers who hired 
themselves out as labor on their 
neighbors’ farms. Finally, there were landless laborers who often moved 
from village to village in search of work.
Interestingly, this social hierarchy didn’t necessarily correspond to the 
villagers’ legal status. A person could be very rich but be a serf, whereas 
even someone who was very poor might still be free. Being a serf was not the 
same as being a slave; slavery was gone from England by the 13th century. 
Being a serf meant being tied to a manor, period. There were no complicated 
degrees of freedom, thanks in large part to the legal reforms of Henry II. 
Since only free persons had the right to use the courts, it was important to 
clarify who was free and who was not. Therefore, a lot of litigation in the 
manor court rolls concerns people establishing their status.
Another strange fact to the modern mind is that land could be free or unfree, 
just like people. Free land didn’t owe obligations to a lord, whereas servile 
land did. Free land was obviously more attractive to a potential buyer. Having 
people of different status and land of different status combined with a very 
active market in land led to some interesting complications. A free peasant 
might buy servile land, so he wouldn’t personally owe any labor, but his land 
might, so he’d have to make sure they were ful¿ lled. Conversely, a rich serf 
might buy free land, and he owned it free and clear with no obligations. This 
The proliferation of parish 
churches in this period is 
actually a sign of economic 
growth—one sign of many.

96
Lecture 21: Daily Life in the 13th Century
confusion of statuses is one reason why the whole system broke down over 
the next few centuries.
Life in the 13th century could still be dangerous and violent. In 1194, the 
of¿ ce of coroner was created to investigate suspicious deaths, and their 
records—called coroners’ rolls—pass down the details about how English 
men, women, and children met untimely ends. They show a strikingly high 
incidence of manslaughter. There are also many accidents recorded in these 
rolls, especially concerning young children—unsurprising in an agricultural 
society where both parents are working from morning to night. 
The parish church—a new feature in 13th-century England—was the center 
of village life. Parish priests often lived very much like their parishioners: 
They were often married, either of¿ cially or unof¿ cially, and they usually 
farmed some land attached to the church. On Sundays and feast days, the 
church was the social hub of the village. The church was also the site of 
baptisms, weddings, funerals, and all sorts of other rituals central to the life 
of the village. The proliferation of parish churches in this period is actually a 
sign of economic growth—one sign of many. 
Life is generally improving in this period, although it’s not getting better 
for everybody, and it’s not improving at the same rate for everybody. The 
economy, although still primarily agricultural, is becoming more specialized 
and commercialized. The climate in the 12th century and 13th centuries 
was warm and mild, improving crop yields. Crops still failed from time to 
time, but we have no records of large-scale famine. Farmers moved beyond 
subsistence and started growing crops for the market more regularly. This 
makes sense, because between the Norman Conquest and the 1220s, 125 
market towns were founded in England, and there were many smaller 
markets springing up throughout the country. Between 1199 and 1272, the 
kings licensed some 770 markets; in that same period, 920 new annual fairs 
were established. 
One way to trace increasing commercialization is through the increasing 
circulation of money. Between 1086 and 1300, the increase in the money 
supply was about 24-fold. By the 13th century, most coins were minted at 
London or Canterbury. The year 1279 saw the ¿ rst minting of small change, 

97
which means small-scale transactions were shifting from the barter economy 
to the money economy. 
Aside from agriculture, England’s hardiest industry was wool. The pastoral 
lowland regions began to raise sheep and produce wool on a large scale; 
ultimately, this product would transform the English economy. The industry 
was pioneered by the Cistercian monasteries of northern England, whose 
breeding and raising techniques were adopted by laymen. Wool was by far 
the most important export from England throughout this period.
Much of England’s economic life was centered on England’s two dozen or 
so cathedral towns. The bishops were engines of job creation in themselves, 
although many cathedrals were built in already thriving towns. Bishops 
could literally make or break the economic fortunes of a town. The arrival 
of Gothic architecture in the early 13th century led to a building boom that in 
itself is evidence of the increasing prosperity in England. Ŷ
maintenance agreement: Formal agreement, registered in a manor court, 
whereby adult children assumed management of the family holding in return 
for guaranteeing their elderly parents a speci¿ ed domicile and allowance of 
food and clothing.
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Term
Suggested Reading

98
Lecture 22: The Disastrous Reign of Henry III
The Disastrous Reign of Henry III
Lecture 22
While [Henry III] was a minor, things had gone pretty well. The barons 
were more or less contented; the royal ¿ nances were in reasonable 
shape. But almost as soon as Henry came of age in the early 1220s, 
Henry’s barons began to complain about him.
K
ing John died in October of 1216 with England in the midst of a civil 
war and a foreign invasion. It looked bad for England, certainly, but 
John’s death changed everything. Instead of having the choice of a 
devil they knew (John) and a devil they didn’t (Prince Louis of France) as 
king, they had a nine-year-old boy, a virtual blank slate, to put on the throne. 
The barons deserted Prince Louis in droves.
One big selling point for young Henry III was his advisers. The most 
important of these was William Marshal, earl of Pembroke. Marshal was 
born the younger son of a second marriage. He was so unimportant, in 
fact, that when he was about six years old, his father gave him as a hostage 
to King Stephen as proof of good faith, then deliberately and publically 
betrayed the king, saying “I have hammer and anvil enough to make another 
[son].” Luckily for William, Stephen was a gentle man and treated William 
as a welcome guest. We can speculate that his time with Stephen—and his 
father’s ruthlessness—taught William a thing or two about politics. And 
when John died, William Marshal was on the spot to resolve England’s 
crises his own way.
One of the most important things Marshal did was to arrange for the reissue 
of Magna Carta in 1217, essentially drawing the teeth from the opposition. 
He did make a few changes to the original charter, however. The security 
clause that mandated a council of barons was dropped; it seemed less 
necessary without John around. He also dropped clause 12 which forbade 
taxation without consent, but the amazing thing was that from this point on, 
the English government behaved as if the clause were still there anyway. 
Finally, the provisions in the Magna Carta that restricted the king’s right to 

99
declare new forest lands were hived off into a separate charter, known as the 
Forest Charter.
The problems began when Henry grew up and took matters into his own 
hands. Henry had many ¿ ne qualities: He was a pious man, a generous 
patron of the arts, and a devoted husband and father. But he was not much 
of a ruler. The two biggest issues between Henry and his barons were the
two that would ¿ gure in many subsequent kings’ reigns: patronage and 
foreign policy.
Kings were the ultimate source of almost all patronage in England; nobody 
objected to this in principle. But Henry III had an unusually large number of 
relatives to provide for, particularly his grasping and greedy half-brothers 
from Poitou (his mother, remarkably, married the son of her original ¿ ancé, 
Huge de Lusignan, as soon as John was in the ground). His wife, Eleanor 
of Provence, had another large set of relatives looking for handouts from 
Henry. This À ood of foreign half-brothers and in-laws did not endear King 
Henry to his subjects at all.
But the most serious disagreements Henry had with his barons had to do 
with foreign policy—namely, being asked to show up, carry it out, and pay 
for it. It wasn’t so much that they didn’t want to serve in the army as that 
they thought his foreign policy was, in a word, silly. The barons wanted 
Henry to focus on recapturing Normandy, then Anjou. Poitou came in 
a very distant third. Of course, that’s exactly the territory that Henry III
spent all his energies trying to win back—repeatedly, unsuccessfully, and 
very expensively. 
Henry was once again way out of step with his barons on the subject of 
Crusading. In the 13th century, every competent ruler was expected to go 
on Crusade. In 1248, Henry not only refused to take part in the Crusades 
personally, he actively tried to block the English barons from taking part. 
He was unsuccessful, but the public relations damage had been done, and 
they later blamed him for the Crusade’s failure. A few years later, Henry 
angered his barons once again by pouring money into a hopeless attempt 
to win his second son, Edmund, the disputed throne of Sicily and into his 

100
Lecture 22: The Disastrous Reign of Henry III
brother Richard’s equally hopeless bid to be named German emperor. The 
barons watched these schemes unfold in consternation and wonder. 
Most of these disputes came about because the king and barons had a 
fundamental disagreement about their roles in government. The king, of 
course, saw himself as God’s anointed ruler. The barons regarded themselves 
as the king’s counselors—in this case, underutilized ones. Smart English 
kings had always consulted his most powerful subjects; remember the 
Anglo-Saxon witan. Now the only leverage the barons had over Henry was 
money. So in 1258, when the Sicilian affair was spiraling out of control, 
they decided to act, led by Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester (who had 
married Henry’s sister Eleanor without Henry’s approval). The king asked 
for money, and the barons insisted on some severe conditions which were 
drawn up in the Provisions of Oxford. Among them were, ¿ rst, requiring the 
king to hold three formal meetings of the great council every year; second, 
that the council include 12 men chosen by the barons whose word would be 
binding; and third, that the day-to-day business of the realm would be run 
by a Council of Fifteen, who would have the right to appoint the chancellor, 
Henry III’s great cultural achievements, such as the renovation of Westminster 
Abbey, were overshadowed by his political failures.
© Photos.com/Thinkstock.

101
the treasurer, and the justiciar and would supervise the Exchequer and other 
local of¿ cials. The barons not only wanted to be heard, they were willing to 
do the hard work of governance. 
But kings, even wishy-washy kings like Henry, don’t like being told what 
to do. By 1262, he saw enough cracks in the baronial opposition that he 
felt bold enough to renounce the provisions. He was quickly up to his old 
tricks, reminding people why they had wanted the provisions in the ¿ rst 
place. Opposition sprang up again, and the king and the barons decided to 
submit their dispute to King Louis of France for arbitration. This was risky 
for the barons: On the one hand, Louis was a renowned peacemaker, but on 
the other, he was Henry’s brother-in-law and a king who believed in divine 
right. Predictably, Louis ruled in favor of Henry. The resulting Mise of 
Amiens annulled the Provisions of Oxford and all subsequent reforms. The 
barons were not about to take this lying down. Now there was open warfare 
in England. 
At the Battle of Lewes May 1264, King Henry was captured by the rebel 
barons. Montfort took advantage of this victory to enforce two demands: 
First, a parliament (from French parler, to talk), where the king and barons 
discussed important matters of state, would be held no fewer than three times 
a year. Second, the parliament would consist of two knights from every shire 
and two members from a select list of boroughs (big towns that had of¿ cial 
royal charters); these members would be elected locally, not appointed by 
the king. 
This ideal parliament only met once, because unfortunately for the barons, 
Henry’s son Edward was everything that Henry was not: a good soldier and 
a clever politician. Having escaped Lewes with his freedom, in August 1265, 
he defeated Montfort’s barons and killed Montfort at the Battle of Evesham. 
Edward learned from the rebels, however; it’s wise to adopt the good ideas 
of your opponents. While the parliaments that followed Montfort’s defeat 
would be made up of the locally chosen representatives the rebels had 
demanded (a feature that would evolve into the House of Commons), Edward 
also gave himself the right to choose which barons attended the parliament. 
Over time, these chosen barons and their heirs would become the hereditary 

102
Lecture 22: The Disastrous Reign of Henry III
peerage—the House of Lords. Although these assemblies were not what we 
would call a capital-P Parliament until the 1320s, the barons’ rebellion had 
unwittingly planted the seeds of modern English government. Ŷ
Parliament: Assembly of representatives of the realm that began meeting 
sporadically during the reign of Henry III to discuss and approve grants of 
taxation. Membership became ¿ xed in the 14th century into the House of 
Commons, consisting of two knights from every shire and representatives 
from the important boroughs or towns, and the House of Lords, consisting of 
the members of the peerage, a speci¿ ed group of important barons. 
peerage: Group of barons who were summoned by name to meetings of 
Parliament. The list was ¿ xed in the 14th century, and the right to a summons 
to Parliament became hereditary.
Provisions of Oxford: Measures imposed on Henry III in 1258 by a 
committee of 24 men, half chosen by the king and half by the barons. 
Three formal meetings of the great council were to be held each year, and a 
Council of Fifteen would handle daily business, including the supervision of 
the Exchequer and sheriffs. The restriction of royal authority proved dif¿ cult 
to impose in practice, and the king renounced the provisions in 1262.
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
    Important Terms
Suggested Reading

103
The Conquests of Edward I
Lecture 23
Edward has a couple of other nicknames besides Longshanks, and they 
speak to those twin preoccupations of his. He’s called the Hammer of 
the Scots because of his campaigns in Scotland. … He’s also called the 
English Justinian because of his efforts to reform the law in England.
E
ngland’s prospects under Edward looked much better than they did 
under Henry. Unlike his father, Edward actually had a lot of experience 
governing the country, mostly during and after Henry’s captivity. He 
was a skilled soldier, having not only fought of Montfort but having gone 
on Crusade in the 1270s. He also looked the part. He was called Edward 
Longshanks because of his long arms and legs, and portraits sometimes 
depicted him with a long neck to emphasize his height. This was an asset 
then just as it can be now; it made him seem more formidable. Edward was 
also handsome, and he seems to have had a kind of personal magnetism that 
attracted talent the way his most successful predecessors did. So when Henry 
III died in 1272, Edward was well-positioned to become King Edward I, and 
he was accepted by the people and the barons even though he remained in 
the Holy Land for two years after Henry’s death. When Edward returned to 
England, he plunged right in to his two big preoccupations: justice and war. 
Edward was determined to centralize legal authority in royal hands. To this 
end, he pioneered the use of the statute—that is, a brand new law written to 
address an immediate need. This is a dramatic departure from the earliest 
Anglo-Saxon traditions; Edward abandoned the illusion that the king simply 
“found” ancient laws. 
The Statute of Merton, one of Henry’s concessions to the barons, is 
technically the ¿ rst law in the English statute book. But Edward’s statutes 
were very different. Many concerned criminal law. For example, in 1275, 
the Statute of Westminster I made culpable homicide a crime subject to 
execution. This statute also regulated elections to Parliament and proclaimed 
that it was being written “for the common good and the relief of those 
who are oppressed”—Edward claimed that his interests and those of the 

104
Lecture 23: The Conquests of Edward I
community were the same. Unsurprisingly, many of Edward’s statutes also 
addressed property law. The 1290 Statute of Quia emptores, for example, 
simpli¿ ed the transfer of feudal lands. It had the side effect of weakening 
the importance of feudalism; landholding became merely an economic 
transaction, not a personal relationship. He also enacted the 1279 Statute of 
Mortmain, regulating gifts of land to the church, which protected the revenue 
stream from property sale and estate taxes.
Edward also centralized justice even further than Henry had. From the 
Norman Conquest down to Edward’s time, lords often held private courts 
for disputes on their own lands. Edward wanted to be sure all the existing 
private courts had been authorized by royal grants, so in 1274, he initiated 
Quo warranto (meaning “by what warrant?”) proceedings. This caused some 
consternation among the barons because in many cases, they didn’t have a 
charter for their 200-plus-year-old tradition. In 1290, Edward enacted the 
Statute of Quo warranto, which allowed a baron without a charter to obtain 
one (for a fee, of course). 
Edward formalized the division of the three most important royal courts, 
the common law courts. Each had speci¿ c areas they covered and had a 
permanent staff of professional judges. The Court of King’s Bench handled 
cases related directly to the king and his affairs, the Exchequer Court handled 
cases involving royal revenues, and the Court of Common Pleas handled 
all remaining cases. Along similar lines, Edward divided up the royal 
administration into four independent bodies, each keeping its own records. 
The Exchequer still supervised the collection of revenues by the sheriffs and 
other local of¿ cials. The Chancery was in charge of issuing and preserving 
royal documents and held the Great Seal. The Council was the inner circle 
of the king’s advisers, a kind of executive department or cabinet. Finally, 
The Household handled day-to-day expenses and other matters for the king 
and his entourage. The Exchequer and Chancery were now permanently 
stationed in Westminster; the council and the household, of course, traveled 
with the king. Because of this, the Household held the Privy Seal, a traveling 
substitute for the Great Seal. The upshot of all of this is that England is 
heading toward bureaucracy.

105
While overall a more successful politician than his father, Edward could be 
brutal. In 1290, he helped his barons erase their debts by simply banning 
the Jews from England. (While this may seem arbitrary, it was part of a 
pattern of rising anti-Semitism across Europe in the late Middle Ages.) There 
wouldn’t be a Jewish community in England again until the 17th century.
Edward ruled 35 years, mostly at peace with his barons. His success as a 
war leader gave him a credibility that helped him push through his reforms. 
The conquest of Wales is probably Edward’s most famous military feat, and 
certainly it lasted the longest. Under the early Norman kings, English settlers 
had made inroads in Wales but had never really conquered the whole place. 
Wales was made up of many small kingdoms, and they fought with each 
other as much as they did with the English. Then in the middle of the 13th 
century came a king who seemed capable of leading the Welsh against the 
English, the leader of Gwynedd, Llywellyn. Llywellyn refused to do homage 
to Edward, which brought the two to battle in 1277 and 1282. After killing 
Llywellyn in battle, Edward set about the systematic conquest of Wales. 
He built a series of massive castles: Flint, Conwy, Aberystwyth, Rhuddlan, 
and Caernarfon. His son Edward was born at Caernarfon in 1284 and thus 
became the ¿ rst English heir to be named prince of Wales. Edward’s castles 
did the trick; today, Wales retains a separate cultural identity, but its political 
integration with England has been quite complete.
Edward’s efforts in Scotland were not nearly as lasting, but at the time 
seemed promising. In the late 1280s, Scotland had a succession crisis; 
the only legitimate claimant was Princess Margaret, the Maid of Norway. 
Edward arranged her marriage to his son Edward, but Margaret died en 
route from Norway to Scotland. Edward then claimed that as her would-
be father-in-law, he had a say in who should inherit the throne. In 1291, 
he took an expedition to Scotland just to demonstrate his authority, and in 
1292 he convened a court, as feudal overlord, to choose between the two 
most promising candidates for the throne, Robert Bruce and John Balliol. 
This episode is known in Scottish history as the Great Cause. The court
chose Balliol. 
The Scots were divided about this turn of events. Some of Bruce’s supporters 
appealed to King Edward to change his mind. Balliol then de¿ ed Edward’s 

106
Lecture 23: The Conquests of Edward I
attempt to treat him as a vassal. In 1296, Edward ravaged southern Scotland 
and forced Balliol to abdicate. Then he did something of symbolic importance 
that opened up a rift between England and Scotland for centuries: Edward 
took the Scottish coronation stone, the Stone of Scone, to Westminster 
Abbey. The idea certainly was to assert that Edward was the overlord of the 
Scottish king. The stone was used there for English and British coronation 
ceremonies for the next 700 years, until Parliament returned it in 1996 as a 
gesture to Scottish nationalists.
So, Edward had taken the throne of Scotland in all but name. But in 1297, a 
new player appeared, William Wallace (best known to us as the hero of the 
¿ lm Braveheart). There are many historical inaccuracies in the movie, but 
one thing is true: Wallace made life dif¿ cult for English rule in Scotland 
for nearly a decade. Finally, he was captured in 1305 and executed. But 
Wallace’s death did not bring stability to Scotland, and when King Edward 
died in 1307, he left a lot of un¿ nished business for his son. Ŷ
The ruins of Caernarfon, one of Edward I’s great Welsh castles and the 
birthplace of Edward II.
© Photos.com/Thinkstock.

107
Quia emptores, Statute of: Measure enacted in 1290 to prevent further 
subinfeudation—that is, the lengthening of the chain of feudal obligation. 
The statute mandated that when the estate of a tenant changed hands, any 
feudal dues owed from that estate would be paid directly to the lord of the 
original tenant, not to the tenant himself. The statute accelerated the process 
by which feudal ties were slowly breaking down.
Quo warranto, Statute of: Measure enacted in 1290 that regulated private 
franchises or courts. Any courts that could not produce a royal charter of 
foundation had to be con¿ rmed by a royal grant. The statute grew out of the 
quo warranto proceedings initiated in 1274 to investigate the origins of all 
private franchises as part of the efforts of Edward I to regularize the English 
court system.
Carpenter, The Struggle for Mastery.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

108
Lecture 24: Edward II—Defeat and Deposition
Edward II—Defeat and Deposition
Lecture 24
But the issue between Edward and his barons wasn’t really about sex 
at all; it was about power and access. I think the barons cared far less 
about whether the king was sleeping with Gaveston than about whether 
he was listening to him. 
E
dward I was a successful ruler. His son, Edward II, despite some 
recent attempts to rehabilitate his reputation, was a disastrously 
bad king. His reign was troubled from the start, and it ended in his 
deposition and (almost certainly) his violent death. The fact is that Edward II 
didn’t seem to like being king. He was famously uninterested in the routine 
work of government, but the real problem was what he did with his time 
instead of attending to royal business. He was also unlucky enough to rule 
during one of the worst natural disasters to hit England during the Middle 
Ages, the Great Famine. He presided over England’s worst military defeat 
since the Battle of Hastings, the humiliating rout at Bannockburn. 
Edward II’s reign naturally breaks down into four periods of crisis: ¿ rst, 
the conÀ ict with the barons over his favorite, Piers Gaveston; second, 
the disaster at Bannockburn and the economic crisis associated with 
the famine; third, the conÀ ict with the king’s cousin, Thomas, earl of 
Lancaster; and fourth, the war with the barons over the king’s patronage 
of the Despensers. Of the four, the conÀ ict over Gaveston was the most 
bitter. Gaveston was from a minor noble family in Gascony, an English-
ruled province of southwestern France. He had been brought to the royal 
household by Edward I, who had thought Gaveston would be a good 
inÀ uence on the young prince. When it turned out quite the opposite, 
Edward I banished him. Virtually the ¿ rst thing Edward II did as king 
was recall his favorite from exile and make him earl of Cornwall. Giving 
this earldom (normally reserved for a member of the royal family) to this 
seeming foreign upstart caused terrible friction among the English barons.
Two main issues caused the bulk of the resentment against Gaveston. The 
more high minded one was their fear that the king was taking counsel 

109
from an unknown and untrusted outsider. Gaveston seemed to exercise a 
greater hold over the king than any royal favorite in English history. And 
Edward’s policymaking was not on a good footing; he was in constant 
debt (and constantly raising taxes). The barons’ more sel¿ sh motive was 
protecting their own self-interest. Gaveston had a stranglehold on royal 
patronage, the barons’ ¿ nancial 
lifeblood. 
The 
more 
of¿ ces, 
land, 
and 
treasure 
Gaveston 
received, the less there was for
anyone else. 
Until recently, it was assumed quite 
matter-of-factly that Gaveston and 
the king were lovers. Shortly after the king’s death, these claims circulated 
widely in England and beyond. Many scholars now argue, however, that the 
relationship between the king and Gaveston wasn’t sexual or that we can’t 
know for sure. In the early 14th century, a charge of sodomy was the default 
if you wanted to damage someone’s reputation, not unlike calling someone 
a communist in America in the 1950s. Whether or not Edward and Gaveston 
were lovers, the real issue was with Gaveston’s power. 
Opposition to Gaveston coalesced around the king’s ¿ rst cousin, Thomas, 
earl of Lancaster. Under his leadership, the barons forced the king to exile 
Gaveston in 1308, but within a year, Gaveston was back in England. In 
1310, the barons forced Edward to name a committee of bishops, earls, and 
barons who would take over the royal administration until rules could be 
drawn up for the future administration of the realm. These measures, called 
the Ordinances, were an attempt to make the king rule responsibly, within 
his means, and above all, with the advice of the barons. The Ordinances 
banished Gaveston again. They gave the barons the right to approve the 
king’s appointed of¿ cers. Parliament was to meet twice a year. The king 
could no longer fund his household with tax revenues before they had been 
counted at the Exchequer. 
Gaveston returned again in 1311, in de¿ ance of the Ordinances. The king’s 
opponents, led by the earls of Lancaster and Warwick, captured him, subjected 
By 1321, Edward had basically 
ceded control of the English 
administration to Despenser.

110
Lecture 24: Edward II—Defeat and Deposition
him to a show trial, and executed him. Naturally, the king was furious. He 
staged an elaborate, expensive funeral for Gaveston and commemorated 
the anniversary of Gaveston’s death for the rest of his life. Edward’s queen, 
Isabella of France, was less sorry to see her husband’s favorite gone. She had 
married Edward in 1308 to seal a peace treaty between England and France. 
As the daughter of France’s King Philip, she had a healthy regard for her own 
dignity and frequently wrote to her father complaining about her treatment at 
the English court and the attention lavished on Gaveston. Gaveston’s death 
seemed to thaw the relationship between the king and queen, however; they 
produced four children over the next decade. 
Gaveston’s death was not the end of the king’s troubles. The 1310s were a 
disastrous decade for the English economy, largely due to a series of terrible 
harvests and a cattle plague between 1315 and 1320. If it weren’t for the 
Black Death a few decades later, this Great Famine would probably be the 
most famous natural disaster of the Middle Ages. Plus, this food scarcity led 
to terrible inÀ ation; high taxes levied to pay for the Scottish war made the 
inÀ ation even worse. Trade was disrupted throughout the country. 
The most humiliating event for the king was the defeat at Bannockburn in 
1314. The English cavalry had been slaughtered; the infantrymen and archers 
never even got into the ¿ ght. All the English baggage was left on the ¿ eld 
and plundered by the Scots. Scottish independence didn’t come into serious 
jeopardy for the rest of Edward’s reign. Edward’s reputation as a military 
leader was destroyed. 
For the next eight years, English politics was dominated by the struggle 
between the king and his cousin Thomas, the powerful and wealthy earl of 
Lancaster. Thomas was able to dominate the post-Bannockburn parliaments, 
which once again forced Edward to accept the Ordinances. For about four 
years, Lancaster virtually ran the royal household. But by 1318, the king had 
a new group of powerful supporters, spearheaded by Hugh Despenser the 
Elder and Hugh Despenser the Younger. The younger Despenser came to ¿ ll 
Gaveston’s shoes, but was of unimpeachable native English stock and was a 
much harder target for Edward’s opposition. By 1321, Edward had basically 
ceded control of the English administration to Despenser. The problem was 
that Despenser had a taste for honors and bribes and lucrative deals. 

111
Once again, the English magnates became frustrated with the high-handed 
behavior of the king’s favorite. A coalition formed led by Lancaster and 
joined by the Mortimers, an important family of lords from the Welsh 
marches. Both baronial and royal forces armed themselves, and in 1322, 
the two armies met at the Battle of Boroughbridge in Yorkshire. Lancaster’s 
army was defeated, and the earl himself was caught and executed without 
trial—perhaps as revenge for Gaveston’s murder 11 years before. 
For the moment, the anti-royal baronial faction had been smashed, but 
resentment of the Despensers didn’t go away. Roger Mortimer, one of the 
rebel leaders, escaped his imprisonment in the Tower of London and À ed to 
France. Meanwhile, Queen Isabella became convinced that the Despensers 
were undermining her inÀ uence at court. When Edward cut her allowance, 
she had ¿ nally had enough. She took their eldest son Edward and joined 
Mortimer in Paris, where they became lovers and plotted their return to 
England. In 1326, Mortimer and Isabella invaded with help from Flemish 
allies. They raised an army with baronial support, and by late in the year, 
they had captured King Edward. The Younger Despenser was executed. 
Mortimer, in an unprecedented move, persuaded parliament to depose the 
king, and Edward was forced to sign an acknowledgment of his deposition at 
the threat of losing the throne for his son. 
What happened next is murky: Edward seems to have died shortly thereafter, 
in early 1327. It was rumored that he was disemboweled with a hot poker by 
one of Mortimer’s henchmen, although accounts of the king’s demise written 
shortly after his death make no mention of such horrible means. 
The reign of Edward I ended in tragedy, but its long-term consequences 
transcend personal drama. From now on, English kings would have to listen 
to their barons if they wanted to stay safely on the throne. The growing power 
of parliament could now be used to give a veneer of legality to some of the 
barons’ most extreme actions. Now it was possible for the barons to rebel 
against royal authority while claiming to represent the will of the community 
of the realm. But in the meantime, the kingdom was in the hands of a rogue 
nobleman, his royal mistress, and a puppet prince. Ŷ

112
Lecture 24: Edward II—Defeat and Deposition
lords ordainers: Committee of 21 lords imposed on Edward II in 1311 to 
regulate the king’s adherence to the Ordinances, which were designed to 
restore good government after a period of mismanagement. 
Ordinances: Measures imposed on Edward II in 1311 by the lords ordainers
to try to restore good government. Piers Gaveston and the king’s Italian 
bankers were banished, and Parliament was required to be summoned once 
a year. 
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

113
Edward III and the Hundred Years’ War
Lecture 25
All of the trouble over Gascony always stemmed from the essential 
falseness of the relationship between the French and English kings. It 
just didn’t make sense for one king to be the vassal of another. It was 
always something the French could hold over the English. But what 
if the Gordian knot were cut at last? What if the French and English 
kings were the same man?
E
dward III was the perfect 14th-century king. He looked the part. He 
had the right wife. He produced a healthy brood of children, including 
¿ ve strapping sons. He liked tournaments, he liked pageantry, and he 
won wars. In short, he gave the public what they wanted. He had a rough 
start, of course; for three years, he was under the thumb of Roger Mortimer. 
Mortimer quickly made himself unpopular by seizing estates and of¿ ces for 
himself just as rapaciously as the Despensers had, and he was ruthless with 
his opponents. At the tender age of 18, Edward III gathered supporters and 
had Mortimer arrested, tried by Parliament, and executed. As for Isabella, 
she retired from active politics and lived out a comfortable retirement for the 
next 28 years. Now Edward was his own man.
Determined to reverse his father’s humiliations, Edward campaigned in 
Scotland from 1333 to 1336, making no permanent gains but holding his own. 
In 1346, Edward at last captured the Scottish king, David Bruce, at the Battle 
of Neville’s Cross, though this didn’t lead to English rule over Scotland. 
The most important aspect of Edward’s reign, though, was unquestionably 
the war with France, the ¿ rst in the series of conÀ icts called the Hundred 
Years’ War. The old conÀ icts of the Angevin period still lingered, and France 
was now openly supporting the enemies of England, including the Scottish. 
In addition, the French were backing an anti-English faction in Flanders, 
England’s most important partner in the wool trade. So everywhere England 
turned, France was causing trouble. The last straw came in 1337 when the 
French king, Philip VI, con¿ scated Gascony, the last of England’s French 
¿ efs, outright. But Edward III had a powerful weapon against the French that 
his predecessors had not: a claim to the French throne through his mother. 

114
Lecture 25: Edward III and the Hundred Years’ War
England’s armies set off for the Continent in 1338, intending to attack France 
via the Low Countries. Edward had forged these Low Country alliances with 
bribes, which he ¿ nanced with loans from Italian bankers. Nothing much 
happened until 1340, when the English won a naval victory at Sluys off the 
Flemish coast. This victory gave the English control of the English Channel, 
which ensured their supply and communications lines. Between 1340 and 
1346, Edward released bands of his soldiers into the French countryside to 
live off the land, which meant stealing from the peasants, but no major battles 
were fought. In 1346, Edward raised an army of 10,000 men by means of 
a new military assessment: Each landowner whose land was valued at 100 
shillings was to provide an archer; each landowner worth ǧ10 had to provide 
a hobelar, a lightly-armed mounted soldier; each landowner worth ǧ25 had 
to provide a man-at-arms. The ranks were then ¿ lled out with criminals 
serving in exchange for pardons. 
Edward landed in Normandy and captured Caen. He then moved toward 
Paris but met up with King Philip’s army outside the town of Crécy. The 
French outnumbered the English, but the English were far better positioned, 
and Philip did not coordinate his various contingents well. More than 
1,500 leading knights and nobles died on the French side. Capitalizing 
on this victory, Edward marched north to besiege Calais, a strategically
important port. 
The townspeople resisted stubbornly at ¿ rst. After protracted negotiations, 
when it became clear that Philip could not rescue them, the citizens 
submitted. Edward, furious with the town’s protracted resistance, ordered 
that six leading citizens of the town, six burghers of Calais, were to present 
themselves to him, naked except for their undershirts, with halters around 
their necks, so that he could do with them whatever he willed. The burghers 
were terri¿ ed, but they did as they were told. Edward ordered them hanged, 
but then Queen Philippa interceded for the burghers, publicly going down 
on her knees before the king begging for their lives. Edward relented. The 
burghers were released, but not to go back to Calais. The entire population of 
Calais was expelled, and new settlers were brought in from England. Calais 
would remain an English town for the next two centuries. The whole scene 
between Edward and Philippa may have been staged—a bit of good cop, bad 

115
cop—but genuine or not, the story had enormous resonance around Europe. 
It demonstrated the terrible wrath and great mercy of Edward III.
The second huge victory of Edward III’s reign was led by Edward’s son, the 
Black Prince. In 1355, he was sent to Gascony to lead a big chévauchée—an 
armed plundering raid. This raid crossed France from Bordeaux in the west 
to the Mediterranean and back, then north toward the Loire River, intending 
to meet up with another English army in Normandy. The French caught 
up with his army at Poitiers and demanded surrender. The Black Prince 
preferred to ¿ ght. Again, the English were outnumbered but better situated. 
In addition, the earl of Warwick used the same trick William the Conqueror 
had used at Hastings, the feigned retreat, to great effect. It was another rout, 
with even worse consequences for the French: King John II, only 5 years on 
the throne, was captured.
At the Battle of Poitiers, the Black Prince demolished the French army and 
captured their king, John II. 
© Photos.com/Thinkstock.

116
Lecture 25: Edward III and the Hundred Years’ War
John was bundled off to England, where he spent the next four years as the 
toast of society; he doesn’t seem to have chafed that much at his captivity. 
Negotiations over his ransom dragged on. Finally, in 1360, the Treaty of 
Brétigny set John’s ransom at 3,000,000 crowns; Edward agreed to drop 
his claim to the French throne but got full sovereignty in Calais, Ponthieu, 
Poitou, and Aquitaine. John was released to raise the ransom money, leaving 
his son, Prince Louis, as a hostage in Calais. At ¿ rst, quite dutifully, John 
sent some money back to England, but then something happened that has 
amazed commentators ever since: In 1363, Louis escaped from Calais, and 
John, deeply humiliated that his son had broken the terms of the treaty, 
surrendered himself back into English captivity. He was greeted in London 
with parades but died a few months later, still in captivity. 
The peace of Brétigny lasted a total of nine years. Fighting broke out in 
1369. Edward was aging, and the Black Prince was in ill health. The French 
slowly recaptured most of their lands. By the time of Edward’s death in 
1377, only Calais and a few other towns remained in English hands. So was 
it all pointless? It may seem so now, but at the time, victory always seemed 
just around the corner. More important from our perspective is what the war 
did to English society and government: It boosted English nationalism, and 
as a side effect, the French language lost its already-waning prestige status 
in England, even among the nobility. King Edward ordered all the priests 
in the kingdom to praise the English nation from their pulpits. English men 
were also ordered to practice archery on Sundays and holidays, for the good 
of England and against France. Perhaps the most important effect of the war, 
though, was the impact it had on Parliament. The need to ¿ nance the war 
gave Parliament even more leverage over the king. The two-house structure 
and the membership of Parliament became ¿ xed, although how members of 
Commons were selected still varied from borough to borough. By the end 
of the 14th century, Commons’ power to grant and deny the king’s proposed 
taxes was ¿ rmly entrenched. So the Hundred Years’ War may not have led to 
lasting gains of territory, but it did contribute to a growing sense of English 
nationhood, and that sense of nationhood was increasingly embodied in the 
institution of Parliament. Ŷ

117
Brétigny, Treaty of: Agreement between England and France made in 
1360 that guaranteed English possession of Gascony and pledged a ransom 
of ǧ500,000 for the captured French king, John the Good, in exchange for 
the promise of Edward III’s renunciation of his right to the French throne 
(which he never ful¿ lled). The treaty brought nine years of peace before 
hostilities resumed.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

118
Lecture 26: The Flowering of Chivalry
The Flowering of Chivalry
Lecture 26
Before the crusades, the church did not look on violence as a good thing, 
and of course, the job of the knight was to ¿ ght. ... With the preaching 
of the crusades in 1095 ... the church ¿ gured out a good reason to ¿ ght; 
it was a positive thing to go ¿ ght the enemies of Christendom. ... So the 
Church was giving knighthood respectability, and as kings got their 
acts together a bit more, knights came to be seen less as a plague and 
more as a way of defending the innocent.
W
hat is chivalry, or what was it in the 14th century? What did it 
mean, and what was it for? How did the warrior code of the 
French elite become an all-encompassing European ethos? The 
word “chivalry,” like so much else having to do with the elite in this period, 
comes from French, speci¿ cally the words for horse, cheval, and knight, 
chevalier. So chivalry is for the horsey set, those wealthy enough to ride 
horses for transportation, rather than hitch them to a plow. 
Although having its origins in events of the 11th century, the earliest form 
of chivalry emerged in France and French-held lands in the 12th century and 
reached its height during the Hundred Years’ War. As we know, England’s 
medieval elite had strong ties to France and French culture, so the customs 
took hold in England rather easily, although it took on local peculiarities. 
One important thing to note is that, wherever it spread, chivalry presupposed 
that the main preoccupation of elite society is war.
The 11th century was a rough time in Europe; governments were rudimentary 
at best, and instability was rampant. Kings and nobles jockeyed each other 
for power, and one of the means they used was a new class of armed 
horsemen called knights. The ¿ rst knights were just hired thugs, the muscle 
nobles used to carve out bigger and bigger lordships for themselves. Over 
the course of the next century or so, knights acquired social respectability 
and made a place for themselves among the elite. The way they did this 
was directly tied to the ideology of the Crusades. Before the 12th century, 

119
the church (accurately) saw the conÀ icts between European nobles as 
sel¿ sh power struggles. But with the call to the First Crusade in 1095, the 
church took a de¿ nitive step to channel that lust for violence and glory 
for the good of Christendom. Churchmen like Saint Bernard of Clairvaux 
began to praise “the new knighthood” as much to encourage good knightly 
behavior as to describe its reality on the ground. As knights came to live 
up to this reputation, they were seen less as a plague and more as defenders
of innocence.
Knighthood became not just respectable but fashionable, and it took on all 
sorts of elaborate trappings over time. These included ceremonies such as 
dubbing, the origins of which are obscure but which eventually took on 
all the elaborate religious 
and 
social 
features 
of 
a wedding. One of the 
ceremony’s purposes was to 
equip the new knight, which 
was not cheap: He needed a 
full suit of armor, a whole 
suite of horses, and of 
course weapons. By the 12th 
century, armor had evolved 
from breastplates of boiled 
armor and a little mail to full 
suits of mail, which were 
custom made and required 
a specialist to make. By the 
14th century, full plate armor 
was being worn by the best-
equipped knights, including 
the Black Prince. 
A knight needed multiple 
horses because each was 
bred and trained for a 
different purpose: a heavy 
war horse (called a destrier 
The Crusades transformed knights from little 
more than hired thugs to warriors of God.
© Photos.com/Thinkstock.

120
Lecture 26: The Flowering of Chivalry
or courser), a horse to ride as transport (such as a palfrey), and one or 
more to carry baggage (such as a rouncey). Horses were then, as they are 
now, expensive to buy and to maintain, plus a war horse even required its 
own armor!
Tournaments were an integral part of knighthood. They had a simple, 
practical origin but, like everything to do with knighthood, got fancier and 
fancier over time. They began in the late 11th century simply as practice for 
war, just giant mêlées. Their other appeal was the rule that if you captured 
another knight and made him yield, you could either keep his horse and armor 
or make him pay a ransom. In this way, a tournament was also a way to make 
a name for yourself and perhaps catch the eye of a wealthy employer. On 
the downside, tournaments could be very dangerous, of course. The knights 
weren’t supposed to be trying to kill each other, but accidents did happen. 
By the 12th century, there was a regular tournament circuit in France, and 
some knights were essentially professional athletes. This circuit was where 
William Marshal, Henry III’s regent, made his fortune and his reputation 
as a young man. Marshal fought on the French circuit because there wasn’t
an English one; the crown had banned tournaments as disruptive,
disorderly affairs. 
The 13th century saw the rise of single combat—the one-on-one jousts we 
usually see in the movies. While this gave a certain narrative clarity to the 
The Eponymous Garter
A
ccording to tradition, the Order of the Garter got its inspiration 
from an incident that took place at the king’s court in 1348. The 
king and his courtiers were dancing, including the countess of Salisbury. 
The king had his eye on the countess (Edward III adored his wife, but 
he wasn’t scrupulously faithful to her). As they danced, the countess’s 
garter slipped off and fell to the À oor. Some of the people around her 
started to snigger, but the king very chivalrously picked it up, tied it to 
his own leg, and said, “Honi soit qui mal y pense,” meaning “Shame to 
whoever thinks ill of it.” That quip became the order’s motto. 

121
event, it made tournaments more arti¿ cial and less like actual ¿ ghting. By 
the 14th and 15th centuries, tournaments were diverging more and more 
from the reality of war as archers and infantry became more important on 
the battle¿ eld. But the circuit had a life of its own; tournaments were great 
social occasions. Women attended in large numbers to cheer their favorites. 
Stands were built for spectators. 
Kings even took the ¿ eld to show 
their prowess. 
Meanwhile, heraldry developed 
from mere decoration to a way to 
identify individual ¿ ghters. By the 
1140s, certain important nobles 
wore speci¿ c emblems on their 
shields; one of the ¿ rst to do so was 
Geoffrey of Anjou, the father of King Henry II. (The gold lions from his 
shield ultimately became part of the English royal coat of arms.) Over the 12th 
and 13th centuries, heraldic devices became hereditary and had worked their 
way down from kings all the way to the humblest of knights. An elaborate 
set of codes and rules had developed regarding heraldic symbols. A shield’s 
description was called a blazon. Richard the Lionheart’s blazon, for example, 
was “gules three lions or, passant guardant,” meaning three gold lions, 
walking to the left with their front legs raised and their heads facing toward 
the viewer, all on a red background. Perfectly clear, right? Heraldry was 
literally its own dialect, and professional heralds arose as its grammarians and
record keepers.
What characterized knightly culture besides war? For one thing, knights 
seem to have liked to listen to stories about other knights. War stories date 
back to the earliest known literature, but the literature of chivalry belonged 
to the subgenre of courtly love, such as troubadour poems and Arthurian 
romances. But then, in the 14th century, as the Hundred Years’ War ensued, 
stories about English knights were increasingly composed in English instead 
of French. Although many of these were biographical, one of the most 
famous examples of these new English knightly romances is “Sir Gawain 
and the Green Knight.” It’s a wonderful story, and it’s proof that by the 14th 
century, knighthood in England has really gone native, but moreover, English 
Tournaments ... had a 
simple, practical origin but, 
like everything to do with 
knighthood, got fancier and 
fancier over time.

122
Lecture 26: The Flowering of Chivalry
knights are asserting a peculiarly English identity, distancing themselves 
from the French enemy.
If knights liked to hear about themselves, it was partly because they were 
very conscious of belonging to a distinct social group. The 14th century was 
the age of formalizing knightly associations. Edward III, the consummate 
knight, took the brilliant step of creating an order of knighthood, the Order 
of the Garter, in 1348. Its purpose was to bind his knights even more closely 
to him in a time of war. Edward was also consciously imitating King Arthur 
and his knights at the court of Camelot. 
But beyond all the pageantry and glamour, there was an ugly side to chivalry. 
Knights very much looked down on people who weren’t knights. English 
knights had no scruples about pillaging French peasant villages, nor about 
raping peasant women of any nationality. It might be good to think for a 
moment about what the rest of society thought about all those tournaments 
and colorful banners and shields. Ŷ
dubbing: Ceremony that of¿ cially conferred knighthood. It began in the 11th 
century as an informal rite but developed into an elaborate ritual. Vassals 
were required to pay for the dubbing of the eldest son of their lord.
Order of the Garter: Order of chivalry founded in 1348 by Edward III to 
foster unity among his closest supporters and increase support for the war in 
France. Membership was highly selective. 
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

123
The Black Death
Lecture 27
A great mortality spread to England from the Continent, where it had 
already been raging for some time. In the course of the outbreak of 
disease that followed, perhaps a third of the English population died. 
... It’s hard for us even to imagine the scale of the catastrophe. Try to 
imagine your family, your friends, your coworkers. Now eliminate one 
in three of them. Imagine what that would do to your life on a daily 
basis. That’s what happened.
I
n the same year in which the Order of the Garter was founded, the Black 
Death came to England. Named perhaps for the extensive black bruises 
the disease produced, or perhaps for the black fate of the infected, the 
disease may have been caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis or a closely 
related one, or it may have been two or more diseases that struck at the same 
time. It seems to have appeared in Asia in the 1340s, from where it spread 
westward along trade routes, especially along the Black Sea. The ships that 
sailed these routes were infested with rats, which were infested with À eas, 
which carried the plague. The disease had spread to southeastern Europe and 
Italy by 1347 and reached England in 1348.
A contemporary chronicler recorded three forms the disease could take: 
The mildest caused buboes (enormous swellings of the lymph nodes of the 
armpits, groin, and so forth) and a fever and took ¿ ve days to kill its victims, 
but if they survived the ¿ ve days, victims had a chance at recovery. A more 
serious form also caused victims to vomit blood; the survival time was about 
three days, and the chance of recovery was low. The third and most terrifying 
form seems to have been airborne and astonishingly fast-moving; reports say 
there were families in which everyone went to bed feeling perfectly ¿ ne and 
were dead by the next morning. 
Word of the plague reached England many, many months before it ¿ nally 
arrived. People took all the precautions they could under medieval conditions. 
They said prayers, held masses, and doubled up on almsgiving; they bought 
quack remedies; they put their affairs in order. But still the plague came. 

124
Lecture 27: The Black Death
And England wasn’t in the best position to resist a major outbreak of 
disease. The Great Famine had weakened the health of an entire generation, 
and bad weather continued to take its toll on the populace into the 1340s. 
A concurrent rapid growth in the 
population meant people were 
living closer together, and disease 
could more easily spread.
The disease likely arrived in June 
1348 in Dorset on a ship from 
Calais; by the autumn, it was all 
over the West Country, including 
the major port of Bristol. From 
there it spread inexorably from west to east by two main routes: a northerly 
route through Oxfordshire and down into London, and a southerly route 
along the south coast through Hampshire, into Surrey, and thus to London 
again. The plague didn’t hit London with its full force until the beginning 
of the following year, but when it did, the cemeteries were unable to 
accommodate all the bodies; No one is sure how many people died in 
London, but one estimate says one-third to one-half of a population of 
70,000. All over England, town authorities were overwhelmed by the task of 
burying the dead. Many towns resorted to mass burials in so-called plague 
pits. Not one but two elected archbishops of Canterbury died before they 
could take of¿ ce. Some of the city’s many livery companies, or guilds, lost 
all of their leadership. Twenty-seven members of the monastic community 
at Westminster Abbey died, and their abbot À ed, taking the plague with him 
to Hampstead. London life was made all the harder by the unwillingness 
of the farmers and tradesmen from the countryside who kept it supplied 
to enter the city environs. From London, the plague spread to East Anglia 
in March of 1349, peaking at last in May, June, and July. The plague also 
spread north through the midlands. It seems to have hit particularly hard in 
Lincolnshire for some reason. The mortality rate for clergy was particularly 
high, partly because they were ministering to the sick and performing last 
rites for the dying.
People tried all sorts of remedies. It was widely believed that the plague 
came from “bad air,” so people tried breathing through special cloths. Other 
The mortality rate for clergy 
was particularly high, partly 
because they were ministering 
to the sick and performing last 
rites for the dying.

125
people wore charms and amulets. Perhaps the strangest remedy was based 
on the belief that one kind of bad air could drive out another. A physician 
named John Colle noted that people who took care of latrines or who worked 
in hospitals and other malodorous places had greater immunity to the plague. 
Worried citizens could sometimes be spotted crouched over a latrine for 
hours, trying to absorb the noxious smells as protection. It worked about as 
well as you might have expected. On the Continent, particularly Germany, 
people tried self-À agellation, believing that this penance for their sins might 
avert the punishment of the plague. One of the uglier responses to the Black 
Death was the persecution of Jews, who were accused of a conspiracy to 
spread the plague. The English did not participate in such persecution, but 
only because they had driven the Jews out of the country 50 years before. 
By the end of 1349, the plague had reached almost every corner of England, 
then subsided. It would return periodically for the next 300 years. The ¿ rst 
time, in 1361, it hit particularly hard among the children who had been born 
since the ¿ rst outbreak of plague, who of course had no immunity to it. But 
in the meantime, England had lost a third of its labor force. Parliament, 
protecting its own members’ interests, passed the Statute of Laborers in 
1351 to set maximum wage rates and order people back into the labor force, 
which held back any dramatic rise in wages until the 1370s. 
The Black Death’s effects on agriculture were also profound, because a huge 
number of farms changed hands. In fact, it was sometimes hard to determine 
who really had a right to the holding, and in many cases, there was simply 
no one left to take over the farm. Landlords everywhere were desperate to 
¿ nd tenants, which often meant lowering rents and commuting servile dues, 
the labor that an unfree tenant owed the manor. Slowly but surely, serfdom 
withered away. Finally, the loss of population meant that demand for goods 
and services was depressed, which meant that prices fell. So despite the 
horrible emotional toll the plague took on the people of England, those who 
survived were far better off in its aftermath. Ŷ

126
Lecture 27: The Black Death
Laborers, Statute of: Measure passed in 1351 intended to protect employers 
from the market forces set in motion by the great mortality caused by the 
Black Death. Wage rates were to be kept at pre-plague levels, and able-
bodied men were required to accept work under those terms. The statute 
caused widespread resentment and contributed to the Peasants’ Revolt 
of 1381.
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

127
The Peasants’ Revolt of 1381
Lecture 28
The rebels were actually rather moderate in their demands; this is a 
characteristic of English revolts throughout history from this point on, 
really. ... We’ve seen real radical revolts, like the French and Russian 
revolutions, and we know that the revolt in 1381 doesn’t look like that. 
But to the powers that be in 1381, it did seem like the end of the world.
T
here were long-term economic consequences to the Black Death in 
England, but the propertied classes were not going to bow to these 
market forces without a ¿ ght. The burgeoning class conÀ ict of the 
late 14th century would play out in the largest, most threatening revolt of the 
entire Middle Ages, the so-called Peasant’s Revolt of 1381.
So far, the rebellions we’ve looked at have been baronial rebellions, men of 
wealth and power trying to get a better deal out of the king. Then, starting 
with the Magna Carta, barons began to claim they were rebelling for the 
good of the realm—or at least, the propertied class. The revolt of 1381 is
the ¿ rst that we can honestly say was motivated by the concerns of the
lower orders.
We call this revolt the Peasant’s Revolt, but strictly speaking, most of the 
participants were a cut above ordinary peasants—small-scale tradesmen, 
low-ranking clergy, and so forth—and their demands were fairly 
sophisticated, addressing both economic and religious grievances. It was 
also an orderly revolt, as revolts go, with far less violence than you would 
expect from thousands of angry people on the march. 
The king who had to confront these rebels was the young Richard II, son of 
the Black Prince and grandson of Edward III. Richard came to the throne in 
1377 at the age of 10. It’s interesting to note that, despite Richard’s age (and 
the succession skipping a generation; the Black Prince died the year before 
Edward did), it was uncontroversial. The principle of dynastic legitimacy 
was well established, and the state had developed suf¿ ciently so that the 
various organs of government could rule even if the king could not. Richard’s 

128
Lecture 28: The Peasants’ Revolt of 1381
uncles, especially John of Gaunt, were also very loyal to their nephew; this 
was a close-knit family. 
The last years of Edward III’s reign were troublesome for England. The 
king had slipped into senility, and the war in France was going badly. 
Royal ¿ nances were in a terrible 
state, so between 1377 and 1381, 
Parliament passed a series of taxes 
of a new form called the poll tax. 
Previous taxes were on property, 
and thus the lowest orders were 
mostly unaffected. The poll tax, 
on the other hand, was per head; 
you had to pay it regardless of how 
much property you owned. Even at 
four pence, the lowest tax rate, it was a hardship for many. By 1381, the rate 
tripled, starting at a shilling a head. The rebels did not miss the irony that 
the same Parliament that was hiking their taxes had been passing laws since 
1351 to keep their wages low. 
Meanwhile, the public was angry with the church over the papal provisions, 
where the pope used his right of patronage to put his own men—often 
foreigners—into all the good jobs in the English church. In 1351 and 1353, 
Parliament passed the Statute of Provisors, which attempted to limit the 
papal provisions, and the Statute of Praemunire, which limited the number 
of cases relating to church property that were referred to Rome. It didn’t 
help matters that the papacy was at the time in exile in Avignon, France—
consorting with the enemy. 
Meanwhile, England had produced its ¿ rst home-grown heretic, an Oxford 
professor named John Wycliffe, who attacked some of the core tenets of the 
Catholic Church. He believed that it was possible for individual believers to 
¿ nd a mystical union with God apart from the sacraments and speci¿ cally 
denied the doctrine of transubstantiation. He said the institutional church 
did not have a monopoly on interpreting scripture. (He even sponsored an 
English translation of the Bible.) Then Wycliffe took the next logical step, 
saying that if lay people don’t need the clergy for much, then the clergy don’t 
Whatever we may think of 
Richard’s later behavior, 
[meeting the rebels] was a 
brave thing for a 14-year-old 
boy to do.

129
need all that property. Parliament cracked down Wycliffe’s followers, the 
Lollards. In 1401 they passed the law known as De haeretico comburendo, 
“On the burning of heretics,” the ¿ rst time in English history that the 
execution of heretics was authorized by law. Wycliffe himself was never 
seriously punished; he had the patronage and protection of John of Gaunt.
Despite the suppression, Lollardy was very much in the air in the spring 
of 1381. In late May and early June, bands of rebels attacked poll tax 
commissioners in Kent and Essex. Led by Wat Tyler, a local tradesman, and 
John Ball, a Lollard-leaning priest, they then attacked religious houses, royal 
castles, and royal of¿ cials and began destroying legal records. By the second 
week of June, large groups of rebels began to converge on London—literally 
thousands of people on the roads headed toward the same place. Once there, 
they were joined by disaffected Londoners. They burned the Savoy Palace, 
the London residence of John of Gaunt; the rebels clearly saw him as the 
public face of the king’s government. They attacked the Tower of London 
and seized the chancellor, Simon Sudbury, who was also archbishop of 
Canterbury, and the treasurer, Sir Robert Hales. Both Sudbury and Hales 
were beheaded. The rebels also targeted Flemish wool merchants—probably 
out of general hostility to foreigners—and destroyed more legal records.
This mob wasn’t merely a mob, however; they had formulated speci¿ c 
demands, which they conveyed to Richard: They wanted the abolition 
of serfdom. They wanted to abolish the nobility other than the king. They 
wanted rents limited to four pence per acre. They wanted the property of the 
church con¿ scated and distributed among the people. Finally, they wanted 
the heads of the chancellor, the treasurer, and John of Gaunt; of course, they 
took care of the ¿ rst two themselves. Wat Tyler demanded an appointment 
with Richard for June 15 at Smith¿ eld, right outside the city, to discuss these 
demands. The amazing thing is, the king went. Whatever we may think of 
Richard’s later behavior, this was a brave thing for a 14-year-old boy to do.
We have various accounts of the meeting, and they conÀ ict in some important 
details, but this is the essence: Wat Tyler made either a disrespectful or a 
sudden gesture toward the king, and the lord mayor of London stabbed Tyler 
with a dagger. This could have been the start of a terrible riot, but the king 
called out to the rebels that he would gladly listen to all their demands if they 

130
Lecture 28: The Peasants’ Revolt of 1381
would only follow him into the ¿ elds further outside the city. They went, 
but they walked into a trap; Richard had bought enough time for his troops 
to arrive and arrest the remaining ringleaders. The rank and ¿ le dispersed 
quickly. The concessions made to the rebels at Smith¿ eld were repudiated. 
The leaders, including John Ball, were executed, but there were no
wholesale reprisals. 
Despite the revolt’s failure, the government got the point. Most of the rebels’ 
demands went unmet, but the poll tax was scrapped. Perhaps the most 
important and interesting point to be made about the revolt is that both the 
rebels and the government acted with considerable restraint. Ŷ
De haeretico comburendo: Act of Parliament passed in 1401 authorizing 
the burning at the stake of heretics. The measure was aimed at the Lollards, 
who had grown in popularity as the result of the writings of John Wycliffe.
poll tax: Tax on every individual in England imposed under Richard II in 
1377, 1379, and 1381. It proved very unpopular and helped touch off the 
Peasants’ Revolt in 1381.
Praemunire, Statutes of: Measures enacted in 1353, 1365, and 1393
to prevent the appeal of ecclesiastical cases to foreign courts in which 
jurisdiction pertained to the royal courts. The ¿ rst statute applied to foreign 
courts in general, whereas the later statutes were more narrowly directed at 
the papal court.
Provisors, Statutes of: Measures enacted in 1351 and 1390 against 
the practice of papal provision, by which the pope could nominate his 
own candidates for English ecclesiastical of¿ ces. Papal provisions were 
extremely unpopular because they deprived the king and the local church 
of a rich source of patronage, and the men “provided” to English of¿ ces 
often failed to perform their duties in person, instead hiring ill-paid and ill-
quali¿ ed substitutes.
    Important Terms

131
Hollister, Stacey, and Stacey, The Making of England to 1399.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
    Suggested Reading

132
Lecture 29: Chaucer and the Rise of English
Chaucer and the Rise of English
Lecture 29
The idea of the strangers thrown together by chance who then decide to 
take turns telling tales is not Chaucer’s own invention. This is exactly 
the same format as you see in The Decameron by Boccaccio. … But 
Chaucer does something new with his group of pilgrims. He uses them 
as a vehicle for social commentary on English men and women of all 
social classes and walks of life. 
T
he 14th century is when the English language really comes into 
its own—as a written language, a literary language, and even a 
theological language. Up to this point, Latin was still the language of 
the church, the king’s law, and the universities, but a working command of 
Latin was restricted to the clerical elite. The language of social prestige was 
French. Literature composed in England about English legends and heroes 
was written in French. French was also the language of the common law 
courts. English, on the other hand, had more or less died out as a written 
language after the Norman Conquest. 
After the reign of King John and the waning of the Angevin Empire, 
England’s elite continued to speak French, but with the passing decades it 
became more and more an affectation, less and less an everyday tongue. 
Chaucer, in The Canterbury Tales, mocks his Prioress character for speaking 
the French of “Stratford atte Bowe,” a degraded form of the language. Likely 
the biggest reason why French lost its prestige is the Hundred Years’ War 
and the anti-French sentiment at all levels of society that accompanied it. 
By the 14th century, literature that was once written in French, like romances, 
was being written in English. More strikingly perhaps, religious texts were 
being composed in English as well for the ¿ rst time since the late 11th
century. The most famous of these texts is The Vision of Piers Ploughman by 
William Langland, composed sometime after 1360. It’s an allegorical work; 
the characters have names like Reason and Truth. But the main character is a 
simple ploughman who really stands for every man. In the story, the author 
has a series of visions that amount to social commentary on the evils of the 

133
day, including church corruption. But there is also a beautiful statement of 
the redemptive value of the toil performed in this life. Piers the Ploughman 
is a humble soul, but he’s better than anyone else in the poem. 
The other great area of English religious writing in the 14th century was 
mystical writing. These mystics were mostly solitary religious ¿ gures 
exploring the direct connection between God and the soul of the believer; 
this plays very much into the sort of arguments Wycliffe was making. The 
best-known of these mystics was Dame Julian of Norwich, an anchoress 
who attached to the church of St. Julian (from which she took her name) 
in the late 14th and early 15th centuries. When Dame Julian was about 30 
years old, she fell ill and believed she was dying. She then had a series of 
direct revelations from God that she committed to writing that she called 
“showings.” The overwhelming focus of her writing is the love of God 
for the individual believer. Richard Rolle, a mid-14th-century hermit from 
Yorkshire wrote “The Fire of Love,” which described his soul’s union with 
God as proceeding in three stages: ¿ rst a physical sensation of warmth, then 
a wonderful sense of sweetness, and ¿ nally heavenly music accompanying 
him as he chanted the Psalms. Another anonymous mystic composed 
the Cloud of Unknowing in the late 14th century as an advice manual for 
potential clerics, but the text suggests they not seek God through reading 
learned works but to empty their minds and approach God directly through 
blind love. This was a fairly severe criticism of the kind of philosophical 
argumentation that was being taught in the schools at that point. 
While these works de¿ nitely dovetail with Wycliffe’s metaphysics, it is 
important to note that they don’t openly deny the validity of the institutional 
church. Still, the fact that these texts are in English is part of the point; 
you are experiencing God in your own language, not in Latin, a language 
acquired through study and labor. The language is part of the theology.
One unique work in the corpus of medieval English religious literature is 
The Book of Margery Kempe. An “as told to” autobiography (several scribes, 
including possibly Margery’s daughter-in-law, were involved in the writing), 
the text concerns the spiritual and material travails of a not-very-mystical, 
occasionally exasperating, but ultimately rather endearing woman who lived 
in King’s Lynn in Norfolk in the late 14th and early 15th centuries. Margery 

134
Lecture 29: Chaucer and the Rise of English
had visions, but they tended to be of a very domestic nature, reÀ ecting her 
bourgeois concerns as the wife of a prominent tradesman and as the mother 
of 14 children. Margery was famous for her pilgrimages, both in England 
and abroad. She often made her fellow pilgrims uncomfortable because she 
had “the gift of tears.” Apparently, she couldn’t turn it off, and the incessant 
weeping got on other people’s 
nerves. It’s easy to poke fun at 
Margery, but she was important 
in a number of respects: She was 
probably the ¿ rst woman to write 
an autobiography. She was a 
laywoman, so her preoccupation 
with her own spiritual life gives 
us a sense of how important these 
questions were to ordinary people in this period. And Margery called enough 
attention to herself to be charged several times with unorthodox behavior 
by the church authorities. Each time she stood her ground and proved her 
innocence. She had grit.
As far as secular, literary writing, the west and northwest were England’s 
center of literary excellence in the 14th century, where the most important 
narrative poems of the period were produced. The poems are written in 
alliterative verse, the kind of verse used in Beowulf, yet the alliterative lines 
are also grouped into rhyming stanzas, just like in the French romances. 
English and French are blending into a new poetic form, perhaps best 
demonstrated by English-language Arthurian romances such as “Sir Gawain 
and the Green Knight” and “The Pearl.” Unfortunately, the author or authors 
of these works is anonymous.
Not so anonymous is Geoffrey Chaucer, the greatest writer of the English 
Middle Ages. He was born in London around 1342 and died in 1400. He 
was the son of a wine merchant, and he held various positions in English 
royal service, which means he left a paper trail; we have nearly 500 written 
references to Chaucer in of¿ cial records. He served on foreign delegations 
during the Hundred Years’ War and was eventually elected to Parliament. So 
he had a very busy public career, but he combined this with a very impressive 
literary output. 
[Chaucer] had a very busy 
public career, but he combined 
this with a very impressive 
literary output. 

135
His masterpiece, The Canterbury Tales, tells the story of a group of pilgrims 
on their way to Canterbury to the shrine of Saint Thomas Becket. These 29 
pilgrims from all walks of life meet at a tavern on south bank of the Thames 
called the Tabard Inn. To pass the time (and smooth some social tensions), 
the innkeeper proposes a wager: the 30 of them will travel to Canterbury 
together, and each of them will tell two tales on the way there and two on the 
way back; whoever tells the best tale will win a free dinner at the expense of 
all the rest. 
Alas, Chaucer never followed through on this scheme; we only have 24 
stories, but we should be very grateful for the ones we do have. Chaucer 
uses the pilgrims’ tales as a vehicle for social commentary. The characters of 
very high status, like the Knight, tell very elevated, very re¿ ned tales about 
courtly adventures and chivalry. The characters of very low social status, 
like the Miller and the Reeve, tell earthy stories with salty language. Even 
the story’s prologue, where Chaucer sets the stage for the pilgrimage and 
the bet, is chock-full of social commentary; Chaucer describes each of the 
characters’ appearance and manner with sharp detail and biting wit. 
One thing we notice right away is that the anticlerical sentiment of the 
Peasant’s Revolt is very much present in The Canterbury Tales; the Friar, for 
example, is described as dissipated, mercenary, and greedy. The Knight and 
the Yeoman, by contrast, receive quite favorable descriptions, and we see in 
the Ploughman some striking resemblances to Langland’s Piers. One of the 
most memorable characters in the Tales—indeed, one of the most famous 
characters in all of English literature—is the Wife of Bath. She is charmingly 
con¿ dent and self-absorbed; in her tale’s prologue, which is probably better 
known than her tale, she gives her autobiography. We learn about her ¿ ve 
husbands, how they treated her, how she treated them, and what she thinks of 
marriage in general. Chaucer is having a lot of fun with the Wife of Bath; she 
comes vividly to life on the page, just as the English language was coming to 
life in the 14th century. Ŷ

136
Lecture 29: Chaucer and the Rise of English
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
Smith, This Realm of England.
    Suggested Reading

137
The Deposition of Richard II
Lecture 30
By Richard II’s reign, there are a lot of these people around, these rich 
and powerful nobles with signi¿ cant private military resources behind 
them. This obviously would tend to tip the power balance between the 
king and the nobles a bit more in favor of the nobles. And the explosive 
dynamic of Richard’s reign is that Richard wants to push back.
R
ichard II’s reign began with the Peasants’ Revolt, but that was by no 
means the last of his troubles. On the one hand, Richard’s conÀ icts 
with his barons were much like his predecessors: arguments over 
patronage and inÀ uence. On the other, the government of England had 
changed signi¿ cantly over the previous two centuries; Parliament not only 
had a much tighter hold of the purse strings, but they had grown powerful 
enough to impeach royal of¿ cers if they so desired. The balance of power 
had shifted. Parliament had also become an instrument whereby political 
enemies attacked one another. Gone were the days of dying in battle for your 
cause; by Richard’s reign, troublesome barons could be executed by order of 
Parliament. Politics had become deadly.
Parliament had become so powerful in part because some individual barons 
had. In particular, the ¿ ve sons of Edward III all founded baronial families 
with signi¿ cant resources and signi¿ cant social clout. In other families, 
stricter inheritance customs, such as entailment, were keeping estates 
consolidated in fewer hands. The wealthiest began to keep large retinues 
of private soldiers, a phenomenon often referred to by historians as bastard 
feudalism. Lords used to grant lands to their followers in exchange for 
military service; now they paid salaries.
Richard didn’t care for this situation at all. He saw that the king had lost 
power both to Parliament and to his own nobles, and he wanted to reverse this 
course. Unfortunately for him, he was the wrong kind of man at the wrong 
time. We’ve seen that Richard was a brave young man, personally facing 
the leaders of the Peasant’s Revolt. But unlike his much-revered grandfather 
Edward III, Richard wasn’t much of a warrior; in fact, there was a lull in the 

138
Lecture 30: The Deposition of Richard II
Hundred Years’ War for most of his 22-year reign—no glorious victories to 
gild his reputation. Richard liked art and literature; he was particularly fond 
of the glitz and ceremony of kingship. The more he set himself up as a quasi-
priestly anointed ruler, the more he distanced himself from his people and 
their good will.
Richard began early on to steer an independent course and build an inner 
circle of advisors, shunning the advice of other barons. This dynamic led to 
problems for Henry III and Edward II, and it would do the same for Richard. 
In 1384, two of Richard’s favorites were accused of ¿ nancial irregularities. 
The furious king, instead of investigating the complaints, punished the 
accusers. In 1385, Parliament asked for an annual review of the accounts of 
the royal household. Richard refused. When Parliament assembled in the fall 
of 1386, they demanded the dismissal of the treasurer and of the chancellor, 
Michael de la Pole, whom they blamed for some of the recent losses in the 
French war. The king replied that he would not dismiss a scullion from his 
Richard II, like his great-grandfather, lost his crown by an act of Parliament.
© Photos.com/Thinkstock.

139
kitchen at their request. Parliament then reminded Richard of his great-
grandfather Edward II’s fate at their hands. 
Richard ¿ nally gave in. Parliament appointed the commission council to 
oversee the royal ¿ nances; in response, Richard called a great council of 
(rather biased) royal judges to declare the council illegal and Parliament’s 
actions treasonous. The obliging judges also declared that the king could 
dissolve Parliament at will. In response, the earls of Gloucester, Arundel, and 
Warwick—called the lords appellants—slapped ¿ ve of the king’s favorites, 
including Michael de la Pole, with an “appeal,” or charge, of treason. Each 
side was now sinking to the other’s level. 
Richard promised that the ¿ ve would answer the charges in Parliament, but 
meanwhile one of the accused, Robert de Vere, was leading a royal army 
from Cheshire toward London to “rescue” the king. In February 1388, the 
appellants—now joined by  Henry Bolingbroke, the son of John of Gaunt, 
and Thomas Mowbray, earl of Nottingham—met de Vere’s army at Radcot 
Bridge in Oxfordshire and dispersed it. So in 1388, Parliament met to decide 
the fate of the ¿ ve favorites. This Parliament became known as the Merciless 
Parliament. All ¿ ve men were condemned and lost their property; two were 
ultimately executed, along with a number of minor royal of¿ cials. It was the 
House of Commons that pressed for the executions; the political classes as a 
whole were opposed to the king’s administration, and the Lords did not feel 
it would be safe to hold out against the Commons.
The bitterness caused by these executions overshadowed the rest of Richard’s 
reign. For a few years, both Parliament and king trod a bit more carefully. 
But eventually, the king began gathering a new group of royal favorites 
far more formidable than the old ones, including men with Parliamentary 
experience whose expertise he could use. Meanwhile, Richard made two 
shrewd moves to improve both his popular image and his personal ¿ nances. 
First, he led an army to Ireland to protect the English settlements there from 
Art MacMorrough, the king of Leinster, and made MacMorrough submit 
to his authority. Second, he agreed to a 28-year truce with France; as part 
of this truce, Richard married Princess Isabella of France and obtained her 
800,000 franc dowry. 

140
Lecture 30: The Deposition of Richard II
At this moment, when the king was stronger than he had ever been, the 
House of Commons presented a petition to rein in the king’s expenditures 
once again, but now Richard was prepared. His allies in the House of Lords 
convicted the petitioner of treason—
threatening to do the same to any 
member of the Commons who came 
after the king. Richard then had a 
carefully chosen group of lords accuse 
Warwick, Arundel, and Gloucester 
of treason for their actions at the 
Merciless Parliament a decade earlier. 
Warwick was exiled. Arundel was sentenced to death. Gloucester died in 
prison, probably murdered on Richard’s orders. 
Note that only three of the appellants were condemned. Henry Bolingbroke 
and Thomas Mowbray actually helped the king convict the others and were 
duly rewarded: Bolingbroke was made duke of Hereford, and Mowbray 
was made duke of Norfolk. Flushed with success, Richard expanded his 
attacks, browbeating Parliament into granting new taxes and enacting the 
king’s prerogative into law; he demanded payments and guarantees of good 
behavior from his former enemies, too. Richard was looking like the victor, 
but then Henry Bolingbroke made a surprising move: He accused Mowbray 
of treason. Mowbray denied the charge, and the matter was scheduled to 
be decided by duel. But before they could ¿ ght, the king banished both 
men—Mowbray for life and Bolingbroke for 10 years. A few months after 
Bolingbroke left England, his father, John of Gaunt, died. This should 
have made Bolingbroke duke of Lancaster, but Richard devised a dubious 
legal provision that allowed the throne to seize the title and the inheritance. 
Feeling secure at last, Richard returned to Ireland, where MacMurrough was 
making trouble again. This move is one of the most famous political blunders 
in history. His treatment of Bolingbroke had spooked nearly everyone of any 
means in England; no one’s titles or property was safe. 
Bolingbroke acted quickly. He returned to England, landing in Yorkshire. 
The earl of Northumberland and his son, Henry Hotspur, joined Bolingbroke 
and marched south. By the time Richard heard the news and returned 
to England, the royal army was dissolving in panic. Bollingbroke sent a 
The balance of power had 
shifted. … Politics had 
become deadly.

141
message to the king: He only wanted his inheritance, not the throne. Richard 
agreed to meet Bolingbroke, but his “escort” turned into his guards, and he 
was never free again. 
Whether Bolingbroke wanted the throne all along or just seized the moment, 
we’ll never know. But Parliament deposed Richard as they had deposed 
Edward II, with a similar result. Richard was imprisoned in the castle of 
Pontefract, where he likely died of starvation in 1400. Henry Bolingbroke 
took the throne as Henry IV, the ¿ rst of the Lancastrian kings. Parliament 
was freed of their power-hungry problem king, but his deposition was to 
have drastic long-term consequences for England. Ŷ       
lords appellants: English magnates who opposed Richard II by appealing 
(accusing) his chief household of¿ cers, who were tried by the Merciless 
Parliament in 1388. The lords appellants were the Duke of Gloucester, the 
Earl of Arundel, the Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Earl of 
Derby (Henry Bolingbroke, later Henry IV).
Merciless Parliament: Parliament of 1388 at which the lords appellants 
accused ¿ ve of the household of¿ cers of Richard II of treason, leading to the 
execution of two of them and the À ight of the other three. The king’s steps 
in 1397–1398 to avenge the actions of the Merciless Parliament led to his 
deposition in 1399 by one of the lords appellants, Henry Bolingbroke. 
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
Smith, This Realm of England.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

142
Lecture 31: Daily Life in the 15th Century
Daily Life in the 15th Century
Lecture 31
In the 14th century, the political climate in England was nothing short 
of toxic; the 15th century would be more of the same. But for those 
not mixed up in the intrigues of king and Parliament, the 15th century 
wasn’t so bad—in fact, it was a great improvement over the famine- 
and plague-ridden 14th. It was a century of economic improvement and 
a great age for art and architecture. 
A
fter the Black Death depleted the population of England, many 
peasants were able to become independent or semi-independent 
farmers due to the buyer’s market in arable land. These small 
farmers who had enough land to support themselves and to produce for the 
market became the yeoman class. These people were not just prosperous in 
economic terms; they were also legally free, with access to the king’s courts 
and the right to vote for Parliament. They even had the ¿ nancial resources to 
educate their sons for careers in the church and, increasingly, the law. 
Some yeomen were successful enough to establish large estates and climb 
into the lower ranks of the gentry. These were the rich and powerful families 
who were not technically members of the nobility; that is, they did not bear 
hereditary titles. A gentleman in this period had to have a coat of arms, 
whether or not he was technically a knight, and he obtained it by hiring a 
herald to invent one for him. Essentially, becoming a gentleman in the 15th
century was really a question of whether or not you could pull it off. 
Perhaps the most famous family to enter the gentry this way is the Pastons 
of Norfolk. Members of this family wrote a lot of letters to each other 
throughout the 15th century that have survived down to today, so we have 
a wonderful insight into the personal and public aspects of gentry life in 
this period. The family’s founder was William Paston, a lawyer who lived 
from 1378 to 1444. In 1415, William became the steward of the duke of 
Norfolk—a role that likely would have been ¿ lled by a cleric in the past. 
Along the way, William acquired substantial estates and a wife who belonged 
unquestionably to the gentry, a woman named Agnes Berry, daughter of 

143
a knight from Hertfordshire. So William Paston has land and a socially 
prominent wife. He is a gentleman.
His children and grandchildren faced several obstacles in trying to maintain 
William’s hard-won status. The low rents and high wages of the period 
hurt holders of large estates more than it did people on their way up from 
nothing. Many large landowners gave up on ¿ nding tenants and turned to 
raising sheep on their lands. They began to practice enclosure—partitioning 
once-open cropland into pastures by enclosing them in large hedges. This 
was a dramatic change in land use. For one thing, oxen could not plow short 
parcels of land, rendering them expensive but useless pieces of equipment. 
For another, many poorer farmers lost the use of common land in which to 
gather wild plants and pasture their personal livestock. It used to be thought 
that many villages were abandoned wholesale due to enclosure. Newer 
archaeological evidence indicates that enclosure only slightly—if at all—
accelerated the normal life cycle of a medieval village. In fact, tenants began 
to enclose their own lands, and if we look at the ¿ nancial records of the 15th 
century, it’s very clear that enclosure increased an estate’s yields. Wool paid.
Eton College, the ¿ rst of England’s public schools, was founded in the 
15th century to educate the sons of the growing gentry.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

144
Lecture 31: Daily Life in the 15th Century
The Hundred Years’ War had disrupted trade with the Continent signi¿ cantly, 
which dramatically altered the English wool trade. Instead of exporting raw 
wool to be ¿ nished in the Low Countries, merchants began manufacturing 
cloth in England, for both export and the domestic market, creating many 
new jobs, especially for women 
and children. The wool export trade 
was handled by the Company of 
Merchant Adventurers. They were 
granted a royal charter by King 
Henry IV in 1407, but they date 
back probably to the early 14th 
century. The charter granted them a monopoly, which was characteristic of 
medieval trade; merchants lobbied the king for special privileges, and they 
were often willing to pay to get them. 
Because the wool trade was so valuable (and restricted), competition among 
the gentry for a share of the market could be ¿ erce. There was only so much 
land to go around, and given the political disorder at the top in England, 
local property disputes could spiral out of control and become violent. The 
¿ rst resort for such disputes was naturally the royal courts, and this period 
saw a large increase in the number of lawyers and lawsuits. Many of the 
Pastons’ letters were written to a family member stuck in London dealing 
with a lawsuit, apprising him of the situation on the estate. Oftentimes the 
news was ominous because while the man of the house was off defending 
the estate in court, the estate itself might come under physical attack from 
the Pastons’ enemies. 
In the Pastons’ case, the most serious challenge ever levied against them was 
that their ancestors had been serfs; this would have invalidated the claim 
of William’s son John to inherit his estate. Luckily for them, the king and 
council ruled against this claim in 1461, which at least put the paternal 
inheritance on a sound footing. But in 1465,  John Paston was imprisoned 
in London as part of the legal maneuvering of the duke of Suffolk over the 
Paston estate at Drayton. To add to this trouble, the 15th century was the 
period of the Wars of the Roses—a war of succession between two groups 
of descendents of Edward III, the houses of Lancaster and York—and the 
bitterness of the national rivalry heightened local tensions. There is a striking 
There is a striking current of 
anxiety running through the 
Paston Letters.

145
current of anxiety running through the Paston Letters; they have worked so 
hard to get where they are, and now they are besieged on all sides. 
But it was not all bad news. When people in the Middle Ages decided to 
undertake a large building project, it was a vote of con¿ dence in the economy 
of the realm due to the expense and time involved. But the 15th century was 
a great age of building: Towns built guildhalls and corn markets, as well as 
parish churches, chapels, and chantries. In London, there was a systematic 
remodeling of parish churches to conform to new À amboyant Gothic style, 
a sprucing up that demonstrated the prosperity of their patrons. The need to 
staff these new and bigger ecclesiastical buildings took many members of 
the clerical underclass off the unemployment rolls, not to mention what it did 
for builders and architects. There was also an increase in the number of inns 
built in this period, a sign that long-distance trade was burgeoning. 
Along with economic prosperity came an increase in leisure time. Literacy 
was on the rise because it was now essential to upward social mobility. Eton, 
the ¿ rst of the great English public (meaning private) schools, was founded 
in 1440; by 1500, many of the larger towns in England had grammar schools. 
Meanwhile Johannes Gutenberg had perfected movable type technology in 
Germany in 1450, and William Caxton brought it to England in 1476. (The 
¿ rst work Caxton printed was an edition of The Canterbury Tales.) This 
new, more ef¿ cient printing process made books cheaper and more widely 
available and started the English language down the path to standardization. 
So reading was becoming a popular leisure activity.
One of the most popular printed works of the period was ¿ rst printed by 
Caxton in 1485: Sir Thomas Malory’s Le Morte d’Arthur. Don’t let the 
French title fool you; this was the ¿ rst-ever version of the King Arthur story 
written in English prose. This huge compendium of all the Arthur stories, 
written in a straightforward style, was accessible to pretty much any educated 
person. What is more, Malory’s Arthur was a very English Arthur—not 
Roman, not Briton, not French—written for a very English people. Ŷ

146
Lecture 31: Daily Life in the 15th Century
enclosure: Practice of enclosing common land and converting it to pasture, 
usually for sheep. The practice was designed to maximize the pro¿ ts of 
landlords at a time of falling rents for agricultural land and rising demand 
for wool.
gentry: In the later Middle Ages, substantial landowners who might bear 
coats of arms but did not belong to the peerage.
yeoman: In the later Middle Ages, a substantial farmer who did not have the 
social prestige of a member of the gentry but was able to live independently 
of the demands of a lord.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
Smith, This Realm of England.
    Important Terms
    Suggested Reading

147
Henry V and the Victory at Agincourt
Lecture 32
Our picture of Henry V, as Prince Hal became, is so colored by 
Shakespeare’s play of the same name that it can be hard to separate the 
¿ ctional prince from the historical one. Shakespeare gives us a prince 
who spends his time with low companions, hanging out in taverns, 
totally neglecting the responsibilities of a prince. … The reality of Prince 
Henry’s career in the last years of his father was somewhat different.
H
enry IV’s accession to the throne as the ¿ rst Lancastrian king caused 
a number of problems. For one thing, since the Norman Conquest, 
no one who was not the nearest heir by blood had seized the throne. 
Edmund Mortimer, earl of March, technically had a stronger claim, but it 
was through the female line—not that it should have mattered; the English 
claim to the French throne, over which they were still at war, was through 
the female line as well. But in addition, on Richard’s deposition in 1399, 
Mortimer was eight years old. The magnates of England did not want 
another child king, not in a time of instability. Mortimer was passed over, 
and Bolingbroke took the throne. It was a realistic outcome politically, but it 
stored up trouble for later. 
Henry IV had also set an uncomfortable precedent by seizing the throne. 
The main issues of Richard’s reign hadn’t been solved; the power struggles 
between the king and the barons continued and sometimes broke into open 
rebellion, one of which was the subject of William Shakespeare’s plays about 
Henry: In 1403, Welsh prince Owen Glendower roused Wales into rebellion 
against England. He called a Welsh parliament, appointed a chancellor, and 
struck an alliance with France. Eventually he was joined in rebellion by the 
earl of Northumberland (a former supporter of Henry’s) and Sir Edmund 
Mortimer (uncle of the earl of March). In 1405, the three took up arms in the 
name of the earl of March, with a private plan to divide the kingdom among 
the three of them—Wales to Glendower, the north to Northumberland, and 
the rest to Mortimer as regent for his nephew. 

148
Lecture 32: Henry V and the Victory at Agincourt
There were some powerful men involved in the conspiracy, but in the end the 
rebels were defeated. Glendower kept ¿ ghting until 1409, and after that, he 
simply melted away. He was never captured; no one knows what became of 
him. The upshot of all this is that Henry IV’s reign was marked by instability. 
The king was never able to relax. Rumors went around that Richard was still 
alive. Plots were uncovered and foiled on a regular basis. As Shakespeare 
has Henry put it, “Uneasy lies the 
head that wears a crown.” 
For the last few years of his reign, 
Henry was chronically ill, and 
the public was just waiting for 
him to die so that his popular son, 
Prince Hal, could take the reins of 
government. Despite the picture 
of him that Shakespeare paints, Hal was not a feckless scoundrel. He had 
an impressive military record in the Welsh revolt. He was deeply engaged 
in court politics, including a serious faction ¿ ght against his own younger 
brother, Thomas. When Prince Hal ¿ nally succeeded his father as Henry V 
in 1413, he was brieÀ y able to restore order to English politics, in part by 
giving the English the magni¿ cent distraction of military victory overseas. 
When he ¿ rst took the crown, Henry faced some very serious threats on the 
home front. Sir John Oldcastle, once his companion on the Welsh campaigns, 
was now a member of the House of Lords. He was also a Lollard who used his 
castle in Kent as a refuge for fellow Lollards. The archbishop of Canterbury 
got wind of this and wanted to proceed against Oldcastle, but he had to be 
careful: Oldcastle was the king’s friend, making the matter dangerous but 
also all the more urgent. Oldcastle could probably have played the card of 
royal inÀ uence, but that would have meant renouncing his beliefs. Instead 
he was convicted of heresy and sentenced to execution. The king requested 
a stay to give him time to talk Oldcastle into recanting, but then Oldcastle 
escaped from the Tower of London and shortly led the Lollards in a revolt. It 
was swiftly put down, and its leaders were executed—except for Oldcastle, 
who escaped and spent three years on the run before being caught and put to 
death. In Oldcastle, we see one of Shakespeare’s models for the character of 
Henry V wanted to restore 
English power in France; it 
would be the perfect way of 
proving his right to the throne.

149
Falstaff, the companion of Prince Henry’s youth who has to be cast aside for 
political reasons. 
But the Oldcastle plot was not nearly as serious from a military perspective 
as the so-called Cambridge plot. The ringleaders were Richard, earl of 
Cambridge, the younger brother of the duke of York (and thus the king’s 
cousin); Lord Scrope of Masham; and Sir Thomas Grey of Heton. Their plan 
was to assassinate the king while he was getting ready to embark for France 
and to crown the earl of March. But March made a prudent move: He gave 
away the plot to the king. The three ringleaders were executed, and Henry 
would never again face a serious threat to his throne. He set sail for France 
and victory.
England and France had been at truce during Richard’s reign, but that 
agreement dissolved with his deposition. Henry IV had sent Richard’s queen, 
Isabella, back to France but offered to arrange her marriage to one of his 
sons. France recon¿ rmed the truce but avoided acknowledging Henry’s right 
to the English throne and declined the marriage proposal. Things deteriorated 
from there. Meanwhile, the French king, Charles VI, was undergoing one of 
his periodic bouts of insanity. The two main royal factions, Burgundy and 
Orleans, were quarreling over the right to rule in the king’s stead.
Henry V wanted to restore English power in France; it would be the perfect 
way of proving his right to the throne. He invaded in August 1415 with a 
force of a bit less than 10,000 men and besieged the port of HarÀ eur, near 
the mouth of the Seine. HarÀ eur surrendered after about a month. As Edward 
III had done with Calais, Henry got rid of the French inhabitants of the city 
with the intention of replacing them with English colonists, but his army 
was depleted and wracked with dysentery. Henry wanted to quarter them 
for the winter at the more secure Calais, 170 miles away. A large French 
army gathered at Rouen to block the English advance. Again and again, the 
English had to change direction to avoid the French, making their march 
much longer. 
Finally, the armies met near the town of Agincourt. The French outnumbered 
the English several times over and were eager to ¿ ght. But the English 
fought the smarter battle. They deployed their forces to take best advantage 

150
Lecture 32: Henry V and the Victory at Agincourt
of the terrain. The ¿ eld of battle was muddy, which caused the heavily-
armored French far more trouble than the less-burdened English. The 
English arranged their men at arms in rows four deep, with archers to protect 
them on the À anks. They also ¿ xed long pointed stakes in the ground to force 
the French cavalry to veer off. By contrast, the French archers were poorly 
deployed and played almost no role in the battle. Their cavalry charge was 
a disaster. By the time their men at arms made it across the muddy ¿ eld, 
they were almost too exhausted to ¿ ght. Late in the battle, the French did 
manage to attack the rear of the English army, where the baggage train was 
stationed. Probably at around this point the king decided to kill the many 
French prisoners who had already been taken in the battle. By then, the battle 
was effectively over. The French counterattack never materialized.
Agincourt was a disaster for the French. They lost as many as nine or ten 
times more men than the English had, including some very highly placed 
nobles. For the next ¿ ve years, the ¿ ghting died down into a series of long 
sieges punctuated by diplomatic maneuvers. Slowly but surely, Henry 
extended his control over northern France. But his main success came not 
from English arms but from French in-¿ ghting. Partisans of the Dauphin, 
the heir to the French throne, assassinated the duke of Burgundy, and his 
heir allied with the English for revenge. Caught between England and 
Burgundy, France was forced to come to terms. In 1420, the French and the 
English signed the Treaty of Troyes. By the terms of the treaty, King Henry 
married Princess Katherine, the daughter of the French king, and the French 
succession was granted to their heirs. The Dauphin, Katherine’s brother, 
was disinherited. 
Perhaps Henry V could have forged a united kingdom out of England and 
France. We’ll never know, because he died of dysentery in 1422, leaving his 
9-month-old son Henry VI the daunting task of living up to a father who had 
subdued one rebellious kingdom and conquered another. Alas, poor Henry 
VI would ¿ nd the task impossible. Ŷ

151
Troyes, Treaty of: Agreement made in 1420 between England and France 
that gave the French princess Catherine to Henry V in marriage and provided 
for the inheritance of both England and France by the couple’s heirs.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
Smith, This Realm of England.
    Important Term
    Suggested Reading

152
Lecture 33: Henry VI—Defeat and Division
Henry VI—Defeat and Division
Lecture 33
The essential problem in English politics was how to get the king to 
behave the way you wanted him to behave. … The deposition of Richard 
II and the accession of Henry Bolingbroke had given opponents of the 
king a good fallback option. They didn’t even have to prove anymore 
that the king wasn’t a good king. They could just get away with saying 
he wasn’t the legitimate king.
T
he reign of Henry VI was marked by defeat overseas and instability at 
home. The war in France dragged on and drained English resources. 
Discontent over the state of the war led to opposition at home, within 
Parliament and among the nobility. And then the essential instability at the 
heart of English politics ¿ nally reared its head: the questionable Lancastrian 
claim to the throne. 
At ¿ rst, after the death of Henry V, it looked as if things were going to be 
¿ ne. Henry had several very competent close relatives who could rule on 
behalf of the infant king, and the Burgundian alliance was still in effect. 
The king’s uncle—John, duke of Bedford—was an experienced military 
commander and made territorial gains for England throughout the 1420s. 
The Dauphin was still ¿ ghting to get his inheritance back, but despite the 
death of his father in the same year as Henry V, he had not managed to get 
himself crowned king of France, and his popularity with his own people
was sinking. 
In 1429, an English army under the command of the duke of Suffolk 
besieged Orleans, the last French royal stronghold, and English victory 
looked certain. But it was not to be: Joan of Arc appeared on the scene to aid 
the Dauphin and lead his troops into battle. She relieved the siege of Orleans 
(and captured Suffolk) and defeated an English force at Patay, clearing 
the way for the French to march on Paris. But wisely, Joan convinced the 
Dauphin to go to Rheims, the traditional site of French coronations, and have 
himself crowned as Charles VII ¿ rst. 

153
Ominously for the English, 
the duke of Burgundy was 
present at the Dauphin’s 
coronation, 
although 
he 
remained an English ally, 
besieging 
the 
town 
of 
Compiègne in 1430 and 
capturing Joan of Arc there. 
Joan was tried for heresy 
and convicted for heresy, 
although the records of 
the trial had to be doctored 
because the original version 
reÀ ected so well on her. She 
was burnt at the stake on 
May 30, 1431. The English 
were rid of their great 
enemy, but this didn’t help 
them much in the long run. 
In 1435, four years after Joan’s death, the duke of Bedford, England’s great 
military commander, died. In that same year, the two warring French royal 
factions made peace. For the ¿ rst time in decades, the English faced a united 
French front. Slowly, the English were pushed back toward the sea, until by 
1453 all that remained to them was Calais. For all intents and purposes, the 
Hundred Years’ War was over. The English had lost.
Back at home, meanwhile, the English royal government was hopelessly 
divided among warring factions of the young king’s relatives. Henry VI 
was not a very promising candidate for the kingship. It seems he was never 
completely sound of mind; later in his reign, he suffered from periodic bouts 
of actual insanity, and when he wasn’t insane, he wasn’t much help, because 
he was completely uninterested in affairs of state. This vacuum at the center 
of English political life led to tremendous competition among those who 
would hold Henry’s reins for him.
The court polarized into two camps: One was led by Humphrey, duke of 
Gloucester, the last surviving full-blooded brother of Henry V. The other was 
The heresy trial and execution of Joan of Arc 
was motivated by politics, not religion.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

154
Lecture 33: Henry VI—Defeat and Division
led by Henry Beaufort—bishop of Winchester and later a cardinal—and his 
numerous relatives, who were also close relatives of the king. Henry Beaufort 
was also chancellor, but Gloucester was lord protector of the king. The 
two factions repeatedly clashed in the early 1420s; one of the most serious 
was over Flemish trade policy which led to such serious riots in London 
that Parliament had to be called 
in Leicester. This led Beaufort to 
resign the chancellorship, but he 
was by no means out of the ¿ ght. 
The rivalry between Beaufort and 
Gloucester got quite nasty, but 
periodically Gloucester’s brother 
Bedford would return from France 
to smooth things over. When 
Bedford died in 1435, there was no one to ¿ ll this role. Plus, Gloucester lost 
the reÀ ected glow of his popular war-hero brother. Things came to a head in 
1441 when Beaufort accused Gloucester’s wife, Eleanor, of attempting to 
kill the king with witchcraft. Eleanor admitted to dabbling in love potions 
but À atly denied any attempt on the king. Her sentence was life in prison. 
The whole affair was purely political, and the man behind it was William de 
la Pole, a Beaufort supporter and later duke of Suffolk. Increasingly, Suffolk 
took over the reins of government from the aging Beaufort.
Suffolk was responsible for one of the most controversial diplomatic 
maneuvers of the 15th century, the marriage of King Henry VI to the French 
princess Margaret of Anjou. Under the terms of the agreement, England 
ceded Maine and Anjou to the French—speci¿ cally to Margaret’s father, 
Duke René of Anjou. As soon as word of the agreement became public, there 
was a ¿ restorm of criticism. Gloucester was particularly furious. Certain that 
Gloucester would cause him trouble, in the spring of 1447 Suffolk arranged 
to have Parliament held in Bury, in Suffolk (his own stronghold), rather than 
in London, where Gloucester had always been popular. When Gloucester 
appeared in Bury, he was arrested. Suffolk was planning to bring a trumped-
up charge of treason against him, but Gloucester died in captivity within a 
week, probably of a heart attack. The aged cardinal Beaufort also died a few 
This vacuum at the center 
of English political life led 
to tremendous competition 
among those who would hold 
Henry’s reins for him.

155
weeks later. One set of embittered opponents had passed from the scene. A 
new set of opponents was about to appear. 
The principles in this faction ¿ ght were Queen Margaret for the House of 
Lancaster and Richard, earl of Cambridge and later duke of York, for the 
House of York. Richard was descended from one of Edward III’s sons, 
and his wife, Anne Mortimer, was descended from another, so Richard 
had a viable claim to the throne—a ticking time bomb for the Lancasters. 
Richard commanded the English forces in Normandy and felt that the ceding 
of Maine and Anjou had undermined his authority. Margaret, of course, 
supported Suffolk’s treaty. The court became polarized, and Richard was 
recalled from Normandy and sent to Ireland to get him out of the way.
This was the situation in 1450, when a revolt of the yeomen and minor gentry 
around London broke out, led by Jack Cade. Cade was a critic of Henry VI’s 
government. He drew up a list of demands that boiled down to more ¿ scal 
restraint on the part of the king and a more aggressive policy toward France, 
with the added complaint that the parliamentary election process was being 
interfered with. Finally, Cade demanded that Richard, duke of York, be added 
to the royal council. The revolt didn’t amount to much militarily; Cade and 
his allies were quickly captured and executed. But the news inspired York to 
make a play for power. Incidentally, the revolt also inspired one of the most 
famous lines in Shakespeare’s corpus; when discussing their plans, one of 
Cade’s confederates says, “The ¿ rst thing we do, let’s kill all the lawyers!” 
At ¿ rst, Richard was content to bide his time because after a decade of 
marriage, Henry and Margaret had failed to produce an heir, making Richard 
heir apparent. But in 1453, Margaret gave birth to a son, Edward, and Henry 
suffered the ¿ rst of his bouts of insanity. It was time for Richard to assert his 
claim to the throne. Ŷ
Jack Cade’s Revolt: Rebellion in 1450 by lesser gentry in the counties 
around London to protest mismanagement of the royal household and 
incompetent prosecution of the war in France. The rebels also demanded that 
    Important Term

156
Lecture 33: Henry VI—Defeat and Division
Richard, duke of York, be given a prominent role in the royal administration. 
Cade was captured and executed.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
Smith, This Realm of England.
    Suggested Reading

157
The Wars of the Roses
Lecture 34
By 1464, the new king had managed to seize all the remaining 
Lancastrian strongholds, and in 1465, Edward had an enormous stroke 
of good luck. The ex-king, Henry VI … was captured and imprisoned 
in the Tower of London. So the Lancastrian threat was, for the moment, 
neutralized. Of course, Queen Margaret was still at large, and she was 
by far the more dangerous of the two.
T
he decision of Richard, duke of York, to assert his claim to the English 
throne led directly to what we call the Wars of the Roses. Over the 
course of the conÀ ict, the momentum frequently shifted between the 
House of York, whose banner bore a white rose, and the House of Lancaster, 
whose banner bore a red one. But the main trajectory was this: In the 1450s, 
the two sides fought each other to a stalemate; in 1461, the Yorkists were 
victorious and took the throne for 10 years; in 1471, the Lancastrians made 
a brief comeback but were swiftly driven off the throne again; and ¿ nally, in 
1485, the Lancastrians were victorious for good, though their family had a 
new name, the Tudors. 
At the outset, York was hesitant to make his claim; he decided ¿ rst to insist 
only on his right to advise the king. He, like many powerful barons, had the 
huge military retinue needed to force the issue. The two sides’ forces met in 
the Battle of St. Albans in May 1455. It was a victory for the Yorkists, and 
York was appointed protector of the insane king. But when the king shortly 
recovered his wits, York was pushed aside and sent back to Ireland. He 
returned in 1459, but was defeated at the Battle of Ludford. York had to À ee 
back to Ireland again, and his oldest son, Edward, earl of March, took refuge 
in Calais. In 1460, York and his ally, the powerful Richard Neville, earl of 
Warwick, captured King Henry VI at Northampton. This emboldened York 
to go to Parliament and claim the throne at last.
Parliament resisted York’s claim; the Lancastrian faction was just too strong. 
As a compromise, York was made the king’s protector again, this time for 
Henry’s lifetime, and was given the right to succeed him. But York was not 

158
Lecture 34: The Wars of the Roses
satis¿ ed. He decided to destroy the last royal army standing—and this was his 
fatal mistake, literally. He was killed at the Battle of Wake¿ eld in December 
1460. His supporters suffered a further blow when Queen Margaret freed 
King Henry from captivity at the second Battle of St. Albans in February 
1461. But Warwick still had a plan. Richard’s son, Edward, was now duke of 
York, and with Warwick’s support, he took up his father’s cause. This is how 
Warwick earned the nickname “Kingmaker.”  
Warwick and Edward took on the Lancastrians at the Battle of Towton, the 
bloodiest battle of the war, possibly the bloodiest ever fought on English 
soil, on March 29, 1461. The Yorkists had to advance uphill against the 
Lancastrian position, but 
the wind was at their backs, 
giving their archers an 
advantage 
and 
blowing 
snow in the Lancastrians’ 
faces. In the end, the 
Lancastrians 
broke 
and 
ran, and apparently, more 
soldiers died in the rout than 
in the actual battle. King 
Henry and Queen Margaret 
À ed to Scotland. Parliament 
formally deposed Henry, 
and Edward claimed the 
throne as Edward IV. 
Edward spent the next 
few 
years 
consolidating 
his rule, with the aid of 
Warwick, of course, and his 
two brothers, George, duke of Clarence, and Richard, duke of Gloucester. 
They seized the remaining Lancastrian strongholds and, ¿ nally in 1465, 
Henry himself, though Margaret was still at large. The biggest problem 
Edward faced was his dependence on his noble backers, especially Warwick. 
He made the crucial blunder of allowing Warwick to enter negotiations 
for a French marriage alliance for the king before revealing he, Edward, 
Edward IV (r. 1461–1483) was the founding 
monarch of the House of York.
© Photos.com/Thinkstock.

159
was already married to an obscure Lancastrian widow named Elizabeth 
Woodville. Plus she brought to court a host of relatives, all of whom needed 
to be provided for. 
The revelation of Edward’s marriage ruined Warwick’s reputation with 
the French and turned him against the king. In the summer of 1469, the 
split between them came out into the open and led to a brief revival of the 
Lancastrian cause. Warwick fomented a rebellion in the north of England led 
by a shadowy ¿ gure calling himself Robin of Redesdale. This was probably 
a pseudonym for one of Warwick’s own supporters, chosen for the allusion 
to Robin Hood. Whoever he was, Robin published a manifesto listing 
grievances similar to Jack Cade’s. Warwick’s motive in all this may have 
been that he had a new candidate for the throne, one he thought would be 
easier to control: his new son-in-law, George, duke of Clarence. After the 
marriage took place in Calais, Warwick returned to England and captured 
Edward. He then executed Elizabeth Woodville’s father and brother as 
traitors. But there was disorder in the streets. It was too dangerous to call 
a Parliament to ratify Edward’s deposition. Warwick had no choice but to 
release Edward. He and Clarence À ed and took refuge with King Louis XI 
of France, who in exchange demanded Warwick’s support in putting Henry 
VI back on the throne. This meant allying with Queen Margaret; Warwick 
married his daughter Anne to Margaret’s son, Edward, the prince of Wales.
Warwick gathered allies with the help of French money and landed in 
England in the fall of 1470. He drove Edward into exile in the Low 
Countries; Elizabeth Woodville took refuge in Westminster Abbey. Warwick 
then engineered Henry’s restoration. But he had forgotten one important 
player on the ¿ eld: Clarence. Seeing no point in maintaining his alliance with 
Warwick, Clarence went crawling back to Edward. They somehow made up 
their quarrel and plotted to get back to England and the throne. Edward went 
to the duke of Burgundy, who was still at odds with the king of France. So, 
just as French money got Henry VI back on the throne, Burgundian money 
would get Edward IV back on the throne. 
Edward returned to England in March 1471 and on April 14 met Warwick’s 
forces at the Battle of Barnet. Warwick was killed. On that same day, Queen 
Margaret and Prince Edward landed at Weymouth and moved west to meet 

160
Lecture 34: The Wars of the Roses
up with a crucial ally from Wales, Jasper Tudor. But King Edward caught 
up with Margaret and took her captive. Clarence captured Prince Edward 
and executed him on the spot. Edward IV was restored to the throne by 
Parliament, and King Henry VI was quietly murdered in the Tower of 
London. The Lancastrian cause seemed buried for good. 
The second period of Edward’s rule proved successful in the realms of 
foreign policy, ¿ nance, and public order. Edward basically turned his back 
on warfare and concentrated on more peaceful pursuits. He concluded a 
peace treaty with France in 1475, the Treaty of Picquigny, which led to a 
big trade boom. He shored up the royal ¿ nances (in part through con¿ scating 
Lancastrian lands) and made an effort not to raise taxes. But he did directly 
demand payments, known as benevolences, from his supposedly grateful 
subjects; glad to have peace, law, and order at last, the people paid without 
complaint. Edward would be the ¿ rst English king since Henry II not to die 
in debt. He put an end to faction ¿ ghts at court by shutting the nobles out 
of his inner circle and relying instead on functionaries. Finally, to address 
the problems of disorder in the north, he appointed his brother Richard, 
duke of Gloucester and a hero of the Battle of Barnet, as his lieutenant in 
the north. Richard made a great success of the post. The only serious threat 
to Edward’s later rule came in 1477 from the now-widowed Clarence, who 
was angry when Edward refused to let him marry the heiress to the duchy 
of Burgundy. When Clarence was discovered plotting against Edward, 
Edward had him imprisoned in the Tower of London and attainted as
a traitor by Parliament. Clarence was killed in prison in 1478, though
the means are unclear; Shakespeare has him drowned in a butt of
malmsey wine. 
Edward’s death at age 40 in 1483 was largely attributed to overindulgence. 
When he died, he left a young and numerous family with the formidable task 
of consolidating the Yorkist ascendancy. Ŷ
Picquigny, Treaty of: Agreement concluded in 1475 between Edward IV of 
England and Louis XI of France, leaving Edward’s Burgundian allies in the 
lurch. In return for a truce and the promise to submit the English claim to the 
    Important Term

161
French throne to a court of arbitration (which never sat), the English were 
promised an annual subsidy of 50,000 gold crowns.
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
Smith, This Realm of England.
    Suggested Reading

162
Lecture 35: Richard III—Betrayal and Defeat
Richard III—Betrayal and Defeat
Lecture 35
The story about him being a hunchback is really later propaganda; in a 
very crude way, later writers were trying to make a physical deformity 
stand for a moral deformity. … The real blows to Richard’s image were 
dealt by the usurpation and then the rumors, almost certainly true, that 
he had killed the princes. Nobody needed to invent that.
D
espite Edward IV’s early death in 1483, it looked as if the new 
Yorkist dynasty was secure. He had left the crown’s ¿ nances in 
excellent shape, and he had dealt with the last disruptive elements 
among the barons. Unfortunately, he had also left a 12-year-old son as 
his heir, Edward V. As we have seen before, members of the court began 
jockeying for power over the young king, and they split into two factions: 
one under the king’s mother, Elizabeth Woodville, and the other under his 
uncle, Richard, duke of Gloucester.
Elizabeth’s relatives had demanded and received a lot of patronage under 
Edward IV, and they were deeply unpopular. Richard, on the other hand, 
was famed for his loyalty to his brother Edward and had been successful 
in managing the north. He was, in many ways, the ideal advisor to his 
nephew and in fact was named Edward V’s protector in Edward IV’s will. 
But the queen’s faction had custody of the young king and hoped to create 
a regency council around him. The inevitable conÀ ict happened: When the 
queen’s brother, Earl Rivers, was bringing Edward V to London to the arms 
of the Woodvilles, Richard and the duke of Buckingham intercepted Rivers, 
took charge of the king, and brought him to London themselves. Rivers was 
executed on no legal basis whatsoever, and the queen À ed into Westminster 
Abbey again with her other children. Richard was now in control of the king.
When exactly Richard decided to seize the throne for himself, we can’t know 
for sure. Perhaps he had it in mind from the start; what we do know is, within 
two months of his nephew’s accession, Richard claimed the throne. But how 
was he going to get rid of his nephew? What he did in fact says a lot about 
how English politics had developed in the last couple of centuries. He went 

163
through Parliament, claiming the throne on the pretext that the marriage of 
Edward IV and Elizabeth Woodville was invalid because when they married, 
Edward was already contracted to marry one Lady Eleanor Butler. In other 
words, Edward V was a bastard. 
There seems to be no evidence whatsoever to support Richard’s story, but 
Richard and Buckingham orchestrated a shrewd propaganda campaign to 
convince the people of its 
truth, even producing a bishop 
to swear he had married 
Edward and Lady Eleanor. 
Parliament met on June 25, 
1483, and of¿ cially petitioned 
Richard to take the crown.
The usurpation, however, was 
deeply unpopular. Most people 
did not believe the story about 
Edward’s 
prior 
marriage. 
But for the moment, Richard 
had coerced the people he 
needed to coerce, and thus, 
on July 6, he was crowned 
King Richard III of England. 
The former king, now once 
again called Edward, prince 
of Wales, was con¿ ned to 
the Tower of London with 
his younger brother, Richard, 
duke of York, “for safekeeping”; by the fall of 1483, they had disappeared. 
No one knows for sure what happened to the boys, but in the 17th century, 
the skeletons of two teenage boys were found buried beneath a staircase at 
the Tower. The majority opinion is that the obvious happened: Richard had 
them murdered.
That said, not everything we’ve been told about Richard III is true. His 
popular image, like Henry V’s, is largely derived from the play Shakespeare 
Edward V (r. April–July 1483) “disappeared” 
from the Tower of London. In truth, he was 
likely murdered by his uncle, Richard III.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

164
Lecture 35: Richard III—Betrayal and Defeat
wrote about him. It’s a wonderful play, but Shakespeare was an entertainer, 
not a historian. He was adapting the sources he had to their best dramatic 
effect. Many of these accounts were written well after Richard’s reign by his 
political rivals. For example, the second most famous thing about Richard 
after his supposed murder of his nephews was the “fact” that he was a 
hunchback, yet there is no evidence 
that this was the case. In fact, one 
thing that can be said in mitigation 
of Richard’s crimes of usurpation 
and murder: His actions weren’t so 
different from his predecessors. It 
was politics as usual for England in 
that period.
The disappearance of the princes 
did not guarantee Richard a smooth 
ride, however. Gaining the throne 
had cost him a lot of political capital. The people were disillusioned, and 
so were many of the barons. Under Richard, the people renamed Edward’s 
benevolences “the malevolences.” People also did not like or trust Richard’s 
close advisers, William Catesby, Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and Lord Lovel. This 
is memorialized in a doggerel rhyme by Thomas Collingbourne: “The Cat, 
the Rat, and Lovel our dog / All rule England under the Hog.” Incidentally, 
Collingbourne was hanged for writing this, a sign of how insecure Richard 
felt on the throne. With good reason.
In the fall of 1483, the gentry of southern England revolted in protest at 
Richard’s treatment of his nephews. Meanwhile, Elizabeth Woodville 
entered into secret negotiations with Henry Tudor, the surviving Lancastrian 
claimant to the throne, promising support for his claim if he would marry 
her oldest daughter, Elizabeth. This is strong evidence that by this point, 
Elizabeth Woodville had concluded that her sons had been killed. Henry 
accepted the offer and swore publicly to marry Elizabeth of York. 
Then something odd happened. The duke of Buckingham—who had stood by 
Richard through all of the tumultuous weeks in the spring and early summer, 
who had stage-managed the process of Richard’s claiming the throne and his 
Henry Tudor’s claim to the 
throne was not particularly 
strong. … What Henry really 
had going for him was the 
Beaufort grit—and the fact that 
he was the only Lancaster left.

165
coronation—joined in the revolt. To this day, we have no idea why. Despite 
Buckingham’s support, the revolt failed. Buckingham was captured and 
was executed after a summary trial. Henry Tudor, who was coming from 
Brittany, appeared off the coast of Dorset in the southwest but never landed; 
he had arrived too late. He returned to Brittany, but he was not beaten yet.
Henry Tudor’s claim to the throne was not particularly strong. On his 
mother’s side, he was descended from the Beauforts, who had a tenuous 
claim to legitimacy. On his father’s side, it was more a matter of association 
than descent: After Henry V’s death, his queen, Katherine, married a Welsh 
page in the royal household named Owen Tudor; this pair were Henry’s 
paternal grandparents. On top of this, Henry had spent most of his life in 
exile in France; he had few English connections, though he had a few more 
relatives in Wales. What Henry really had going for him was the Beaufort 
grit—and the fact that he was the only Lancaster left.
After Buckingham’s failed revolt, Richard demanded that the Bretons send 
Henry to England to stand trial for treason. Henry À ed to the French court. 
Richard then threatened to invade Brittany, so the French decided to back 
Henry’s claim and provided him with money and a small force of French and 
Scottish soldiers. Henry also made the prudent move of securing the support 
of his stepfather, Lord Stanley, and his family. 
In August 1485, Henry Tudor landed at Milford Haven in Wales. Hearing of 
Henry’s landing, Richard moved against the Stanleys ¿ rst. Lord Stanley’s 
son was seized and held as a hostage for his father’s good behavior, so 
Stanley could not keep his promise to Henry. Nevertheless, Henry pressed 
on toward Leicester. Richard gathered his army via writs, ordering men to 
¿ ght for him on the threat of losing their goods, estates, and lives. Richard 
got word from the north that his supposedly trusted lieutenant, the earl of 
Northumberland, hadn’t raised troops on his behalf. Things looked bad for 
Richard, but he had to intercept Henry before he reached London. 
On Aug. 22, 1485, the two armies met at Bosworth Field in Leicestershire. 
The Yorkists had twice the number of Lancastrian troops and had the hilltop 
position. Richard commanded the center of the army, while the duke of 
Norfolk had the left À ank and the earl of Northumberland had the right. 

166
Lecture 35: Richard III—Betrayal and Defeat
The Stanleys were held in reserve nearby; the big question was, what would 
they do? Richard sent Stanley a message threatening to execute his son if 
Stanley did not advance. Stanley replied that he had other sons. In fury, 
Richard ordered the captive executed, but his men wafÀ ed. When Henry 
sent a message asking for Stanley’s help, Stanley equivocated. Once the 
battle was joined, Northumberland refused to ¿ ght. Henry made a move 
to meet with Stanley, but Richard spotted this and led a charge at Henry’s 
contingent. There was ¿ erce hand to hand ¿ ghting, then Stanley ¿ nally 
joined the Lancastrian side. Richard fought bravely to the end, but he was 
unseated from his horse and killed. That was the end of the Yorkists, and the 
beginning of the new Tudor dynasty. 
This is an exciting story, but what does it matter? One conclusion we may 
draw from the last act of the Wars of the Roses is how, despite how restricted 
the power of the king had become toward the end of the Middle Ages, in 
some ways the crown was more important than ever. In the 15th century, the 
English economy had expanded, and that wealth needed a competent king 
to administer it. Even for those without a claim to the crown, the succession 
was an issue worth ¿ ghting and dying for. Ŷ
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
Smith, This Realm of England.
    Suggested Reading

167
England in 1485
Lecture 36
In 1485, England was by no means among the wealthiest and most 
powerful countries in Europe. … [But] the English had good, solid 
institutions of government that worked fairly well and that were fairly 
responsive to the popular will. They had a united people who were 
proud to be English. There was a lot of greatness to come.
A
s historians reckon such things, England left the Middle Ages with 
the ascent of the House of Tudor. But at the time, no one knew that 
the battles of 1485 would bring about the end of English dynastic 
instability—at least for the time being. They could not have forseen what 
a successful king Henry VII would be. Henry restored the royal ¿ nances 
to good health, largely by extreme tight-¿ stedness, removing one constant 
source of friction between the king and 
his people. He also shrewdly saw the 
dangers of the weakness of his claim 
to the throne. Thus he proactively 
eliminated his potential rivals before 
they had a chance to gather support. 
The ¿ rst Yorkist challenger was a 
10-year-old boy named Lambert Simnel, 
who was actually the instrument of a 
London priest (and con man) Roger 
Simon, who passed him off as the son 
and heir of the duke of Clarence and the 
earl of Warwick. (The real child was 
actually imprisoned in the Tower from 
the start of Henry’s reign.) Simon took 
this imposter to Ireland and raised a 
force against Henry, but Henry defeated 
them, had Simon imprisoned for life, and gave the child a job in the royal 
kitchens. Henry would not be merciful a second time. When another 
pretender arose claiming to be the Richard, duke of York, one of the 
missing princes, Henry had him executed. Over the next several decades, 
Henry VII’s reign (r. 1485–1509), 
marks England’s entry into 
the Renaissance.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

168
Lecture 36: England in 1485
Henry VII and his son, Henry VIII, systematically got rid of all the genuine 
Yorkist claimants they could get their hands on, even the women. 
So Henry was good with money and ruthless with enemies. But what 
were the de¿ ning characteristics of a successful English king over the 
centuries? Perhaps the most important was a king’s ability to acquire and 
keep the allegiance of the great barons. But what made the barons likely to 
support a particular king? It helped if kings seemed “kinglike”—attractive 
and chivalrous, someone to admire. Kings who didn’t live up to these 
expectations often got into trouble. Of course, it was important to back up 
appearances with deeds. A certain degree of carefully deployed ruthlessness 
made a big impression. 
But barons weren’t just going to follow the king because they were afraid 
of him. Kings had to reward faithful service and create a climate of hopeful 
expectation among their followers. The 
proper use of patronage could be one of 
the trickiest aspects of being the king of 
England. Inevitably someone would be 
dissatis¿ ed with what they had, no matter 
how careful you were with distributing 
lands 
and 
titles. 
Mostly, 
though, 
patronage became a problem when kings 
were thought to be abusing it, rewarding 
the wrong people. Barons were willing 
to take up arms to make sure the À ow of 
patronage was to their liking.
One of the best ways to guarantee that 
there was extra patronage to go around 
was to be successful in war. It helped a 
king if he expanded the territory under 
English control, or at least successfully held on to what he had. Edward I, 
Edward III, and Henry V were very popular kings. By contrast, John and 
Edward II were decidedly not. One of the factors that led to the Wars of 
the Roses was the perceived mismanagement of the war in France. English 
kings were de¿ nitely expected to win.
Edward III was regarded in his 
own time as the epitome of the 
English monarch.
© iStockphoto/Thinkstock.

169
But kings had to win other kinds of battles as well. They had to be adept 
at the art of compromise, and this often meant the willingness to take 
good advice, and the barons regarded themselves as the king’s natural 
counselors. But not all of the 
barons had good advice to give. 
Good kings surrounded themselves 
with sensible advisers; bad kings 
listened to fools. Over time, the 
number of people the king had to 
compromise with expanded—¿ rst 
the barons, then the gentry and the 
yeomen, then even the peasants. 
This broadening led to the institution of Parliament, made up of the barons 
and representatives of the shires. During the 14th century, Parliament’s 
House of Commons gained the right to approve or reject the king’s taxes, 
giving them true leverage over royal policy. It’s a fundamental fact about 
English history that the rise of Parliament, the rise really of political
rights in England, might never have taken place if the English kings had 
been richer.
We’ve spent a lot of time on disputes between the king and his barons, 
between the king and Parliament, but fundamentally, England was a 
remarkably stable entity, perhaps uniquely so in medieval Europe. When 
the Wessex monarchy united the various separate Anglo-Saxon kingdoms 
into a single, well-governed state, this actually made England easier for 
the Danes and Normans to conquer. So this stability may be a weakness if 
you face foreign invasion, but it’s a strength the rest of the time. Of course, 
there were many regional differences in terrain, in economy, in dialect; 
we’ve seen that northern England always needed a little bit of special 
handling. But overall, the commonalities were far more striking than the 
differences. The kingdom of England was simply conceived of as a unit. 
Even England’s long history of involvement with France didn’t really do 
anything to shake the fundamental sense that England was its own entity. 
Another byproduct of this remarkable unity within England was the very 
strong support in the kingdom for a strong monarchy. The English as a 
whole really preferred strong kings. They saw them as the best protection 
against potential enemies, both foreign and domestic. A strong king could 
Fundamentally, England was 
a remarkably stable entity, 
perhaps uniquely so in 
medieval Europe.

170
Lecture 36: England in 1485
keep public order; a strong king could keep lordly violence in check. That 
was worth supporting. 
The English really developed as a people right alongside their institutions, 
and they identi¿ ed very strongly with those institutions. Even the Normans 
were assimilated quickly into English society after the Norman Conquest 
and proudly identi¿ ed themselves with England’s glorious past, perhaps best 
demonstrated by their wholesale adoption of the legend of King Arthur. The 
English people also became strongly attached to Parliament almost as soon 
as it developed. 
Despite the prestige position of the French language for a time by the elite, to 
the average English person, to be English also meant to speak English, and 
increasingly to read and write English. Literacy brought with it not just skills 
important for the new trading economy but also a strong sense of belonging 
to a great literary tradition that included the tales of King Arthur and Robin 
Hood, the poetry of Langland and Chaucer. England was also fairly uni¿ ed 
with regard to religious observance. Although there was a strong strain of 
anti-clericalism in society, this did not tip over into outright de¿ ance of the 
church; the Lollard heretics were a tiny minority of the population. 
So England in 1485 had come a long way. The average English man or 
woman was far better off in a material sense than his or her predecessor of 
1,000 years before—less likely to go hungry and possessed of greater social 
mobility, access to education, and a nascent representative government. 
And all this progress came despite a long series of invasions, famines, wars, 
and the biggest catastrophe of them all, the Black Death. Or maybe partly 
because of these disasters. The English people had proved they could not 
just survive but À ourish in the face of the greatest challenges. Soon, England 
would found the empire on which the sun never set, and it would inÀ uence 
countries and peoples around the globe, none which would have been 
possible without the developments of the Middle Ages. Ŷ

171
Keen, England in the Later Middle Ages.
Rubin, The Hollow Crown.
Smith, This Realm of England.
    Suggested Reading

172
Timeline
Timeline
55 B.C. ............................................Julius Caesar invades 
Britain and withdraws.
A.D. 43 ............................................Emperor Claudius invades Britain 
and establishes a Roman colony.
60.....................................................Revolt of Boudicca.
122–127...........................................Erection of Hadrian’s Wall.
367...................................................“Barbarian conspiracy” of 
Scots, Picts, and Saxons.
410...................................................Roman legions withdraw from Britain.
mid-5th century ................................Settlement of Angles and 
Saxons begins.
c. 500 ...............................................Battle of Mount Badon.
597...................................................Mission of Saint Augustine 
to Canterbury.
664...................................................Synod of Whitby.
733...................................................Death of the Venerable Bede.
825...................................................Battle of Ellendon: Egbert of 
Wessex defeats Mercia.
793...................................................Vikings raid Lindisfarne.

173
850...................................................Viking army winters on 
the island of Thanet.
869...................................................King Edmund of East Anglia 
killed by Danes.
871–899...........................................Alfred the Great
878...................................................Battle of Edington: Alfred 
defeats the Danes.
886...................................................Alfred recaptures London 
from the Danes.
899–924...........................................Edward the Elder
918...................................................All Danes south of the Humber owe 
allegiance to Edward the Elder.
924–939...........................................Athelstan
939–946...........................................Edmund
946–955...........................................Eadred
c. 950–1000 .....................................Earliest surviving Beowulf 
manuscript created.
955–959...........................................Eadwig
959–975...........................................Edgar the Peaceable
975–978...........................................Edward the Martyr
975–978...........................................The antimonastic reaction.
978–1016.........................................Æthelred II Unræd (“of no counsel”)

174
Timeline
991...................................................Battle of Maldon: The Danes 
defeat the English; Æthelred pays 
Danegeld for the ¿ rst time.
c. 1000 .............................................Battle of Maldon composed.
1014.................................................Archbishop Wulstand composes 
“Sermon of the Wolf to the English.”
1016–1035.......................................Cnut
1027.................................................Cnut makes pilgrimage to Rome.
1035–1040.......................................Harold Harefoot
1040–1042.......................................Harthacnut
1042–1066.......................................Edward the Confessor
1051–1052.......................................Revolt of the Godwinsons.
1064.................................................Harold Godwinson’s alleged oath 
to Duke William of Normandy.
1066.................................................Harold II Godwinson
September 25, 1066 ........................Battle of Stamford Bridge: 
Harold Godwinson defeats 
Harold Hardraada of Norway.
October 14, 1066 .............................Battle of Hastings: Duke William of 
Normandy defeats Harold Godwinson.
December 25, 1066 .........................Duke William is crowned 
king of England.
1066–1087.......................................William I the Conqueror

175
1069–1070.......................................The Harrying of the North.
1070.................................................Revolt of Hereward the Wake.
1086.................................................Salisbury Oath; Domesday survey.
1087–1100 .......................................William II Rufus
1100–1135 .......................................Henry I 
1106 .................................................Battle of Tinchebrai.
1107 .................................................Settlement of the investiture 
controversy.
1120 .................................................Wreck of the White Ship.
1123 .................................................Punishment of the royal moneyers.
1135–1154 .......................................Stephen
1138 .................................................Revolt of Robert, earl of Gloucester; 
Geoffrey of Monmouth composes 
History of the Kings of Britain.
1139 .................................................Empress Matilda invades England.
1140 .................................................Matilda brieÀ y holds London.
1152 .................................................Marriage of Henry of Anjou 
and Eleanor of Aquitaine.
1153 .................................................Peace agreement between 
Stephen and Henry of Anjou.
1154–1189 .......................................Henry II

176
Timeline
1164 .................................................Constitutions of Clarendon and exile 
of Archbishop Thomas Becket.
1166 .................................................Assize of Novel disseisin.
1170 .................................................Murder of Thomas Becket.
1170–1190 .......................................Chrétien de Troyes writes his 
Arthurian romances.
1173–1174 .......................................Revolt of the sons of Henry II and 
imprisonment of Eleanor of Aquitaine.
1183 .................................................Death of Henry the Young King.
1184–1186 .......................................Andreas Capellanus writes 
The Art of Courtly Love.
1186 .................................................Death of Geoffrey, duke of Brittany.
1187 .................................................Saladin captures Jerusalem.
1189–1199 .......................................Richard I the Lion-Heart
1189–1190 .......................................Anti-Jewish outbreaks in England.
1191–1193 .......................................Richard participates in 
the Third Crusade.
1193–1194 .......................................Richard is held in German captivity.
1199–1216 .......................................John
1200.................................................Marriage of John and 
Isabelle of Angoulême.
1203? ...............................................Murder of Arthur of Brittany.

177
1204.................................................John loses Normandy to Philip 
II Augustus of France.
1206–1213.......................................Papal interdict is imposed on England.
1214.................................................Battle of Bouvines: Philip 
Augustus defeats Otto the Welf.
1215.................................................The Magna Carta is signed 
at Runnymede.
1216–1272.......................................Henry III
1254.................................................Henry III accepts the crown of Sicily 
for his younger son, Edmund.
1258–1265.......................................Baronial revolt in England.
1258.................................................Provisions of Oxford.
1264.................................................Mise of Amiens; Battle of 
Lewes: Simon de Montfort 
defeats the royal army.
1265.................................................Battle of Evesham: Royal army 
defeats Simonde Montfort.
1272–1307.......................................Edward I
1274.................................................Quo warranto proceedings.
1275.................................................Statute of Westminster I.
1279.................................................Statute of Mortmain.
1282–1283.......................................War of conquest in Wales.

178
Timeline
1285.................................................Statute of Westminster II.
1290.................................................Statute of Quo warranto; Expulsion 
of the Jews from England.
1291.................................................Edward I recognized as 
overlord in Scotland.
1297.................................................Con¿ rmatio Cartarum; Revolt of 
William Wallace in Scotland.
1297–1304.......................................War with France concerning Gascony.
1305–1378.......................................Papacy in Avignon (a.k.a. the 
Babylonian Caoptivity).
1307–1327.......................................Edward II
1310.................................................Ordinances imposed on Edward 
II by Lords Ordainers.
1311 .................................................Return of Piers Gaveston from exile.
1312.................................................Murder of Gaveston.
1314.................................................Battle of Bannockburn: Scottish 
army defeats the royal army.
1322.................................................Battle of Boroughbridge: Royal 
army defeats Thomas, earl of 
Lancaster; murder of Lancaster.
1326.................................................Roger Mortimer and Queen 
Isabella invade England.
1327.................................................Edward II deposed by 
Parliament and murdered.

179
1327–1377.......................................Edward III
1330.................................................Execution of Roger Mortimer and 
imprisonment of Queen Isabella.
1338–1453.......................................The Hundred Years’ War.
1340.................................................Battle of Sluys: English À eet 
defeats French À eet.
1346.................................................Battle of Neville’s Cross: Royal 
army defeats Scottish army and 
captures King Alexander III of 
Scotland; Battle of Crécy: English 
army defeats French army.
1348–1349.......................................Black Death.
c. 1350–1400 ...................................Sir Gawain and the Green 
Knight written.
1351.................................................Statute of Provisors; 
Statute of Laborers.
1353.................................................Statute of Praemunire.
1356.................................................Battle of Poitiers: English 
army defeats French army.
1360.................................................Treaty of Brétigny between 
France and England.
1361–62...........................................Recurrence of Black Death.
c. 1362 .............................................First version of William Langland’s 
Piers Plowman composed.

180
Timeline
1376.................................................Death of Edward the Black Prince.
1377–1399.......................................Richard II
1378–1417.......................................Papal Schism.
c. 1380 .............................................Julian of Norwich writes Showings.
1381.................................................Peasants’ Revolt.
1386–1400.......................................Geoffrey Chaucer writes 
The Canterbury Tales.
1388.................................................Merciless Parliament.
1398.................................................Banishment of Henry Bolingbroke. 
1399.................................................Invasion of England by Bolingbroke; 
deposition of Richard II.
1399–1413.......................................Henry IV
1400–1408.......................................Revolt of Owen Glendower.
1401.................................................De haeretico comburendo enacted.
1403.................................................Battle of Shrewsbury: Royal 
army defeats Harry Hotspur.
1413–1422.......................................Henry V
1414.................................................Revolt of Sir John Oldcastle.
1415.................................................Battle of Agincourt: English 
army defeats French army.

181
1420.................................................Treaty of Troyes between 
France and England.
1422–1461.......................................Henry VI
1429.................................................Joan of Arc leads French royal army.
1431.................................................Execution of Joan of Arc.
1432–1436.......................................The Book of Margery Kempe composed.
1435.................................................Death of John, duke of Bedford.
1445.................................................Marriage of Henry VI and 
Margaret of Anjou.
1450.................................................Jack Cade’s Revolt.
1455.................................................First Battle of Stamford Bridge: 
Yorkists defeat Lancastrians.
1455.................................................William Caxton publishes Le Morte 
d’Arthur by Sir Thomas Malory.
1459.................................................Battle of Ludford: Lancastrians 
defeat Yorkists.
1460.................................................Henry VI captured at Northampton 
by Edward, earl of March; Battle of 
Wake¿ eld: Lancastrians defeat Yorkists; 
Richard, duke of York, killed.
1461.................................................Second Battle of St. Albans: 
Lancastrians defeat Yorkists; Henry VI 
freed from captivity Battle of Towton: 
Yorkists defeat Lancastrians; Queen 
Margaret and Henry VI forced to À ee.

182
Timeline
1461–1483.......................................Edward IV
1465.................................................Capture of Henry VI.
1469.................................................Revolt of Robin of Redesdale.
1470.................................................Richard earl of Warwick and George 
duke of Clarence take refuge with 
Louis XI in France; Warwick allies with 
Queen Margaret and lands in England; 
Edward IV À ees to the Low Countries.
1471.................................................Edward returns to England; Battle 
of Barnet: Warwick killed; Battle of 
Tewkesbury: Edward, prince of Wales, 
killed; Edward IV restored to the throne.
1475.................................................Treaty of Picquigny.
April–July 1483 .............................Edward V
1483–1485.......................................Richard III
1483.................................................Revolt of the duke of Buckingham.
1485.................................................Invasion of England by Henry Tudor; 
Battle of Bosworth Field: Henry Tudor 
defeats Richard III; Richard III killed.

183
Glossary
aetheling: Anglo-Saxon title designating the heir to the throne.
alliterative verse: Verse that relies on repeated initial sounds for its structure. 
Lines are divided into two parts, divided by a caesura, or pause; usually the 
alliterative element occurs once or twice in the ¿ rst part of the line and then 
once in the second part of the line. This verse form was characteristic of all 
ancient Germanic poetry, including Old English poetry. Examples include 
Beowulf and The Battle of Maldon. Later, alliterative verse might also 
include rhyme, as in the 14th-century Piers Plowman and Sir Gawain and the 
Green Knight.
Anglo-Saxon heptarchy: Modern historical term for the seven most 
signi¿ cant Anglo-Saxon kingdoms: Wessex, Sussex, and Essex (settled by 
Saxons); Northumbria, Mercia, and East Anglia (settled by Angles); and 
Kent (possibly settled by Jutes, though this is uncertain).
Brétigny, Treaty of: Agreement between England and France made in 
1360 that guaranteed English possession of Gascony and pledged a ransom 
of ǧ500,000 for the captured French king, John the Good, in exchange for 
the promise of Edward III’s renunciation of his right to the French throne 
(which he never ful¿ lled). The treaty brought nine years of peace before 
hostilities resumed.
bretwalda: Anglo-Saxon title that may have designated the preeminent king 
among the kingdoms of the heptarchy between the 5th and 9th centuries. The 
rights of the bretwalda seem to have included tribute, military service, and 
appearance at his court, but the details of how these rights were exercised 
are unclear.
burh: Anglo-Saxon term for a forti¿ ed town or settlement. Alfred 
systematically strengthened existing burhs and founded new ones to defend 
Wessex from Viking attack. The taxes required to pay for these burhs were 
enumerated in the Burghal Hidage. 

184
Glossary
ceorl: Anglo-Saxon peasant farmer.
chancery: Royal writing of¿ ce, in charge of all royal documents. The head 
of the chancery, the chancellor, was one of the king’s closest advisers.
clamores: From the Latin for “outcries”; complaints recorded in the 
Domesday Book about unjust seizures of land following the Norman 
Conquest. The clamores were presented by juries with knowledge of the 
history of local estates.
comitatus: From the Latin for “retinue”; the war band of a Germanic 
tribal leader. It formed the chief ¿ ghting unit defending the early 
Anglo-Saxon settlers.
Con¿ rmatio Cartarum: con¿ rmation of Magna Carta and the Forest 
Charter issued in 1297 by Edward I in exchange for taxes to pay for his 
war in Gascony. It set the precedent for the right of the whole realm, as 
represented in Parliament, to approve or refuse taxation.
consanguinity: A relationship that was considered too close for marriage. 
Consanguinity was often used as a pretext for dissolving royal and noble 
marriages in the 11th and 12th centuries until the church tightened up the rules 
in 1215.
Constitutions of Clarendon: Imposed on Thomas Becket, archbishop of 
Canterbury, by Henry II in 1164, the constitutions spelled out the rights 
of the English royal courts with respect to the church courts in England, 
especially the right to try criminous clerks. Becket’s humiliating acceptance 
of the constitutions and subsequent renunciation of his oath to abide by them 
cost him support among his bishops. See also criminous clerks.
council: Advisers to the king, derived from the Anglo-Saxon witan. After the 
Norman Conquest, the council was typically divided into the small council 
of the king’s closest household advisers and the great council consisting of 
the important magnates of the realm.

185
court rolls: Records kept by various English courts, so called because they 
were arranged as continuous rolls of parchment leaves sewn end to end.
criminous clerk: A man in one of the seven grades of the clerical order 
who has been accused of a secular crime. Ordinarily, criminous clerks 
were supposed to be turned over to the church courts for trial, but Henry II 
demanded that the worst offenders be tried by the royal courts. Treatment of 
criminous clerks was one of the salient issues in the dispute between the king 
and Thomas Becket. See also Constitutions of Clarendon.
Danegeld: Tax imposed on England for the ¿ rst time in 991 by Æthelred 
II to buy protection from the invading Danish armies. After the victory 
of Cnut, the tax was known as the heregeld and was used to pay for the 
king’s bodyguard, the housecarles. It later became a tax levied regularly to 
pay for the defense of the realm. It was collected for the last time in 1163. 
See housecarles.
Danelaw: the areas of northern, central, and eastern England that were 
heavily settled by the Danes beginning in the 9th century. In these areas, 
Danish law was followed rather than English law, and Danish units of land 
measurement were in use.
De haeretico comburendo: Act of Parliament passed in 1401 authorizing 
the burning at the stake of heretics. The measure was aimed at the Lollards, 
who had grown in popularity as the result of the writings of John Wycliffe.
dubbing: Ceremony that of¿ cially conferred knighthood. It began in the 11th 
century as an informal rite but developed into an elaborate ritual. Vassals 
were required to pay for the dubbing of the eldest son of their lord.
ealdorman: Anglo-Saxon royal of¿ cial in charge of a shire, responsible for 
summoning the fyrd. The ealdorman was replaced by the earl in the Danish 
regions of England and then throughout the kingdom under Cnut. See also 
fyrd and shire.

186
Glossary
enclosure: Practice of enclosing common land and converting it to pasture, 
usually for sheep. The practice was designed to maximize the pro¿ ts of 
landlords at a time of falling rents for agricultural land and rising demand 
for wool.
eyre: Circuit of courts under the jurisdiction of an itinerant commission 
of judges. The circuit of the justices in eyre was established on a regular 
basis by Henry II in 1176, though itinerant judges had occasionally been 
used earlier.
Exchequer: Accounting branch of the medieval English treasury. By 
the reign of Henry I, sheriffs would account for their expenditures at 
twice-yearly sessions at which counters representing various sums of money 
would be manipulated on a board covered by a checkered cloth. Records 
of the exchequer accounts were kept in the Pipe Rolls. See also Pipe Rolls 
and sheriff.
forest law: Law applied to areas of England set aside for hunting by the king 
after the Norman Conquest. Interference with animals in areas designated as 
forest (which were not necessarily wooded) could be punished by mutilation 
or death until the granting of the Forest Charter in 1217, which accompanied 
the reissue of the Magna Carta by Henry III.
fyrd: Anglo-Saxon military force consisting of all free men of the shire, who 
were obligated to serve as requested for 60 days. 
gentry: In the later Middle Ages, substantial landowners who might bear 
coats of arms but did not belong to the peerage.
hide: Anglo-Saxon unit of land, originally consisting of enough land to 
support a single peasant family; the size of the hide varied by region. Hides 
were used to assess taxes and military obligations.
housecarles: Danish royal bodyguard serving in England from the time of 
Cnut, paid for by the Danegeld. See also Danegeld.

187
household: Originally the personal entourage of the king, it developed into a 
department of government responsible for the personal expenses of the ruler. 
Meticulous records were kept beginning from the reign of John.
hundred: Anglo-Saxon unit of local government that survived the Norman 
Conquest, consisting of groupings of perhaps a hundred hides. Hundred 
courts assessed taxes and met every four weeks to hear cases of local 
importance. See also hides.
interdict: Penalty imposed by the church on an entire ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction whereby public sacraments may not be performed; usually, 
interdicts are intended to force compliance with a speci¿ c church policy. 
Pope Innocent III placed England under interdict for seven years to pressure 
John to accept Stephen Langton as archbishop of Canterbury.
Jack Cade’s Revolt: Rebellion in 1450 by lesser gentry in the counties 
around London to protest mismanagement of the royal household and 
incompetent prosecution of the war in France. The rebels also demanded that 
Richard, duke of York, be given a prominent role in the royal administration. 
Cade was captured and executed.
Laborers, Statute of: Measure passed in 1351 intended to protect employers 
from the market forces set in motion by the great mortality caused by the Black 
Death. Wage rates were to be kept at pre-plague levels, and able-bodied men 
were required to accept work under those terms. The statute caused widespread 
resentment and contributed to the Peasants’ Revolt of 1381.
lords appellants: English magnates who opposed Richard II by appealing 
(accusing) his chief household of¿ cers, who were tried by the Merciless 
Parliament in 1388. The lords appellants were the Duke of Gloucester, the 
Earl of Arundel, the Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Nottingham, and the Earl of 
Derby (Henry Bolingbroke, later Henry IV). See also Merciless Parliament.
lords ordainers: Committee of 21 lords imposed on Edward II in 
1311 to regulate the king’s adherence to the Ordinances, which were 
designed to restore good government after a period of mismanagement. 
See also Ordinances.

188
Glossary
maintenance agreement: Formal agreement, registered in a manor court, 
whereby adult children assumed management of the family holding in return 
for guaranteeing their elderly parents a speci¿ ed domicile and allowance of 
food and clothing.
manor: Dating from late Anglo-Saxon times, a unit of landholding 
comprising the land in a speci¿ c location that was held by a lord. It often 
coincided with the village, but some manors comprised several villages, 
whereas some villages were divided between two or more manors. The lord 
presided over the manor court that held jurisdiction over most of the affairs 
of the tenants.
matter of Britain: Literary corpus comprising stories of King Arthur and 
his knights.
Merciless Parliament: Parliament of 1388 at which the lords appellants 
accused ¿ ve of the household of¿ cers of Richard II of treason, leading to the 
execution of two of them and the À ight of the other three. The king’s steps 
in 1397–1398 to avenge the actions of the Merciless Parliament led to his 
deposition in 1399 by one of the lords appellants, Henry Bolingbroke. See 
also lords appellants.
mort d’ancestor: Writ devised in 1176 under Henry II whereby tenants 
could be swiftly put in possession of inherited lands.
novel disseisin: Writ devised in 1166 under Henry II whereby those 
disseised (deprived) of land could purchase a writ ordering the sheriff of the 
shire in which the estate lay to restore them to possession until the case could 
be adjudicated.
oath-helper: Beginning in the Anglo-Saxon period, the persons produced 
by an individual in court who would swear to the truth of what he said. 
Different numbers of oath-helpers were required in different contexts, and in 
some cases the oath-helpers had to include men from outside the kin group 
of the man whose oath was being sworn. 

189
Order of the Garter: Order of chivalry founded in 1348 by Edward III to 
foster unity among his closest supporters and increase support for the war in 
France. Membership was highly selective. 
Ordinances: Measures imposed on Edward II in 1311 by the lords ordainers 
to try to restore good government. Piers Gaveston and the king’s Italian 
bankers were banished, and Parliament was required to be summoned once a 
year. See also lords ordainers.
Parliament: Assembly of representatives of the realm that began meeting 
sporadically during the reign of Henry III to discuss and approve grants of 
taxation. Membership became ¿ xed in the 14th century into the House of 
Commons, consisting of two knights from every shire and representatives 
from the important boroughs or towns, and the House of Lords, consisting 
of the members of the peerage, a speci¿ ed group of important barons. 
See also peerage.
peerage: Group of barons who were summoned by name to meetings of 
Parliament. The list was ¿ xed in the 14th century, and the right to a summons 
to Parliament became hereditary.
Picquigny, Treaty of: Agreement concluded in 1475 between Edward IV of 
England and Louis XI of France, leaving Edward’s Burgundian allies in the 
lurch. In return for a truce and the promise to submit the English claim to the 
French throne to a court of arbitration (which never sat), the English were 
promised an annual subsidy of 50,000 gold crowns.
Pipe Rolls: Records kept of the accounts made by the sheriffs in the 
Exchequer, so called because they consisted of sheets of parchment sewn 
end to end and rolled up for storage. The earliest surviving Pipe Roll dates 
from 1130. See also sheriffs and Exchequer.
poll tax: Tax on every individual in England imposed under Richard II in 
1377, 1379, and 1381. It proved very unpopular and helped touch off the 
Peasants’ Revolt in 1381.

190
Glossary
Praemunire, Statutes of: Measures enacted in 1353, 1365, and 1393 
to prevent the appeal of ecclesiastical cases to foreign courts in which 
jurisdiction pertained to the royal courts. The ¿ rst statute applied to foreign 
courts in general, whereas the later statutes were more narrowly directed at 
the papal court.
Provisions of Oxford: Measures imposed on Henry III in 1258 by a 
committee of 24 men, half chosen by the king and half by the barons. 
Three formal meetings of the great council were to be held each year, and a 
Council of Fifteen would handle daily business, including the supervision of 
the Exchequer and sheriffs. The restriction of royal authority proved dif¿ cult 
to impose in practice, and the king renounced the provisions in 1262.
Provisors, Statutes of: Measures enacted in 1351 and 1390 against 
the practice of papal provision, by which the pope could nominate his 
own candidates for English ecclesiastical of¿ ces. Papal provisions were 
extremely unpopular because they deprived the king and the local church 
of a rich source of patronage, and the men “provided” to English of¿ ces 
often failed to perform their duties in person, instead hiring ill-paid and ill-
quali¿ ed substitutes.
Quia emptores, Statute of: Measure enacted in 1290 to prevent further 
subinfeudation—that is, the lengthening of the chain of feudal obligation. 
The statute mandated that when the estate of a tenant changed hands, any 
feudal dues owed from that estate would be paid directly to the lord of the 
original tenant, not to the tenant himself. The statute accelerated the process 
by which feudal ties were slowly breaking down.
Quo warranto, Statute of: Measure enacted in 1290 that regulated private 
franchises or courts. Any courts that could not produce a royal charter of 
foundation had to be con¿ rmed by a royal grant. The statute grew out of the 
quo warranto proceedings initiated in 1274 to investigate the origins of all 
private franchises as part of the efforts of Edward I to regularize the English 
court system.

191
relief: Payment exacted by a lord from the heir of his tenant on the occasion 
of his inheriting the property. The amount of a relief was usually ¿ xed by 
custom, and efforts to exceed the customary amount were very unpopular. 
William Rufus was criticized for charging very high reliefs.
royal courts: By the late 13th century, the three main central courts based 
at Westminster: the Exchequer, which handled matters respecting revenue 
collection; the King’s Bench, which handled cases relating directly to the 
king; and Common Pleas, which handled all other cases. 
schism, papal: Result of a disputed papal election in which more than one 
candidate for the papacy claims to be the legitimately elected pope. The 
most serious schism occurred from 1378 to 1417, during which time one 
pope resided in Avignon and enjoyed French support, while the other lived 
in Rome, backed by England. The schism exacerbated anticlerical feeling in 
England and complicated diplomatic efforts to end the Hundred Years’ War.
sheriff: From “shire reeve”; beginning in the 11th century, the royal of¿ cial 
in charge of administering the shire on behalf of the king. The sheriff 
accounted for the expenses and revenues of the shire at the Exchequer and, 
from the Norman Conquest onward, presided over the shire court. See also 
Exchequer and shire.
shire: Largest unit of local government from the Anglo-Saxon England 
onward. The shire was administered by an ealdorman or later by a sheriff, 
who was responsible for judicial, ¿ nancial, and military matters within the 
shire on behalf of the king. See also ealdorman and sheriff.
sokemen: Originally, a Danish designation for those substantial tenants who 
had the right and obligation to appear in the local courts.
thegn: Important Anglo-Saxon landholder who owed the king military 
service, attendance at court, and help with administrative tasks. The thegns 
were the backbone of the royal government on the local level, but their 
position was undermined in the 11th century by the advent of the housecarles.

192
Glossary
Troyes, Treaty of: Agreement made in 1420 between England and France 
that gave the French princess Catherine to Henry V in marriage and provided 
for the inheritance of both England and France by the couple’s heirs.
wapentake: From “the taking up of arms”; Danish landholding unit, roughly 
equivalent to the hide, used in the Danelaw. It most likely originated in the 
assembly of able-bodied men held to inspect their condition and that of 
their weapons. 
wergild: Literally, “man money”; the value assessed in Anglo-Saxon law 
for the death or injury of a speci¿ c individual, intended to forestall family 
feuding. The amount of the wergild varied according to the age, gender, and 
social status of the individual concerned. All members of one’s close kin 
were obligated to contribute to the payment of a wergild ¿ ne.
witan: Anglo-Saxon royal council, consisting of the “wise men” of the 
realm. The witenagemot was a formal meeting of these advisers.
writ: Legal document recording a royal order, ¿ rst used by the Anglo-Saxon 
kings, when writs were written in English, and adopted by the Normans, 
who changed the language of the writs to Latin. Under Henry II, many forms 
of writ proliferated to streamline legal procedures and increase the prestige 
of the royal courts.
yeoman: In the later Middle Ages, a substantial farmer who did not have the 
social prestige of a member of the gentry but was able to live independently 
of the demands of a lord.

193
Bibliography
Abels, Richard. Alfred the Great: War, Kingship, and Culture in Anglo-
Saxon England. New York: Longman, 1998. The de¿ nitive biography of 
King Alfred.
Allmand, Christopher. Henry V. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1992. A biography that goes beyond Henry’s famous military exploits to 
examine his domestic policies as well.
Backhouse, Janet, D. H. Turner, and Leslie Webster, eds. The Golden Age of 
Anglo-Saxon Art, 966–1066. London: British Museum, 1984. A beautifully 
illustrated exhibition catalogue, well worth tracking down.
Barber, Richard, ed. The Pastons: A Family in the Wars of the Roses.
Rochester, NY: Boydell, 2004. Long extracts from the letters themselves 
connected by masterful commentary.
Barlow, Frank. The Godwins: The Rise and Fall of a Noble Dynasty. New 
York: Longman, 2002. A brief, highly readable study of a crucial Anglo-
Danish family.
———. Thomas Becket. London: Wiedenfeld & Nicolson, 1986. A 
biography critical of Becket by a scholar with an unsurpassed command of 
the sources for Becket’s life.
Bates, David. William the Conqueror. London: Philip, 1989. A masterful 
study by the foremost expert on the documents of William’s reign.
The Battle of Maldon and Other Old English Poems. Edited by Bruce 
Mitchell. Translated by Kevin Crossley-Holland. New York: St. Martin’s, 
1965. A modern verse translation with a helpful introduction.

194
Bibliography
Bede. Ecclesiastical History of the English People. Rev. ed. Edited by D. H. 
Farmer and Ronald E. Latham. Translated by Leo Sherley Price. New York: 
Penguin Classics, 1991. A very readable translation with excellent notes.
Bédoyère, Guy de la. Roman Britain: A New History. New York: Thames 
& Hudson, 2006. The most recent complete study of Roman Britain with 
excellent illustrations.
Bennett, Matthew. Campaigns of the Norman Conquest. Chicago: Fitzroy 
Dearborn, 2001. A richly illustrated study by one of Britain’s foremost 
military historians.
Beowulf: A New Verse Translation. Translated by Seamus Heaney. New 
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2000. The best modern verse translation, 
produced by a Nobel Prize–winning poet.
Beresford, M. W., and John G. Hurst, eds. Deserted Medieval Villages: 
Studies. New York: St. Martin’s, 1971. A collection of articles deeply 
informed by archeological studies. 
Blair, Peter Hunter. Roman Britain and Early England, 55 B.C.–A.D. 871. 
London: Nelson and Sons, 1963. A venerable but still useful survey.
Bradbury, Jim. The Battle of Hastings. Stroud, UK: Sutton, 1998. An 
excellent introduction to the context of and sources for the battle.
Campbell, 
James. 
The 
Anglo-Saxon 
State. 
London: 
Hambledon, 
2000. A study that argues strongly for the sophistication of the late 
Anglo-Saxon state.
———. Essays in Anglo-Saxon History. London: Hambledon, 1986. 
An excellent collection of articles about the Anglo-Saxon period, as 
well as a seminal article about the Anglo-Saxon view of the past after the 
Norman Conquest.

195
Campbell, James, Eric John, and Patrick Wormald, eds. The Anglo-Saxons. 
New York: Penguin, 1991. A lavishly illustrated, multi-authored work 
spanning the whole Anglo-Saxon period.
Carpenter, David. The Reign of Henry III. London: Hambledon, 1996. The 
de¿ nitive political history of the reign.
———. The Struggle for Mastery: Britain 1066–1284. New York: 
Penguin, 2004. 
Chaplais, Pierre. Piers Gaveston: Edward II’s Adoptive Brother. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1994. A revisionist interpretation of the relationship 
between Edward II and Piers Gaveston, arguing that they were not lovers but 
instead sworn blood brothers.
Chaucer, Geoffrey. The Canterbury Tales. Translated by Nevill Coghill. New 
York: Penguin, 2003. Still the best modern verse translation.
Chibnall, Marjorie. The Empress Matilda: Queen Consort, Queen Mother 
and Lady of the English. Oxford: Blackwell, 1991. The de¿ nitive biography 
of Matilda.
Chrétien de Troyes. The Complete Romances of Chrétien de Troyes. 
Translated by David Staines. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1990. 
Prose translations of all of the romances of Chrétien de Troyes.
Cook, G. H. The English Mediaeval Parish Church. London: Phoenix House, 
1954. Worth seeking out for its 180 photographs of English parish churches.
Crouch, David. The Normans: The History of a Dynasty. London: 
Hambledon, 2002. A beautifully written history of the Norman ruling house.
———. The Reign of King Stephen, 1135–1154. New York: Longman, 2000. 
The most recent treatment of the controversial reign of Stephen, written in 
sparkling prose.

196
Bibliography
Curry, Anne. The Hundred Years’ War, 1337–1453. New York: Routledge, 
2003. A brief, lavishly illustrated introduction to the Hundred Years’ War.
Daniell, Christopher. Atlas of Medieval Britain. New York: Routledge, 2008.
Davis. R. H. C. King Stephen, 1135–1154. 3rd ed. New York: Longman, 1990. 
The classic treatment of Stephen’s reign, still worth reading for its powerful 
narrative, though it should be read alongside David Crouch.
Dobson, R. B., ed. The Peasants’ Revolt of 1381. 2nd ed. London: Macmillan, 
1983. An excellent collection of source materials for the Peasants’ Revolt 
with a very useful introduction.
Duggan, Joseph J. The Romances of Chrétien de Troyes. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 2001. The most recent comprehensive treatment of 
Chrétien’s romances, aimed at both the scholar and the general reader.
Fleming, Robin. Britain after Rome: The Fall and Rise, from 400–1070. 
Penguin History of Britain 2. London: Allen Lane, 2010. 
Gies, Frances and Joseph Gies. A Medieval Family: The Pastons of Fifteenth-
Century England. New York: HarperCollins, 1998. A highly accessible study 
of the Pastons for the general reader.
Gillingham, John. The Angevin Empire. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2001. The best brief treatment of the relationship between England 
and its continental possessions under Henry II and his progeny.
———. Richard the Lionheart. New York: Times Books, 1978. A beautifully 
written, judicious biography.
———. The Wars of the Roses: Peace and ConÀ ict in 15th Century England. 
London: Phoenix, 2001. A highly readable, revisionist history of the Wars of 
the Roses that deemphasizes the military confrontations of the period.

197
Goodman, Anthony. The Loyal Conspiracy: The Lords Appellant under 
Richard II. London: Routledge, 1971. A study of the key ¿ gures involved in 
the Merciless Parliament, including the future Henry IV.
Green, Judith. The Government of England under Henry I. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1986. A thorough analysis of the institutions of 
government during this crucial reign.
———. Henry I: King of England and Duke of Normandy. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2006. A biography focusing strongly on 
political history, with a ¿ nal chapter on the culture of Henry’s court.
Hamilton, J. S. Piers Gaveston, Earl of Cornwall, 1307–1312: Politics and 
Patronage in the Reign of Edward II. Detroit, MI: Wayne State University 
Press, 1988. A monograph on the life of the pivotal ¿ gure of Edward II’s 
early reign.
Hanawalt, Barbara. The Ties That Bound: Peasant Families in Medieval 
England. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986. InÀ uential study of 
peasant life in England drawing on the evidence contained in coroners’ rolls 
and other sources.
Harvey, I. M. W. Jack Cade’s Rebellion of 1450. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1991. De¿ nitive monograph on this crucial revolt.
Hatcher, John. The Black Death: A Personal History. Philadelphia, PA: 
Da Capo Press, 2008. A highly readable, partly ¿ ctionalized, but solidly 
researched reconstruction of the effects of the Black Death on a small 
community in Suffolk.
Hilton, Rodney. Bond Men Made Free: Medieval Peasant Movements and 
the English Rising of 1381. New York: Routledge, 2003. A reissue of a 
classic left-wing study of the Peasants’ Revolt.
Hollister, C. Warren. Henry I. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2001. 
A posthumously published biography by the premiere scholar of Anglo-
Norman institutions.

198
Bibliography
Hollister, C. Warren, Robert C. Stacey, and Robin Chapman Stacey. The 
Making of England to 1399, 8th ed. Boston: Houghton MifÀ in, 2001. 
Holt, J. C. Magna Carta. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. 
The classic study of Magna Carta in its long-term, Angevin political context.
———. Robin Hood. London: Thames & Hudson, 1989. Abundantly 
illustrated study of the development of the legend of Robin Hood.
Homans, George. English Villagers of the Thirteenth Century. New York: 
Russell & Russell, 1960. A classic study of English peasants that helped 
touch off an entirely new ¿ eld of research.
Horrox, Rosemary, ed. The Black Death. Manchester, UK: Manchester 
University Press, 1994. An indispensable collection of contemporary sources 
for the plague with abundant explanatory materials.
Hudson, John. The Formation of the English Common Law: Law and 
Society in England from the Norman Conquest to Magna Carta. New York: 
Longman, 1996. A de¿ nitive guide to the development of English common 
law by a brilliant legal historian.
Johnson, P. A. Duke Richard of York, 1411–1460. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1988. A brief but thorough monograph on one of the 
pivotal ¿ gures of the Wars of the Roses.
Julian of Norwich. Showings.Translated by Edmund Colledge and James 
Walsh. New York: Paulist Press, 1978. Excellent translation of a classic of 
medieval English mysticism.
Keen, Maurice. Chivalry. New York: Yale University Press, 1984. Richly 
detailed study of the multifaceted phenomenon of chivalry.
Keen, M. H. England in the Later Middle Ages: A Political History. London: 
Methuen, 1973.

199
Kempe, Margery. The Book of Margery Kempe. Translated by B. A. 
Windeatt. New York: Penguin Books, 1985. An excellent translation into 
modern English of this fascinating personal narrative.
Knowles, David. The English Mystical Tradition. New York: Harper, 1961. 
Classic, highly readable study by the foremost 20th-century scholar of the 
medieval English church.
Langland, William. Piers Plowman: A New Translation of the B-Text. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992. A prose rendering of the B-Text of 
Piers Plowman.
———. William Langland’s Piers Plowman: The C Version. Translated by 
George Economou. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996. A 
verse rendering of the C-Text of Piers Plowman. 
Lawson, M. K. Cnut: The Danes in England in the Early Eleventh Century. 
New York: Longman, 1993. A thorough study of Cnut’s reign and the impact 
of the Danish presence in England.
Lewis, C. S. The Allegory of Love: A Study in Medieval Tradtion. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1938. A classic study of the development of the 
courtly love tradition.
Loyn, H. R. The Governance of Anglo-Saxon England, 500–1087. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 1984. A detailed account of the institutions 
and mechanisms of the Anglo-Saxon state.
Maddicott, J. R. Simon de Montfort. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1994. A biography that covers the baronial revolt in great detail.
———. Thomas of Lancaster, 1307–1322: A Study in the Reign of Edward 
II. London: Oxford University Press, 1970. An invaluable study of the 
conÀ ict between king and barons during the reign of Edward II.

200
Bibliography
Malory, Thomas. Malory: Works. 2nd edition. Edited by Eugène Vinaver. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971. An edition that preserves the Middle 
English spellings of the original text.
———. Le Morte d’Arthur. Edited by John Matthews. London: Cassell, 
2000. Beautifully illustrated version in modern English spelling.
McFarlane, K. B. John Wycliffe and the beginnings of English Nonconformity. 
New York: Macmillan, 1953. A classic study by a great historian of late 
medieval English social and religious history.
O’Brien, Mark. When Adam Delved and Eve Span: A History of the Peasants’ 
Revolt of 1381. Cheltenham, UK: New Clarion, 2004. Brief, accessible 
introduction to the Peasants’ Revolt for the general reader.
Ormond, W. M. The Reign of Edward III: Crown and Political Society 
in England, 1327–1377. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1990. 
A biography that also concentrates heavily on the evolving relationship 
between the king and the other major social actors of the period.
Platt, Colin. The Architecture of Medieval Britain: A Social History. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1990. An abundantly illustrated study of 
English architecture from the Norman Conquest through the 15th century.
Prestwich, Michael. Edward I. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1988. The de¿ nitive biography, thoroughly covering Edward’s legal reforms 
and military campaigns.
Rex, Richard. The Lollards. New York: Palgrave, 2002. An excellent 
introduction to the Lollards and their social and religious context. 
Riley-Smith, Jonathan. The Crusades: A Short History. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1987. A very readable brief account of the crusades by 
a leading crusade historian.
Ross, Charles. Edward IV. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1974. 
Still the best political and institutional study of the reign of Edward IV.

201
———. Richard III. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981. A study 
of Richard that sets him in his own political context and deals briskly with 
modern attempts to rehabilitate his reputation.
Rubin, Miri. The Hollow Crown: A History of Britain in the Late Middle 
Ages. New York: Penguin Books, 2005.
Saaler, Mary. Edward II, 1307–1327. London: The Rubicon Press, 1997. 
A good general biography that focuses on psychological factors that 
undermined Edward’s ability to rule effectively.
Saul, Nigel. Richard II. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997. 
A detailed study with abundant illustrations of the magni¿ cent court of 
Richard II.
Sawyer, Peter. Domesday Book: A Reassessment. Baltimore, MD: E. Arnold, 
1985. An indispensable collection of articles that examine every aspect of 
the Domesday Book.
———. Kings and Vikings: Scandinavia and Europe: AD 700–1100. New 
York: Methuen, 1982. A brief, highly readable introduction to the Vikings.
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. Translated by Bernard O’Donoghue. New 
York: Penguin Classics, 2007. A new verse translation by a noted Irish poet 
and scholar.
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. Rev. ed. Translated by William Vantuono. 
Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1999. Facing page 
translation into modern verse with extensive notes.
Smith, Lacey Baldwin. This Realm of England, 1399–1688, 8th ed. Boston: 
Houghton MifÀ in, 2001. 
Smyth, Alfred P. King Alfred the Great. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1995. Controversial approach to the sources for Alfred’s reign.

202
Bibliography
Snyder, Christopher. The World of King Arthur. New York: Thames & 
Hudson, 2000. A richly illustrated study of the development of the Arthurian 
legends in their literary and historical context.
Stenton, Sir Frank. Anglo-Saxon England. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1989. Still the best narrative account of the Anglo-Saxon period, and 
full of valuable insights about institutional, religious and cultural history
as well.
Thomas, Hugh. The English and the Normans: Ethnic Hostility, Assimilation, 
and Identity 1066–c. 1220. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. A 
detailed study of the encounter between English, Norman, and other ethnic 
groups at the time of the Norman Conquest and after, using both historical 
and literary texts to argue for a complete melding of cultures by the late 
12th century.
Thomas, Hugh M. The Norman Conquest: England after William 
the Conqueror. Lanham, MD.: Rowman & Little¿ eld, 2008. An 
excellent introduction to the historical controversies surrounding the 
Norman Conquest.
Warren, W. L. Henry II. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973. Still 
the best biography of this important king.
———. King John. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1961. A 
very useful biography, well-written and measured in its evaluation of its 
controversial subject.
Watkin, David. English Architecture: A Concise History. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1979. Well-illustrated survey of English architecture from 
the Anglo-Saxon period to the 20th century with a very useful examination of 
the different styles of the English Gothic.
Watt, John Lovett. Henry VI and the Politics of Kingship. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996. Detailed political history of this long and 
complicated reign. 

203
Weir, Alison. Eleanor of Aquitaine: By the Wrath of God, Queen of 
England. London: Jonathan Cape, 1999. A popular biography based on 
thorough research.
———. 
Queen 
Isabella: 
Treachery, 
Adultery, 
and 
Murder 
in 
Medieval England. New York: Ballantine Books, 2005. A popular 
biography unabashedly designed to rehabilitate the reputation of this 
controversial queen.
Ziegler, Philip. The Black Death. New York: Harper Perennial, 1971. A 
venerable study, still worth reading for its extensive treatment of the plague 
in England.

Notes

Notes

Notes

Notes

Notes

