Storythinking
THE NEW SCIENCE OF 
NARRATIVE INTELLIGENCE
Angus Fletcher

Storythinking

NO LIMITS
Edited by Costica Bradatan
The most important questions in life haunt us with a sense of 
boundlessness: there is no one right way to think about them 
or an exclusive place to look for answers. Philosophers and 
prophets, poets and scholars, scientists and artists— all are right 
in their quest for clarity and meaning. We care about these issues 
not simply in themselves but for ourselves— for us. To make 
sense of them is to understand who we are better. No Limits 
brings together creative thinkers who delight in the pleasure 
of intellectual hunting, wherever the hunt may take them and 
whatever critical boundaries they have to trample as they go. And 
in so doing they prove that such searching is not just rewarding 
but also transformative. There are no limits to knowledge and 
 self- knowledge— just as there are none to self- fashioning.
Aimlessness, Tom Lutz
Intervolution: Smart Bodies Smart Things, Mark C. Taylor
Touch: Recovering Our Most Vital Sense, Richard Kearney
Inwardness: An Outsider’s Guide, Jonardon Ganeri
Self- Improvement: Technologies of the Soul in the Age of Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence, Mark Coeckelbergh
Taste: A Book of Small Bites, Jehanne Dubrow

Storythinking
THE NEW SCIENCE OF  
NARRATIVE INTELLIGENCE
Angus Fletcher
Columbia University Press
New York

Columbia University Press
Publishers Since 1893
New York Chichester, West Sussex
cup . columbia . edu
Copyright © 2023 Columbia University Press
All rights reserved
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available from the  
Library of Congress.
ISBN 978-0-231-20692-1 (hardback)
ISBN 978-0-231-20693-8 (trade paperback)
ISBN 978-0-231-55672-9 (ebook)
LCCN 2022050211
Columbia University Press books are printed  
on permanent and durable acid- free paper.
Printed in the United States of America
Cover design: Chang Jae Lee

For Marlowe  
inventor of the moon balloon 
#


Ruminate strange plots.
— SHAKESPEARE


Contents
 1. Story 1
 2. Story and Thinking 17
 3. The Origin of Story 35
 4. Why Our Schools Teach Logic, Not Story 47
 5. The Limits of Logic— or Why We Still Need Storythinking 61
 6. The Brain Machinery of Storythinking 77
 7. Improving Storythinking 99
 8. Storythinking for Personal Growth 111
 9. Storythinking for Social Growth 127
 10. Story’s Answer to the Meaning of Life 143
  Coda: Conversations with a Storythinker 159
Notes 177
Index 183


1
Story
S
tory.
It’s for communicating ideas, not producing them. 
Sure, story is capable of inventing fantastical notions, but 
that’s not real intelligence. Real intelligence is thinking criti-
cally, pushing past plausible anecdotes and beguiling fairy 
tales for true facts and enduring principles.
That’s what I was taught in school. Which is why I was 
also taught that story’s active form was storytelling.
Storytelling is writing or speaking a narrative, like when 
screenwriters type out movie scripts or when physicists 
explain the Big Bang in cartoon strips. Which is to say, it’s 
ﬁction or rhetoric.
Fiction, my teachers warned me, was dangerous. Because 
really, “ﬁction” was another word for lie. And rhetoric was 
worse. It was lies that tried to seem legitimate.
Yet then came a surprise twist: ﬁction and rhetoric could 
also, my teachers revealed, be true instructors. A comic 
book could inspire kindness. A persuasive essay could share 
knowledge.

2
STORY
How was this possible? How could lies advance the 
truth? And why? What caused our brains to learn from 
fables? Was it a mental quirk— or something deeper?
I was mystiﬁed— and hooked. I’d long been entranced 
by the power of stories: The Lord of the Rings, Frankenstein, 
Othello. Making me wonder: Had my favorite books taught 
me right, or wrong?
And beneath this question lay an even more intriguing 
one: What was the secret to truthful storytelling? Find that 
secret, and classrooms could be ﬁlled with enchanting 
textbooks, rescuing students from boredom and confu-
sion. Find that secret, and propaganda could be disman-
tled, ending the reigns of brainwashers and demagogues.
Excited by the prospect, I set out on a hunt for answers. 
After training for four years in the late 1990s in a Michi-
gan neurophysiology laboratory (puzzling over how brain 
cells spoke to one another), I did a PhD in literature at Yale 
(puzzling over how Shakespeare spoke to me), then went 
west to Stanford for a postdoc, where in 2005 I encoun-
tered the ﬁeld of narrative theory.
Narrative theory deployed a mix of literary tools (some 
more than 2,300 years old) to dissect novelistic plots and 
cinematic characters. Fascinated by the resulting insights 
and wanting to glimpse further, I paired narrative theory 
with a few neuroscience techniques I’d learned at the 
Michigan lab. The most spectacular were gadgets for peer-
ing into skulls; the most signiﬁcant was a biology- based 
method: while previous researchers had scoured the sto-
ries of paper libraries and digital archives, I focused instead 
on living authors and audiences, trying to catch narrative’s 
action in the way that a naturalist would net wild butter-
ﬂies. I spent years in Hollywood and in MFA classrooms, 

3
STORY
attempting to pinpoint the elusive physical moment when 
stories sprang to life. I subjected thousands of book read-
ers and theatergoers to weird experiments designed to cap-
ture the alchemical second where narrative fused with 
human consciousness, transforming it.
And as I did all this, I made an unexpected discovery: my 
teachers had taught me story wrong. Story wasn’t just for 
telling. It was for something far more fundamental.
Story was for thinking.
STORYTHINKING
Storythinking hails from a time prior to authors, prior to 
humans, prior to language. It dates back hundreds of mil-
lions of years to the ﬁrst creaky machinery of the animal 
brain. And its initial springs can be traced before even 
that, all the way to the earliest days of evolution by natural 
selection. Which is to say: all the way to the origins of life.
The origins of life were: creative action. Or in scientiﬁc 
lingo: reproducible new functions. That innovative conduct 
enabled the earth’s ﬁrst species to adapt to the Precambrian 
sea. And it also enabled those species to out- adapt each 
other, winning every changing instant of the tide’s dynamic 
web of traps and assets.
More than a billion years ago, creative action became 
the function of whip- tailed prokaryotes, and a little more 
than 500 million years ago, it became the function of neu-
rons. Neurons were, in their initial incarnation, insentient, 
so they didn’t mean to act creatively. But just as natural 
selection had innovated unintentionally, so did neurons 
develop a mechanical procedure for cranking out fresh 

4
STORY
biological activity. The method was to ﬂail experimentally 
and adjust to feedback, trial- and- erroring into beneﬁcial 
new movings and makings. From these primeval begin-
nings, creative action became the function of the verte-
brate nervous system, which (sometimes consciously and 
other times impulsively, improvisationally, spontaneously) 
linked together neurons into novel sequences of hunting, 
dodging, building, singing, loving. Until ﬁnally, a few hun-
dred thousand years ago, creative action became a function 
of the human brain.
The human brain empowered our Stone Age ancestors 
to respond to unpredicted challenges and opportunities by 
linking creative actions into new plans— which is to say, 
new plots. That hatching of plots was narrative cognition. 
Aka, storythinking.
Storythinking is contemplating why and what if. It’s 
conjecturing from causes to eﬀects. It’s envisioning the 
consequences of diﬀerent rules for action. It’s mentally 
modeling hypotheticals, possibles, counterfactuals, and 
other kinds of could happen. It’s using our cerebral machin-
ery to stick original characters into never- before story-
worlds and speculate on what happens next. It’s natural 
selection, imaginatively accelerated.
Thus it was that storythinking became a tool of human 
intelligence. It reﬁned the cruelly ineﬃcient mechanics of 
Darwinian evolution into a motor of purposeful growth, 
helping us plan better futures and the individual steps to 
bring those futures to be. With storythinking, our forerun-
ners dreamed up the republics, renaissances, and rocket 
ships of our today. And with storythinking, we continue on 
the narrative, inventing political revolutions, artistic move-
ments, and technological contraptions— then plotting out 

5
STORY
the actions to hammer fantasy and sci- ﬁ into tomorrow’s 
fresh realities.
How had my teachers not seen this? How had they 
reduced story to communication? How had they not recog-
nized that it could be a mental engine of practical problem 
solving and real- world innovation?
The answer is: my teachers had listened to the philoso-
phers. And the philosophers had convinced my teachers— 
and just about everybody else— that intelligence sprang 
not from story but from logic.
THE LOGIC OF THE PHILOSOPHERS
The philosophers materialized more than ﬁve thousand 
years ago, all across the globe. They appeared in Sumerian 
Mesopotamia, Fifth Dynasty Egypt, Bronze Age India, the 
archaic Mediterranean, Spring and Autumn China, Classi-
cal Mesoamerica, and no doubt many other ancient sites 
whose history has quicksilvered from our annals.
From the beginning, the philosophers argued relent-
lessly. They disputed over where the world came from, 
what it was made of, and why we humans were here. Yet 
they could nevertheless concur on one thing: story wasn’t a 
reliable tool for thinking. It was too idiosyncratic, too arbi-
trary, too fact- independent. So, the philosophers devoted 
themselves to ﬁnding a more rigorous thought instru-
ment. And gradually they came to agree: that instrument 
was logic.
Logic’s workings were discovered in bits and pieces by a 
disparate host of independent reasoners, ranging from 
the semimythical Saptarishi of the Hindu Vedas to the 

6
STORY
semihistorical Seven Sages of preclassical Greece. Until in 
350 BCE, the scattered suppositions of those musing intel-
lects were regularized, integrated, and uniﬁed by the Mace-
donian polymath Aristotle in the Organon.
The Organon consists of six books that lay out the for-
mal rules of induction, deduction, interpretation, and dia-
lectic. Those rules became the foundation of philosophy in 
much of the Roman Empire, West and East; then in most 
of Golden Age Islam; and ﬁnally, from the twelfth to the 
sixteenth century, in every great Western university, from 
Bologna to Paris to Oxford.
This reign of logic was challenged during the European 
Renaissance, when empirically minded natural philosophers 
such as Leonardo da Vinci, Galileo Galilei, and William Har-
vey abandoned (and even attacked) their Aristotelian school-
books for being myopic, sterile, and useless. But logic made 
a comeback during the Enlightenment, thanks to René Des-
cartes’s Cogito, Isaac Newton’s mathematical astronomy, and 
Immanuel Kant’s ultimate Reason. And from that time on, 
logic continued to expand its place in philosophy. In the 
early nineteenth century, it seeded Romanticism after 
Georg Hegel revived Aristotle’s dialectic, birthing Marxism 
and the rest of continental philosophy. In the late nine-
teenth century, it became the basis of analytic philosophy 
when Gottlob Frege enlarged Aristotle’s propositional laws 
into a calculus that could process any argument. In the 
early twentieth century, it was leveraged by philosopher- 
psychologist Charles Spearman into the modern doctrine 
of “general intelligence,” from which we have inherited our 
faith in critical thinking, creative ideation, and standard-
ized testing. And ﬁnally, in the latter decades of the twenti-
eth century, it launched computer AI.

7
STORY
AI is driven by the same syllogisms— AND/NOT/OR— 
that Aristotle established as logic’s immortal laws. Those 
three syllogisms are hardwired into the logic gates of the 
computer brain (the Arithmetic Logic Unit, or ALU). And in 
fact, those syllogisms are the only rules of thought that AI— or 
any computer— ever uses. Which means that the wonders 
of machine learning all follow the blueprint of the Organon. 
Anything that an algorithm can— or will— think is purest 
logic.
This is why my teachers didn’t associate story with think-
ing. They’d been impressed by philosophy’s wide- ranging 
epiphanies, from Vedic India to the linguistic turn. They’d 
learned to measure cleverness as IQ and creativity as 
design. They’d witnessed the future in AI’s electric bril-
liance. And so, they’d come to equate astuteness with logic 
and its intellectual fruits, from mathematics to semiotics to 
computer science; from Euclid’s geometry to C. S. Pierce’s 
theory of signs to Alan Turing’s proof of general comput-
ing; from the political principles of the U.S. Constitution to 
the hermeneutic methods of the modern humanities to the 
innovation protocols of divergent and convergent thinking.
What could be wrong with this version of intellectual 
history? What could my teachers have possibly missed?
WHAT MY TEACHERS MISSED
My teachers weren’t wrong to see logic as thinking. They 
were wrong to see logic as the only kind of thinking. That’s 
because there are at least two ways to think: logic and story. 
Each can solve problems that the other can’t; each can cre-
ate things that the other never will.

8
STORY
This dualism of intelligence can be demonstrated both 
analytically and empirically.
Analytically, story and logic employ diﬀerent epistemo-
logical methods. Logic’s method is equation, or more techni-
cally, correlational reasoning, which inhabits the eternal 
present tense of this equals that. Story’s method is experi-
ment, or more technically, causal speculation, which requires 
the past/present/future of this causes that. Each method has 
its own operational range: logic’s is stable, high- data envi-
ronments; story’s is volatile, low-  (and even no- ) data environ-
ments. And while there’s some overlap between these ranges 
(e.g., chess, Go, and other board games, at which story can 
weakly challenge logic; and corporate HR, institutional health 
care, and other large- scale human systems, at which logic can 
weakly challenge story), most of what one method can do, the 
other can’t. Story cannot calculate timeless truths; logic can-
not generate original actions.
Empirically, story and logic can be traced to diﬀerent 
mechanical operations in the human brain. Which is to say, 
contrary to what many cognitive scientists once believed 
(and quite a few still do), the brain does not operate like a 
computer. It operates partly like a computer, because some 
of its neuroanatomical sectors (e.g., the visual cortex) 
think in representations and other logic functions. But the 
human brain operates largely like a narrative machine, 
because one of its chief evolved purposes (as evidenced by 
the antiquity and centrality of its motor regions) is to cogi-
tate in action, and action requires causal speculation, or in 
other words, storythinking.
This is what my teachers missed. They believed that 
intelligence could be reduced to a single mechanism. And 
once they’d equated that mechanism with logic, the only 

9
STORY
role remaining for story was communication, prompting 
my teachers to conclude that story’s lone job was to trans-
mit logic’s inferences to folk who lacked the acumen to be 
logical themselves.
So conﬁdent were my teachers in this conclusion that 
they overlooked its obvious hitch: story could only commu-
nicate if the brain cogitated naturally in story. Otherwise, 
story wouldn’t plug with such ease into our gray matter’s 
cranks and pistons. What my teachers had seen as dumb-
ing down was actually story meshing with a main operat-
ing system of human intelligence, a system that has helped 
plot the creative workings of everything from pottery to ﬂy-
ing machines, democracy to trade networks, agriculture to 
antibiotics, scripture to everyday ethics.
Narrative’s leading role in human ingenuity doesn’t 
mean that story is the best way to be smart. Our brain 
evolved blindly, as did everything biological, so there’s no 
enlightened design behind our psychology. Like our epi-
glottis and our lumbar spine, it’s a haphazard mix of luck 
and legacy, and in the speciﬁc case of story, its limits have 
been exposed not just by the advent of computers (which 
can marshal their logic gates to identify patterns, run algo-
rithms, and perform other operations impossible for our 
brain’s narrative networks) but also by our own neuro-
anatomy (which has itself developed a few computational 
zones, capable of math tasks that story can’t accomplish).
Yet narrative’s leading role does mean that my teachers’ 
logic- based curriculum is shortsighted, for two reasons.
First, by devaluing a major way that we naturally think, 
it has had deeply negative social consequences. It has insti-
tutionalized schoolwork (like the Common Core) that 
befuddles, shames, and demoralizes students by ruthlessly 

10
STORY
assessing human brains on tasks— memorization, critical 
thinking, quantitative reasoning— that are better per-
formed by smartphones and laptops. And it has bred 
excessive enthusiasm for metrics and data, injecting deper-
sonalization, brittleness, and burnout into our economies, 
governments, and health care systems.
Second, it overlooks our brain’s natural history. That 
history is riddled with mystery, but even so, we know that 
our brain’s logical circuitry isn’t a recent breakthrough 
that obsolesced story’s antiquated mental technology. Far 
from it: our brain’s logical circuitry is itself incredibly 
ancient, originating more than 500 million years ago in the 
eye networks of Paleozoic sea swimmers. Logic has thus 
had plenty of time to make its mark upon the evolution of 
intelligence; had it outperformed story over the long haul, it 
would predominate in our head rather than coexisting with 
storythinking.
These basic facts suggest that smart classrooms, busi-
nesses, and cities require more than data- driven decision 
making, design, and optimization. And they also spur some 
rebel questions: What if the philosophers had valued story as 
highly as logic? Would we have middle schools of creative 
action and PhDs in narrative cognition? Would we have Sili-
con Valley startups building plot technologies to handle the 
jobs that ﬂummox computer AI? Would we have more litera-
ture and ﬂying machines and democracy and antibiotics?
What problems could we solve— and what innovations 
could we achieve— if we were better at thinking in story?

11
STORY
GETTING BETTER AT THINKING IN STORY
This book’s ambition is to do for storythinking what Aris-
totle’s Organon did for logic: provide a philosophical intro-
duction to improving our brain’s inborn ability.
This book’s ambition, in other words, is to be useful. It 
won’t pretend to diagram story’s ﬁnal truth; truth requires 
logic’s unvarying rules and mathematical landscapes, and 
story is too supple and provisional for that. It’s restricted to 
good- enough answers to real- world problems. It’s an out-
cast from absolute theory into provisional pragmatism.
Such pragmatism has not, on the whole, proved attrac-
tive to philosophers. Even when philosophers attend to 
praxis (as Aristotle did with rhetoric and William James did 
later with epistemology), they have a habit, as a wag once 
wryly observed, of abstracting practice into the theory of 
practice. Yet as intellectually shallow as practicality often 
feels to the philosophically inclined, it can be a deeply valu-
able enterprise. Until our lives become a logical utopia— a 
utopia that, as we’ll see in later chapters, is neither possible 
nor desirable for biological organisms— the mundanities 
of problem solving and applied innovation will remain the 
motors of our corporeal survival and mental ﬂourishing.
By improving our storythinking, we can thus make our 
earthly lives hardier, healthier, and happier. Or to invest 
that humble project with a loftier tone: By improving the 
practice of narrative cognition, we can advance philosophy’s 
original purpose of gaining the good life. (With “good” under-
stood as “best possible, here and now,” and “life” understood 
as “biological existence, from birth through growth.”)
Because of this practical aim, the book you hold is 
empirical, exploratory, and provisional. Which is to say: it’s 

12
STORY
not ideal, sacred, or immutable. So, nothing you read here 
will last. It will all be outmoded by future storythinkers, of 
which one will hopefully be you.
To aid you in that happy task of obsolescence, the fol-
lowing chapters will work to sharpen and extend your 
innate storythinking skills. The skills are many, but to get 
the journey under way, the big three are:
(1) Prioritizing the exceptional. This is focusing on what’s 
unique, special, and distinct about a person or place (or in 
narrative jargon, an actor or physical environment). It’s resist-
ing the temptation to abstract individuals into universal 
archetypes. It’s thinking the opposite way from AI, which 
treats outlying data points as blips, aberrations, noise to be 
regressed to a statistical mean. It’s instead ﬁxating on events 
that break the pattern of history— and speculating: What 
radically new future could they portend? And it’s continuing to 
speculate again and again, like a library of science ﬁction 
novels that unfold diﬀerent tomorrows, each of which is 
surprising in the moment but possible in retrospect.
(2) Perspective shifting. This is imagining what you’d do if 
you were someone else, like when you see through a charac-
ter’s eyes in a ﬁlm or a novel. It comes from identifying a 
root cause of another person’s behavior and internalizing 
that why as your own. Such internalization of outside motives 
can carry you only so far: it’s impossible for your brain to lit-
erally become another. Yet it’s nonetheless possible to hoist 
yourself far enough out of your biases, hopes, and fears to 
productively expand your neural range of action.
(3) Stoking narrative conﬂict. This is encouraging a bat-
tle in your head (or in your larger social unit) between two 
asymmetric physical causes, like when a novelist pits 

13
STORY
characters against one another, generating plot. It’s diﬀer-
ent from a conﬂict between ideas, arguments, theories, and 
other logical stuﬀ, because instead of generating dialectic 
syntheses and resolutions, it creates original actions. And 
the only way to ﬁnd out what those actions can do is to test 
them simultaneously, comparing their eﬀects.
These three skills tighten the core mechanism of evolu-
tion by natural selection, increasing its creative yield. And 
all three are performed naturally by your brain. Your brain 
is wired to notice environmental irregularities (hence, 
your primal twinges of paranoia); your brain has potent 
perspective- shifting networks that evolved to see the world 
from diﬀerent strategic vantages; and your brain is a dem-
ocratic conglomerate of individual neurons ﬁring at their 
own semiautonomous frequencies, generating the con-
stant inner struggles of your storythought.
And just as these mental processes have grown natural 
selection’s root capacity for problem solving and innova-
tion, so too can they themselves be grown.
Through art. And through science.
GROWING STORYTHINKING WITH ART  
AND SCIENCE
Historically, our species has grown storythinking via narra-
tive artworks (myths, plays, novels, ﬁlms) that deploy their 
own versions of the big three above, tweaking our minds 
with singular happenings, drawing us into other psycho-
logical motives, and crashing together diﬀerent- acting 
characters. These three ways of nurturing storythinking 

14
STORY
can be found throughout global libraries, but as a ready 
illustration, there’s English literature’s most celebrated 
story: Hamlet.
(1) Hamlet prioritizes the exceptional. Hamlet focuses 
our gaze on weird events: bizarre hauntings and unnatural 
portents; ear poisonings and stairwell burials; revenge 
machinations so atypical as to seem insane. And it pulls 
us into the thoughts of a title character who is similarly 
obsessed with the importance of the unusual: As a stranger, 
give it welcome . . .  Why seems it so particular to thee? Nay, 
madam, I know not seems . . .  
(2) Hamlet perspective shifts. Hamlet thrusts us into a 
litany of alternate psychologies, using innovative tech-
niques such as Hamlet’s soliloquies and Ophelia’s half- 
sense songs to prompt our brain to inhabit the purposes of 
diﬀerent thinkers.
(3) Hamlet stokes narrative conﬂict. Hamlet relentlessly 
collides causal agents, or to use their literary name, dra-
matic characters: Hamlet against his mother, Hamlet 
against Polonius, Hamlet against Claudius, Hamlet against 
Ophelia, Hamlet against Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, 
Hamlet against Laertes. And also, Hamlet against himself: 
To be or not to be . . .  
This three- part recipe is, to borrow the play’s own phras-
ing, “madness . . .  [with] method in it.” It’s the uncertain, 
unstable, and unpredictable process of imagination rigo-
rized. It’s the neural nuts and bolts of how Shakespeare’s 
theater has sparked so many audience members— from 
Van Gogh to Albert Camus to Maya Angelou— to hatch 
their own artistic and philosophical creations.

15
STORY
The identical recipe can be found in modern science. To 
take three quick examples: Charles Darwin’s theory of nat-
ural selection, Marie Curie’s theory of radioactivity, and 
Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity span biology, chemis-
try, and physics, but they were born of a shared scientiﬁc 
method that hinges on storythinking’s big three:
(1) Science prioritizes the exceptional. Science empha-
sizes occurrences that don’t ﬁt established models of 
nature. Darwin was transﬁxed by the eccentric local beaks 
of Galapagos ﬁnches, Curie by a weird element whose 
action violated the indivisibility of atoms, and Einstein by 
the unique properties of light.
(2) Science perspective shifts. Science steps into the per-
spective of natural causes, treating them as actors whose 
actions can be narrated. Darwin imagined natural selec-
tion as a story of too many siblings, Curie imagined molec-
ular reactions as fairy tales, and Einstein imagined himself 
in footraces with sunbeams.
(3) Science stokes narrative conﬂict. Science pits its 
hypotheses against one another, honing them into diver-
gent predictions. Because those predictions are narrative, 
they cannot be arbitrated via logic, only via carefully plot-
ted experiments, like the 1865 pea cross- pollinations with 
which Gregor Mendel (accidentally) aﬃrmed Darwin, the 
1911 gold- foil bombardment with which Thomas Ruther-
ford aﬃrmed Curie, and the 1919 solar eclipse photograph 
with which Arthur Eddington aﬃrmed Einstein.
Modern science is, in short, Hamlet’s laboratory part-
ner. And it’s no coincidence that Darwin, Curie, and Ein-
stein all knew Shakespeare’s play: Darwin absorbed it as a 

16
STORY
youthful escape from dreary schoolwork; Curie via the 
poetry of Polish Romantic Adam Mickiewicz; and Einstein 
through the theater of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.
To improve your storythinking, this book will draw 
upon the same threefold storythinking recipe as narrative 
art and modern science. Like a biological researcher, it will 
leap from rogue facts into fresh hypotheses, imagine back-
ward from observed eﬀects to hidden causes, and advance 
conﬂicting predictions that can only be resolved via ran-
domized controlled trials. And like a theatrical scriptwriter, 
it will explore storythinking’s past, present, and future 
through unique characters and their idiosyncratic life nar-
ratives. Those narratives will enrich what we’ve covered in 
this short introduction by adding new perspectives, twists, 
and collisions, but their goal is to go beyond communicating 
knowledge into stimulating original thinking. By immersing 
you in story’s creative processes, they aim to deepen your 
neural know- how of narrative, like a dance class that deepens 
a doctor’s understanding of anatomy by helping the body act 
more widely, inventively, and adaptively.
Which is to say, the following narratives won’t be stories 
as my teachers understood them. They won’t be rhetorical 
instruments for implanting deductive typologies, induc-
tive deﬁnitions, and interpretive formulas. Instead, they 
will be tools for cogitating in ways that logic can’t. Empow-
ering your brain to strategize in chaos, evolve in doubt, 
and thrive in life, they will oﬀer methods for the mad.

2
Story and Thinking
A
t the dawn of Western philosophy, story was severed 
from thinking.
The severance occurred outside of Athens in 335 BCE, 
just east of the city’s limestone walls. There, at a new- built 
library tucked beside a wolf- prowled hill, a wizened poly-
math unfurled a long papyrus scroll. The polymath was 
Aristotle, a Macedonian immigrant who’d spent the past 
decade rambling the Mediterranean, studying Egyptian 
medicine and Asian ﬂowers. And the long scroll was The 
Republic. Composed forty years prior by Aristotle’s now- dead 
teacher, Plato, it chronicled the eﬀorts of Plato’s own mentor, 
Socrates, to map an ideal government, governed by reason.
To achieve that reason, The Republic expelled poetry— 
and with it, story. Story was a euphemism for ﬁction, which 
was itself a euphemism for fabrications, deceits, and lies. 
And if that wasn’t bad enough, story’s dramatic fables 
churned up unreason’s dark enchantment: emotion. To 
expunge untruths, feelings, and story’s other mental dregs, 
the republic’s enlightened citizenry therefore outlawed 

18
STORY AND THINKING
poets and their myths. In the utopia, there would be math-
ematics and there would be music. But there would be no 
narrative.
As Aristotle mulled this political blueprint in the ﬂicker 
of a seed- oil lamp, he frowned. No narrative? But wasn’t 
The Republic itself a story? And weren’t Plato’s other writ-
ings stocked with literary plots, like the tale of Atlantis and 
the fable of Timaeus? So surely, story wasn’t philosophy’s 
enemy. It was instead a humble ally, the easy teacher to 
philosophy’s hard genius. What philosophy reached high 
into truth’s empyrean to pluck, narrative bent low to hand 
to common understanding.
Pleased with this conclusion, Aristotle inked two scrolls 
of his own: Poetics and Rhetoric. In the ﬁrst, he anatomized 
how narrative could generate emotion; in the second, how 
emotion could sway audiences onto the path of reason.
With that pair of insights, Aristotle meant to redeem 
narrative. But instead, he completed Plato’s cutting stroke. 
From then on, story would be placed by both its detractors 
and its advocates in the ﬁeld of learning known as rhetoric, 
a ﬁeld sometimes treated as antithetical to philosophy and 
other times as complementary, but in either case distinct. 
The philosopher used reason to think, while the rhetori-
cian used story to communicate.
During the twenty- three centuries since Aristotle, this 
split between story and thinking has remained characteris-
tic of Western culture, becoming foundational to twenty- 
ﬁrst- century law, politics, economics, business, computer 
science, K– 12 education, and even narrative’s academic 
bulwark: literary studies. So deep and omnipresent is the 
divide that it now seems entirely natural.

19
STORY AND THINKING
But it is not, as we can see by spinning back time’s gears 
to discover how, long before Plato’s republic, philosophy’s 
own origin was story.
PHILOSOPHY’S ORIGIN
It was ﬁve millennia ago on the silt marshlands of Sumer. 
Inside the great library at Nippur, where mud- brick gates 
stood high against the chariot lords, the master taught his 
students.
He taught how Summer took credit for the June har-
vest. And how Winter protested, insisting that the harvest 
soil was fed by January waters. And how the Lord Creator 
took Winter’s side, rebuking Summer’s arrogance.
Thus did philosophy begin. Or perhaps not. Perhaps the 
beginning was elsewhere. Perhaps in Egypt’s Twelfth 
Dynasty, when a scribe claiming to be the reincarnate 
Ptahhotep handed down the higher prudence: Do not bully 
the weak— lest the strong bully you.
Or perhaps philosophy began in the monsoon foothills 
of the Himalayas, where the water- drinking Yajnavalkya 
and his deep- thinking wife mused in the Brihadaranyaka 
Upanishad that the cosmos had been horse- born from 
hunger’s nothingness— and that to know this was to gain 
wealth, might, and bliss.
Or perhaps in biblical Judah, when dream- seeing King 
Solomon soared upon his mechanical throne to dictate in 
Proverbs how everlasting God had separated the ﬁrma-
ment with a thoughtful radiance that guided humankind 
to leave the crooked road and ﬁnd the Tree of Life.

20
STORY AND THINKING
Or perhaps in the paper- roomed Zhou dynasty colleges 
that Confucius honored in Analects for discovering that ren 
was cultivated by “not doing to others what you would not 
want done to you.”
Or perhaps in the Mayan metropolis of Tulan, amid 
waterfalls and pine, where royal artisans dabbed the Popol 
Vuh on lime- coated strips of deerskin, telling how Sky-
Heart implanted Maize men with purposeful eyes.
Or perhaps none of these was the true beginning of phi-
losophia. (A Greek term that was unknown to the thinkers 
above, coined as it was on a faraway Italian shore by the 
equally faraway psyche of the numerological vegetarian 
Pythagoras.) Perhaps the beginning was more ancient, 
indeed, so ancient that it came before any Homo sapiens— 
that synonym for “wise man” with which we self- 
importantly celebrate our species. Perhaps the beginning 
happened in a Neanderthal, Homo erectus, or other intro-
spective animal, occurring as an unrecorded mental jump 
that predated human language and its scanty written 
remnants.
Yet even if the sayings of Confucius, Solomon, Ptahho-
tep, Yajnavalkya, the royal Mayans, and the Nippur master 
are more early chapters than true genesis, they neverthe-
less provide a glimpse of philosophy’s ﬁrst pages. And in 
those pages, we see: philosophy was not born ex nihilo by 
logic’s pure light. Its vast library started as annotations in 
the margins of another kind of intellectual work: wisdom 
literature.
Wisdom literature’s own earliest days are draped in 
myth and hearsay, for although wisdom literature came, 
like philosophy, to be associated with writing’s eternal 

21
STORY AND THINKING
symbols, it was hatched over time by an organic process of 
oral creation that bore less resemblance to a deliberate 
sequence of rational choices than to a sprawling garden of 
vegetable exploration.
This literary garden sprouted (as far as we can tell) from 
the scattered seeds of many cultures, stretching from the 
beast fables of archaic Africa and Vedic India to the Near 
Eastern legends of Genesis and the Book of Job to the other-
worldly songs of Amazon prophets and Aborigine Dream-
timers. And what held its branching multiplicity together 
was not a deﬁnable metaphysical essence but a pair of phys-
ical processes:
1. A focus on answering the question: “How should I 
live my life?”
This question is the source of the vast philosophical 
ﬁeld now known as ethics, and its own source is the brute 
biological hunger for less pain and more pleasure. That 
hunger ﬂashed through our animal brain in primordial 
days, shaping our appetites and yielding the proto- scientiﬁc 
method of trial and error that enabled prehuman homi-
nids to fashion the implements of hunting, ﬁre, and shel-
ter, and our more recent ancestors to craft the tools of agri-
culture, law, and art.
2. A method rich in narrative.
Narrative is actors performing actions. Or in literary ter-
minology, it’s characters engaged in plots. Those characters 
and their plots, like the foundational question of ethics, 
derive ultimately from our biology, which has evolved to 
prioritize other humans because they, more than any 
other environmental factor, determine our worldly success. 

22
STORY AND THINKING
We need other humans to solve problems and pass on our 
genes, and we compete with them over life- sustaining 
resources, making them not just our friends and lovers but 
also our rivals and adversaries.
Thus it is that our brain has evolved to function in a 
human landscape. And thus it is that our brain often nar-
rates that landscape onto the actual geography outside. 
The sun, the weather, the wheat ﬁelds— all are frequently 
invested by our brain with human motives that manifest in 
plotted actions: storms reveal their anger through thunder-
claps and the wheat ﬁelds their creativity through sprouted 
stalks.
Both features of wisdom literature mark philosophy’s 
earliest works, as we can see by returning to the great 
library at Nippur and examining the Sumerian tale of 
Summer and Winter:
The tale’s focus is practical ethics. By stressing the 
importance of irrigating the soil many months before har-
vest, it raises awareness of the beneﬁts of foresight, prepa-
ration, and patient labor.
The tale’s method is heavily narrative. The seasons are 
anthropomorphized, and their behaviors throw them into 
conﬂict, plot’s core engine, driving the story forward.
Yet even though the Sumerian tale is wisdom literature, it’s 
not only wisdom literature. Already, 5,000 years ago, the 
focus and the method had begun to undergo a shift that 
marks the inception of what we now hail as professional 
philosophy.

23
STORY AND THINKING
THE RISE OF PROFESSIONAL PHILOSOPHY
Professional philosophy is almost as capacious a category 
as wisdom literature.
It stretches from the Socratic instructors of Plato’s 
Academy to the Islamic academics of the Abbasid Golden 
Age to the theology faculty of medieval European universi-
ties to the metaethics professors of modern higher ed. It 
doesn’t require that philosophers have any speciﬁc train-
ing or institutional position, but it does require that phi-
losophers exist in enough numbers at any given location 
to prompt competition over status, students, and tuition. 
That competition drives philosophers in two related direc-
tions. The ﬁrst is to seek intellectual foundations that can 
be inured from the attacks of their professional competi-
tors. The second is to develop ways of attacking those com-
petitors back.
The ﬁrst direction has driven a shift in focus from ethics 
to metaphysics:
Metaphysics is the search for ﬁrst principles. It’s the hunt 
for the ultimate cause, the fundamental reason. It is, in 
other words, an attempt to mount philosophy on the 
unshakable pedestal known as truth.
Truth is ontologically distinct from action. Action is a 
going, a growing, or some other doing that changes over 
time. In the language of philosophy, it’s a becoming. Truth, 
in contrast, is being. And being is perpetual. It exists for-
ever in the present tense, everlastingly untimed.
Such being is achieved in the Sumerian tale’s ﬁnal 
moments, where the Lord Creator judges Winter to be 

24
STORY AND THINKING
superior to Summer. This superiority isn’t temporary, to be 
undone if Summer wises up or Winter stumbles. It’s eter-
nal and absolute, a metaphysical law. It declares that Win-
ter will forever be worshiped over Summer and insists 
that, even though Summer once usurped Winter, the usur-
pation was false. The reality, even then, was that Winter 
was king.
The second direction of professional philosophy has 
driven a shift of method from narrative to argument:
Argument replaces action with equation, identity, inter-
pretation, and other logic- based protocols for relating one 
state of being to another. And because being exists in the 
eternal present tense, so does argument. Argument states 
that X is Y, or that X is NOT Y. It doesn’t state that X leads 
to Y, because such temporal processes are excluded from 
the eternal.
With this eschewal of change, argument deletes narra-
tive’s core function: connecting beginnings to endings, or in 
other words, describing how speciﬁc causes yield speciﬁc 
eﬀects. In the timeless zone of argument, a cause cannot 
produce an eﬀect, nor can an eﬀect come from a cause. 
Instead, every cause is its eﬀect and every eﬀect is its cause: 
whenever X is present, so is Y. Truth is beauty and beauty 
truth. Law is justice and justice law.
The result of argument’s past- future deletion is to make 
power symbolic, converting wisdom literature’s gods from 
earthly sources of food, warmth, or light into timeless 
beings who assert their absolute rightness. Such is the 
conversion that takes place during the Sumerian tale. The 
tale begins with the god An planning the day and the god 

25
STORY AND THINKING
Enlil copulating with a mountain to engender Winter and 
Summer (who themselves proceed to birth lambs, butter, 
honey, and onions). But following these creative actions, 
the tale switches into timeless arguments. Summer taunts 
Winter: “Your time is chilly, and my time is abundant.” To 
which Winter rejoins: “My time is strong, and your time is 
ﬁlled with clothes- eating moths.” The tale then ends with 
the Lord Creator declaring, “Winter is the ruler of life- 
giving waters.” Which the tale then carves into stone by 
pronouncing: “This verdict is unchangeable.”
After the Sumerian tale, in the works of Confucius, Sol-
omon, Ptahhotep, Yajnavalkya, and the Mayans, this pivot 
out of ethics and narrative continued. And as in the Sume-
rian tale, its result was to invest professional philosophy 
with more metaphysics— and more argument.
MORE METAPHYSICS, MORE ARGUMENT
In the works of Confucius, Solomon, and other early phi-
losophers, metaphysics doesn’t simply become the foun-
dation of ethics. It becomes the whole of ethics, from bot-
tom to top.
This transition wasn’t driven by a collective program of 
reform; Confucius, Solomon, and the Mayans had no 
knowledge of one another. But it was driven by an indepen-
dently shared priority: the seeking of truth. Truth was 
adopted by philosophers across the ancient world as their 
common aspiration, an aspiration that, as the philoso-
phers came to recognize, was postponed during, and even 
disrupted by, the physical pressures of ordinary existence. 

26
STORY AND THINKING
Who has time to ponder the world’s deep reasons when 
crops must be planted, watered, and protected from 
insects? Who hasn’t been tempted away from principled 
pursuits by the material lures of ﬁnancial proﬁt and social 
advancement?
To create a more capacious and less corruptible space 
for intellectual questing, the philosophers therefore urged 
their students to withdraw as much as possible from the 
jumble and claw of daily survival. Where ethics had served 
initially as a way of improving the physical health and hap-
piness of farmers and merchants, it thus morphed in early 
ﬁrst- millennia- BCE philosophy into an aggrandizement of 
reclusive sages. Which is why the ultimate lesson of Con-
fucius is: Be Confucius. And the ultimate lesson of Solo-
mon is: Do like me; forget the body’s passing troubles to stretch 
your soul toward eternity.
This trend accelerated with the rise of professional phi-
losophy and, indeed, was a major reason for the coining 
and propagation of the term “philosopher.” The term 
means a lover of truth, so when Pythagoras styled himself 
as such, he implicitly claimed verity as his life pursuit. 
This equation of ethics with truth seeking was then ren-
dered explicit by Plato, Aristotle, and the many ancient and 
medieval philosophers (from Plotinus and the Neopla-
tonists to Ibn Sina and the Islamic Kalāmists to Thomas 
Aquinas and the European scholastics) who deﬁned the 
good life as knowing the ultimate facts of Justice and 
Nature. And its ethos of verity for its own sake remains 
pervasive in Enlightenment, Romantic, and modern philos-
ophy, leading thinkers as divergent as Descartes, Kant, Hegel, 
Friedrich Nietzsche, and Martin Heidegger to agree: the 

27
STORY AND THINKING
highest state of human existence is one spent grappling 
with the problems of metaphysics.
At the same time that philosophers were transmuting 
ethics into metaphysics, they were also converting narrative 
into argument. This conversion can be felt in the allegorical 
quality of early philosophy, where behaviors (such as kind-
ness) are distilled by Ptahhotep into the truth of Maat (eter-
nal heart) and characters (such as the Underworld twins 
Hunahpu and Xbalanque) are abstracted by Mayan priests 
into abiding binaries (sun/moon, day/night, light/dark). 
And the trend accelerated further as philosophy profession-
alized, as we can see from one of the profession’s earliest 
and most inﬂuential works: Topics.
Topics was authored in roughly 350 BCE by Aristotle as 
the ﬁfth book of his Organon. Over the previous four books, 
Aristotle had laid down the rules of induction, deduction, 
and interpretation, establishing the calculus that would 
power Catholic theology, Enlightenment science, analytic 
philosophy, literary semiotics, and digital AI (see chapter 5). 
Now, in Topics, he enriched logic with a tool— dialectic— 
that would form the foundation of medieval quaestiones, 
Renaissance rhetoric, Hegelian reasoning, Marxism, and 
modern continental philosophy (see chapter 8).
Dialectic’s own basis was Socrates, a stoneworker’s son 
born in 470 BCE Athens, who used his inheritance to estab-
lish himself as teacher of young men. One of those young 
men was Aristotle’s teacher, Plato. And after Socrates was 
executed— really, murdered— in 399 BCE by an Athenian 
jury, Plato decided to strike back for justice by writing a series 
of documentary scripts, known as the Dialogues, that pre-
served Socrates’s unconventional approach to truth discovery.

28
STORY AND THINKING
That approach was to act like a chatty gadﬂy: after strik-
ing up a conversation with a possessor of strong opinions, 
Socrates would proceed to query, challenge, and spoof 
those opinions, precipitating a verbal back- and- forth that 
midwifed more solidly rational claims.
Impressed by this technique for reﬁning opinion into 
reason, Aristotle set out, a half- century after Socrates’s 
death, to distill it into a formal argumentative procedure. 
He set out, in other words, to convert literary dialogue into 
logical dialectic. To eﬀect this conversion, Aristotle 
 carefully divested the Socratic Dialogues of their narrative 
components. The character of Socrates was removed, as 
was the plot of him talking with Meno, Ion, Gorgias, and 
other semiﬁctionalized actors, until all that remained was 
the truth- computing protocol of thesis- antithesis- synthesis.
With this purge of narrative, Topics completed the reduc-
tion of wisdom literature into professional philosophy: a 
character whose actions modeled a distinctive way of behav-
ing was converted into argumentative propositions that 
yielded algorithmic outputs. Those outputs, Aristotle was 
certain, achieved greater rigor than Socrates’s narrative 
chatter, and at no intellectual cost. By replacing story with 
syllogism, they discarded only rhetorical frippery. Every-
thing of intellectual substance was maintained; none of 
the thought- machinery was lost.
Yet was this really so? Did Topics sacriﬁce nothing by 
deleting the nonrational parts of Socrates’s psychology? 
Did it preserve his intelligence entirely intact?
No, it did not. As we can see by expanding our historical 
lens beyond Topics, Aristotle’s dialogue- to- dialectic conver-
sion deletes a big part of how Socrates’s mind works.

29
STORY AND THINKING
HOW SOCRATES’S MIND WORKS
During late antiquity, Socrates’s most legendary bit of wis-
dom was: “I know that I know nothing.”
When, where, and even whether these precise words 
were spoken is unknown: their ﬁrst record appears in a 
biography inked by Diogenes Laertius some six hundred 
years after an Athenian jury sentenced Socrates to death by 
suicide. But even if the utterance is not literally true, it cap-
tures a core element of the Socratic Dialogues. That ele-
ment is: the plot twist.
Within any given Dialogue, the twist is prepared when 
we’re introduced to a merchant, entertainer, politician, or 
other successful man- about- Athens. Such men, as evi-
denced by their worldly achievements, are smart— at least 
in a practical sense. They know how to make money, woo 
hearts, and win audiences, so naturally, we ﬁnd some (per-
haps even a lot) of what they say persuasive. It rings true to 
lived experience; it matches prudent common sense. At 
which point, it’s obliterated. In the plot twist’s culmina-
tion, Socrates reveals, patiently but irresistibly, that the 
apparent wisdom of his interlocutors lacks substance, 
pitching us, the shared thinkers of that insubstantial 
thought, into the stunned epiphany: I know less than I 
thought. And even: I’m not sure that I know anything. Or in 
other words: Maybe all I know is that I know nothing.
This epiphany is self- irony. It’s us mentally exiting our 
perspective to look wryly at ourselves from without. Which 
is to say: it’s a psychological action. It’s our prefrontal cor-
tex pointing a perspective- shifting neural network at the 
rest of our brain.

30
STORY AND THINKING
Because self- irony is an action, it can be processed 
seamlessly by narrative. Narrative is itself built of action, 
so a character in a Socratic Dialogue (or any other story) 
can state, “I know that I know nothing,” and the plot con-
tinues running smoothly. A glitch occurs, however, when 
we try to convert that plot— as Aristotle does in Topics— 
into a logical proposition. The propositional form of I know 
that I know nothing is: I KNOW = I KNOW NOTHING, or 
in other words, X = NOT X. Which is to say, it’s a contradic-
tion, a paradox, an incomputable proposition.
Such propositions have a home in mysticism as gate-
ways to God’s via negativa and other truths beyond rational 
comprehension. But they must be excluded from formal 
logic in the way that dividing by zero must be excluded 
from algebra, for to admit them would be to haywire the 
system. Thus it is that Aristotle makes the law of noncon-
tradiction a ﬁrst principle— indeed, the ﬁrst principle— of 
metaphysics. And thus it is that in Topics, Aristotle deletes 
Socrates’s self- irony.
This deletion takes with it a signiﬁcant chunk of 
Socrates’s psyche. How signiﬁcant? Well, even if self- irony 
isn’t the essence of Socrates’s cerebral activity, it’s a major 
source of his intelligence. It allows him to interrogate his 
own assumptions, escaping the lazy sophistries that clog 
less introspective intellects.
And Aristotle’s deletion doesn’t just eliminate part of 
Socrates’s intelligence. It also eliminates a path for us to 
develop such intelligence ourselves. That path is the Dia-
logue’s literary plot, which we walk along in our imagination, 
encountering Socrates as a story character who prompts us 
to dramatize the mental action: I know that I know nothing. 
(Or to be more technical: encountering Socrates as a causal 

31
STORY AND THINKING
agent who activates perspective- taking networks in our neo-
cortex, stimulating us to act simultaneously as narrative and 
narrator.)
This process lets us role- play a long- gone philosopher. It 
helps us grasp his self- ironic cleverness. It allows us to exit 
our thoughts and test them from an outside vantage.
And that’s just the start of the psychological work we 
can accomplish by walking back Aristotle’s logical erasure 
of plot and character. For by reactivating our neural power 
to cogitate in narrative, we can go beyond thinking 
Socratic— and think with many minds.
THINKING WITH MANY MINDS
Socrates wasn’t the ﬁrst Socratic thinker.
Who was ﬁrst? We can’t know for sure. But we do know 
that self- irony goes back at least two thousand years before 
classical Athens, all the way to the Sumerian tale of Winter 
and Summer. At the tale’s end, after Winter ﬁnishes speak-
ing, Summer experiences a reﬂexive moment: “Summer 
thought through it all and calmed down.” Here a pre- 
Socratic character does a Socrates, modeling the use of per-
spective shifting to examine his own behavior.
And this isn’t the only time that the Sumerian tale 
encourages us to cogitate with another perspective. The 
tale repeatedly invites us into the thoughts of Summer and 
Winter: “I groom the plowed ﬁelds . . .  I gloss fabrics with 
oils . . .  I sweeten drink with cold water.” These ﬁrst- person 
mental actions aren’t the rational introspections of a Greek 
philosopher, yet they are, no less than self- irony, occasions 
of narrative perspective shifting. Just like Socrates’s I know 

32
STORY AND THINKING
that I know nothing, they activate neocortical networks in 
our head, nudging us to simulate how the minds of story 
characters might act. That mental simulation can then be 
continued by our brain after the tale is ﬁnished, sparking 
real- world thought experiments: What if I acted like Winter 
here— or like Summer there?
Such experiments are hardly rigorous. Winter and Sum-
mer are ﬁctional entities without actual psychologies, and 
even if they did happen to have living brains, we couldn’t 
enter those brains by reading a story. A narrative can do a 
great deal to our neurons, but it can’t convert them into 
someone else’s. No matter how richly or accurately a story 
depicts another person’s thought, the thought is still ﬂash-
ing through our head, which remains forever conditioned 
by our own subjective memories, traits, and biases. When 
we imagine ourselves to be acting like Winter and Summer, 
that’s thus exactly what we’re doing: imagining. There’s 
no irrefutable basis for knowing whether the actions we 
conjure to mind are the ones that the story characters 
would take.
Far from invalidating our Winter- Summer thought 
experiments, however, this imaginary quality is the special 
opportunity they oﬀer. Returning us to the root meaning 
of experiment— a test of a novel action— it escorts us out of 
logic’s deducible truths into a lab space where we can adopt 
the role of original actors (or to be technical, original 
causes) to hypothesize on what might work in practice. 
Since the biological purpose of this activity is to grow our 
psychological range of motion, it doesn’t matter whether 
our attempted actions fall within the narrative domain 
intended by Winter and Summer’s Sumerian author. In 
fact, on a populational level, it’s better if we each arrive at 

33
STORY AND THINKING
slightly diﬀerent imaginations of what the two characters 
would do. Such diﬀerentiation broadens our collective 
gamut of mental activity, so that rather than functioning 
like computers who all reiteratively output the same logical 
result, our brains follow natural selection in organically 
branching life’s possible actions.
This nonlogical thought process of trial- and- erroring 
actors and outcomes is narrative cognition. Which is to 
say: it’s storythinking. It’s what Aristotle missed by reduc-
ing character to communication and thinking to logic. It’s 
an intellectual element of wisdom literature that cannot be 
reduced to dialectic, syllogistic NOTs and other logical 
equations. It’s an invitation to use imaginative plotting to 
experimentally expand our brain’s breadth of behaviors.
That expansion may add nothing to metaphysics; we 
may get no closer to the world’s ultimate truth by conjec-
turing the possible actions of Mesopotamian seasons. But 
such thinking can do something of earthly value: grow our 
catalogue of daily doings. Or in academic speak: it can con-
tribute to ethics, reconnecting us to the original biological 
function of the wisdom works that preceded the Sumerian 
tale and the rise of the professional philosophers.
There’s a chance that Aristotle himself realized this. 
Fifteen years after Topics, he authored Poetics. And in its 
knotted paragraphs, he acknowledged narrative’s irreduc-
ibility to formal logic, perhaps revealing that, as he sat 
beneath the wolf- prowled hill, he had second thoughts 
about deleting Socrates from Socratic thinking.
If Aristotle experienced this epiphany, however, it was 
lost on his philosophical inheritors. They embraced not 
only the Organon’s formalization of logic but also its elimi-
nation of narrative, birthing philosophy’s golden ages yet 

34
STORY AND THINKING
simultaneously raising the questions: What if we used phi-
losophy’s intellectual rigor not to delete our brain’s natural 
power to cogitate in plot and character— but to sharpen it? 
Could we advance beyond the early insights of wisdom lit-
erature, doing for narrative what the past 2,400 years of 
metaphysics have done for argument? Could we craft our 
own Topics, our own Summa Theologica, our own Media-
tions and Critique of Pure Reason and Phenomenology of 
Spirit— but this time for storythinking?
Answers— tentative yet hopefully generative— will be 
oﬀered by the following chapters. In their pages, we’ll see 
how a more methodical approach to the mechanics of nar-
rative cognition can boost creative intelligence, nurture 
emotional growth, reform K– 12 education, enlarge democ-
racy, and even bring us closer to life’s ultimate summit: the 
meaning of existence.
But to base our inquiry solidly upon ﬁrst principles, let’s 
begin with the most basic question: Since narrative pre-
dates philosophy, what’s the story of its own origin?

3
The Origin of Story
T
he oldest accounts of story’s origin come from poets.
Some of those poets were Iroquois tobacco smokers 
who told how the ﬁrst stories descended from the holy 
Lodges of the Sky. Some were Hindu river folk who hymned 
how the ﬁrst stories were inspired by Thunder. Some were 
archaic Peloponnesians— Hesiod, Homer— who sang how 
the ﬁrst stories were invented by Calliope and the Muses.
These poetic mythologies charmed many an audience— 
but exasperated the philosophers, who felt certain that sto-
ries had a far less grandiose origin: imitation. Imitation 
was what primates did when they witnessed something 
interesting: aped its motions. And the same process of 
monkey- see, monkey- do, the philosophers assured their 
students, was the true source of the world’s aboriginal sto-
ries. Heroic legends and the like weren’t heaven- sent 
inventions. They were facsimiles of earthly happenings. To 
the extent they contained anything new, it was due not to 
celestial vision but to embellishment, exaggeration, and 
other chimpanzee behaviors.

36
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
As we’ll see in a moment, the philosophers were too 
quick to dismiss the poets; story may not literally have 
arisen from divine creators, but it nevertheless traces its 
initial springs to a primordial mechanism that created— 
and continues to create— intelligent life. However, before 
we delve into the science behind the myths of the Sky 
Lodges, Thunder, and the Muses, let’s give the philoso-
phers the respect they denied the poets and see what 
insights we can glean from their ancient speculations.
The ﬁrst- known philosophers to plumb story’s origin 
are the fourth- century BCE Greeks Plato and Aristotle. 
Both claim that the origin is imitation, prompting Plato to 
condemn story as inauthentic— and Aristotle to celebrate 
it as a scientiﬁc instrument. Aristotle dispenses this sur-
prising tribute in Poetics (see chapter 2), where he observes 
that stories can imitate either the way life literally is or the 
way life generally works. The former might seem the 
more intellectually valuable, but Aristotle dismisses it as 
simple history, devoid of real discernment. It’s the latter that 
yields ethics, psychology, and politics— practical sciences 
that, while they fall below metaphysics’ ultimate peak, still 
reach the upper slopes of physics.
Why did Aristotle locate this high intelligence in the 
same tales that Plato rejected as counterfeit copies? He did 
so because he noticed: stories can possess plausibility. 
Plausibility is when something sounds like it could be 
true, even if it isn’t actually. This seems dangerous terrain, 
the hunting grounds of artful dodgers and unscrupulous 
illusionists. But not according to Aristotle. According to 
Aristotle, things sound plausible when they imitate the 
rule of necessity, or in other words, when they stick to the 
laws of the material world. When a story sounds plausible, 

37
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
it’s thus operating like a telescope or a hadron collider: it’s 
shining a light on the mechanics of nature.
Aristotle would be chastised by later philosophers for 
this equation of plausible stories with natural philosophy. 
He had himself turned con man, they opined. Or possibly 
(since he composed Poetics in his silver years, long after 
the logic treatises of his academic prime) gone senile. But 
Aristotle’s equation was merrily embraced by the philoso-
phers’ scholarly rivals: the rhetoricians.
The rhetoricians were champions of persuasion. That 
is, unlike the philosophers, who were most concerned 
with what was true, the rhetoricians were primarily focused 
on what seemed true. This focus prompted the rhetoricians 
to pay great attention to Aristotle’s discovery that story was 
a source of plausibility. And it wasn’t long before one of 
them leveraged that discovery into becoming the most 
powerful man in the world.
RHETORIC TAKES OVER THE WORLD
The world’s most powerful man was Cicero.
Cicero was born in 106 BCE, two centuries after Aristo-
tle’s death. He dedicated his twenties to studying rhetoric. 
And at the age of forty- three, he achieved the conjuring 
trick of lifting himself from a nobody clan of southern 
chickpea farmers into the leadership of Rome’s republican 
empire, its legions so mighty that they’d defeated the ele-
phant knights of Epirus, the gold- palmed princes of 
Numidia, and even the cruciﬁx oligarchs of Carthage.
Yet it wasn’t Rome’s military that gave Cicero his global 
inﬂuence. It was that he authored a string of oratorical 

38
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
handbooks— De Inventione, De Oratore, Ad Herennium— 
whose teachings became immensely popular. Over the 
next two thousand years, those teachings ﬁltered into 
imperial decrees, underground pamphlets, and theatrical 
stage plays, swaying the destinies of kingdoms, nations, 
continents. And their most inﬂuential dictum was Cicero’s 
reiteration of Aristotle’s claim about story. Or to use Cice-
ro’s preferred term for story, narratio.
Narratio, Cicero observed when he was a thirty- something 
trial lawyer, had great persuasive force: whereas bare facts 
often left juries unconvinced, the same facts incorporated 
into a story became immediately believable. That believ-
ability, moreover, was due to precisely the reason that Aris-
totle had claimed: story possessed plausibility. By tapping 
into what seemed intuitively likely to the human mind, it 
won over audiences by feeling more reasonable than rea-
son, achieving the incredible eﬀect of making true data 
appear truer.
As evidence of this narrative wizardry, Cicero tirelessly 
reminded readers of his own most gloriously eﬀective nar-
ratio, delivered at the dark hour when the republic’s free-
dom was threatened by Cataline. Cataline was a more than 
usually ambitious senator who in 63 BCE, having failed to 
rig a popular election, concocted an open power grab: 
promising debt relief to emeritus soldiers, he raised a mob 
legion, their ranks hardy with veteran mettle, their cause 
hardened by ﬁnancial desperation. All of Rome quaked— 
but not Cicero. He stepped into the Senate’s cramped mar-
ble, and facing its huddled mass of nervous legislators, 
shared a story: “An army is camped outside this city. An army 
of Romans against the Republic. An army swelling bigger 
every minute. And two nights ago, its commander— a man 

39
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
who sits among us— yes, I am speaking of you, Cataline! 
You slipped through the street of the scythe- makers to the 
home of Marcus Lecca, where you met your accomplices 
in madness and in wickedness.” Such was the power of 
this Ciceronian narrative that it incited the Senate to expel 
Cataline, and Cataline to ﬂee to his militia of desperados, 
and the desperados to panic, abandoning their renegade 
general to return to their retirement cottages. Soon after, 
Cataline was dead, massacred alongside his last handful of 
followers in the frozen grapeﬁelds of Pistoia.
Over the succeeding centuries, as Cicero’s rhetorical the-
ories permeated Rome’s empire, Greek Byzantium, medi-
eval Christendom, Renaissance Italy, Elizabethan England, 
the intercontinental Enlightenment, and ﬁnally, just about 
every modern college writing course, his equation of story 
with plausibility became an uncontested truism. Not because 
of Cicero’s writerly eloquence (compelling as it was), but 
because narrative worked just like he and Aristotle adver-
tised. Politicians, lawyers, entrepreneurs, and students all 
discovered for themselves: nothing sounds truer to human 
brains than a story.
Thus it has become that inﬂuential talkers— from 
Barack Obama to Sheryl Sandberg to the next salesperson 
you encounter— are practiced storytellers. MBAs at Har-
vard, the globe’s most successfully self- promotional busi-
ness school, are scrupulously instructed: “Telling a story 
has been proven to be a superior way of communicating 
information because people process stories diﬀerently 
than they do non- narrative information, such as a simple 
recitation of facts.”
None of this has done much to shift the thinking of phi-
losophers. Most have continued to agree with Aristotle’s 

40
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
critics: story’s rhetorical potency makes it as readily a tool 
of falsehood as of scientiﬁc accuracy. Meanwhile, the hand-
ful of philosophers who’ve sided with Aristotle have also 
typically followed the Greek in viewing narrative as deriva-
tive of the world’s underlying physics, a mental mirror of 
material reality.
Few philosophers today, that is, take seriously the poets’ 
old claim that narrative is a god work, or to phrase it in 
less high- ﬂown speech, that narrative creates original pos-
sibilities for thinking and doing. Yet more philosophers 
should. Because the plausibility that Aristotle detected 
in storytelling reveals that story’s origin goes far deeper 
than imitation, all the way down to a life- making source of 
new actions, new actors, and even new worlds.
THE DEEPER ORIGIN OF STORY
Buried inside the worldly success of Cicero’s rhetorical maxim 
is a mystery: Why is storytelling so powerful? Why has 
 narrative long been recognized— by even its detractors— as 
a potent mode of communication? Why do human brains 
absorb stories better than raw facts and ﬁgures?
To Aristotle, the mystery had a clear solution: the world 
was eternal. Aristotle reached this answer via logic, which 
(as we saw in chapter 2) makes everything perpetual, lead-
ing the Greek to conclude that since the eternal laws of 
physics were expressed through actions, it was only natural 
that the human psyche should contain an equally eternal, 
action- learning mechanism. That mechanism, Aristotle 
deduced, was imitation, which he viewed as the soul’s 

41
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
inborn tool for converting observed, external doings into 
mental, inner narratives.
This explanation for storytelling’s potency has been 
upended by modern science, which by replacing Aristotle’s 
everlasting cosmos with the shifting environments of nat-
ural selection has reopened the mystery of why our brain 
ﬁnds spoken narratives so plausible. Those narratives, as 
any biologist will tell you, were absent from the ecosys-
tems in which our brain evolved. Before archaic humans 
invented speech, there existed no anecdotes, no personal 
histories, no Aesopian fables. There were only bits of infor-
mation, input to the brain from eyes and ears and other 
senses. Such sensory data has thus been processed by the 
animal brain for hundreds of millions of years, while oral 
stories have been processed for less than one percent of 
that period, meaning that logically, the brain should have 
evolved many more neural systems for crunching mega-
bytes than for running narratives. Yet somehow the oppo-
site is true. Why? Why are our primeval mechanisms of 
intelligence so adept at the nascent communication tech-
nology of story?
The answer is: our brain is good at processing the narra-
tives of Cicero and other orators because even though story 
is an evolutionarily modern method of communication, it’s 
an evolutionary ancient method of thinking. As we can see 
by going back to life’s beginnings.
At those beginnings, the sea was scattered with bobbing 
life- forms. The life- forms came in multiple varieties, from 
grifting virus particles to nitrogen- feasting microbes to 
sun- catching bacteria. But their diversity was still just sub-
categories of bobbing. None of it chased food or evaded 

42
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
danger; it all acquiescently ﬂoated where the waves went, 
borne by the whims of the current.
Until one day, more than a billion years ago, action 
evolved. Its earliest manifestation was probably a primi-
tive ﬂagellum, an ancestor of the whiplike appendage that 
now propels human spermatozoa. But whatever action’s 
ﬁrst anatomy, it gave life an opportunity to shape the 
future. No longer did our microscopic ancestors need to 
trust entirely to the luck of slipstreams. They could paddle 
forward destiny.
That fate- changing motion wasn’t intentional in the 
sense of being consciously planned, but as millennia 
passed, it did become increasingly responsive to feedback. 
Life would ﬂail its limbs in one direction, and when the 
ﬂailing had a beneﬁcial outcome, it would be repeated. 
The result was a creative process through which random 
improvisation and positive reinforcement combined to pro-
duce adaptive learning, learning that took a leap forward 
with the evolution of a new cell type: the neuron.
The neuron’s earliest beginnings are shrouded in obscu-
rity. All we know is that one day, more than 525 million 
years ago, the neuron caused a tail to ﬂick, a mouth to close, 
or a body to turn. It did so by committing an action, or as 
scientists now call it, an action potential: an electrical trans-
mission that jumps down the neuron’s axon, from den-
drites to synapses.
Like the ﬂagellum, the neuron thus evolved a capacity 
for behavior, conditioned by feedback in response to blind 
spontaneity. Such spontaneity is embedded in the neu-
ron’s biology; unlike an electronic wire, which transmits 
only when triggered, a neuron pulses continuously at its own 
idiosyncratic frequency, a frequency that can be regulated 

43
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
by other neurons but can’t (unless the neuron is killed) be 
dialed down to zero. To be a neuron is therefore necessar-
ily to possess some independent activity. In contrast to a 
computer circuit, a neuron isn’t the mathematically 
derived sum of its inputs but is always informed in part by 
inner impulse.
That impulse allows neurons to do more than mule- train 
data; it allows them to initiate activity, which in turn enables 
them to pilot their own experiments. Neurons can ﬁre wildly 
and after being informed of the result, can calibrate the ﬁr-
ing, learning to operate within productive bandwidths.
At ﬁrst, the neurons who engaged in this experimental 
behavior did so solo. They were lone mad scientists, shoot-
ing out arbitrary actions to a minimal limb and receiving 
input from a simple sense organ (perhaps even the limb 
itself). Until neurons discovered: they could network. And 
by networking, they could experiment more widely— and 
more responsively.
THE NEURON NETWORKS
Neural networks were made possible by the evolution of 
the synapse.
The synapse was originally the junction between a neu-
ron and a motor cell. That junction took the form of a 
chemical- mechanical prod through which the neuron 
aﬀected the non- neuron’s behavior (for more detail, see 
chapter 6). But roughly 500 million years ago, the synapse 
developed into a tool for one neuron to aﬀect another, 
making possible the ﬁrst nervous systems and with them, 
the origins of the animal brain. From there, the synapse 

44
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
branched and evolved into an astonishing variety of 
machineries that— through intricate protein operations— 
enable neurons to increase or decrease each other’s activity 
(an inﬂuence that primarily runs from synapse to dendrite 
but can also ﬂow in the opposite direction).
The upshot of those operations is that synaptic networks 
can generate experimental action scripts that in turn gener-
ate physical doings: two muscles (or two hundred) can 
contract in orchestrated sequences, allowing bird wings to 
ﬂy, cheetah eyes to stalk, and human ﬁngers to type on key-
boards. With such doings, the synapse enlarges the innova-
tion engine of natural selection. Natural selection operates 
by hatching functional variants that are winnowed by the 
environment. Neural networks do the same, with a twist: 
their functional variants aren’t reproducible organisms, 
they’re reproducible behaviors. This way, adaptation can 
happen faster; instead of requiring the generation of new 
bodily structures, it can discover new operations for already 
existing anatomies.
Or put simply, neurons are the source of the mental 
marvel that we know as creativity. Creativity gets its name 
from “creation,” which is what natural selection does: gen-
erate original organisms. Neurons build upon that pro-
cess by generating original actions that allow animals to 
increase their odds of biological success. Those original 
actions aren’t, biologically speaking, inheritable (although 
we humans have devised cultural methods, such as schools 
and art, to bequeath them to later generations). But even if 
animals can’t pass their survival- boosting innovations to 
their oﬀspring, they can still pass along the genetic capac-
ity to make such breakthroughs. Which is why, over hun-
dreds of millions of years, some animal brains have 

45
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
evolved to become more eﬀectively imaginative, enlarging 
the root power of neuronal creativity.
Neuronal creativity isn’t autonomous in the metaphysi-
cal sense of possessing free will. It’s a physical operation 
that can happen without sentience— and so without inten-
tion. But neuronal creativity is autonomous in the practical 
sense of being liberated from what the brain has done 
before. It can be as wildly original as the world’s ﬁrst heart-
beat, vocal cord, or opposable thumb, powering limbs on 
journeys never taken before.
Because neuronal creativity takes the form of original 
action, it exists physiologically as narrative sequences of 
this causes that. Which is why creativity manifests in our 
consciousness as storythinking. Storythinking is our brain 
riﬃng up new chains of actions. It’s us planning original 
deeds, speculating on the future eﬀects of present doings, 
hypothesizing on the causes of observed occurrences, and 
generally imagining what might happen and why. It’s the 
superpower that has allowed our species to adapt like no 
other, inventing the extraordinary life improvements of 
culture, science, business, and technology. It’s a major rea-
son that you and I are alive today, and it’s our tool for plot-
ting better tomorrows.
So, from a modern scientiﬁc perspective, Aristotle was 
partly correct about story. Even though his metaphysics 
prioritized logic as the timeless stuﬀ of true intelligence, 
he saw that the physical world and much of human psy-
chology ran on action. Meanwhile, the poets— Iroquois, 
Hindu, and Greek— were even more right. They realized 
that story could go beyond imitation into creation. Like a 
deity, it could generate original doings that made living 
things resilient, adaptive, and ever branching.

46
THE ORIGIN OF STORY
That solves the mystery of why our brain is so good at 
cogitating in narrative. The answer being: because life is sus-
tained by creative action. And creative action isn’t derived, 
logically, from data. It comes about nonlogically through trial 
and error. A trial and error that occurs insentiently as synap-
tic improvisation and sentiently as storythinking.
Yet this answer, like the answers before, raises new 
questions: If storythinking is a source of creative action, 
and if creative action is a biological wellspring of innova-
tion, problem solving, and resilience, then why is this little 
book the ﬁrst time you’ve heard of storythinking? Why 
isn’t narrative cognition a subject taught to all of us in 
school? Why aren’t we trained to get more out of our plot- 
hatching brains, helping us imagine more widely, sustain-
ably, and successfully?
Why are we so relentlessly drilled, from kindergarten to 
college, to think not in story but in logic?

4
Why Our Schools Teach Logic, Not Story
T
he day broke hot and overcast. But at the United States 
Department of Education, the teachers smiled cool 
and sunny for the cameras.
The date was June 2, 2010. And the beaming teachers 
were spearheading a pedagogical initiative that traced its 
origins to the 1990s, a decade that America’s leaders had 
begun by giddily reveling in the Soviet Union’s collapse— 
and had ended by fretting that their own superpower 
would topple next. If the United States were to remain 
atop the global pecking order, its schools had to crank out 
the world’s smartest young scientists, soldiers, bankers, 
engineers, and policy makers. Yet there was already a trou-
blesome sign that things were trending oppositely: high 
school test scores in reading and math were sagging in 
comparison to European and Asian countries. To win the 
intelligence war, the United States therefore vowed to 
undertake bold educational reform, starting with a cutting- 
edge K– 12 curriculum.

48
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
The result was presented that day in Washington, D.C. 
Known as the Common Core, it took what the bright, air- 
conditioned teachers saw as the progressive side of a 
debate that had erupted in 1880s England. At that time, the 
British Empire was at its peak, but just as in 1990s Amer-
ica, concern had arisen about the best way to train young 
minds to maintain the empire’s wealth and inﬂuence.
On one side was the Oxford classicist and school inspec-
tor Matthew Arnold, who endorsed the traditional peda-
gogy (stretching back through Renaissance humanists to 
Byzantium schoolmasters and Greek Sophists) of steeping 
students in epic poems, theatrical plays, and other literary 
narratives. Those narratives, Arnold was certain, instilled 
culture, which was to say, the right way to think and act; 
for, as Sir Philip Sidney had deftly argued in his 1580 
Defense of Poetry, literature combined history’s vivid partic-
ularity with philosophy’s virtuous generalities, making it a 
pleasant stair to moral truth.
On the other side was the self- educated comparative 
anatomist Thomas Henry Huxley, who believed that the 
future lay in new forms of the practical arts— commerce, 
industry, medicine— outlined in the 1620s by Sir Francis 
Bacon in his visionary New Atlantis. Rather than immers-
ing students in the Shakespearean masterworks champi-
oned by Arnold, Huxley favored a focus on the newer 
 academic areas of science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics— or STEM, as they would later be summed.
America’s Common Core teachers agreed with Huxley, 
front- and- centering STEM in their new curriculum. By 
doing so, they limited the space for Shakespeare and other 
literary stories, which, you might think, is why American 
students don’t learn to storythink in school today. But in 

49
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
fact, from the perspective of storythinking, the Core’s 
emphasis on STEM wasn’t the problem. The problem was 
what the Core did with the literary stories it retained.
It retained those stories under the heading “Language 
Arts.” The heading was uncontroversial. None of the teach-
ers in D.C. had any doubts about its appropriateness, and 
with good reason: it reﬂected the overwhelming consensus 
of middle school, high school, and college literature 
instructors across America (and for that matter, Europe). 
The only complaint came from a contrarian faction so 
minuscule in its numbers— and so utterly out of step in its 
thinking— that it seemed a typical instance of the rule- 
proving exception.
The out- of- step faction contained the remnants of a 
scholarly movement that had begun in the 1930s at the 
University of Chicago’s literature department but failed to 
catch on elsewhere. By the era of the Common Core, the 
ranks of this “Chicago School” had dwindled to a smatter-
ing of U.S. academics, yet refusing to go entirely silent, its 
remaining members raised the question: Why was the 
Core treating literary works as Language Arts instead of as 
Narrative Arts? Or to put it more directly: Why was Shake-
speare being analyzed as semantics rather than as story?
The question was regarded by the Core’s architects as 
bizarre, even perverse. To them, the answer was obvious: 
narrative was composed of language. This followed deduc-
tively from (1) the incontestable fact that Shakespeare’s 
stories were printed on play scripts as words; and (2) the 
equally incontestable fact that words were language.
Yet as self- evident as all this was, there remained some-
thing to the Chicago School’s question. For by treating sto-
ries as nothing more than language, the Common Core 

50
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
had done just as the Chicago School had charged. It had 
deleted narrative.
THE COMMON CORE’S DELETION OF NARRATIVE
The deletion’s origins go back to Cambridge (later, Har-
vard) University literature professor I. A. Richards.
Richards was not one of the teachers in D.C. He’d 
passed away thirty years earlier, in 1979, while America 
was more worried about Soviet nukes than Chinese 
STEM. But still, it was Richards who provided the justiﬁca-
tion for the Core’s decision to opt for “Language” over “Nar-
rative,” a justiﬁcation he’d developed by turning to logic, or 
to be precise, to the subﬁeld of logic known as semiotics.
Semiotics is the application of symbolic logic to lan-
guage. It was pioneered in roughly 350 BCE by Aristotle’s 
On Hermeneutics, another book in the Organon (see chap-
ter 2). Since those early days, it has grown to encompass a 
range of competing theories, yielding viewpoints that are 
famously— even infamously— diverse. Yet even so, its 
roots in symbolic logic lend it (and all its hermeneutic oﬀ-
spring) a broadly consistent methodology. That methodol-
ogy is to treat texts as sets of propositions that establish 
equations (i.e., identities) between subjects and predicates 
(e.g., man = the rational animal). Those propositions are 
then crunched via Aristotelian logic’s three syllogistic 
rules— AND, OR, NOT— to yield truth statements that 
reveal what the texts are claiming, or more colloquially, 
what the words mean.
When transferred onto written narratives, semiotics has 
three broad consequences:

51
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
 1. It treats novels, plays, fables, epic poems, ﬁlms, and other 
stories as collections of symbols. These symbols are, most 
basically, the words found on printed pages. But they’re 
often also extended to include poetic images and cultural 
representations that are taken to signify ideas, attitudes, 
trends, and social groups.
 2. It converts literature into a vehicle for truth claims. Those 
claims can be about nature, human psychology, society, 
ethics, metaphysics, or anything. But because they’re state-
ments about what is TRUE and FALSE, they often pertain 
to what is RIGHT and WRONG, stretching into ideology 
and morality.
 3. It derives (2) from (1) via a logical technique known as 
interpretation. That is, after identifying a story’s key sym-
bols, semiotics uses interpretation to transform those sym-
bols into arguments, themes, allegories, motifs, and other 
propositional forms of meaning.
Interpretation has a wide- ranging history that extends 
beyond the formal semiotics of Aristotle’s On Hermeneutics 
to incorporate Bronze Age Indian commentators from the 
Rigveda, Zhou dynasty compilers of the Shijing, gnostic 
commentators on the Hebrew Bible, and Aesop in his 
beast fables. But these alternate traditions all follow the 
same basic 3- 2- 1 process of converting narratives into sym-
bolic meanings. And in the case of I. A. Richards, his 3- 2- 1 
derived directly from the semiotic mainstream.
That mainstream ﬂowed from a fourth- century epistle 
(composed in a cave under the Bethlehem hills) in which 
the Christian theologian Saint Jerome articulated de optimo 
genere interpretandi— “the best method of interpreting.” It 
merged with Aristotle’s logic in the medieval universities 

52
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
of Europe, where diligent friars wielded syllogisms to distill 
Beowulf, Oedipus, and The Aeneid into moral allegories. It 
was reenergized in the nineteenth century by a pair of 
inﬂuential logicians, Ferdinand de Saussure (1857– 1913) 
and C. S. Peirce (1839– 1914). And when it came to Richards’s 
attention in the early 1920s, he became convinced: semiot-
ics was the only rationally valid way to analyze literature. 
Indeed, so utterly rational and so utterly valid was semiot-
ics, in Richards’s opinion, that it necessitated a purge of 
what was then the era’s most popular approach to literary 
studies, an approach known as character criticism.
Character criticism wasn’t logical. It was narrative. It had 
its roots in the human brain’s biological interest in the ori-
gins of other people’s behaviors (see chapter 2). This inter-
est had prompted seventeenth- century theater audiences 
and eighteenth- century novel readers to ask why dramatic 
characters acted as they did, and it was subsequently mobi-
lized by nineteenth- century German Romantics (such as 
A. W. von Schlegel) and English Victorians (such as 
A. C. Bradley) to minutely anatomize the doings of Hamlet, 
Lady Macbeth, and other literary persons. The anatomizing 
worked via causal thinking: after isolating a character’s 
public actions, character criticism hypothesized private 
motives beneath.
The resulting speculations were by no means unani-
mous; wildly divergent motives were ascribed to Hamlet by 
diﬀerent scholars, performers, and members of the general 
public. But character criticism’s overall method was so 
uncontroversial as to be ubiquitous, and it reigned unchal-
lenged in Europe’s lecture halls and book clubs— until 
I. A. Richards used semiotics to prove: character criticism 
had a shortcoming.

53
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
A shortcoming that reﬂected an intractable problem 
with narrative itself.
NARRATIVE’S INTRACTABLE PROBLEM
The problem is narrative’s relationship to data.
Data is logic’s lifeblood. It ﬂows into the veins through 
induction, is pumped around by deduction, and oxygen-
ates the muscles of argument, interpretation, and critical 
thinking.
No such data connection exists in narrative. Narrative 
can jump past the facts, as in imaginative speculation. It 
can run free of verities, as in literary ﬁction. It can even 
ﬂatly contradict the truth, as in counterfactual thinking.
This independence from data is the source of narra-
tive’s creative powers. It’s why narrative can shake free of 
the ways things are to invent what could happen. It’s why 
narrative can chart fresh paths and original tomorrows. 
It’s why narrative can remake the world instead of being 
predetermined by it.
But this independence from data is also the genesis of 
untold distortions of reality, via elision, bias, and outright 
fabrication. Such distortions litter the book you hold now. 
In this chapter, the narrative has glibly lumped the Com-
mon Core teachers into a single grinning entity, when 
those teachers were diﬀerent people with diverse perspec-
tives and professional experiences. In the previous chapter, 
the narrative presented storythinking as the culmination of 
an evolutionary process of neuronal development— when 
natural selection is a blindly insentient process without any 
direction. And in the chapter before that, the narrative 

54
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
ﬂashed inside Aristotle’s head to reveal what he was 
thinking— when the narrative was simply guessing.
This looseness with facts is what hatched Plato’s origi-
nal attack on story (see chapter 2). And it similarly motived 
I. A. Richards to reject character criticism. Character criti-
cism had been deployed by the Romantics to conclude that 
the cause of Hamlet’s unique behavior was his mental 
habit of “abstracting” (i.e., of overthinking). But the only evi-
dence for this conclusion was a single word— “abstract”— 
deployed once by Hamlet during a singular conversation 
with his girlfriend’s oﬀbeat father. That was not data, not 
by logic’s standards. It was a sample size of one, the very 
deﬁnition of statistical insigniﬁcance. Hardly surprising, 
then, as Richards pointed out, that early twentieth- century 
literary studies was not considered a “real” scholarly disci-
pline with the rigor of mathematics or the moral sciences. 
Indeed, so scholastically peripheral was literary studies 
that it wasn’t part of Cambridge University’s oﬃcial bud-
get, forcing Richards to collect tuition from his students as 
they ﬁled into the classroom.
Semiotics allowed Richards to escape this embarrassingly 
subordinate status, upgrading literary studies into a logical 
apparatus with the hallmarks of calculus and analytic phi-
losophy. Semiotics insisted that literature’s fundamental 
stuﬀ wasn’t characters and their actions; it was words and 
their meanings. To deduce those meanings, semiotics taught 
readers to convert narratives into symbols— then to interpret 
those symbols for propositional content. Richards called this 
“close reading,” and to his students at Cambridge, it seemed 
a revelation. What semiotics had done to the Bible’s chapters 
and verses, close reading did to Hamlet, converting printed 
text into a font of hidden truth statements.

55
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
Close reading’s logical method took hold of higher ed 
with incredible speed. After being elaborated by Richards in 
The Meaning of Meaning (coauthored with C. K. Ogden in 
1923), Principles of Literary Criticism (1924) and Practical Crit-
icism (1929), it gained a devoted following among a crew of 
midcentury transatlantic scholars who styled themselves 
the New Critics. The New Critics became highly inﬂuential 
in postwar America, publishing popular textbooks (such as 
John Ransom’s 1941 The New Criticism and Cleanth Brooks’s 
1947 The Well- Wrought Urn) and rising steadily through the 
academic ranks: in 1979, Yale appointed a New Critic as its 
president; in 1991, Harvard did the same.
And although New Criticism was challenged from 
the  1970s onward by new theoretical paradigms— 
deconstruction, psychoanalysis, new historicism— none of 
them disputed Richards’s core claim: that literary narratives 
were composed of words, representations, and other sym-
bolic stuﬀ that could be analyzed to yield propositional con-
tent. Even as literary studies absorbed an eclectic array of 
hermeneutics drawn from history, critical theory, Marxism, 
cognitive science, and other academic ﬁelds, those herme-
neutics were all used to assert (or critique) what literature 
was saying (overtly or implicitly). While scholars vigorously 
disagreed about how literature should be interpreted, their 
disagreement thus tacitly united them in a deeper consen-
sus: that literature should be interpreted.
This consensus held together literary studies as it frac-
tured over the twentieth century (just as biblical herme-
neutics had fractured over the sixteenth century) into com-
peting sects whose shared anchoring in semiotics enabled 
them to claim that beneath their irresolvable disputes 
were a set of practical intellectual skills. In addition to 

56
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
interpretation (which allowed readers to extract the mean-
ings of written texts, historical facts, physical gestures, 
political statements, scientiﬁc claims, and other data 
points), there was also argument (which was produced by 
weighing and debating diﬀerent interpretations) and criti-
cal thinking (which came from identifying the logical ﬂaws 
of biased or hasty interpretations).
In 2010, that scholarly consensus became the basis of the 
Common Core. The Core explicitly mandated that the Lan-
guage Arts would develop “critical thinking” by teaching 
students to “read closely.” This was I. A. Richards’s “close 
reading,” tactfully rephrased to reach beyond New Criticism 
into broader methods of textual analysis. And like Richards 
and those broader methods, the Core stressed logic, inter-
pretation, argument, and data- backed reasoning:
Read closely to determine what the text says explicitly and 
to make logical inferences from it; cite speciﬁc textual evi-
dence when writing or speaking to support conclusions 
drawn from the text.
Interpret words and phrases as they are used in a text, 
including determining technical, connotative, and ﬁgurative 
meanings, and analyze how speciﬁc word choices shape 
meaning or tone.
Delineate and evaluate the argument and speciﬁc 
claims in a text, including the validity of the reasoning as 
well as the relevance and suﬃciency of the evidence.
Thus were the faults that Richards had detected in narra-
tive deleted, upgrading American education and uphold-
ing the nation’s global ascendance.

57
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
Or so the United States Department of Education con-
vinced itself. But the department had placed too much 
faith in Richards’s method. By replacing narrative with 
semiotics, the Core may have rendered literary coursework 
more logical, yet the result wasn’t to make the US school 
system unequivocally better. Instead, it was to deprive stu-
dents of literature’s full educational beneﬁts.
WHAT SEMIOTICS MISSES
By exchanging narrative for logic, semiotics deletes a great 
deal of what poetry, ﬁction, and theater can teach, as 
becomes clear when we turn back before Richards to the 
origin of literature.
That origin, according to semiotics, is the Latin word 
litterātūra, which literally means “that which is lettered,” or 
in other words, “that which is writ.” But prior to being writ, 
literature was oral. Printed texts and their alphabet letters 
came later, as a way of recording the dramatic perfor-
mances of poets, playwrights, and mythmakers. So, it’s 
worth asking: Was anything lost in the recording?
We can answer this question by excavating the anthropo-
logical origins of writing. Writing was invented (in multiple 
cultures, independently, more than ﬁve thousand years 
ago) as a record- keeping aid for merchants who wanted to 
log commercial transactions, regents who wanted to docu-
ment political treaties, and priests who wanted to maintain 
ancient rites and rituals. Writing came to be, in other 
words, as a memorial tool. It was devised not as a stand- 
alone representation of reality but as a prompt to help 

58
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
human brains recall things. Those things included objects 
and events, so writing developed nouns and verbs, respec-
tively. Yet beneath nouns and verbs’ shared linguistic nature 
was a functional diﬀerence: nouns referred to things that 
needed only space to exist, whereas verbs referred to things 
that required time.
This diﬀerence matters because writing (like any sym-
bol system) does not exist in time, only in space. So, nouns 
can embody objects in a way that verbs cannot embody 
events. You can visualize the distinction by rewinding 
history before the development of alphabets, returning 
writing to its archaic beginnings in etched and painted pic-
tures. A picture can capture objects such as trees and 
humans, but a picture cannot capture events such as a tree 
growing or a human running. To depict those actions 
requires two pictures, the ﬁrst with a shorter tree and the 
second with a taller; the ﬁrst with a person’s legs in one 
position and the second with the legs advanced. Yet even 
those two pictures don’t capture the event’s physical action; 
the action occurs in the gap between them. And if we ﬁll 
that gap with a third picture, we still don’t capture the 
action. Instead, we create two more gaps where the action 
occurs, unseen.
If the action cannot be captured on the page, then where 
does it exist? The answer is: It exists in a human brain that 
reads the page. The brain’s narrative machinery thinks in 
action, so it can reconstitute the element of time by 
remembering tree growing, leg running, and other physi-
cal motions signaled by verbs. And indeed, our brain’s 
machinery does this so automatically that it never occurs 
to most of us that the narrative is not contained in the 
printed text of books and scrolls. The narrative appears to 

59
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
be self- evidently there, explaining the intuitive but faulty 
belief that Shakespeare is merely language.
This faulty belief had no practical consequence when 
Shakespeare was read by nineteenth- century character 
critics, because their storythinking neurons ran unham-
pered by their conscious conviction that Hamlet’s script 
fully reproduced the playwright’s physical imagination. A 
gigantic glitch occurred, however, when Richards fed the 
script into semiotics and its logical apparatus. That appara-
tus lacked a narrative mechanism for recalling the action 
absent from the script’s static symbols. It could only read 
those symbols for what they literally were, remaining 
oblivious to the story elements— actors, events, dramatic 
conﬂicts— that the script’s verbs had been intended to 
prompt in the brains of human readers.
Even though Richards claimed to be analyzing literature 
more rigorously, he was thus missing most of its original 
ingredients. And likewise, even though the Common Core 
emphasized the “extensive reading of stories, dramas, 
poems, and myths,” it was really only skimming. By con-
verting literature into language and then interpreting lan-
guage with semiotics, America’s futuristic curriculum was 
ﬂattening four- dimensional narratives into two- dimensional 
propositions that reduced characters to representations and 
plots to arguments. Behaviors became themes, happenings 
became meanings, and actions became allegories, expung-
ing much of the psychological activity that Shakespeare and 
the rest of our global library had been crafted to generate.
And there you have the answer to the question posed at 
the last chapter’s end: Why aren’t we taught storythinking in 
school? Storythinking requires stories, and over the past 
century, our educational institutions have programmatically 

60
WHY OUR SCHOOLS TEACH LOGIC, NOT STORY
erased the story from the world’s most powerful myths, 
plays, novels, memoirs, ﬁlms, comics, and television series, 
just as the philosophers did to wisdom literature ﬁve millen-
nia before (see chapter 2).
All of which would be entirely salutary if Richards and 
the philosophers were right to think that data- driven logic 
is the lone mental tool required for a wise and prosperous 
life. But as we’ll explore in the following chapter, it’s not.

5
The Limits of Logic— or Why We Still  
Need Storythinking
A
mong the schizophrenics of the German Reich, the 
epiphany struck: mental illness was a breakdown of 
logic.
The epiphany ﬁred the young doctor into ecstasy. And 
soon the ecstasy would spread, sparking epiphanies even 
more incandescent:
The insanities of society— war, injustice, poverty— could 
be ﬁxed by a more logical mind.
That more logical mind was the smarter version of the 
human brain known as “the computer.”
The computer would learn to invent more of itself, until 
everywhere was a rational heaven.
This was a utopian vision to rival any in history, a vision 
that would come to be known in the later twentieth century 
as the Singularity. And to many hopeful souls, over many 
faithful generations, it seemed the true religion. Yet unfor-
tunately, the epiphanies— all of them— were errant.

62
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
They were errant because they rested on the belief that 
intelligence can be reduced to logic, and logic, powerful as 
it is, can only compute what is, not what could happen. It 
can only understand the future as a version of the past, so 
it can only survive inside board games, mathematical 
simulations, medieval theologies, planned communities, 
rigged economies, and other artiﬁcially bounded envi-
ronments with never- changing rules. It cannot react to 
change, adapt to emergent threats, exploit fresh opportu-
nities, cope with uncertainty, handle instability, innovate, 
or grow.
This operational limit to logic is why computer AI can 
defeat humans at chess— but not write novels, innovate tech-
nology, or do scientiﬁc research. And it’s why the Core Cur-
riculum and the other educational reforms described in the 
previous chapter are misdirected. By emphasizing memori-
zation, evidence- based reasoning, critical thinking, design, 
and other logical skills, those reforms teach students to oper-
ate like computers. But for humanity, that’s a double loser.
First, we humans will never out- compute computers. 
Their silicon circuits are already better at logically crunch-
ing data than we’ll ever be, so why devote the bulk of school 
time to setting up future generations to be second- class 
algorithms?
Second, by focusing on teaching logic, we’re neglecting 
human intelligence’s main source: the plan- generating, 
hypothesis- imagining, action- inventing neural processes 
of storythinking. We’re leaving young minds unprepared 
to cope with a tomorrow that demands creative problem 
solving, innovation, and all the other narrative actions that 
computers can’t do. It makes as much sense as drilling a 
child for twelve years in basic addition, then handing her a 

63
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
calculator and telling her to cure cancer. What she knows, 
her tool knows better; what she needs, she hasn’t been 
equipped to accomplish.
If you’re conﬁdent about all this— if you already know that 
humans, unlike computers, are capable of nonlogical, non-
magical thought that enables adaptation and innovation— 
then skip to the next chapter, where we’ll explore the brain 
machinery that powers storythinking, launching us on a 
journey to discover how that machinery can be upgraded by 
a diﬀerent educational approach that culminates not in AI 
autocracy but in human democracy.
But if you suspect otherwise— if you think that logic could 
solve all the world’s problems, that the future lies in design 
thinking, or that computers will someday replace us— then 
here’s the story of the young doctor and his epiphany.
THE YOUNG DOCTOR’S EPIPHANY
The young doctor was Eilhard von Domarus.
Domarus was born on October 12, 1893, in the German 
Empire’s Kingdom of Saxony, where he survived the Great 
War to train in neurology at the University of Jena. In 1922, 
he traveled to the Rhine city of Bonn to work at a psychiat-
ric clinic, which housed, in underfunded and desperate 
conditions, patients suﬀering from hysteria, trench trauma, 
and schizophrenia. To Domarus’s dismay, none of the psy-
chic treatments he’d faithfully memorized in school did 
anything to heal his patients. So, turning his back on the 
failed panaceas of past generations, he ventured east, across 
the Bauhaus jazz cabarets of the Weimar Republic, search-
ing for new medicine.

64
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
In Freiberg, he imbibed philosophy under the logical 
idealist Edmund Husserl and the hermeneutic ontologist 
Martin Heidegger; in Berlin, he studied Gestalt psychology 
under Wolfgang Köhler and Max Wertheimer; until ﬁnally 
he began, under the Platonist turned empiricist Carl 
Stumpf, to swirl together all he’d learned, dreaming of a 
future science that would link human reason to precise 
neuroanatomical mechanisms. That science would enable 
doctors to troubleshoot the nervous systems of shell- 
shocked veterans. That science would turn lunatics into 
true philosophers. That science would root out the neuro-
logical misﬁres responsible for hatred and violence.
These ideas, spectacular as they were, went generally 
unheeded. Until in 1930, Domarus earned a fellowship to 
do a PhD across the Atlantic at Yale University. And at Yale, 
he encountered a mind as unusual as his own.
The second unusual mind was possessed by Warren 
Sturgis McCulloch. Born into a pious New Jersey house-
hold in 1898, young McCulloch entertained thoughts of 
becoming a minister, going so far as to journey in his late 
teens to study with Philadelphia’s Quakers at Haverford 
College. But while still in his freshman year, he heard echo 
through the sacred pastures: Whiz! Boom! Bang! It was the 
Great War, raging across France. And coming to believe 
that this industrial conﬂict— with its machine guns, ﬁeld 
radios, and portable X- rays— was a harbinger of scientiﬁc 
innovation, McCulloch quit his paciﬁst teachers and 
enrolled in 1918 as a trainee naval oﬃcer at Yale.
Yale had no sooner welcomed McCulloch into its wood- 
paneled classrooms than the combat in Europe ended. But 
McCulloch found another outlet for his futurism in the 
emergent laboratory discipline of psychology, which oﬀered 

65
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
curious minds the chance to upgrade humanity in a less 
bellicose, more clinical fashion. After picking up a major in 
philosophy and minor in psychology, McCulloch headed 
postgraduation to Columbia University, earned a psychol-
ogy master’s and a medical degree, then returned to do 
neurophysiology research at Yale. And there, amid a build-
ing boom ﬁnanced by the collapsing wage structure of the 
Great Depression, McCulloch met Domarus.
The two doctors quickly bonded over their shared con-
viction that philosophy and psychology were poised to con-
verge. As formulated by McCulloch: “What is a number, 
that a man may know it, and a man, that he may know a 
number?” Or summed up even more concisely by Doma-
rus: sanity = logic.
Eager to arithmetic further, McCulloch spent the early 
1930s helping Domarus translate his PhD thesis from a 
complicated cacophony of German, Greek, Latin, and Eng-
lish into a book on the “logical structure” of healthy human 
cognition. The book would later be published with the sup-
port of NASA and the U.S. Air Force, and sensing further 
triumphs in the future they were co- creating, the two 
unusual minds traveled upstate to New York’s Rockland 
Asylum, where McCulloch delved into the electronics of 
epilepsy while Domarus patiently explained the ﬁner 
points of deductive reasoning to the inmates.
Hung up on the belief— dubbed the “von Domarus 
principle”— that schizophrenia stemmed from a brain 
hitch in processing the middle term of syllogistic proposi-
tions, Domarus gently faded into obscurity. But his convic-
tion that human brains were logic processors endured in 
McCulloch as he blazed a singular path across the aca-
demic ﬁrmament. In the later 1930s, McCulloch entered 

66
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
Yale’s Institute of Human Relations to attend the seminars 
of Clark L. Hull, who, inspired by Bertrand Russell’s recent 
reduction of math to logic, was determined to do the same 
to the psychological sciences. Then in 1941, after funding 
dried up at Yale, McCulloch relocated to the University of 
Illinois at Chicago, which provided a lab for him to test his 
(later debunked) theory that toxic doses of insulin could 
shock schizophrenics into thinking logically.
And in Chicago, McCulloch encountered another unusual 
mind. The most unusual of them all.
THE MOST UNUSUAL MIND
The mind belonged to Walter Pitts.
Pitts was a vagrant autodidact who in 1935, at the age of 
twelve, had huddled in a Detroit public library for three 
straight days, poring over Bertrand Russell’s coauthored 
magum opus, Principia Mathematica. Captivated by the 
work’s intricate density but troubled by what he perceived 
as its lack of rigor, the precocious youth sent Russell a let-
ter listing the Principia’s computational shortcomings. 
Impressed, Russell invited Pitts to study logic with him at 
Cambridge University— an oﬀer that Pitts declined. Trust-
ing instead to his own intelligence, Pitts returned to the 
public library, imbibing logic’s ﬁrst truths from Aristotle’s 
Organon in the original Greek. Until at last, at the age of 
ﬁfteen, this extraordinary intellect became homeless when 
his uneducated father discovered him perusing a philoso-
phy treatise in Sanskrit— and expelled him from the fami-
ly’s house for being a black magic freak.

67
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
The next chapter of Pitts’s life would inspire the 1997 
Hollywood blockbuster romance Good Will Hunting. But it 
was anything but happy or glamorous for Pitts. He made 
his way to the University of Chicago, where in 1938, he 
covertly attended visiting lectures delivered by Bertrand 
Russell. Russell was startled to see the bereft teenager, but 
brokered a connection to the Viennese language- logician 
Rudolf Carnap, who found Pitts a job as a university janitor. 
Pitts gratefully accepted this faculty- proximate position, yet 
slowly, his mind turned inward. Becoming reclusive and 
paranoid, he started drinking heavily, precipitating, two 
short decades thence, death by esophageal bleeding.
While slipping down this tragic slope, however, Pitts 
enjoyed what seemed a stroke of luck: in 1942, at a Chicago 
colloquium, he collided with the recently arrived McCull-
och. McCulloch was so struck by Pitts’s unconventional 
intelligence that he promptly invited the nineteen- year- old 
to bunk at his rural homestead in Hinsdale, and there, after 
the McCulloch children were tucked into bed, the two 
unusual minds mingled their singular views, a mingling 
that, one year later, yielded a world- astonishing paper.
Titled “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Imminent in 
Nervous Activity,” the paper was published in the Bulletin 
of Mathematical Biophysics. It claimed that “neural events 
and the relations among them can be treated by means of 
propositional logic.” Or in other words, that the human 
brain’s hardwired operating system could be modeled by 
the AND- OR- NOT of Aristotle’s Organon.
For readers not steeped in Pitts’s know- how of Greek 
philosophy or McCulloch’s numerological psychiatry, the 
implications of this statement took a few moments to 

68
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
process. But after those moments, the readers’ eyebrows 
shot up in amazement. For if Pitts and McCulloch were 
right, then there followed two extraordinary consequences. 
The ﬁrst was that Pitts and McCulloch had proved what 
Domarus had intuited: sane minds thought in pure sym-
bolic logic. This meant that all the brain’s healthy opera-
tions took the form of induction, deduction, interpretation, 
and other syllogistic processes. Which meant, in turn, that 
all the intelligent things that humans had done— in sci-
ence, technology, art, business, politics, literature— could 
be reduced to AND- OR- NOT formulas. Out of those for-
mulas had come the physics of Einstein, the plays of Shake-
speare, the contraptions of Tesla, the paintings of van Gogh, 
the wealth of J. P. Morgan, the republic of the American 
Founding Fathers, and everything, everything, everything that 
the most brilliant of our species had created.
The second extraordinary consequence was that a machine 
could be built to think like those brilliant minds. Symbolic 
logic, after all, hewed to rules that could be embodied in an 
electronic- gate apparatus. That apparatus could then be pro-
grammed with formulas to cogitate like Einstein, Shake-
speare, Tesla, and all the rest. And, even better, the apparatus 
could compute improved formulas. It could be fed Einstein’s 
equations, Shakespeare’s scripts, and Tesla’s blueprints, and 
from that data, it could use its logical smarts to induct, 
deduct, and interpret its way to better and better— and 
ﬁnally, perfect— algorithms. At the ﬂick of a digital switch, 
the world would be ﬂooded with ultimate science, ultimate 
technology, ultimate government, ultimate culture, ulti-
mate art. Utopia was logically imminent.
So mind- spinning was this vision that it seemed at ﬁrst 
a reality break. The world had suﬀered a short circuit of 

69
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
logic, joining the Bonn schizophrenics in dream. But Pitts 
and McCulloch’s paper was perfectly real, and it was soon 
to get realer. Because three years later, in 1946, the 
Einstein- Shakespeare- Tesla machine got built.
THE RATIONAL, SENSE- MAKING MACHINE
Pitts and McCulloch weren’t the ﬁrst to propose that 
human intelligence could be reduced to an automated 
symbolic- logic processor.
The proposal originated in Pitts’s own master text, Aristo-
tle’s Organon, which posited a theory of human language in 
which words represented cognitive archetypes. According to 
that theory, our intelligent thoughts could be expressed in 
universal symbols that could in turn be processed by an 
automatic calculus, implying that human minds (or at 
least the minds of trained philosophers) were general logic 
engines.
This view of intelligence became the reigning dogma of 
the European Middle Ages, when Organon- reading friars 
(such as Thomas Aquinas) imagined God’s psyche as 
an omniscient rational calculator. And after the collapse 
of medieval theology, it was reborn in Enlightenment 
philosophy:

Q
In 1655, Thomas Hobbes deduced in De Corpore that human 
intelligence was an addition- subtraction automaton: “by rea-
soning, I understand computation.”

Q
In 1666, a twenty- year- old Gottfried Leibniz (as a twenty- 
year- old Pitts discovered to his fascination) penned On the 
Combinatorial Art, which theorized the existence of a mind 

70
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
machine that could deploy a logical clockwork to crunch the 
symbolic language of human thought into the ultimate 
truth of everything.

Q
In 1854, the rogue British logician George Boole argued in 
The Laws of Thought that human reason could be summed 
in algebraic equations that captured the rote action of Aris-
totle’s syllogisms.
Yet even though McCulloch and Pitts’s basic idea was 
not new, it was well timed. Seven years earlier, in 1936, the 
youthful mathematician Alan Turing had proved in a revo-
lutionary paper: “It is possible to invent a single machine 
which can be used to compute any computable sequence.” 
A year later, at an MIT lab, that theoretical machine was 
given a practical blueprint by the even more youthful 
Claude Shannon, who demonstrated in his master’s thesis 
that electronic switches could automate Boole’s algebraic 
equations. The result was the Arithmetic Logic Unit, or as 
we now know it, the computer.
The computer ﬁrst appeared in downtown Philadel-
phia, a few blocks west of the Schuylkill River, and swiftly 
expanded into the 18,000 vacuum tubes, 6,000 switches, 
and 30- ton bulk of the Electronic Numerical Integrator 
and Computer, or ENIAC. ENIAC was designed in 1943, a 
few months before Pitts and McCulloch published their 
paper, and it whirred to life three years later. It deployed 
Shannon’s blueprint and fulﬁlled Turing’s conditions. It 
was, in other words, an automatic logician, powered by 
Boolean algebra and capable of solving all the problems 
that could be cracked by Aristotelian syllogisms.
In the end, ENIAC did not solve all— or indeed, very 
many— of those problems. It was mostly used to compute 

71
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
the physics of ﬁeld artillery and hydrogen bombs. But its 
limited output did not discourage McCulloch and Pitts. 
They predicted that ENIAC would be upgraded, and true to 
their prediction, the eight decades since have brought 
remarkable improvements.
Those improvements fall into two broad categories: 
hardware and software. The hardware improvements (the 
biggest of which was the 1959 invention of the MOS tran-
sistor by Bell Lab scientists Dawon Kahng and Mohamed 
Atalla) allow for increased computing power, to the point 
that we now possess CPUs that can perform quadrillions 
of operations per second. The software improvements, 
meanwhile, have allowed for increased specialization and 
reﬁnement:

Q
Thanks to the development of assembly language operat-
ing systems such as LINUX, computers can be adapted 
eﬃciently to a vast range of logical computation.

Q
Thanks to the development of Bayesian software, comput-
ers can cogitate in probabilities.

Q
Thanks to the development of machine- learning algorithms, 
computers can teach themselves faster than humans can 
program.
Taken as a whole, these upgrades have made computers 
quicker, more rangy, and more nuanced at logic. And that, 
in turn, has yielded two great results.
The ﬁrst is the mainstreaming of Pitts and McCulloch’s 
equation of human intelligence with automated symbolic 
logic. This mainstreaming can be seen across modern uni-
versities in the rise of computational theories of mind. 
Those theories were initially developed by philosophers 

72
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
such as Hilary Putnam and Jerry Fodor, and they’ve perme-
ated the inﬂuential ﬁelds of cognitive science and evolu-
tionary biology. So it is that a great many scholars who 
study the brain approach it as a logical apparatus that 
inducts through its eyes and ears, then deducts, infers, and 
interprets through “sense- making” neural networks.
Outside the academy, this way of thinking has become 
pervasive in broad swaths of the general public. It has 
made “logical” synonymous with “intelligent” in ordinary 
parlance. It has spawned hordes of self- help experts who, 
in diet books and TV ﬁnance shows, counsel us to look at 
the data, crunch the numbers, obey the statistics. It has 
birthed the corporate- educational phenomenon known as 
“design thinking.” And it has produced the near ubiquity 
of business analytics: when picking stocks, building sports 
rosters, marketing, or doing anything else money related, 
expert analysts funnel big data and digitized spreadsheets 
into rational- choice theory (another logic product).
The second result is that, at long last, philosophy’s con-
ﬁdence in logic can be put to the test. Previously, the test 
was doomed by a seemingly insuperable problem: humans. 
Humans were the philosopher- kings in charge of Plato’s 
republic; humans were the theologians who interpreted 
God’s biblical commandments; humans were the doctors 
who debugged the brains of shell- shocked schizophrenics. 
And humans are imperfect. Our neural operating system 
sputters with biological quirks, erratic emotions, and local 
data. To have us institute a more logical life is to have 
Rockland’s inmates ﬁx the asylum.
But now, our mortal shortcomings can be exorcised. Con-
trol of society can be handed entirely to logic. Logic can 
build an AI that never deviates from math and syllogisms. 

73
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
Logic can invent a supercomputer that possesses McCull-
och and Pitts’s intelligence without succumbing to their 
ﬂeshly frailties. Logic can combine modern engineering 
with medieval theology to design an Almighty to redeem us 
from ourselves.
Thus it is that Domarus’s great experiment has launched. 
As you read these pages, billions of dollars are ﬂowing 
across the globe into AI research. And billions more dollars 
of digital infrastructure are humming away, gathering data, 
crunching numbers, spitting out recommendations on how 
to run global economies, multinational corporations, health 
care systems, educational institutions, democratic govern-
ments, and the rest of our human intelligence network.
But already the experiment has failed.
THE FAILED EXPERIMENT
Computer AI fails at most human- thinking tasks. It can’t 
create scientiﬁc hypotheses. It can’t imagine novels. It 
can’t invent technologies. It can’t, that is, do anything that 
requires it to plan or process original actions.
This failure has prompted many diﬀerent explanations 
from AI advocates: AI just needs more processing power; AI 
just needs more contextual data; AI just needs upgraded soft-
ware. And even: AI just needs to achieve consciousness. But 
the simple truth is: AI’s failure to human think is not cor-
rectable. The failure is forever.
There are many ways to prove this, but they can all be 
distilled to the fact that logic and story involve diﬀerent 
physical mechanisms of intelligence, each with its own 
material limit. Story’s limit is that it cannot ever yield 

74
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
eternal verities. Logic’s limit is that it cannot ever process 
actions.
These limits are two sides of the same ontological coin:

Q
Story is a tool for sequencing, combining, and generating 
actions; actions are temporal; the temporal is not timeless; 
and the not timeless cannot be forever true.

Q
Logic, in contrast, can be forever true. That’s because logic 
is a tool for computing numbers, representations, and 
other symbols. And symbols are timeless. They exist, 
unchanging, in the eternal present tense of logic’s “X is Y” 
and math’s “1 + 1 is 2.”
Because logic can do what story can’t, it can’t do what 
story can: process actions. Actions include, at minimum, a 
cause and its eﬀect, and those two elements cannot exist 
concurrently in logic’s eternal is. A cause must precede its 
eﬀect in time, necessitating either a past or a future. Which 
means that when actions are fed into a logical system, the 
system is confronted with an insoluble problem: Render a 
cause and its eﬀect into a single, present- tense instant. Or in 
other words: Take two things that can’t coexist— and make 
them simultaneous.
This logic buster has been acknowledged by logicians 
as far back as Aristotle. Aristotle observes in Organon that 
logic can process actions only by rendering them into 
qualities. (E.g., the action to reason must be rendered into 
the quality rational, turning the narrative “Aristotle rea-
sons” into the subject- predicate proposition “Aristotle is 
rational.”) Since qualities are unchanging, the eﬀect of 
this rendering is to deactivate action, discarding its 
essence: motion. In other words: to save logic from being 

75
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
broken by action, action is ghosted from the Organon’s 
logical system.
The same evaporation of action remains the sole way 
that the logic gates of modern AI can handle the narrative 
operations processed automatically by human brains, as 
we can see from the procedure that computerized Natural 
Language Processors (NLPs) use to translate our everyday 
speech into binary machine code. The procedure converts 
action verbs (e.g., Jane runs) into linking verbs and partici-
ples (e.g., Jane is running). The double upshot is (1) to 
equate the action’s cause (Jane) with its eﬀect (running); 
and (2) to make the action (runs) a timeless state (running) 
with no beginning, eﬀectively deleting the action’s origin.
Neither upshot is signiﬁcant within logic’s timeless 
domain of correlation, but when we exit logic for the tem-
poral world of causation, both have eerily unnatural conse-
quences. The consequence of (1), that is, of equating causes 
with their eﬀects, is to make action symbolic, precipitating 
magical thinking. The consequence of (2), that is, of sever-
ing eﬀects from their causes, is to rob causes of their phys-
ical function, making them causes in name only.
Together, these consequences replace mechanics with 
semiotics, substituting signiﬁcation for action. Symbols 
are mystically transubstantiated into causes while material 
actors are divested of their mechanical nature, luring us 
into believing that magic incantations, words of power, 
and priestly rituals can change reality— and that gravity, 
ﬁre, and other physical forces are made of the same onto-
logical stuﬀ as alphabet letters, ASCII characters, and 
mathematical formulas.
This logical distortion of physics is what happened in 
medieval science. Powered by Aristotle’s Organon, the 

76
THE LIMITS OF LOGIC— OR WHY WE STILL NEED STORYTHINKING
European natural philosophers of the late Middle Ages 
reduced material actors to verbiage (ﬁnal cause, formal 
cause, eﬃcient cause) and embraced language as a causal 
agent: “In the beginning was the Word.” Nature became a 
web of symbols and life an allegory.
The same thing happened in twentieth- century litera-
ture departments (see chapter 4) when character criticism 
was replaced by semiotics: language became power and 
representation, reality. And the same thing is happening 
now in computer AI. Which is why computer AI— no less 
than fourteenth- century science and twentieth- century lit-
erary criticism— runs afoul of earthly physics. And which 
is also why computer AI will never do what Domarus, 
McCulloch, and Pitts dreamed: obsolesce human intelli-
gence. Human intelligence can fathom the distinction 
between a cause and its eﬀect, so while computers are 
stuck permanently in a semiotic zone of magic, we humans 
can operate as scientists, grasping the forces of nature and 
leveraging them into original creations.
How do we humans have this capacity to think in cause 
and eﬀect? Is it because our brain possesses conscious-
ness, intuition, or some other fuzzily “emergent” prop-
erty? No. As we will explore in the following chapter, our 
brain is as reductively mechanical in its operations as com-
puter transistors. It simply possesses diﬀerent machinery.
Narrative machinery.

6
The Brain Machinery of Storythinking
I
t was the summer of 1951 at a little brick lab in southern 
New Zealand. And as evening dropped in pink and gold, a 
bespectacled scientist with trim gray hair and a trim white 
coat unlocked a metal cage, selecting a frightened cat to shave.
The scientist was John Eccles. In his lab, he had shaved 
many a cat. But this cat would be diﬀerent. It would pro-
vide Eccles with a peek at the brain’s plugs and cables, 
earning him a Nobel Prize and revealing the machinery of 
storythinking.
That machinery, as Eccles saw, has two main compo-
nents: (1) self- powered electronic wires and (2) nonelec-
tronic connectors.
The self- powered electronic wires are neurons, the bio-
logical marvel we explored in chapter 3. Their electronics 
allow them to think fast, fast, fast. And their self- powering 
enables them to initiate action: do this.
The nonelectronic connectors are synapses, the biologi-
cal marvel that Eccles was probing at his New Zealand lab. 
Synapses can link one action to another. And because 

78
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
they’re nonelectronic, they can operate free from the con-
straints of design, improvising narrative scripts beyond 
the laws of logic.
Neurons and synapses are wildly unlike the machinery 
found in computers. That computer machinery can be 
built of electric switches, vacuum tubes, or silicon tran-
sistors, but it all amounts to mechanisms for running 
(1) binary and (2) NAND/NOR logic gates. Or, as formally 
articulated in 1965 by Alan Turing’s protégé I. J. Good: (1) a 
symbolic language and (2) a set of ﬁxed rules.
How do these two computer components relate to the 
two components of storythinking? Well, “a symbolic lan-
guage” is so diﬀerent from “self- powered wires” and “a set 
of ﬁxed rules” so diﬀerent from “nonelectronic connec-
tors” that to compare them risks distorting more than it 
clariﬁes. But as a rough distinction, we could say that our 
storythinking brain can rewire its hardware, while the 
computer can only rewrite its software. And although com-
puter software can do a great deal, it must do it all through 
the computer CPU’s three hardwired actions: AND, OR, 
NOT. Which means that while our brain can devise origi-
nal actions, the computer is always running combinations 
of the same ﬁxed logic operations.
The functional cash- out of these mechanical diﬀerences 
is that computers can pick the best available option— while 
our brain can imagine new options. Or, more briskly, that 
computers are deciders while our brain is an innovator. 
For evidence- based judgment, you want a computer. For 
creative action, thank your neurons and their synapses.
This isn’t to say that computers can’t be creative; they 
can. But it is to say that their creativity extends only to the 
semiotic, and the semiotic (as we saw in chapter 5) does not 

79
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
contain action. To a computer, being creative is randomly 
mix- and- matching words, images, and other timeless sym-
bols from divergent sets. To the human brain, being cre-
ative is guessing a new cause, then testing its eﬀect. Which 
is why computer AI can engineer new haikus and pixel 
faces but will never invent strategies, novels, scientiﬁc 
hypotheses, or anything else requiring narrative.
This mechanical distinction between computers and 
brains has been repeatedly fudged by AI purveyors in the 
seven decades since Eccles’s 1951 experiment. But the dis-
tinction is important to enforce— not to denigrate comput-
ers or to preserve human ineﬀability, but because it is cru-
cial for understanding how to upgrade our own mental 
performance. That upgrade won’t happen if we persist in 
downplaying the diﬀerences between animal neurons and 
silicon transistors. Instead, we’ll keep cranking out coun-
terproductive educational curricula like the Common Core 
(see chapter 4). To do better, we need to grasp what’s dis-
tinct about our head technology, so that rather than trying 
to force- program it to perform critical thinking, data- driven 
decision making, and other computational tasks, we craft 
pedagogical rubrics tailored to our brain’s storythinking 
strengths: creativity, adaptability, growth.
One such rubric will be outlined in chapter 7, which will 
describe a few processes you can run on your gray matter 
to boost storythinking. But to provide a hardware founda-
tion for those software enhancements, this chapter will 
explore the backstory of Eccles’s cat experiment, touring a 
historical collection of characters who include a tortured 
twentieth- century logician, a Renaissance revolutionary 
who almost launched modern science, and a Victorian 
astronomer who actually did.

80
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
From those characters, we’ll learn about the nonlogical 
neural machinery that Eccles glimpsed. And as we stretch 
our brain to connect their biographies into a single narra-
tive, we’ll experience that machinery ourselves.
OUR STORY’S FIRST CHARACTERS: ECCLES AND  
THE SOUPS
Eccles had never heard (and never would hear) of story-
thinking, so he had no idea that he was on the verge of 
advancing its study. Yet as he shaved the cat on that mid-
century eve, he did know that he was about to run a highly 
illuminating experiment.
The experiment was the culmination of a long struggle 
that dated back to modern science’s origins in the seven-
teenth century. But its immediate purpose was to resolve a 
more recent ﬁght. That ﬁght had started with a point of 
agreement: the neuroscientists of the 1940s all concurred 
that the neuron was electric. It ﬁred a charge— the action 
potential— down a winding axon stalk via a battery of salt- 
ion channels into the neuron’s terminal, where a tiny gap— 
the synapse— separated the charge from another brain cell.
Here, however, a question arose: How did the charge 
hop the gap, sparking the neighboring cell? Two answers 
were proposed, one by a group of scientists who styled 
themselves “sparks” and the other by a group who 
styled themselves “soups.”
The sparks thought: the charge itself hopped the gap, 
zapping like a lightning bolt across the synapse. After all, if 
the neuron was electric, then surely the junction was too. 
That would make the entire brain electronic, reducing all 

81
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
thought to voltage whizzing through circuits. This was the 
simplest— and most elegant— model of human intelli-
gence. Which is to say: it was the most logical model, 
because logic dictated parsimony.
Yet despite such sophisticated arguments from logic, 
the soups had an opposing answer: the synapse was non-
electronic. It was traversed not by electrical brainwaves but 
by chemicals dumped into the gap. Was the dumping sim-
ple or elegant? No, it was not, the soups conceded. But they 
had run many clever experiments that suggested it was 
nevertheless how neurons worked.
This soupy contention had been relayed to John Eccles 
in the late 1920s when he was a Rhodes Scholar at Magda-
len College, Oxford. Immediately, it had struck him as ludi-
crous. How could chemicals ﬂoat at the velocity of thought? 
And why would neurons have evolved such a convoluted 
mechanism for communicating with one another? Why 
wouldn’t they have stuck with the fast- acting electrical sys-
tem they already had?
Convinced by this rational deduction, Eccles set out to 
conﬁrm it with empiricism. Throughout the 1930s, as he 
made his way from Oxford to Australia, he ran a series of 
ingenious experiments on frog and feline neuromuscular 
junctions. Those experiments revealed that synaptic trans-
mission was fast— so fast that it was inconceivable to 
Eccles that it could be occurring at anything less than elec-
tricity’s lightspeed.
The soups, however, remained unmoved. They stuck 
doggedly to their hypothesis of chemical transmission, 
enraging Eccles and impelling him to act. In May 1935 he 
publicly derided the soups at the annual meeting of the 
Physiology Society. This “very tense encounter” precipitated 

82
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
a pointed exchange of letters between Eccles and the soups’ 
smugly placid leader, Nobel laureate Henry Dale. And over 
the following years, their scientiﬁc disagreement escalated 
into “war.”
The war raged through the 1940s, as the world itself 
convulsed in violence. And long after a global armistice 
was signed in 1945, the sparks and soups battled on. Until 
at last, in the early 1950s, Eccles struck upon a brilliant 
strategy for concluding the struggle.
Eccles had by then relocated from Australia to New Zea-
land, where he’d met an awkwardly earnest Austrian 
scholar who’d ﬂed the Nazis to take up a philosophy lec-
tureship at Canterbury University College. A scholar with 
a creatively idiosyncratic take on the working of science.
A scholar named Karl Popper.
CHARACTER THREE: THE TORTURED LOGICIAN  
KARL POPPER
Karl Popper would, in the dusk of his career, come to be 
regarded as one of the twentieth century’s most inﬂuen-
tially original thinkers. But at the time he met Eccles, he 
was viewed as a minor curiosity, his mind at strenuous 
odds with contemporary philosophy— and indeed, with its 
own psychology.
The conﬂict in Popper’s psyche sprang from his dual 
intellectual nature. On the one hand, he was gripped from 
childhood by a love for logic, a love so pure that it could not 
tolerate the slightest deviation from absolute reason. On 
the other hand, he was entranced by the material world 
and its living things: humans, cultures, markets. And 

83
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
because these living things, by virtue of their dynamism in 
time, deﬁed the static eternities of logical equation, Popper 
was forever shattering one of his loves with the other. He 
would embrace logic— and tear it apart with life. He would 
embrace life— and tear it apart with logic.
This state of exquisite inner tension made Popper’s exis-
tence an agony of reluctant iconoclasm. Time and again, 
he arrived at a temple of learning, hopeful of joining its 
reverent congregation— only to instead smash the altar, 
exposing idolatry.
The smashing began when Popper debunked his teen-
age idol, Karl Marx. Marx had wielded Hegel’s dialectic (see 
chapter 8) to construct what he viewed as an unassailably 
rational theory of economic history. But Popper relent-
lessly detected the theory’s failed predictions: contra Marx, 
the middle class had not disappeared; contra Marx, there 
had not been a death spiral of overproduction; contra Marx, 
the capitalists had not been everywhere overthrown by a 
chain reaction of proletarian revolutions. And with a cry of 
horror at his own apostasy, Popper pulled Marx’s mighty 
structure down.
Next, Popper turned on Sigmund Freud. Freud had 
been more cursory in his reasoning than Marx but also 
more canny, basing his theories of human psychology in 
tautologies that twisted objections into proofs. Yet Popper 
was not intimidated by Freud’s ingenious labyrinth. Plung-
ing unﬂinchingly into its circular logic, he grabbed its 
murky sophistries and dragged them out into the sun, 
revealing psychoanalysis as a beguiling con.
It was in this idol- breaking frame of mind that Popper 
arrived in the 1920s at Vienna’s recently established Päda-
gogisches Institut— Pedagogical Institute. Enrolling to 

84
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
pursue a psychology doctorate, the twenty- something Pop-
per set his uncompromising gaze on modern science. And 
as he inspected the grand theories of recent physicists, he 
found himself drawn into a tussle that dated back three 
centuries to the 1620 Novum Organum— that is, New 
Logic— of Francis Bacon.
CHARACTER FOUR: FRANCIS BACON, THE  
ALMOST- FOUNDER OF MODERN SCIENCE
Bacon was, like Popper, an iconoclast, albeit a less reluc-
tant one.
Castigating the European universities of his day for 
anchoring nature’s study in deduction, which worked top 
down to impose preexisting ideologies on subsequent dis-
coveries, he called for a pivot to deduction’s opposite: 
induction. Induction used data to update existing rules, so 
Bacon believed that it would inject vitality into the study of 
physics. Fresh facts would be gathered through an ener-
getic program of observation and experiment, powered by 
astral telescopes and atomic microscopes. And instead of 
being deducted into old theories, those facts would be 
inducted into new theories, lifting science out of medieval 
stasis into modern progress.
This shift toward induction was hailed by Bacon’s fellow 
Englishmen— most famously Isaac Newton— as the begin-
ning of a revolution. But in point of fact, the revolution 
was only partly revolutionary. Induction was, after all, one 
of the traditional logical processes championed in Aristot-
le’s Organon, the textbook foundation of epistemology in 
the Middle Ages. So, by championing an inductive method, 

85
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
Bacon was not distancing himself as radically from medi-
eval science as his insurgent rhetoric implied.
Thus it was that Bacon continued the Aristotelian school-
men’s practice of treating the physical world as a text: the 
“book of nature.” Thus it was that Bacon’s acolytes main-
tained the old practice of referring to physicists as philoso-
phers of nature, or more succinctly, natural philosophers. 
And thus it was that Bacon’s new philosophers retained the 
medieval practice of treating knowledge as strictly logical: 
symbolic data was inserted into science’s inductive machine, 
which, like the syllogisms of the Middle Ages, automatically 
computed the mathematical laws of nature.
This quasi- new, quasi- traditional, Baconian- Aristotelian 
logic processor hummed along, unchallenged in England, 
through Newton and the eighteenth century. Yet against 
what Bacon had predicted, the processor did not yield 
enlightened consensus. Instead, natural philosophy was 
riven by endless disputes, because even when everyone 
agreed upon a basic fact, they quarreled over how to inter-
pret it. The same data that prompted one natural philoso-
pher to conclude that light was a corpuscle prompted 
another to conclude that it was instead a longitudinal vibra-
tion. The same data that prompted one natural philosopher 
to posit that gravity was action at a distance prompted 
another to argue for the existence of invisible astral ﬂuids.
That such bickering was the result of applying logic to 
“the book” of nature should not have been a surprise, for 
logic had malfunctioned in identical fashion when applied 
to another weighty tome: the Bible. Rather than building 
gradually but inexorably toward unanimity, logic had 
assiduously inducted the Bible’s historical, linguistic, and 
symbolic data— then churned out the competing doctrines 

86
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
of Catholicism, Calvinism, Unitarianism, and other Chris-
tian sects.
And indeed, this tendency of induction to proliferate 
interpretations is why Europe’s feudal universities had all 
along preferred deduction. The university faculty did not 
disagree with Bacon’s fundamental point: deduction was a 
retardant of intellectual progress. Yet to them, there was 
value in the retardant, not least because by maintaining 
the old theories, it also maintained cohesion and stability. 
And were not cohesion and stability two necessary features 
of any logical system? And had these features not been dis-
arrayed by Bacon’s so- called reform, riddling his “new 
logic” with ﬂux and fragmentation?
Hence early nineteenth- century physics found itself in 
crisis. Instead of achieving exultant unanimity, it had been 
sucked into the same inﬁghting that had sundered the theol-
ogy of the Middle Ages. Clearly, if moderns were to outdo 
medievals, science would have to undergo a more profound 
methodological revolution, one that carried it beyond Bacon.
And science did undergo that second revolution. Because 
in 1830, a jump forward was made by another iconoclast: the 
royal astronomer John Herschel.
CHARACTER FIVE: JOHN HERSCHEL AND  
THE MODERN SCIENTIFIC METHOD
John Herschel was as gorgeously- tragically divided of mind 
as Popper.
Born with a butterﬂy intelligence, Herschel ﬂitted between 
scholarly ﬂowers: chemistry, poetry, mathematics, miner-
ology, physics, painting, photography. But wherever he 

87
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
winged, he could not escape the long shadow of his father, 
William, an astronomer of such global celebrity that he’d 
hobnobbed with the English king, the German royal fam-
ily, and pre- Waterloo Napoleon.
Stricken by a ﬁlial sense of obligation to reach an equal 
zenith of achievement, young John procured his own tele-
scope and chained himself to its eyepiece each twilight, 
determined to map every glowing object in the sky. This epic 
task required so much discipline that it turned young John 
machine. Ruthlessly restraining his nomadic curiosity, he 
cranked through automatic midnight after automatic mid-
night, surveying the sable constellations with such inﬂexible 
precision that he logged coordinates (checked in triplicate) 
for more than 70,000 stars. Until his dazzling persistence 
was rewarded with the Royal Society’s Copley Medal for out-
standing scientiﬁc research, not once but twice, trumping 
the medal count of his one- time- winning father.
Yet even though John Herschel outdid his father by 
being an inductive engine, his most enduring contribution 
to science came from releasing (at last) his butterﬂy brain. 
The release came in the late 1820s as Herschel was com-
posing a popular introduction to science, A Preliminary 
Discourse on the Study of Natural History. The work’s 
monotonous title reﬂected its author’s iron resolve to be a 
responsible scientist, but tucked into its pages was a wild 
departure from scientiﬁc norms. For as Herschel attempted 
to explain the scientiﬁc method to his lay audience, he 
crashed against the problem that induction simply didn’t 
work. And rather than dutifully recycling Bacon’s malfunc-
tioning logic, he bravely conjured up a new hypothesis: 
Instead of distilling millions of inductions into logical law, the 
scientist’s mind jumps from a few data points to hypothesize a 

88
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
provisional cause, which it uses to narrate bold predictions that 
can be veriﬁed via experiment.
Or in Herschel’s words: “Such is the tendency of the 
human mind to speculation, that on the least idea of an 
analogy between a few phenomena, it leaps forward, as it 
were, to a cause or law, to the temporary neglect of all the 
rest; so that, in fact, almost all our principal inductions 
must be regarded as a series of ascents and descents, and 
of conclusions from a few cases, veriﬁed by trial on many.” 
Such “leap[ing]” to a possible “cause,” Herschel pointed 
out, was how Nicolas Copernicus had overturned the medi-
eval view of the solar system. The solar system had not 
been inducted in every minute detail, yet Copernicus had 
seen enough through his telescopic lenses to identify a 
ﬂaw in the traditional theory that the earth sat, still, at the 
system’s center. So, oﬀ the facts that he possessed, Coper-
nicus vaulted to a new narrative: the earth orbited the sun. 
That narrative then yielded the astonishing prediction 
that the planet Venus had crescent phases— a prediction that 
subsequent astronomers conﬁrmed.
With this reformulation of the Copernican Revolution, 
Herschel provoked high alarm in England’s scientiﬁc 
establishment. Herschel’s good friend William Whewell— a 
forward- enough thinker to have coined the term “scien-
tist” as a replacement for “natural philosopher”— agitatedly 
responded that Herschel’s method of speculative leaps 
would mean that science wasn’t really science; it was a 
“guess.” To fend oﬀ this incursion of imagination into the 
scientiﬁc method, Whewell sternly reminded his friend 
about Bacon’s warning against vaulting past the facts— 
and about Herschel’s own celebration of Newton. Had 
Newton not been utterly opposed to notional guesswork? 

89
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
Had Newton not, when pressed for an explanation for 
gravity, famously replied, “Hypotheses non ﬁngo”— “I 
don’t jump to conclusions”? Had Newton not stuck always 
to inductive mathematics?
Herschel persisted, however, in his incautious apostasy, 
for his years of patient induction had revealed to him that 
both the Old (medieval) Logic and the New (Baconian) 
Logic were wrong. During his nocturnal vigils, he had col-
lected more raw data than Aristotle or Newton— or indeed, 
anyone else in history. Yet that raw data had not produced 
any major scientiﬁc breakthroughs. Such breakthroughs, 
he saw now, required narrative conjectures. That was how 
science really advanced.
True to Herschel’s own conjecture, this was how 
nineteenth- century science itself proceeded. Shortly after 
Herschel’s book was published in 1830, it was read avidly 
by a young Charles Darwin, who leveraged its conjecture- 
then- test method to leap from a few Galapagos ﬁnches to 
the hypothesis of evolution by natural selection. After 
which, Darwin devoted himself to conﬁrming his specula-
tion via predictions about the particulars of blue- eyed cats, 
dung beetles, and human emotions.
In 1871, Herschel was buried at Westminster Abbey, 
where his grave now sits between the tombs of Newton 
and Darwin, a ﬁtting place for the man who served as the 
transition between the Enlightenment scientiﬁc method 
of computational induction and the modern scientiﬁc 
method of narrative speculation. But even though Her-
schel had made room in science for creative experiment, 
logic’s ghost still lingered.
Until six decades after Herschel was laid to rest, a ﬁnal 
exorcism was performed by Karl Popper.

90
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
FROM HERSCHEL BACK TO POPPER
Popper was drawn into science by the work of Albert 
Einstein.
(Einstein is this chapter’s seventh protagonist, after 
Eccles, the soups, Popper, Bacon, Herschel, and Darwin. 
Which means that you might be feeling a bit lost in all the 
characters and their subplots. What do these people have to 
do with storythinking? Or even with each other?
If such questions are creeping into your head, here are 
two ways to answer them:
 1. Rewind the previous pages to focus on the narrative jumps 
from character to character, helping your synapses do a 
Copernicus (see the previous section) and hypothesize 
why.
 2. Keep forging ahead in half- comprehension until you reach 
the chapter’s end, enabling your synapses to do like the 
character critics (see chapter 4) and reverse- engineer the 
overall plot via causal thinking.
Why should you bother doing that extra work when this 
chapter’s author could have spared you the trouble by trim-
ming a few characters? Because the instant you grasp why 
the soup- spark war leads to Herschel’s telescope leads to 
Albert Einstein, you’ll feel your synapses connect a vast 
range of actors into a single sequence of events, conﬁrm-
ing the power of your brain’s storythinking machinery by 
experiencing it, ﬁrsthand.)
Einstein, like Darwin, made a narrative leap. After spot-
ting a few anomalies in science’s existing theories, he used 
a sequence of storythinking imaginations— where he ran 

91
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
alongside sunbeams and dreamed of “a beam of light as an 
electromagnetic ﬁeld at rest though spatially oscillating”— to 
invent a new theory, relativity, in which gravity bent light to 
a diﬀerent degree than in Newton’s old physics.
Einstein’s adventurous prediction was put to the test in 
1919, when the British astronomers Arthur Stanley Edding-
ton and Frank Watson Dyson journeyed to West Africa and 
East Brazil with giant lenses for photographing the May 29 
solar eclipse. Six months later, the snapshot results were 
announced to a dumbfounded world: Einstein had pre-
dicted right! Relativity was true!
Popper was enthralled— yet skeptical. Typically split of 
mind, he was convinced that Einstein’s theory diﬀered 
from the pseudoscience of Marx and Freud— yet simulta-
neously convinced that it was logically incomplete. And as 
Popper bent his ferocious reason to scrutinize the data 
before him, he realized: both sides of his mind were right. 
Einstein’s theory wasn’t pseudoscience, and it also wasn’t a 
logical proof. Against what the world believed, relativity 
had not been veriﬁed by the 1919 solar eclipse. This was 
because veriﬁcation exceeded the power of empirical 
experiments: experiments couldn’t conﬁrm a scientiﬁc 
theory, any more than an anecdote (or indeed, a billion 
anecdotes) could conﬁrm an absolute truth. Yet even so, 
Popper saw that Einstein had gone beyond Marx and 
Freud. His new theory of light had operated as a counter-
narrative that had successfully anticipated the major plot 
twist of the Eddington- Dyson expedition. And now that the 
twist had transpired, Einstein’s theory could be used to 
predict further plot twists that could themselves be tested 
via innovative experiments, creatively expanding the prac-
tice of science.

92
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
With this, Popper proved what Herschel had intuited: 
science wasn’t built of logic. It was built of speculative nar-
ratives from outlying events. To the extent that logic played 
a role, it was to debunk errant hypotheses and establish the 
permanent uncertainty of the remainder, encouraging 
inventive research like Eddington and Dyson’s globe- 
trotting supercameras.
In 1934, Popper sketched the basics of this scientiﬁc 
method in Logik der Forschung— The Logic of Scientiﬁc Dis-
covery— a tersely worded monograph that produced a mix 
of apathy and head scratching. For as readers slowly unrid-
dled Popper’s dense prose, they realized that his title was 
misleading: the work it designated was not so much a logic 
as an unlogic. Rather than providing a systematic calculus 
for doing science, it urged scientists to be as imaginative 
as Einstein— and to then dedicate themselves to falsifying 
what they’d just imagined.
Befuddled as to how they were to achieve such great 
ﬂights of fancy (and equally befuddled as to why they 
would then want to turn against their own creations), the 
book’s readers therefore acted rationally: they ignored Pop-
per’s method and kept up their bickering over diﬀerent 
interpretations of the same inductions.
Hence it was that Popper found himself relegated to his 
anonymous faculty position in New Zealand. But when 
Popper met Eccles, Eccles realized: Popper’s method could 
help end the soup- spark disagreement. In the past, both 
sides had devoted their energies to proving they were right. 
Yet now, following Popper’s method, Eccles would do the 
opposite: run an experiment to prove he was wrong. If 
the experiment failed, he’d then set about debunking the 

93
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
soups. If the experiment succeeded, he’d concede that 
there was more to the brain than electricity.
So, that’s what Eccles did on the warm summer’s eve in 
1951. He sedated the frightened cat and shaved its lower 
back. He prepared an intracellular electrode, its tip so nar-
row that it could plug into a single feline nerve. He slid the 
electrode into the sleeping animal’s spinal cord, tapping a 
quadriceps motor neuron. And he ﬁxed his eyes on a 
cathode- ray ampliﬁer, a blinking technology that measured 
the neuron’s transmembrane voltage. If the voltage fell, 
that would instantly falsify the spark hypothesis, proving 
that Eccles had, for his entire career, been wrong.
The voltage plunged. Eccles had been totally, utterly mis-
taken. His electronic theory of the synapse evaporated in a 
cathode blink. But while the experiment falsiﬁed Eccles’s 
prior publications, it aﬃrmed something else: his worth as 
a scientist. Instantly acknowledging that he’d been incor-
rect, he dashed oﬀ a letter to his rival Henry Dale, conced-
ing defeat. The war with the soups had ended. The sparks 
were extinguished.
Dale was extremely pleased. He wrote Eccles back, con-
gratulating his “newfound enthusiasm” for the soups’ posi-
tion. But Dale’s self- satisfaction led him astray. Eccles hadn’t 
become a soup. Instead, hewing strictly to Popper’s method, 
he’d just stopped being a spark. He’d come to acknowledge 
that there was more to the brain than electricity— a more 
that might conform to the soup synapse but also might 
ramble elsewhere, into the unknown.
Subsequent experiments have conﬁrmed this latter pos-
sibility. Where the soups focused their attention on a sin-
gle chemical neurotransmitter (acetylcholine), we now 

94
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
think that the synapse contains an enormous variety of 
machinery, some of it chemical, much of it peptide. Are we 
right about that? We can never say for sure. But thanks to 
Eccles— who’d be granted his own Nobel in 1963 for his 
summer eve experiment— we can be quite certain that the 
brain is more than electric.
Which, to pull together this chapter’s wending historical 
narrative, explains how the brain can do the Herschel- 
Popper method of science, escaping the strictures of logi-
cal induction to speculate creatively.
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF  
SCIENTIFIC SPECULATION
The more- than- electric brain machinery glimpsed by 
Eccles emerged about a billion years ago in tentacle- 
mouthed jellyﬁsh known as archaic cnidarians.
Those cnidarians possessed special cells that paralyzed 
prey with stinging peptides . . .  until through an act of hap-
penstance, the peptides were repurposed as internal sting-
ers. Instead of being dumped into external ocean waters, 
they were deployed by one cnidarian cell to jolt another into 
acting.
This peptide system was the genesis of the animal syn-
apse. (Or at least, that’s our best unfalsiﬁed guess.) And as 
the cnidarian peptide cells specialized, becoming neurons, 
the synapse revealed an unexpected potential: it could do 
more than link neurons to other kinds of cells. It could 
link neurons to neurons, such that one action activated 
another, activated another, activated another.

95
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
Thus started the animal nervous system, leading even-
tually to the feline spine— and the human brain.
The human brain contains a vast number of neurons. 
(Our current best guess is about 85 billion.) And most of 
those neurons are synaptically interconnected. They’re part of 
a hugely involuted jellyﬁsh that is incessantly stinging itself.
Why? Why so many neurons, jolting each other with 
peptides? Why has the synapse’s machinery become such 
a gigantic part of our headspace?
The answer from logic is: storage and processing power. 
But if that’s what our synapses are providing, they’re 
extraordinarily bad at their job. Our brain’s memory is 
weak— and dodgy. It can record far less raw information 
than a comparatively sized hard drive and recall it with 
much less accuracy. Nor is our brain that good at crunch-
ing data. If it were, then we wouldn’t need to spend so 
many agonizing years in school, grinding away at math 
and critical thinking.
The alternative hypothesis from storythinking is that 
our synapses are contributing to the brain’s core behav-
ioral function: plotting original actions. How, exactly, syn-
apses do that, we can’t say. Yet we can, like Herschel and 
Darwin and Einstein, productively conjecture:

Q
Since our neurons contribute to plotting via the generation 
of actions . . .  

Q
And since our synapses link one neuron to another . . .  

Q
Our synapses contribute to plotting via the linking of actions.
Our synapses, that is, chain together individual actions 
into causal sequences, allowing our brain to improvise, 

96
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
test, and revise cognitive narratives. By doing so, our syn-
apses enlarge our neurons’ trial- and- error process into an 
experimental method for inventing and adapting plans. 
On a micro level, the method works by speculatively gener-
ating (or eliminating) a this- leads- to- that connection between 
one neuron and another. On a macro level, it works by 
expanding, editing, branching, innovating, pruning, and 
redirecting our mental strategies.
This storythinking process is lent enormous plasticity 
by the sheer number of synapses in the human neocor-
tex. They’re estimated to be in the trillions, enabling our 
brain to fork and ﬂex action scripts in almost endless 
new directions, innovating art, technology, business, and 
politics.
Such innovation lies beyond the power of computer AI. 
AI can only reiterate symbolic logic’s three preprogrammed 
actions: AND, OR, NOT. Which is why AI is limited to 
deducing— based on the data ﬂowing into it— what sport, 
science, or dance is. It cannot freestyle fresh actions that 
expand what sport, science, and dance can do.
To change this situation, we’d need to create a computer 
capable of rearranging its core architecture. Which is to say, 
we’d need to exchange the etched transistors of modern 
CPUs with free- ﬂoating hardware that could riﬀ itself into 
original circuitry. Beyond the obvious engineering chal-
lenges that this poses, it’s rendered impossible from the get-
 go by the fact that electronic systems are governed by math-
ematical equations of voltage and current. Step outside those 
equations, and the systems melt or shut down. This means 
that computer brains cannot be blindly improvised; they 
must be designed in advance to stick to the math. Such stick-
ing is what their current logic gates are engineered, precisely, 

97
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
to do. But if those gates were freed to shuﬄe about, they’d 
swiftly unglue, frying themselves or blinking out.
For a thinking machine to get around this hurdle, it 
would thus have to be mechanically diﬀerent from a com-
puter. Instead of running a continuous electron ﬂow from 
an outside power source, it would need its individual cables 
to be powered internally. And it would also need its cables to 
be buﬀered from one another, so that rather than passing 
on their electric charges like transistors do, they plug into 
one another nonelectrically, enabling them to ad lib action 
circuits that escape the design requirement of electronics.
Which, as Eccles discovered on that summer’s eve, is 
exactly how the brain works.
THE BRAIN’S STORYTHINKING ARCHITECTURE
The brain is composed of neurons, which are electric 
cables powered internally (via mitochondrial ATP) and 
joined by nonelectric plugs (i.e., synapses).
This mixed architecture gives our neurons the beneﬁt 
of both electronic and nonelectronic transmission. The 
beneﬁt of the former is speed, empowering our thoughts 
to zip with light’s rapidity. The beneﬁt of the latter is 
experimental action; by enabling our neurons to freely 
alter their connections to each other, our synapses allow 
us to improvise our mental architecture in ways that 
purely electronic machines cannot. Thus it is that our 
gray matter can do what Darwin and Einstein did: hypoth-
esize, imagine, think new. And thus it is that our species 
can speculate adaptively, giving us an edge in life’s ever- 
shifting battle.

98
THE BRAIN MACHINERY OF STORYTHINKING
That battle— like every asymmetric conﬂict— is charac-
terized by the two factors that John Herschel’s Prussian 
contemporary Carl von Clausewitz detected in war: dynamic 
opposition that changes in response to our success, forcing 
us to counter- change; and an uncertain environment where 
evolving conditions produce intractable data “fog.”
These factors are the demise of computer AI; its statisti-
cal methods cannot gain traction in volatility or murk. But 
both can be productively engaged by our neuroanatomy. 
Our neuroanatomy can operate with limited data, because 
limited data (as we saw in chapter 4) is the province of nar-
rative, and narrative (as we’ve experienced in this chapter) 
is the province of our brain’s synaptic machinery. Thanks 
to that machinery, we’re able to survive in fast- changing, 
contested domains where the only intel is anomalous— 
and where we must constantly compete against original 
adversaries.
If we wanted to do an Eilhard von Domarus (see chap-
ter 5) and devise an Artiﬁcial Intelligence that could out- 
strategize the human brain, we’d therefore need to pursue 
one of two routes: program a logical AI with all the facts of 
nature or invent a postcomputer AI that swaps out transis-
tors for a mixed electronic- nonelectronic unit akin to the 
animal neuron. The ﬁrst route lies beyond current science; 
the second, beyond current engineering.
Yet even though such superhuman AI lies past time’s 
horizon, we’ll see in the next chapter that we can still cre-
ate a superior new intelligence. That intelligence is: us, 
with a story- software upgrade.

7
Improving Storythinking
I
n the spring of 1927, as red tulips popped in New York’s 
city parks, the scholars of Columbia University’s litera-
ture department peered closely at the wizard.
He had athletic legs and dark, wavy hair. And more 
enchantingly still, he possessed a mind that thought in 
fairy tales and legends.
With that mind, the wizard had discovered that his 
dreams contained a story. A story created by the author of 
the world’s religions. A story that held the key to fathom-
ing life’s true meaning.
Yet even so, the wizard grasped less light than shadow: 
How exactly did the story start? Where precisely did it end? 
What middle chapters bound its cosmic plot?
Hungry to ﬁnd out, the wizard made a request of 
Columbia’s scholars: Let me study the fables gathered on your 
bookshelves. Help me master their wide geographies and vast 
time scales, discovering the myth that connects the globe’s great 
narratives into one.

100
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
The scholars pondered this earnest proposal. And they 
decided: for all the wizard’s charming seriousness, he was 
a wannabe. So, they denied him his PhD and forced him 
out of their department’s new white halls to wander crum-
bling archives to the East, studying Sanskrit and trouba-
dours. They condescended after his return, goading him to 
ﬂee upstate to Woodstock, where he self- educated for ﬁve 
years in a rented shack ﬁlled with haphazardly gathered 
paperbacks. They smirked at his intellectual quest, calling 
it magic, mysticism, and theosophy.
But the wizard would laugh last. His quest led to a best- 
selling book and then the biggest blockbuster in Holly-
wood history. Until ﬁnally, he came back from the dead to 
whisper his gospel. A gospel that became— and remains— 
the world’s most popular theory of story.
The wizard’s name was Joseph Campbell. His bestseller 
was The Hero with a Thousand Faces, published in 1949 by 
Pantheon. His blockbuster was Star Wars, directed in 1977 
by George Lucas. His posthumous gospel was The Power 
of Myth, aired in June 1988 on PBS with Bill Moyers.
From him, millions have taken a map to the ultimate 
story, a map known as the Hero’s Journey. And even now, 
when so much has been gleaned from Campbell, we have 
more to learn. Because we always learn the most from 
mistakes. And the wizard made an epic error.
THE WIZARD’S ERROR
The scholars thought that Joseph Campbell’s error was to 
foray into pseudoscience. First, he trusted in the monomyth. 
.

101
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
Second, in the symbolism of dreams. Third, in a collective 
unconscious.
The ﬁrst bit of pseudoscience came from James George 
Frazer’s The Golden Bough (1890), which alleged that every 
global myth— from Africa to Asia to the Americas— was a 
rendition of the same eternal tale: a hero who sacriﬁced 
himself to resurrect the world. The second bit of pseudo-
science came from Sigmund Freud’s The Interpretation of 
Dreams (1899), which claimed that our nightly imagina-
tions contained a symbolic language that could be decoded 
to reveal the repressed wishes of our unconscious. The 
third bit of pseudoscience came from Carl Jung’s Über die 
archetypen des kollektiven unbewussten (1934), which, by 
merging Frazer and Freud with strains of Plato’s philo-
sophical idealism, styled our minds as buddings of an 
intergalactic psyche implanted with eternal archetypes: the 
hero, the mother, the teacher. Mashed together, these three 
pseudoscientiﬁc inﬂuences produced Campbell’s theory of 
the Hero’s Journey: A universal human narrative that chron-
icles the metaphorical death and rebirth of our questing soul 
as it travels, like an ancient demigod into the underworld, to 
bring back life’s sacred truth from the cavern of our shared 
unconscious.
But although the scholars were right to brand this as 
magical thinking, that’s not the real ﬂaw in Campbell’s 
approach to story. The real ﬂaw is more fundamental. 
You can detect it in the very opening sentence of Camp-
bell’s 1949 bestseller: “Whether we listen with aloof 
amusement to the dreamlike mumbo jumbo of some 
red- eyed witch doctor of the Congo, or read with culti-
vated rapture thin translations from the sonnets of the 

102
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
mystic Lao- tse; now and again crack the hard nutshell of 
an argument of Aquinas, or catch suddenly the shining 
meaning of a bizarre Eskimo fairy tale: it will be always 
the one, shape- shifting yet marvelously constant story.” 
At the bottom of this stream of outdated anthropology 
lies: “always the one . . .  constant story.” And that is the 
slip in Campbell’s thinking. To seek one eternal story is to 
convert narrative into logic, like Aristotle did in Topics 
(see chapter 2). It’s to think in terms of ideal product instead 
of practical process, chasing the metaphysical dream of ulti-
mate truth at the expense of story’s biological function: 
creative action.
To pinpoint this as Campbell’s core mistake is to realize 
that it extends far beyond him. Plenty of academics who 
dismiss the Hero’s Journey as quackery are guilty of treat-
ing story as a product, not a process. This is the error of 
modern philosophers, semioticians, screenwriting gurus, 
and AI researchers who try to reduce movies and novels to 
timeless story structures, ﬁxed literary genres, or univer-
sal themes. This is the misstep made by anyone who 
believes that every successful Hollywood script or ﬁction 
paperback derives its plot from a shortlist of immortal 
formulas.
In order to escape this evolutionary dead end, we need 
to overturn Campbell’s method. Instead of searching for 
the best narrative product, we need to search for a better 
narrative process. We need, that is, to ﬁnd a more eﬀective 
method for generating narrative plans and strategies that 
can help us navigate life’s inﬁnite possibilities.
That’s the scientiﬁc answer to Campbell’s quest. That’s 
the real path to becoming a story wizard.

103
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
BECOMING A STORY WIZARD
Storythinking, as we’ve seen over the preceding chapters, is a 
neural reﬁnement of Darwinian evolution. It’s a more fruit-
ful version of nature’s blind mechanism of problem solving 
and innovation. If we want to storythink more expertly, we 
therefore need to continue reﬁning evolution’s core process. 
Or to be precise, we need to continue reﬁning evolution’s two 
core processes, creation and selection. Creation generates 
functional variety. Selection winnows that variety.
“Functional variety” is another way of saying: a diversity 
of causes. Causes are processes, so they’re diﬀerent from 
words, representations, and the other symbol stuﬀ that 
Campbell saw as story’s essence. That symbol stuﬀ yields 
truth and its ﬁnal products: morality and meaning. Causes, 
in contrast, yield action and its ﬂuid oﬀspring: change and 
opportunity.
Philosophically, all causes fall into the same ontological 
family. Practically, they vary widely:

Q
If you’re an engineer, your typical causes are tools and 
procedures.

Q
If you’re an entrepreneur, goods and services.

Q
If you’re a politico, laws and slogans.

Q
If you’re a soldier, tactics and weapons.

Q
If you’re a health care worker, therapies and medicines.

Q
If you’re a novelist or screenwriter, characters and 
storyworlds.
From this real- world vantage, creation can be the mak-
ing of new tools, goods, laws, tactics, therapies, characters, 

104
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
etc. Or it can be the ﬁnding of new uses for old tools, 
goods, laws, tactics, therapies, characters, etc.
Selection, meanwhile, is ranking the eﬀects of those 
tools, goods, characters, etc. If one tool saws faster than 
another, it earns the higher score for quick construction. If 
one character generates more empathy than another, it 
earns the higher score for sentimental ﬁction.
Since the physical world is in continual ﬂux, driven by 
conﬂict between asymmetric life- forms, such rankings 
aren’t absolute. They’re based upon performance at a given 
task. A hammer can be ranked above a saw when it comes 
to driving nails, while a saw can be ranked above a ham-
mer when it comes to shaping wood.
This means that there can be no ultimate tool, tactic, 
medicine, or screenplay. Nor can there even be a better tool, 
tactic, medicine, or screenplay, because what is handy now 
can in ﬁve minutes be unworkable— and what is rubbish 
in my cultural niche can be treasure in yours.
Yet even though we can’t manufacture perfect story-
thoughts, we can nonetheless cultivate better storythinking—
better in the practical sense of being more eﬀective and eﬃ-
cient (or, in biological terms, generating more growth at lower 
suﬀering and waste).
That improvement can be achieved in three broad ways: 
maximizing creation, honing selection, and separating 
creation and selection.
Here’s the basics of each.

105
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
Maximizing Creation
Creation is enlarged by a focus on what could work. And 
what could work is enlarged by emphasizing the speciﬁc 
potential of each individual cause.
Or, to put it in ordinary language, we can maximize our 
brain’s creativity by looking at a given tool, good, law, tac-
tic, therapy, or character— and focusing on what makes it 
unique.
To identify that uniqueness, ask: What can this cause do 
that no other cause can? What’s peculiar, particular, or 
exclusive about its function?
Once you’ve got your mind in the habit of emphasizing 
the singularity of individual causes (the opposite of Camp-
bell’s method of abstracting into general types), you can 
generate more could work via three techniques:
(1) Work backward from eﬀects. Start by imagining what 
you want to do. Then imagine a behavior or tool that can 
accomplish that end, reverse- engineering from a new eﬀect 
to an original cause. This reverse- engineering functions 
better when you stay speciﬁc, pinpointing exactly what you 
want to achieve and inventing a cause that achieves only 
that eﬀect. (If you instead imagine a cause that can accom-
plish multiple eﬀects, you’ll drift toward magical thinking 
and its omnipotent causes: God, symbolism, and the phi-
losopher’s stone.)
(2) Hybridize causes. This is the technique beneath sex-
ual reproduction, genetic recombination, and other bio-
logical procedures for increasing functional diversity. Use 
it to mix and match preexisting practices and tool uses 
to  generate new actions, like when you marry character 

106
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
behaviors from one story with world opportunities from 
another. For this technique to be eﬀective, don’t hybridize 
structures, that is, products. Hybridize causal agents, that 
is, processes.
(3) Maintain an inclusive library. An inclusive library 
allows for conservation. Conservation is often reserved 
for tools and tactics that have a history of great achieve-
ment, earning them a place in the canon of classic inven-
tions and discoveries. But conservation should also be 
used to keep around old tools and tactics that didn’t 
 succeed. Those past losers have as much potential as 
past winners— and possibly more. That’s because, like a 
Michelangelo born into an era without a Sistine Chapel, 
they haven’t found their milieu . . .  yet. By hanging on to 
these unrealized Renaissance makers, you can rescue 
tomorrow’s potential from today’s short- term pressures, 
safeguarding alternative futures for when we really need 
them.
Join these techniques with an attitude of open- mindedness. 
Remind yourself that no action is intrinsically better than 
any other and that the future is permanently uncertain. 
These two biological realities mean that any cause (no mat-
ter how weird or apparently unfeasible) could supply you 
with the power to handle life’s next twist.
Honing Selection
Selection is honed by a precise sense of the needed result. 
The more precise your sense, the faster and less wasteful 
your selection process.

107
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
To achieve that clarity, ask yourself: What’s the mini-
mum successful outcome? Not: What’s the best possible 
outcome? Not: What other things would I like to accom-
plish? Simply and purely: What’s the bare threshold of vic-
tory? What single event constitutes success?
That honing can be sharpened via three techniques:
(1) Design tightly controlled experiments. Do what scien-
tists do: eliminate variables, isolating the eﬀect of every 
tested action. Measure exactly what each cause is doing, so 
you can conﬁdently determine which of your tools, laws, 
characters, etc., are working— and how.
(2) Reject optimization for good enough. Optimization is 
the goal of logic and its outputs (like critical and conver-
gent thinking), but outside the timeless zone of mathemat-
ical idealism, it’s a dangerous pursuit. To seek the optimal 
in any dynamic, asymmetrically contested environment is 
to invite catastrophic fragility. Why? Because the environ-
mental niche to which you have perfectly adapted can at 
any moment go sideways, shattering your honed ideal. 
Better to maintain your overall ﬂexibility by specializing 
only to the degree required to get by. So, when selecting, 
focus exclusively on what you need, not what you want. 
(Reserve what you want for the earlier, creation phase of 
storythinking.)
(3) Prioritize second- generation outcomes. In natural selec-
tion, the ﬁnish line isn’t having children. It’s having 
 children who themselves have children. That’s sustainable 
achievement. That’s balancing the short- term with the 
long, and it’s the minimum for biological success. Success 
isn’t success if it sacriﬁces tomorrow for today.

108
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
Join these techniques with an attitude of detached ruth-
lessness toward your creations. For your grandchildren to 
bloom, you must weed your sons and daughters.
Separating Creation from Selection
Creation and selection have fundamentally opposite 
actions. That opposition is narratively generative, but logi-
cally it seems ineﬃcient. The temptation can therefore be 
to subordinate either creation or selection to the other, 
smoothing irrational clash into harmony.
Such “improvement” will ruin your evolutionary pro-
cess, replacing the fruitful antagonism of natural selection 
with the sterile unity of Campbell’s monoproduct. To carry 
forward nature’s method and maximize innovation, you 
need to ward oﬀ idealism and its dream of perfect alchemy.
In practical terms, this means that you must avoid pre-
judging your creations. When you imagine a new tool, law, 
or character, don’t shape or discard it based on your past 
experiences. That’s allowing selection into your creative 
process, pruning the orchard before it’s been watered.
It also means that you should never play favorites dur-
ing selection. Once you’ve decided to test a storythought, 
treat it with the heartless impartiality with which nature 
treats a new life- form. Don’t permit optimism— the hope 
of what might be— to blunt the edge of your cull. That’s 
allowing your creative process into selection, coddling 
diversity instead of trusting it to ﬁght for itself.
The more diligently you preserve this partition between 
creation and selection, the more the two will boost each 
other. Creation will yield more narrative prototypes, 
allowing selection to be more vigorously disinterested. 

109
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
Meanwhile, selection will yield a crisper sense of each 
cause’s unique action, allowing creation to be more spe-
ciﬁcally original.
THE BENEFITS OF IMPROVING STORYTHINKING
The three ways of improving storythinking aren’t easy. 
Unlike Campbell’s plug- and- play formula, they plunge us 
into the uncertain conﬂict of Darwin’s cauldron. Splitting 
our brain between creation and selection, they force our 
thoughts to gallop simultaneously in contrary directions: 
optimism and realism; anything goes and must work; lib-
erty and discipline.
So, the natural question becomes: Why bother with that 
head- straining labor? Why challenge ourselves to become 
better storythinkers? What if we have priorities other than 
creativity or innovation? Or what if we’re not persuaded by 
the fact that our neurons evolved to storythink? Perhaps 
they did, but what does that matter? We don’t need to be 
tied to history— or to nature. We can leave behind our 
ancient synapses to engineer a more rational future of 
Hero’s Journeys.
Yes, absolutely, we can. But in any future that contains 
human brains or environmental instability, there will be 
practical beneﬁts to storythinking. The main ones are:

Q
The personal beneﬁts of physical, emotional, and mental 
growth.

Q
The social beneﬁts of inclusive and resilient communities 
that maximize the biological possibilities for individual 
freedom, development, and achievement.

110
IMPROVING STORYTHINKING

Q
The spiritual beneﬁts of discovering the meaning of life. 
Or at least the meaning that resonates with our brain, giv-
ing us the desire to extract the most from every waking 
heartbeat.
For the ﬁrst beneﬁt, turn to chapter  8. For the second, 
chapter 9. For the third, chapter 10.
Or, keep turning the pages into all three.

8
Storythinking for Personal Growth
T
he quickest path to a better tomorrow is luck. Which 
is why luck is so wonderful— and always to be wel-
comed when it chances by. But while we’re waiting for 
luck’s next arbitrary visit, we can busy ourselves with a 
more sustainable path to better tomorrows: growth.
Growth is the action of life. It’s reacting oﬀ problems 
and reaching toward opportunities. It’s organic, creative, 
and nonteleological. Which is to say: it’s natural, unpre-
dictable, and branching.
Because growth is natural, it’s frequently automatic, 
spontaneous, and insentient: grass grows, and so do bacte-
ria, fungi, and ecosystems. Yet growth isn’t limited to 
nonintentional processes; it can also be informed by con-
scious planning. That planning makes growth more rapid, 
diverse, and sustainable. And like all planning, it comes 
from storythinking.
Unlike plant growth, storythinking isn’t taught in mod-
ern biology classrooms. But its method of intelligent devel-
opment has been studied by an empiricist tradition that 

112
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
spans from Renaissance writers (such as Shakespeare) to 
Romantics (such as Victor Hugo) to modern psychologists 
(such as William James) to Progressive reformers (such as 
W. E. B. Du Bois).
So varied are these names and ﬁelds of inquiry that they 
may seem to have little, even nothing, in common; and cer-
tainly, the tradition is a loose and mostly unincorporated 
one, sprawling free like prairie wildﬂower. Yet its spontane-
ous ramble was neatly summed in the early twentieth cen-
tury by a University of Chicago professor who, over the 
course of a ninety- two- year existence, wandered the tradi-
tion’s main savannahs, from Shakespeare to Romanticism, 
modern psychology, and Progressivism.
That long- lived, wide- striding professor was John Dewey. 
And his summation was: Growth is born of narrative conﬂict.
THE ROOTS OF DEWEY’S THINKING
Dewey was recruited to Chicago in 1892, at a time of mas-
sive reinvention. Plucked from its original ten- acre campus 
on the dusty corner of 35th and Cottage Grove, the univer-
sity had been transplanted to Hyde Park’s garden homes 
and lakeshore drives by oil magnate John D. Rockefeller, 
who’d entrusted its future development to a youthful Bap-
tist philologist by the name of William Rainey Harper.
Harper was an antiquarian with an innovative bent, and 
he felt an instinctive kinship with the thirty- two- year- old 
Dewey. Dewey would, Harper was certain, remake Chica-
go’s philosophy department. Yet as it happened, Dewey 
went rather further than Harper anticipated. Dewey didn’t 

113
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
just remake Chicago’s department; he set about re- creating 
all of professional philosophy.
Professional philosophy was then in the throes of a col-
lapse that had begun in 1859 with the publication of 
Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species. The Origin had 
stirred naked horror in churches— and an only slightly 
more concealed dismay in philosophy departments. Those 
departments had long instituted eternal natural forms 
(e.g., animal and rational and man) as the foundation of 
logic, which they’d in turn instituted as the foundation 
of ontology, epistemology, and metaphysics. The perpetu-
ity of the natural forms was therefore the stability of phi-
losophy’s whole ediﬁce; because man was forever, so were 
truth and justice.
But then in the Origin, Darwin advanced his theory of 
natural selection, challenging the immutability of biologi-
cal life- forms by proposing a nonrational mechanism 
through which species evolved— then went extinct. And 
although this Darwinian narrative was radically iconoclas-
tic, it was also indisputably compelling. Reconciling the 
natural world’s complexities with greater elegance than 
any logic textbook, it explained why dinosaur fossils 
existed, why Australia and Argentina diﬀered in their 
fauna, and why the anatomy of man contained so many 
animal vestiges, from the tail stump of his coccyx bone to 
the panic, hate, and anger of his primordial heart.
Thus did Darwin’s origin story of man crumble logic’s 
timeless cornerstone. And thus did tumble truth and jus-
tice and the rest of philosophy’s cathedral architecture.
So total was this disaster that it seemed to many a phi-
losopher that logic had run its course. If philosophy was 

114
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
to help humanity regain a higher permanence, it would 
have to do so via the intuition of the New England Tran-
scendentalists, the faith of Søren Kierkegaard, or some 
other extrarational source.
But logic was not ﬁnished. Although it had barely 
changed since Aristotle, it would in Darwin’s century develop 
two remarkable new forms, each of which kindled the 
hope that philosophy could follow the example of man— 
and evolve.
LOGIC’S TWO NEW FORMS
One of the new forms was Gottlob Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift, or 
Concept- Script: A formula language, modeled on arithmetic, 
for pure thought.
Published in 1879, this ambitious book strove to covert 
human language into math. Words and grammar would 
become arithmetic symbols and equations, a transmuta-
tion that promised not only to debug human communica-
tion but also to perfect intelligence by reducing verbal con-
ceptions (that is, the thoughts consciously articulated in 
human heads) to a rigorous calculus.
With this grand plan, Frege boldly advanced logic’s 
ancient syntax. Flexing beyond Aristotle’s Organon and its 
rigidly narrow utterances— all men are rational and Achilles 
is a man, therefore Achilles is rational— Frege’s concept- script 
captured supple and extensive arrangements of subjects, 
predicates, and quantities: Most people are capable of rea-
soned behavior, but Odysseus is the rare master of logic who is 
almost always rational, while Achilles is unusually emotional 
about military trophies.

115
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
This breakthrough had massive implications for phi-
losophy, yet as great an innovator as Frege was, he failed in 
his goal of replacing natural language with mathematical 
equations. Just like Aristotle, millennia before, he collided 
with the problem of action verbs (see chapter  5). Action 
verbs express action, and since action isn’t timeless, it 
couldn’t be translated into the perpetual is of mathematics, 
forcing Frege to limit his concept- script to nouns, adjec-
tives, and linking verbs.
It was to address this limit that the second new form of 
logic was devised. Its devisor was the German Idealist 
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, who in 1816 published his 
own ambitious book: Wissenschaft der Logik— Science of 
Logic. Because Hegel was writing six decades prior to 
Frege, he was unaware of the gap in Frege’s concept- script, 
but he’d spotted the same hole in Aristotle.
Aristotle was revered by Hegel as history’s greatest phi-
losopher, more brilliant even than Hegel’s ﬁrst idol, Plato. 
At the root of Hegel’s reverence lay his admiration for Aris-
totle’s syllogisms, which (like the schoolmen of ancient 
Byzantium, golden age Baghdad, and medieval Paris) Hegel 
saw as infallible, the very stuﬀ of God’s eternal Reason. Yet 
as much as Hegel admired Aristotle’s logic, he realized 
that it had overlooked something: biological change. Out-
side the logician’s window, the forest’s green stretched 
upward, and inside the logician’s chest, the heart’s blood 
pumped around. Such physical activities weren’t states of 
being; they were processes of becoming (or, in Hegel’s Ger-
man, Werden). And becoming wasn’t reducible to the syllo-
gism’s immortal present tense. For logic to fully compre-
hend the world, capturing not just the immutable heaven 
that God inhabited but the temporal earth that God had 

116
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
made below, it therefore needed to be enlarged. Aristotle’s 
ageless identities had to be joined to a logical apparatus 
that could encompass life’s dynamic to and fro.
That apparatus, Hegel concluded, was dialectic. Dialec-
tic’s most famous formula is thesis- antithesis- synthesis (see 
chapter 2), but dialectic can involve any two opposite enti-
ties that generate a third. In the case of becoming, the oppo-
sites are being and nothing, which in Hegel’s logic produce 
a struggle that carries life— like a sprouting acorn— from 
immaturity into the completeness of its intended form. 
From nature into Godhead; from dialectic into syllogism.
The new logics of Hegel and Frege were so revolution-
ary that they at ﬁrst produced more bewilderment than 
innovation, yet eventually, forward progress came. Frege’s 
concept- script was elevated by Bertrand Russell to the 
foundation of analytic philosophy, whence it helped inspire 
rational choice economics, game theory, computer AI, and 
the logical infrastructures of twenty- ﬁrst- century business, 
government, and public education. Meanwhile, Hegel’s 
dialectic birthed Marxism and much of modern continen-
tal philosophy.
And it also wended its way to Dewey.
DEWEY GOES DIALECTIC— AND BEYOND
In 1881, Dewey was a recent college grad, kicking about 
his home state of Vermont, teaching elementary school 
from Monday to Friday and browsing philosophy journals 
on Saturdays. Energized by both pursuits, he decided in 
the spring of 1882 to ﬁnd a way to pair them. And after 
locating a luggage trunk big enough to transport both his 

117
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
weekend reading and his weekday syllabi, he journeyed 
south to pursue a doctorate at Johns Hopkins University.
At Hopkins, Dewey encountered one of history’s most 
brilliant logicians, C. S. Peirce. But deeming Peirce too 
“mathematical,” Dewey immersed himself instead in 
Hegel’s dialectic, excited by its promise to map life’s dynamic 
character.
So compelling did Dewey ﬁnd Hegel’s dialectic that, had 
it been twenty- ﬁve years earlier, he might have become a 
committed Romantic. The intervening quarter century 
had, however, birthed Darwin’s Origin, a copy of which sat 
in the Hopkins philosophy library. And upon reading the 
narrative of natural selection, Dewey had an epiphany: 
Hegel had underplayed the problem with logic. The prob-
lem wasn’t that logic could not process change; the prob-
lem was that logic locked change on a ﬁxed route. On that 
route, change could proceed toward the ideal, or it could 
regress, away. The former was growth; the latter decay. But 
within logic’s timeless rule domain, change couldn’t itself 
change. It was always just forward and back, a train chug-
ging up and down a perpetual track.
This invariant locomotion had prompted Aristotle to 
make life teleological: every living thing— every acorn, 
every human child— was in his view programmed to grow 
into a predetermined archetype. And it prompted Hegel’s 
new logic of dialectic to do the same. According to dialec-
tic, becoming was a logically mandated stage on the way to 
being. It was a beating heart destined to culminate in a per-
fect pulse, like an electrocardiogram paused as an ideal 
waveform inside the algebraic mind of God.
Such plotted idealism was attractive emotionally to 
Dewey. But he saw immediately that its logic had been 

118
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
sundered by Darwin’s Origin, which replaced teleology with 
the revelation that living species were forking, endlessly, to 
nowhere. To logic this was terrifying, because it meant the 
end of a permanent is. But to life, Dewey realized, it could 
be emancipating. It freed biological creatures from abso-
lute hierarchies of value and meaning, and in doing so it 
also liberated language, releasing “rational” and “man” 
from the cage of eternal signiﬁcation. Rather than being 
impelled to function as semiotic truths, these words could 
now operate as artisanal tools: useful ways of telling stories, 
crafting laws, and conversing about ethics.
Yet even as Dewey embraced this Darwinian revolution 
of philosophy, he didn’t cast away everything he’d gleaned 
from reading Hegel. Reaching into the rubble of Hegelian 
dialectic, he rescued one of its core innovations: the action 
of growth.
GROWTH FROM HEGEL TO DEWEY
In Hegel’s logic, “growth” is a synonym for “becoming.” 
It’s the process of life, the activity of living.
Hegel wasn’t the ﬁrst philosopher to emphasize growth; 
growth had played an important role in Aristotle’s meta-
physics. But Hegel nevertheless added a twist: where 
Aristotle had seen mental and physical development as 
upshots of natural algorithms, Hegel treated them as prod-
ucts of a collision between antagonistic elements. In Hegel’s 
logic, growth thus stopped being a computational output. 
And it became the oﬀspring of conﬂict. 
This Hegelian dynamic of growth out of conﬂict excited 
Dewey for a reason that Hegel could not have imagined: it 

119
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
oﬀered a way to reframe the most troubling aspect of 
Darwin’s new science. According to that science, life had 
come about for no reason and was headed to no particu-
lar destination, making it battle for the sake of battle, 
unending and without purpose. Such pointless violence 
was dismaying to the human brain, which is why even 
Darwin’s acolytes supported him reluctantly. They didn’t 
want (any more than Darwin himself had wanted) for 
nature to be aimless war; they simply felt that the only 
intellectually honest option aﬀorded by the Origin’s hard 
science was to accept the fundamental tragedy of lived 
existence.
But then, in Hegel’s claim that struggle could generate 
growth, Dewey saw a way to invest Darwinian conﬂict with 
purpose. That purpose wasn’t the logical one of Aristote-
lian nature or Hegelian dialectic, yet it possessed its own 
coherent mechanism: narrative. Like a story, it was gener-
ated by conﬂict. And like a story, it was psychologically 
resonant not because it contained permanent truths but 
because it provided the experience of discovering new pos-
sibilities for life activity, stimulating intense feelings of 
wonder, hope, and meaning.
Dewey began outlining this narrative natural philoso-
phy in an 1898 Monist essay, “Evolution and Ethics,” which 
ﬂipped the title of a lecture— “Ethics and Evolution”— 
delivered ﬁve years earlier by Thomas Henry Huxley. Hux-
ley was a staunch defender of Darwin’s theory of natural 
selection, so staunch that he earned himself the moniker 
“Darwin’s bulldog.” Yet despite that hard- won public repu-
tation, Huxley had deep misgivings about Darwinism’s 
moral consequences, and in his lecture, he’d declared that 
humanity’s ultimate goal was to evolve beyond evolution, 

120
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
replacing nature’s blind cruelty with cultivated charity: 
“the practice of that which is ethically best— what we call 
goodness or virtue— involves a course of conduct which, in 
all respects, is opposed to that which leads to success in 
the cosmic struggle for existence.” 
This pivot out of nature was intended to repudiate social 
Darwinism and eugenics, two pseudoscientiﬁc distortions 
of Darwin’s theory that appalled Huxley— and also Dewey. 
But while Dewey shared Huxley’s abhorrence of attempts 
to engineer a master race, he was also perturbed by Hux-
ley’s anti- Darwinian alternative. In fact, Huxley’s ethics 
struck Dewey as so unbiological that in his own lecture, he 
condemned it as literally antilife: “The man who regards 
his animal inheritance as evil in and of itself apart from its 
relation to aims proposed by his intelligence, has logically 
but one recourse,— to seek Nirvana. With him the princi-
ple of self- negation becomes absolute.”
In place of Huxley’s life- ending immaterialism, Dewey 
pivoted into a narrative of growth:
The growth of science, its application in invention to indus-
trial life, the multiplication and acceleration of means of 
transportation and intercommunication, have created a 
peculiarly unstable environment. . . .  In [that] environment, 
ﬂexibility of function, the enlargement of the range of uses 
to which one and the same organ, grossly considered, may 
be put, is a great, almost the supreme, condition of success. 
As such, any change in that direction is a favorable varia-
tion which must be selected.
Evolution’s upshot was thus to increase life’s “ﬂexibility of 
function,” or in other words, to do the opposite of what 

121
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
Huxley had claimed. Rather than culminating in an opti-
mally enlightened life- form (the human race) that broke 
from nature by devising eternal rules of right and wrong, 
evolution was a ceaseless process of selecting variants that 
contained more potential for variation. Hence our species 
had evolved the open- ended tools of opposable thumbs, 
plotting brains, and modern science, all of which had as 
their basic function the enlarging of options for future 
activity. The human cultures that Huxley had taken as 
proof of evolution’s obsolescence were instead evidence 
that evolution encouraged an ethics that did intentionally 
what natural selection had done unintentionally: grow 
life’s capacity to act more diversely.
With this rethinking of Darwinian evolution, Dewey 
rebooted his Chicago university department— and the rest 
of professional philosophy. Trading the metaphysical ideal 
of eternal signiﬁcation for a physical method of diversify-
ing function, he reframed conﬂict from a logical problem 
(to be solved via synthesis, abstraction, or rational decision 
making) into a narrative opportunity (for personal growth). 
The result was an ethics that harnessed struggle as a 
source of cultural and scientiﬁc innovation, leveraging the 
oppositions between divergent lives into practical ways to 
grow better at growing.
The rich possibilities for this evolutionary ethics can be 
gleaned from Dewey’s Romantic precursors: Johann Goethe, 
Victor Hugo, Charles Delacroix, Vincent van Gogh, and other 
philosopher- artists who sought an alternative to Enlighten-
ment logic in the vivacious clashes of Shakespearean drama. 
And more still of its possibilities can be gained from Dewey’s 
followers: Progressive educators and psychologists such as 
Du Bois, Ronald Salmon Crane, and Martin Seligman.

122
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
But while these possibilities are all worth exploring, we 
can, for summary purposes here, distill them to a single 
narrative process: harnessing conﬂict to generate personal 
growth of three kinds— physical, emotional, and intellectual.
THE THREE KINDS OF PERSONAL GROWTH
Physical Growth. Physical growth is generated by the con-
ﬂict between our mind and our body. That conﬂict is inher-
ent and automatic, but, like any narrative process, it can be 
rendered more fruitful by intentional storythinking (see 
chapter  7), yielding a three- part recipe for growing our 
physical range of motion:
 1. Listen with our mind to our body’s current range of 
motion, that is, our body’s existing physical narratives.
 2. Use those narratives not to deﬁne what our body is but to 
speculate on what our body could do.
 3. Convert those speculations into fresh narratives for our 
body to try.
To help our body attempt those fresh narratives, our 
mind can act like a dance partner, encouraging our body to 
push beyond its comfort zone without going so far that it 
tumbles. Our mind can, in short, have more conﬁdence in 
our body than our body has in itself, because our mind can 
perceive, as our body cannot, our body’s potential to do 
what it has never done before.
▶▹▶

123
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
Emotional Growth. Emotional growth builds on the narra-
tive action of physical growth. It occurs when our mind 
challenges our heart to attempt new behaviors that bring 
more of the things our heart wants for itself. This interac-
tive mind- heart struggle yields ﬂexible stories for nurtur-
ing mental health (by reducing negative emotions such as 
grief, trauma, anger, loneliness, and pessimism) and well- 
being (by promoting positive emotions such as wonder, 
purpose, joy, love, courage, and gratitude).
The ﬂexibility of this process manifests in the way we 
may discover that in one moment of setback, we can ward 
oﬀ an anxiety spiral by telling ourselves: That was just bad 
luck. It wasn’t something intrinsic in me that caused that 
disaster. While we may discover that in another moment 
of setback, it’s empowering to tell ourselves the opposite 
tale: That was my fault. I caused that, and I will learn. I 
have the conﬁdence in myself, and the healthy belief in my 
own powers of self- determination, to take full ownership of 
this disaster— even if there are signs that there were other fac-
tors at work.
And these two stories are themselves just a fraction of 
the branching options for leveraging life’s downs and ups 
into sources of emotional resilience and positive emotion. 
There exists in global literature a vast library of narratives 
for growing our hardiness and our joy, a library that our 
storytelling brain can daily expand with never- before- seen 
characters and plots. Because every heart is diﬀerent, and 
every situation varies. There’s no universal right or wrong 
for therapy or thriving.
▶▹▶

124
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
Intellectual Growth. Intellectual growth is supported by 
emotional and physical growth, because our mind is really 
not a mind. It is a brain. And the more emotionally and 
physically healthy our brain, the more its higher intellec-
tual operations can grow.
That intellectual growth can branch in endless direc-
tions, but they all have one thing in common: they expand 
our brain’s range of actions, allowing it to adapt better to 
life’s obstacles and opportunities. Intellectual growth’s 
core biological function is thus to increase our creative 
planning, expanding the diversity, elaborateness, and orig-
inality of our storythinking.
Intellectual growth is generated via the same narrative 
process as physical and emotional growth, with one twist: 
instead of challenging our body or heart, our mind must 
challenge itself.
This self- challenging requires our mind to split apart. 
Such splitting is logically paradoxical but psychologically 
straightforward; our brain’s perspective- shifting networks 
enable it to imagine itself as diﬀerent characters who envi-
sion unique challenges and opportunities— and therefore 
unique plot possibilities— in nature’s storyworlds (see 
chapter  2). The result is an inner theater in which our 
mind, like a Shakespearean drama, tussles one potential 
course of action against another, generating fresh behav-
ioral scripts for us to try.
Those new scripts expand the ways that our mind can 
challenge our body and heart, so just as physical and emo-
tional growth give to intellectual growth, it returns to them, 
feeding the creative passions and practices that inspire new 
technologies, new works of art, new political platforms, 
new scientiﬁc hypotheses, new social movements, new 

125
STORYTHINKING FOR PERSONAL GROWTH
business plans, new schemes for the day. And intellectual 
growth can also be its own end. It provides the thrill of 
mental freedom and stimulates the possibility thinking 
that’s our brain’s highest biological purpose— and the day’s 
always opportunity.
At which point, once our mind has done all it can to 
grow itself, the next question becomes: Can we grow fur-
ther? Can we go beyond personal growth into social 
growth, stretching into intellectual communities that 
expand life’s potential wider and higher than the imagina-
tions of lone storythinkers?
Yes. As we’ll explore in the next chapter, we can.


9
Storythinking for Social Growth
W
here does society come from? And does it support 
our individuality? Or constrain it?
These are thorny questions. So thorny that they’ve pricked 
just about every thinker who’s dared to touch them. But still, 
a promising start toward answers was made many years ago 
in a wintry suburb of sixteenth- century Florence, where 
amid frosted wheat ﬁelds sat the bad inn, an irregular brick 
domicile with a cellar escape tunnel, in case the prince’s 
gangsters came knocking again.
THE BAD INN
It was December 10, 1513.
Hunched over a desk in the inn’s clay murk was forty- 
three- year- old Niccolò Machiavelli. He’d been exiled there 
eight months earlier from his birthplace of Florence, 
although the city remained close enough that, in the quiet 

128
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
of evenlight, he could hear the laughter of its piazza revel-
ers. The sound was painful, a match for the memory of the 
gangsters breaking his shoulders with rope. But shrugging 
it oﬀ, Machiavelli dipped a quill in iron ink to record the 
story of his new life in the countryside: “I hunt sparrows 
and truck lumber until dusk falls. Then I return home and 
enter my study. At the door, I trade my muddied robes for 
my ﬁnest clothes. Now dressed ﬁtly, I step into the courts 
of ancient men, where, lovingly welcomed, I feed on that 
food for which I was born. I ask the men the reason for 
their actions [ragione delle loro azioni]; and from their 
humanity, they answer.”
By chatting like this with the past, Machiavelli seemed 
to set a backward course. Yet in a plot swerve that made 
him famous, his question- and- answer sessions guided 
him to join an original- minded group that he dubbed 
innovatori— innovators.
Innovators were makers of new laws. Which is to say, 
they were the inventors of fresh rules for social action. They 
included, in Machiavelli’s opinion, the Hebrew prophet 
Moses and the founders of Rome’s republic, but their spe-
ciﬁc identities were less important than the greater fact 
they demonstrated: the ethical insuﬃciency of logic. Logic 
had led the medieval Church to conclude that morality was 
timeless, meaning, in turn, that every good deed had 
already been instantiated by God. From the Church’s pious 
perspective, any novel rule of action was thus, by deﬁnition, 
evil, as illustrated by Eve’s original sin in Eden.
Machiavelli disagreed. In the example of the innovatori, 
he saw the proof that inventive social actions could change 
human life for the good. And at the same desk, during the 
same year that he narrated his country life in exile, he 

129
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
expressed his enthusiasm for innovation in what would 
become his most notorious treatise: Il Principe— The Prince.
The Prince was its own form of innovation: in place of 
the rational doctrines of medieval political philosophy, it 
oﬀered a storywork of stratagems. And of those strata-
gems, the grand exemplar was The Prince itself: plotted to 
gain the prince’s favor by proving that its author could 
scheme as cynically as any gangster, it was a cunning gam-
bit to vault Machiavelli out of the bad inn and back into 
Florence.
The gambit failed. The prince was unimpressed by The 
Prince, marooning Machiavelli at his gloomy desk. Yet the 
exile did not abandon hope. He continued back- and- 
forthing with the ancients, taking as his next conversation 
partner the Latin historian Livy. Livy had been born in 
Padua sixteen centuries earlier, 120 miles north of the bad 
inn. He’d spent his early years in his own country retreat, 
avoiding partisan politics and civil war, until in middle age, 
he’d left home to pen what he saw as history’s greatest 
story: Rome, from backwater birth to Caesarian empire.
The result was an epic 142- book chronicle that stretched 
from the mythic age when Trojan refugees had founded a 
new city in Italy all the way to the day that Livy himself sat 
in that city, marveling at its imperial wealth. Such was the 
chronicle’s narrative bulk that later archivists grew weary 
of transcribing its contents, abridging them into summa-
ries before at last surrendering the job entirely. By Machia-
velli’s day, only about a quarter of the original survived, the 
rest disintegrated into papyrus dust or nibbled up by 
library moths.
Still, in the fragments, Machiavelli could detect Livy’s 
voice. And each night after he returned from the ﬁelds to 

130
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
don his closet ﬁnery, he asked that voice: What was the rea-
son for your actions? And what, do you think, were the reasons 
for the actions of the lives who came before?
The answers were surprising, unlike anything that either 
Machiavelli or Livy had previously writ. So, to preserve their 
original genius, Machiavelli procured a fresh stack of parch-
ment. He titled it Discorsi di Tito Livio— Conversations with 
Livy. And on its rippled leaves, he recorded a plan for invent-
ing better stratagems.
Stratagems that didn’t involve princes. But instead, free 
societies.
THE FREE- SOCIETY BLUEPRINT
Conversations with Livy is studied now in universities 
across the world as a contribution to political philosophy. 
Just as medieval scholastics at Oxford and Paris mined 
Aristotle’s Politics for insights into ideal kingdoms, so 
have modern scholars sifted Machiavelli’s parchment for 
the founding principles of republicanism, treating it as a 
text that contains a well- reasoned thesis— perhaps even 
the ﬁnal truth— about the origins and operations of free 
societies.
By doing so, those scholars have diligently, earnestly, 
and completely missed the point. Conversations isn’t a 
rational inquiry into the principles of good government. 
It’s a series of non sequiturs and outright reversals. The 
preface begins with Machiavelli announcing his plan to 
innovate by reviving the ancients, a paradoxical assertion 
that leads rapidly to more:

131
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH

Q
Conversations’ ﬁrst chapter describes Rome as a city of des-
tiny whose success was evident from its origin. The second 
chapter then describes Rome as precisely the opposite: a 
beneﬁciary of enormous fortune, obtaining by chance 
what its founders failed to design.

Q
Conversations’ ﬁrst book builds to the grand oxymoron: 
“Here we see the Roman Senate’s steadfast virtue: how 
always, no matter what, it wasn’t ashamed to reject its pre-
vious behavior.” Or in other words: the Senate was regu-
larly irregular, an institution that consistently swerved.

Q
Conversations’ second book starts with Machiavelli observ-
ing that he seems to have contradicted himself. At which 
point, he disputes his own observation— before plunging 
into further contradictions.
As rationally perplexing as these switchbacks are, they 
have a straightforward motive: Machiavelli doesn’t believe 
in timeless reasons that can be followed in all cases. He 
thinks that every situation has unique contours, necessitat-
ing plastic politics: “Actions— especially big ones— must 
be adapted to the moment. To act against the moment— 
whether because of psychological compulsion or our own 
free choice— is to doom ourselves to misery and failure.” 
Hence it is that Machiavelli celebrates freedom— yet also 
dictators. Hence it is that Machiavelli reveres piety— yet is 
frankly irreligious. Hence it is that Machiavelli inveighs 
against factional conﬂict— yet credits the factional conﬂict 
between nobles and plebs for Rome’s political greatness.
This ﬂexibility is responsible for Machiavelli’s notorious 
reputation as an arch- pragmatist. And it hatches another 
riddle: What practical advice can be provided by a book 

132
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
that claims that anything goes, so long as the situation is 
propitious? Isn’t Conversations just a long- winded insis-
tence that success boils down to happenstance? And isn’t 
that the same as saying that there’s no foreseeable way to 
engineer better societies, only canny rationalizations 
pieced together after the fact?
In short, isn’t political instrumentalism intrinsically 
devoid of practical direction?
Mathematically, yes. Machiavelli’s contradictions add up 
to nothing. (Literally: X plus its opposite equals zero.) Yet 
even though Conversations lacks logical substance, it’s still 
able to provide useful guidance through another intellec-
tual mechanism: narrative.
Narrative is everywhere in Conversations, which reca-
pitulates Livy’s origin story of Rome, made vivid with his-
torical fables: “There’s the famous tale of Horatius Cocles 
holding oﬀ an army . . .  and of Cincinnatus plowing his 
little ﬁeld . . .  and of the public’s onetime hero, Manlius 
Capitolinus.” These legendary anecdotes are entwined 
with a relentless emphasis on narrative’s nonlogical 
engine of cause and eﬀect— “the cause of this was . . .  the 
cause of that was”— all of which builds to the plot twist: 
“Thus it comes about that republics survive better and 
enjoy good fortune longer than princedoms. Because the 
diversity of their people allows them to adapt better to 
the diversity of the times.” This is easy to misread as a 
rational maxim: republics > princedoms. But it’s another 
logic buster. In the narrative of Conversations, what makes 
republics into republics is diversity. And diversity isn’t a 
perfectible attribute. Unlike unity (the deﬁning attribute 
of princedoms), diversity has no eternal endpoint, no 
ideal culmination. It can always be increased, not simply 

133
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
in quantity but in quality: there are endless ways to think 
and do diﬀerent.
That illimitable space for growth is why Machiavelli 
declares that the ultimate source of political success is 
innovation. And while this emphasis on creative action 
leads to another logical dead end (there can be no calculus 
of novelty, no algorithm for originality), a door forward is 
once again opened by story. Story reveals that Machiavelli’s 
account of republics isn’t a timeless truth but a historical 
opportunity: republics have come about haphazardly over 
time yet have done better than mere chance allows, stum-
bling into a set of behaviors that work more reliably than 
rational alternatives. And although this lucky strike can’t 
be computationally replicated, it can be continued by feed-
ing the narrative process that birthed it. Which is to say, by 
retelling the story of past republics, we can keep alive the 
actions of their characters, extending Rome’s tale through 
our own sequels.
Such extension is what Conversations encourages. 
Instead of anointing itself the ﬁnal word on politics, it 
invites us to do what Machiavelli did when he read Livy 
and keep the story going: “The work of my narrative isn’t 
done yet. But helped on by others, I’ve carried it far enough 
that I believe that it won’t be too hard for someone else to 
get it there.” This invitation to carry on the plot would be 
accepted by many later storythinkers, branching into 
future tales of communal science, liberty, and ethics:

Q
In the 1620s, Francis Bacon elaborated Machiavelli’s Con-
versations into New Atlantis, a utopian parable that imag-
ines a “diverse” collective of empiricists inventing “diverse” 
solutions to life’s “diverse” problems.

134
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH

Q
In 1762, Jacques- Jean Rousseau expanded Machiavelli’s 
Conversations into the populist narrative of The Social Con-
tract: “Men are born free yet are everywhere in chains.”

Q
In 1776, Thomas Paine spun Machiavelli’s Conversations 
into the revolutionary inclusiveness of Common Sense: “I 
fully and conscientiously believe . . .  that there should be a 
diversity of religious opinions among us.”
And if we want, we can now join the plot ourselves.
JOINING THE PLOT
Last chapter, we identiﬁed Dewey’s method of personal 
growth: an experimental feedback loop between our story-
thinking brain and the rest of our anatomy. Machiavelli’s 
method of social growth is the same, but with one innova-
tion: the experimental feedback loop is between our story-
thinking brain and . . .  another storythinking brain. It’s two 
of us storythinkers, hooked up together.
By connecting ourselves in this way, we operate as one 
another’s laboratory audiences, nurturing each other’s 
potential for innovation by encouraging improvisational 
actions that are shaped through empirical reinforcement. 
So, like characters in a novel, we come together in an origi-
nal plot that extends the story longer, through more 
chances for narrative branching, than a script that centers 
on one hero’s journey, alone.
In practical terms, this social experiment is launched 
when we reverse the behavior of princes. Rather than tell-
ing people what they should do in the future, we ask them: 
“Why did you do what you did in the past?” Such is the 

135
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
speciﬁc question— [Qual è la] ragione delle loro azioni?— 
that Machiavelli directed toward the ancients as he sat at 
his desk in the bad inn.
When we pose this question without judgment to our fel-
low citizens, we gain access to the psychological motives— 
that is, the biological causes— at the bottom of their behav-
iors, enabling us to explore what they might (not should) do 
in the future. Out of that exploration will come a wending 
conversation that generates possibilities for action that nei-
ther of our minds would have imagined alone. And at the 
same time as we’re helping our fellow citizens grow their 
creative suite of future options, they can return the favor by 
asking us about our own past behaviors, evolving our range 
of motion in tandem.
This process of mutual growth yields a freedom very 
diﬀerent from that of classical liberalism. In classical liber-
alism (and its libertarian oﬀspring), freedom is a logically 
immutable right that, like the laws of mathematics, has 
always been (and will always be) true. According to that 
everlasting principle, society is the product of individuals 
who voluntarily come together, forming contracts to secure 
their wealth and extend their life spans. It’s a rational deci-
sion, made out of mutual self- interest, designed to main-
tain the good that already is.
Storythinking oﬀers a counternarrative: it’s not indi-
viduals that create democratic society, but democratic 
society that creates individuals. This isn’t logical, but it 
unfolds as a straightforward sequence of biological actions: 
in the beginning, back in a state of nature, you and I 
weren’t individuals; we were each a whole society unto 
ourself, responsible for an entire nation’s work. I did all 
my food making, all my protecting, all my clothing, all my 

136
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
entertaining. And so did you. You played the roles of 
farmer, soldier, tailor, playwright. You, alone, were every-
one in your empire.
But then we met each other and saw a chance to special-
ize. If we joined together, I could be the farmer and you, 
the soldier. And the more people we invited into our com-
munal narrative, the more specialization could occur. To 
my farming and your soldiering, we added tailors and 
playwrights— and from there we kept adding until at last, 
we had multiple kinds of clothiers and entertainers, each 
with their own stitching and performance methods. Thus 
our society enabled us to become individuals, trading our 
do- everything lifestyles for unique civic roles.
This narrative process generates the diversity of action 
that makes republics more resilient— and more prosper-
ously happy. And it also generates something else: trust. 
Trust is the emotional result of both perspective shifting 
and collaboration, so it forms part of the connective tissue 
of republics, tightening the ties between individuals and 
holding the broader public together.
And the wonder of this process is that it doesn’t just 
bond society through trust. Because this process is narra-
tive, it can also generate cohesion through another mecha-
nism: conﬂict.
THE SOCIAL GLUE OF NARRATIVE CONFLICT
Conﬂict is a counterintuitive source of cohesion, but it 
binds stories for a simple reason: conﬂict isn’t just one 
actor ﬁghting against another; it’s also one actor ﬁghting 

137
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
with another. That with sticks the actors together: to win 
the conﬂict, they must continue engaging their opponent. 
Which is why narrative conﬂict tends to perpetuate itself. 
As long as two characters in a story remain at odds, there 
will be a sequel.
In the case of republics, conﬂict is lent additional stick 
by the fact that the struggle is over a special commodity: 
freedom. To call freedom a commodity is to acknowledge: 
it is made. It’s not an innate right, handed us by Reason or 
Nature. It comes into being when societies (via the story-
thinking narrative above) liberate us from the burden of 
doing everything we need to survive. The moment I 
become a farmer, you’re freed from the need to sow crops. 
The moment you become a tailor, I’m relieved of the obli-
gation to sew clothes. And the more such specialization 
proceeds, the more liberation occurs: you and I don’t need 
to make soap, cornmeal, shoes, songs, tables, or a million 
other things. We can be released to devote our time to 
tasks— and hobbies— that suit our personal inclinations.
This freedom is the most prized commodity of repub-
lics. Partly, that’s because the alternative— being forced to 
work— is unpleasant and dispiriting. But mostly, it’s 
because the opportunity to plot our own lives is empower-
ing and fun, giving us a constant appetite for additional 
liberties. Which means that we spend most of our time in 
republics jousting with our fellow citizens over who gets to 
be more free.
That jousting is the jousting we do over specialized 
social roles. If I want my role to be gadget making, I’ll nat-
urally be thrust into competition with everyone else who’s 
trying to become a professional engineer; if I want my role 

138
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
to be theater production, I’ll naturally be thrust into com-
petition with everyone else who’s trying to recruit actors 
and audiences. Such competition doesn’t always take the 
form of open aggression; we can learn from our rivals and 
even, when the social prospects are open enough, mentor 
one another. But at some point the opportunity space will 
tighten, and we’ll feel the pinch to win. So, we’ll bend all 
our ingenuity, all our resources, and all our will to defeat-
ing the person whose special social role is most like ours.
From the perspective of individuals, this conﬂict is bru-
tal. It can dash hopes and end careers, and it’s character-
ized throughout by painful emotional urgency. Because 
freedom is a cherished psychological good, we can experi-
ence terrible angst when others outdo us in our chosen 
ﬁeld. Yet even so, the conﬂict is a contributor to social 
growth, for two reasons:
1. The conﬂict promotes further specialization. Since you 
and I cannot easily succeed if we’re both doing the same 
thing, it pushes each of us to seek the distinctive potential 
of our nature, developing original- to- us behaviors that 
secure our place in the jostle to live uninhibited. Which is 
to say: the conﬂict encourages me to develop my personal 
gadget- making capabilities, and you, yours, increasing our 
individual odds of survival and also opening the possibility 
that, if our capabilities are diﬀerent enough, we can survive 
together.
2. The conﬂict’s destructive force is limited. That’s because 
our freedoms are mutually interdependent: the more social 
diversity exists, the more I’m free to do my own thing. So, 
broadly speaking, none of us gains in the long term by act-
ing tyrannically: if I control others, restricting their growth, 
I lose out on the freedom that their growth would create for 

139
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
me. And although each of us is liable— even prone— to ﬁts 
of pettiness in which we seek to crush our rivals, society as a 
whole has a vested interest in preventing such damage. If I, 
in my zealousness to run the only drama troupe in town, set 
ﬁre to your theater, I destroy everyone else’s freedom to 
enjoy two types of entertainment (or to audition for two 
types of play). And if you respond to my arson by demand-
ing that I be hanged, you diminish the same freedoms, 
which is why republics work organically over time to install 
checks against conﬂict’s extreme consequences, maximiz-
ing its function as a source of innovation and togetherness.
This social maximization of innovation and together-
ness does to narrative what computer AI does to logic: 
scales it. Just as AI can solve computational problems faster 
than a lone logician, so can storythinking communities plot 
actions more creatively than a lone storythinker— making 
good on Machiavelli’s claim that republics are better at the 
practical process of adapting to life’s changing tides.
And bringing this book near to its ending.
THIS BOOK’S ENDING
This book began by pledging to restore the partnership 
between story and thinking that ancient sages, in the days 
before Plato, marshalled to tackle humanity’s primordial 
question: How can I make my life better?
Perhaps the previous chapters have made good on that 
promise. Perhaps they’ve shone light on the narrative 
gears of human intelligence. Perhaps they’ve explained 
how those gears can power personal and social growth, 
helping you plan your own storythinking ethics.

140
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
Or perhaps not. Perhaps they’ve fallen into story’s old 
problems. Perhaps they’ve skipped free of data. Perhaps 
they’ve mildly entertained without seriously informing, 
revealing nothing more than the author’s peculiar skew.
Yet either way, they’ve got as far down the road as they 
can. If their wheels have by now carried you nowhere valu-
able, you can conﬁdently abandon the ride, knowing you 
gave it fair try. And if the journey is worth continuing, it 
has made enough headway for you to reach the next mile 
marker on your own.
But even if you can spot that marker, you might not be 
feeling particularly eager to continue. In fact, you might be 
feeling eager’s opposite: apathetic. Because now that we’ve 
gone as far as we’ve gone, you can see that the book in your 
hands has neglected something quite important.
Okay, not quite important. Very important. Crucially 
important. The book has gone all this distance, through all 
these chapters, without bothering to explain the point of 
going at all. Or phrased more philosophically, the book has 
acted— out of foolishness or laziness— as if human life’s 
root question is: How do I live? When, really, the question 
is: Why?
Why is the thing that gets us up in the morning— and 
the thing that impels us, throughout all the day’s trials, to 
keep on trying. Why is the reason that we choose each dawn 
to live, to not give up, to carry on the hard adventure.
Why isn’t a problem for most living things, because 
most living things are propelled automatically. They oper-
ate as machines, powered by the gears of their bacterial 
DNA, their vegetable stalks, their animal reﬂexes. And 
much of the time, we operate that way too. Our brains are 

141
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
moved by our emotions: fears, hopes, desires. Their pas-
sion makes us care. Their urgency thrusts us on.
But not always. Because the human brain isn’t just an 
engine of feeling. It’s also, as we’ve explored over the previ-
ous chapters, an engine of planning. In the brain’s earliest 
days, back before it was human, that planning was limited. 
Part of the limit came from the brain’s cranial size, and part 
from the lack of time the brain had to cogitate: the hours 
were crowded, full of pressing dangers and pleasures, so 
planning had to be equally hasty. Yet gradually those restric-
tions lifted. The brain grew, developing the human neocor-
tex. And the crush of nature was pushed back by civiliza-
tion, creating whole afternoons for our brain to plot forward 
and back.
Thus it came to be that storythinking confronted the 
brain with the question: Why are we here? And its quick 
follower: Why keep going? There was no ultimate point 
that the brain could see. And in fact, the more the brain 
brooded, the more it began to believe that there could be no 
ultimate point. For when the brain employed its narrative 
cogs to fast- forward time, what it saw was: death. Death 
was the inevitable end of life’s story. And given that inevita-
bility, what purpose existed in striving onward?
This is the question we must face now. Why does it mat-
ter that some societies adapt better, if in the end, they suﬀer 
life’s common fate: extinction? Why strive energetically to 
pen a communal tale when every tale must run its course, 
forgotten in the wake of newer narratives? Why expend our 
days on struggle when the struggle is— and will always 
be— unwinnable?
Why, in short, bother with growth at all?

142
STORYTHINKING FOR SOCIAL GROWTH
The answer provided by biology is: because growth is 
our nature, and therefore good in itself. Yet this answer is 
really just another version of logic’s old sophistry: convert-
ing an action into a being. So, in the next and ﬁnal chapter, 
we’ll explore the answer that narrative supplies.
Which is to say: we’ll ﬁnd story’s answer to the meaning 
of life.

10
Story’s Answer to the Meaning of Life
S
ometime around 300 BCE, she exited west through 
the four towers of Athens’s sacred gate. And walking 
the north bank of the Eridanus River, she arrived at the 
Garden.
The Garden bloomed on a small plot of land, loosely 
enclosed by a low wood fence. At its open door she was 
handed an earthen cup ﬁlled with water. And cooling her 
thirst, she entered to stroll among summer plum and mul-
berry trees.
Who she was, we can’t say with certainty. We think we 
know her name: Leontion. We think we know her profes-
sion: a hetaira, or paid girlfriend, clever, charming, and 
willing to satisfy a man’s wants; for enough cash, anything 
was possible, even the lifelong love of bearing his child. 
And we think we know why she came to the Garden: she 
was attached to the arm of Metrodorus of Lampsacus, an 
ebullient gastronomist who’d appalled Athens’s most emi-
nent philosophers, the Platonists, by declaring that wis-
dom dwelled in the belly.

144
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
Yet as to why she stayed in the Garden, that’s a harder 
matter. If she’d wanted, she could have left its modest fruit 
and barley meals, and she could have left the arm of Metro-
dorus, too. Her job gave her that freedom. She wasn’t 
trapped in a wife’s chambers (upstairs, beside the sleeping 
quarters of the slaves), emerging only (when appropriately 
accompanied) to do the oyster- cake shopping and wool- 
tunic washing. She could wander anywhere by herself— the 
downstairs drinking couches, the gymnasium ﬁelds dot-
ting the city outskirts, the theater bleachers on the southern 
Acropolis.
Not, of course, that her freedom was limitless. She had 
to feed herself, which meant ﬁnding a client, which meant, 
in turn, that she had to groom her hair, perfume her skin, 
and clothe her body in ways that agreeably surprised the 
senses. All that cost time, thought, and silver. And it 
required, too, that she compete with other eye- catchers for 
men’s attention.
Did she like that attention? Did she enjoy the long gaze 
surveying her? Did she relish the emphatic pause during 
which a man decided whether her body was worth the 
drachma coins inside his ﬁst? Probably not. Even if she 
passed the test, it was never pleasant to be in someone 
else’s power, your future hanging on their verdict.
So, that’s one thing she might have enjoyed about the 
Garden, encouraging her to linger in its green, away from 
the more boisterous entertainments of symposium wine 
ﬂasks and phallic stage clowns. For the Garden’s purpose 
was to create a space free from men’s judgments. That 
space was not, admittedly, perfect; Metrodorus remained 
close, his maw stuﬀed with olives, his muscled ﬁngers 

145
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
grabbing. But that the space existed at all was a credit to the 
creative thinking of the Garden’s founder, Epicurus.
Epicurus was an Athenian born near Troy in the eastern 
colonies, where he’d studied the books of the atomists, a 
weird sect who thought that the world had been birthed not 
by gods or by reason but by happenstance. After developing 
a few equally unconventional theories of his own, Epicurus 
had then been expelled from the isle of Lesbos, which 
found even its Sapphic tolerance overtaxed by his iconoclas-
tic life teachings. At which point he’d come here, to the out-
skirts of Athens, to set himself up as a philosopher.
Not that Epicurus liked being called a philosopher, mind 
you. He thought the philosophers talked as much twaddle 
as their ancient rivals: the poets. And indeed, his intent in 
cultivating the Garden was to provide a refuge from the 
twin ills of philosophy and poetry, or, to name their deeper 
roots, logic and story.
THE TWIN ILLS OF LOGIC AND STORY
Story’s ill was the more ancient. In times long ago, it had 
caused humankind to imagine a sky full of angry gods, 
and from there, to dream that the gods were so unappeas-
ably angry that they refused to allow us to die at our deaths 
but kept alive our souls in darkness to wrack us with eter-
nal torments.
All of which, of course, was nonsense. There were no 
furious gods; there was no perdition beyond the grave.
And as for the ill of logic: logic had caused humankind 
to deduce immutable laws of right and wrong from which 

146
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
there could be no deviation. Deviation, the logicians 
claimed, led swiftly to chaos, a state of such dreadful inco-
herence that to avoid it, the ﬁrst hint of license had to be 
punished by enlightened tyrants. Not to mention that 
some philosophers had gone still further, asserting that it 
was impossible for us, even if we wanted, to depart from 
the rules. For so deeply were the rules embedded in phys-
ics that they dictated all we did, turning us into clockworks 
on the track of Fate.
Which was also nonsense. Philosophical rules shouldn’t 
be imposed by force. Nor were we prisoners of destiny. 
Life was free. If it wasn’t, we could never be happy, for 
liberty was essential to mental gladness, and as proof of 
such gladness— and therefore of freedom— Epicurus 
pointed at the smiles of Leontion and the other folk who 
entered the Garden.
This proof provoked much smirking among the phi-
losophers. They said: Epicurus, all that’s proved by the glad-
ness of the Garden is that you and your friends were predes-
tined to be glad. Or even: You Garden people are only 
superﬁcially happy; to reach real bliss, you need my higher 
enlightenment. But such naysaying was ignored by Epicu-
rus. He devoted his energies to growing his new way: 
happiness. Happiness was the justiﬁcation for everything 
done in the Garden. Any action that contributed to its 
increase was gently nurtured. Any action that didn’t was 
ﬁrmly weeded.
With his cultivation of contentment, Epicurus returned 
philosophy to its ancient root: ethics. Ethics, as we saw in 
chapter 2, is the attempt to address the practical question: 
How can I make my life better? Which Epicurus answered, 
in the manner of a hedonic accountant, by teaching: forget 

147
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
worldly success, rich cuisine, heaven, gods, metaphysical 
verities, and other made- up or unreachable things that 
bring dissatisfaction and angst. Satisfy your natural 
aches— hunger, curiosity, loneliness— with simple meals, 
empirical facts, and honest friends. That will optimize 
your gladness between birth and death; that’s the recipe 
for the best possible life span.
This utilitarian ethics earned Epicurus the ire of genera-
tions of deontic preachers, an ire that endures in our use 
of “epicurean” as a synonym for “glutton,” “gastric fantas-
tic,” and “godless worshiper of sensuality.” All of which 
can seem an overreaction, but alerts us to just how insur-
gent Epicurus was. By restoring ethics to its original place 
as the basis of philosophy, he disturbed metaphysics, the 
modern groundwork upon which the philosophers had 
come to rest their professional authority (see chapter 2), 
prompting the philosophers to set aside their compara-
tively minor squabbles with each other and unite with one 
voice to condemn Epicurus’s sally against the bulwark of 
their rising power, wealth, and fame.
Nor were the philosophers the only guardians of meta-
physics. The guardians also included many nonacademic 
folk who’d run into the problem we encountered at last 
chapter’s end: the human brain’s emotional need for Why. 
Yearning for a feeling of greater purpose, those folk had 
responded with hopeful wonderment when the philoso-
phers had quarried Whys of various ideologies to install as 
life’s new foundation. And they had come to revere philos-
ophy’s new temple architecture as ﬁercely as the philoso-
phers themselves.
Yet despite such popular veneration, the philosophers’ 
new masonry had, Epicurus concluded, failed to better the 

148
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
public’s daily existence. Instead, its rational granite of Jus-
tice and Truth had stoked unnecessary anxieties about fan-
tastical hells and logical principles, contravening the origi-
nal purpose of ethics and hence, philosophy. So, now it 
was time for the metaphysical construction project to end. 
No longer would inner experience be subordinated to the 
external verities deduced by Plato’s Academy, Aristotle’s 
Lyceum, and Athens’s other reigning schools. No longer 
would the human psyche groan beneath moral dictates 
and mystical prescriptions. Instead, ethics would itself be 
elevated into the Why. Happiness would become the alpha 
and omega, philosophy’s sum total, the twilight of the 
gods. And it would be found, complete, in the Garden.
Epicurus’s Garden worked. It improved many ancient 
Mediterranean lives, including that of Leontion. And has 
its acolytes still; although there aren’t many self- declared 
Epicureans ambling among us, millions everywhere 
belong to the cult of happiness, chasing it as life’s ulti-
mate good.
Yet as successful as Epicurus’s ethics has been, it has 
not succeeded completely, for two reasons:
First, our brain can only be so happy. That’s because 
brain happiness comes from chemicals that exist in lim-
ited neural quantities, and although we can increase those 
quantities with opiates and other artiﬁcial substances, the 
increase soon produces a hangover in which our brain 
counterbalances our drug intake by cutting back the man-
ufacture of our natural bliss. This cutback happens because 
happiness evolved (like everything in our head) not as an 
ideal end state but as a biological tool. That tool’s function 
is to nurture ongoing growth, so it’s valued by our brain as 
a temporary reward. Doled out too liberally, it would make 

149
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
us lazily self- satisﬁed, a recipe for death in the contested 
habitats of life.
This natural limit to happiness was discovered, via 
trial and error, by Epicurus. Which is why he oﬀered 
water, not wine, to his visitors; why he focused on the 
quality, not the quantity, of joy; and why the only enter-
tainment in his leafy enclosure was friendly conversa-
tion. But as prudent as this restrained happiness was, it 
couldn’t overcome . . .  
Second, a focus on happiness is psychologically coun-
terproductive. This has been discovered by recent psychol-
ogy research, which has shown that the more that we turn 
happiness into a metric, the more that we compare our-
selves to others— and to ourselves. This is how metrics 
work, after all: they rank. Which means that our brain 
inevitably starts to worry: She’s happier than me. And: I was 
happier before. Pulling down our gladness with the fret: 
This isn’t perfect happiness. It could be better . . .  
But even though the Garden didn’t satisfy modern sci-
ence’s full conditions for an empirically durable ethics, it 
still went a good distance toward addressing the problem 
raised at the last chapter’s end: transitioning ethics from 
How into Why.
So, to see if we can perhaps advance a bit further, let’s 
return with fresh eyes to Epicurus’s diagnosis of how story 
and logic went astray.
HOW STORY AND LOGIC WENT ASTRAY
Story, as we saw in chapter 2, predates logic, inviting us to 
begin our diagnosis with story’s problem.

150
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
The problem, as crisply anatomized by Epicurus, is that 
story led our species to imagine hell. Exactly how story got 
us to this myth, it’s impossible to say; our archives and 
archaeological records have captured only a few grains of 
history’s vast hourglass. But still, we can say that hell was 
not there at the beginning. In the beginning, the story was 
simply that the world was alive. That living world was char-
acterized variously in diﬀerent stories, some of which still 
exist today, passed down by Brazilian rainforest tribes, East 
African hunter- gatherer Hadze, and Australian Indigenous 
Peoples.
From these enduring oral traditions, we can see that the 
world’s aliveness ﬁrst manifested itself in tales about giants, 
gods, and spirit folk who caused rivers, rains, and the other 
natural happenings that science traces now to geology, mete-
orology, and physics. Out of that earthly aliveness, the story 
then developed chapters, forward and backward. The back-
ward chapters rolled time in reverse, detailing the causes of 
the gods and giants, all the way to the ultimate genesis. The 
forward chapters leaped ahead, imagining future ages— 
and then, the story’s ultimate ending: Elysium, Valhalla, 
Fólkvangr, and other bodily paradises where the heroes of 
legend reveled in feasts, songs, and friends.
All this story was positive. It deepened our brain’s emo-
tional Why by making us feel part of a bigger narrative, 
ﬁlled with huge lives, headed for rapture.
But then in scattered clans and kingdoms across the 
archaic world, the narrative began to take a less positive 
turn. Warped by jealousy, anxiety, and other negative feel-
ings, people stopped being glad for the heroes in heaven 
and coveted paradise themselves. To satisfy this envious 
yearning, up sprouted priests beside the Nile and other 

151
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
sacred waterways to promise: Do as I say, and bliss will be 
yours. Followed hard by the warning: Cross my words, and 
your soul will writhe forever in ﬂame.
Thus was hell invented as a threat for bad behavior. And 
as a curse of anger. And as a cry of self- loathing. All of 
which hurt life, and hurt it more when story was joined by 
an equally unfortunate trend in philosophy.
Philosophy, like story, began as an outcropping of nature. 
Nature was, in the days before philosophy, constantly crash-
ing against itself as one way of life battled another. Until 
eventually, there evolved a biological tool for mediating 
conﬂict. That tool was self- awareness. Self- awareness came 
into being when two actions in a sentient brain collided, 
and instead of the stronger immediately crushing the other, 
the two were spotted by a perspective- taking neural net-
work. The network examined the colliding actions and real-
ized: That conﬂict is in me. Prompting the further epiphany: 
Which means that there’s not only a conﬂict; there’s a me.
With this insight came the brain’s experience of a self 
that was distinct from the ﬂow of consciousness. A self that 
could step back and decide: Which of the two conﬂicting 
actions is better for my well- being?
That deciding self felt mighty— yet also inadequate. It 
was mighty because it ﬂoated above the fray like a cloud- 
borne demigod, empowered to choose while the rest of life 
crashed mindlessly by. But it was also inadequate because 
it didn’t know how to choose: the decision could be evalu-
ated in so many equally plausible ways. Was the better 
option the one that worked right away, or the one that 
worked in the long term? And if the long term, then how 
long? Was it better to sacriﬁce a little good tomorrow for a 
big good next year? Or was next year not a far enough 

152
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
horizon? Should the decision be made with ten— or even a 
hundred— years in view?
Out of such dilemmas arose ethics, the brain’s system-
atic eﬀort to answer questions about the best way to live. 
That eﬀort pushed the brain to take a wider view, stepping 
outside its immediate emotions to calculate the greater 
dividends that came from patience, cooperation, and gen-
erosity. All of which was positive: connecting us to a pos-
sibility beyond our near- term appetites, it grew the space 
for creative action.
But about ﬁve millennia or so ago (see chapter 2), that 
space was gradually colonized by a less positive trend: the 
philosophical attempt to seek a master vantage from which 
all conﬂicts could be resolved. The master vantage gained 
the names Truth and Justice, and to derive its global out-
look from unassailable ﬁrst principles, philosophers began 
fashioning the calculation tool we know now as logic.
Logic replaced philosophy’s original fruit of open- 
minded inquiry with omniscient certainty, restyling the 
philosopher from an outside perspective into the only per-
spective. And then, sometime around 1000 BCE, in reli-
gions such as Zoroastrianism, logic merged with the fable 
of hell.
This merging replaced the multifarious possibilities of 
polytheism with the jealous righteousness of One True 
God. No longer was it possible to consider Zeus from the 
alternative psychology of Prometheus, or Shiva from 
the  alternative psychology of Vishnu, or Yudi from the 
alternative psychology of Doumou. Instead, there was 
only Ahura Mazda, Jehovah, the Almighty.
With the emergence of monotheism, logic’s moral 
commandments were attached to absolute rewards and 

153
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
punishments in the hereafter. Philosophy ascended to meta-
physics, then to theology. To trespass the theologians’ ratio-
nal deductions was to risk eternal damnation. It was to be 
condemned by logic to the underworld imagined by story.
About three decades before Epicurus was born, this 
logic- story fusion was made manifest by Plato, who in 
roughly 375 BCE inked it as the ﬁnal passage of The 
Republic:
The good things of life are nothing, said Socrates, com-
pared to the prizes and punishments that await the just 
and the unjust after death. And to show you, I will tell the 
tale of a hero named Er.
Er died in war, but his body did not rot. And when his 
body was placed on a funeral pyre, he awoke to reveal that 
he had seen the afterlife. In that time beyond death, he’d 
come to a place, between heaven and hell, at which sat a 
group of judges. The judges sent the just souls to heaven, 
where they experienced delight and unimaginable beauty; 
and the judges sent the unjust souls to hell, where they 
suﬀered tenfold punishment for every wrong they’d done. 
Tyrants and other sinners were kept in hell for a thousand 
years— and then, just when they believed that they would 
be freed at last from their tortures, they were seized by 
men of ﬁre, ﬂayed alive, and shredded with thorns.
This story of Er has lived and has not perished. And it 
will save us if we’re obedient to its teachings. So, I advise 
you, stay true forever to its heavenly way. And walk with 
justice and virtue always.
In 335 BCE, this “Myth of Er” helped inspire Aristotle’s 
severance of story from thinking (see chapter  2). Three 

154
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
decades later, by the time Leontion walked the Garden, it 
had become the most popular religious teaching in Ath-
ens. And in further days, it was spread by Rome’s empire, 
then by medieval Christianity and Islam, going on to spin 
oﬀ modern, materialist variants like Communism and the 
Singularity, which promise that if we stick rigorously to 
logic’s dictates, we’ll engineer an earthly paradise— or a 
digital messiah.
Rationally, this has all been for the best. But biologically, 
it hasn’t. That’s because our neurons don’t input- output 
the heavenly binary of RIGHT and WRONG; instead, they 
experiment with neighboring networks to improvise new 
action scripts (see chapter 6). Our neuroanatomy is thus a 
fundamentally bad match with the logical architecture of 
Plato’s myth, so even if we uploaded ourselves, like Er, into 
a realm of immortal being, we wouldn’t achieve lasting 
happiness. We’d be overcome by the sublime beauty; we’d 
feel a rapture of meaning; then, slowly but inevitably, we’d 
get bored. We’d wonder: What other heights can I visit? And: 
What’s happening in those misty valleys below? We’d want, 
that is, to adventure into the unknown. To test ourselves in 
uncertain times. And above all, to grow.
As holy light glittered ﬂawlessly, we’d thus feel the urge 
to escape. Like the gods whose ennui led them to create 
humanity— and like the subsequent deities who decided 
to leave their sky mount to grapple with life’s hurly- 
burly— we’d desire more than truth, justice, and perfec-
tion forever. We’d hunger to blow up the ideal algorithm 
and get out.
This is the problem with logical utopias, classical and 
otherwise. Even if we managed to construct a society of 
absolute reason, where equality reigned and we could avail 

155
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
ourselves of inﬁnite manna, ambrosia, and panacea, our 
brain would still want more. Our storythinking synapses 
are simply not that interested in justice, truth, and other 
eternally logical fruits. What our narrative brain really 
craves is new challenges— and new opportunities. The 
only way to keep our gray matter following the rules (even 
when the rules are utterly enlightened) is to sedate it with 
drugs or with fear.
Which is why myths such as Er and the Singularity 
are— and were, and will always be— sources of human 
unhappiness. Just as Epicurus perceived in his Garden, 
logic’s fables make our brains feel discontented. They ﬁll 
us with negative judgments about ourselves and others. 
They trap us in a state of unhuman regulation. They bless 
us with tedium unending.
Yet fortunately, we can break the spell of platonic 
monotony. Because even though Epicurus’s ethics didn’t 
completely sync with our psychology, we’re now in a posi-
tion to cultivate a new Garden, one capable of growing 
human life beyond happiness.
BEYOND HAPPINESS
Our minihistory of story and philosophy reveals that the 
unhappiness diagnosed by Epicurus is a symptom of the 
deeper problem caused by Plato’s heaven. The deeper 
problem is that logic limits creative action.
Creative action (as we saw back in chapters 1 and 2) is 
the root driver of our biology. It’s what generated our 
brain— and what led our brain to generate story and phi-
losophy. Story increased creative action by attuning us to a 

156
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
bigger narrative ﬁlled with outside powers. Philosophy 
increased creative action by lifting us out of our egoistic 
biases, liberating us to imagine worlds beyond what we 
feared and wanted.
To recover those life- sustaining possibilities, we need to 
interrupt the narrowing of story and philosophy that 
yielded Plato’s myth of Er. That narrowing began when we 
started thinking that our story was more important than 
others, and it accelerated when we started thinking that 
philosophy was a tool for ﬁnding the one, true plot. So, we 
must reverse those two processes. We must restore phi-
losophy’s original function: to help us exit our lone per-
spective and to broaden the chances for action. And we 
must also reclaim story’s original function: to help us 
imagine a broader narrative ﬁlled with characters beyond 
ourselves.
Taken together, these two functions converge on a big-
ger process: enlarging the stories of outside lives. Or more 
concretely: expanding other people’s creative opportuni-
ties. Which we can do by giving those people the intellec-
tual space, emotional conﬁdence, and material support to 
plan their most original lives.
This is the ultimate Why of human existence. Not because 
it’s true, just, or logical. But because it works biologically for 
our brain. It shifts our attention away from eternal states— 
such as heaven and happiness— that are counterproductive 
to our process psychology. And it engages us in the worldly 
action of growing other storythinking minds.
That action cannot be weakened by even our brain’s 
most powerful fear: death. Death has no grip on a story 
that goes on beyond us, ﬂowing forward as far as we can 
imagine. Nor can that action be corrupted by our brain’s 

157
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
most potent desire: self- love. To ﬁnd purpose in nurturing 
the narratives of others is to channel egoism into its oppo-
site, discovering our immortality in the temporal ﬂourish-
ing of every life we encounter.
Hence the joyous days of many a parent, teacher, men-
tor, and friend. And hence the way for us to mobilize the 
ethics that this book’s previous chapters have excavated 
from natural history. Those excavations reveal:
 1. That our brain evolved as a storythinker.
 2. That storythinking can be further evolved via personal 
strategies (such as perspective shifting) and social narra-
tives (such as democracy).
 3. That such evolutions yield the fun and freedom of physi-
cal, emotional, and intellectual growth.
To these three plot points, we can now add:
 4. That our personal physical, emotional, and intellectual 
growth is accelerated by empowering the storythinking of 
the people around us.
Our better story, in other words, is one where we con-
centrate on writing books that help readers imagine more 
books, on building schools that help students invent new 
ways of learning, and on engineering technologies that 
help users pioneer fresh breakthroughs.
If we live like this, we’ll get up every morning with hope 
and energy. Not perfect hope and energy, because, of course, 
we’re human. But enough hope and energy to get the day 
rolling, and from there to spin through the years, as life’s 
plots absorb us and we ﬁnd our ultimate reason in using 

158
STORY’S ANSWER TO THE MEANING OF LIFE
our biography to grow the biographies of others. Aka, nar-
rative generosity, or storygiving.
Such giving is what Epicurus did when he invited Leon-
tion into the Garden. And although Leontion vanished 
from history’s scroll soon after, perhaps she carried on the 
gift in unrecorded deeds, growing the chances of other 
lives, helping them tend their own Gardens, unique and 
branching. Perhaps she became, as the English novelist 
George Eliot imagined twenty- three centuries later, one of 
those unremembered souls whose eﬀect “on those around 
her was incalculably diﬀusive: for the growing good of the 
world is partly dependent on unhistoric acts; and that 
things are not so ill with you and me as they might have 
been, is half owing to the number who lived faithfully a 
hidden life, and rest in unvisited tombs.”
And perhaps that can be our story, too.

M
y time is short and this book is long. Can you summa-
rize it for me?
 1. Philosophers have historically tried to reduce all intelligence 
to symbolic logic, which includes induction, deduction, 
interpretation, critical thinking, dialectic, math, statistics, 
data- driven decision making, rational choice theory, homo 
economicus, systems 1 and 2, divergent thinking, conver-
gent thinking, design thinking, Bayesian inference, IQ, and 
computer AI.
 2. But the human brain runs another form of intelligence, 
narrative intelligence, that can’t be reduced to logic. Narrative 
intelligence powers counterfactual thinking (or, what if think-
ing), causal thinking (or, speculating why), and other mental 
actions that drive creativity, adaptability, and low- data deci-
sion making in volatile and uncertain environments.
 3. Narrative intelligence is an engine of empirical science, 
medicine, engineering, business, technological innovation, 
and psychological resilience. It’s what allows us to thrive 
Coda
Conversations with a Storythinker

160
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
in dynamic domains, which, despite the best eﬀorts of AI 
logistics and rational civilization to impose eternal order, 
inevitably result from the asymmetric contests of biologi-
cal life.
▶▹▶
A lot of what you call narrative— like causal and counterfac-
tual thinking— sounds to me like logic.
You’re using the word “logic” in its colloquial sense, as 
opposed to its rigorous formal deﬁnition.
When we call something “logical” in ordinary conversa-
tion, we’re typically referring to narrative, not logic. That’s 
because most of us base our views of what is reasonable 
upon lived experience, history, and other empirical obser-
vations that we errantly claim as inductions— and that we 
use to draw what we mistakenly call deductions. In fact, 
our “inductions” are exceptional information (i.e., a few 
vivid events that seem highly signiﬁcant), and our “deduc-
tions” are causal and counterfactual thinking (i.e., hypoth-
esizing why something happened and imagining what 
might result).
This reliance on narrative intelligence is why ordinary 
folk diverge on what they see as “logical.” And why philos-
ophers have long criticized nonphilosophers for being 
sloppy thinkers. But that doesn’t mean that nonphiloso-
phers are guilty of mental incompetence. They’re simply 
deploying a diﬀerent form of acumen, one that recognizes 
that in our constantly changing biological world, there can 
be multiple good ways to act.
▶▹▶

161
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
Why are you so certain that narrative intelligence can’t be 
reduced to logic?
There are deductive proofs (like the one in chapter 5). But 
the empirical giveaway is the human brain, which contains 
two diﬀerent neural mechanisms that evolved more than 
500 million years ago to perform distinct biological func-
tions: vision and action.
Vision employs the mechanics of symbolic logic, includ-
ing representation, equation, pattern recognition, mean-
ing, and sense making. Action employs the mechanics of 
narrative, including experimentation, speculation, process 
recognition, planning, and use making.
Each of these ancient neural mechanisms takes up sig-
niﬁcant space in our modern head. This wouldn’t be the 
case if either mechanism could be reduced to the other: 
evolution would have slowly relegated the unnecessary 
mechanism to a biological appendix, making our brain 
more eﬃcient.
What our brain’s dual mechanisms thus reveal is that 
narrative and logic are complementary tools. There’s no 
way to replace storythinking with deduction or interpreta-
tion, any more than there’s a way to replace a hammer with 
a saw.
▶▹▶
Could you deﬁne storythinking?
Storythinking is a synonym for narrative cognition, or in 
other words, thinking in actions (as opposed to thinking in 
equations, meanings, representations, symbols, numbers, 
and other logical stuﬀ.) So, it’s nonsemantic and noncom-
putational. It’s not used for sense making; it’s used for 

162
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
planning, plotting, strategizing, and in other ways creating 
new behaviors and courses of action.
Storythinking includes causal thinking (i.e., speculating 
on why something happened), scientiﬁc hypothesizing 
(i.e., predicting what will happen in response to speciﬁc 
interventions), counterfactual thinking (i.e., imagining 
what could have happened if past events were changed), 
and outright ﬁction (i.e., inventing alternate worlds). It 
proceeds by manipulating the elements of story, of which 
the big four are: characters, storyworlds, plots, and 
narrators.

Q
Characters are causal actors; the causes of their behavior 
are usually hopes, fears, desires, and other psychological 
motives.

Q
Storyworlds are environments with their own distinct laws 
of action, that is, rules about what can and cannot happen. 
Such rules can be social, natural, magical, etc.

Q
Plots are the speciﬁc sequences of action generated by 
characters in a storyworld.

Q
Narrators are the ultimate cause of the story. They are why 
it is told, and their why shapes how it is told.
All four elements are anchored in our brain’s biology, 
which evolved to keep us alive by processing other people’s 
psychological motives (characters); by onboarding the 
rules of new environments (storyworlds); by explaining 
and predicting emergent threats, opportunities, and other 
changes in our physical vicinity (plots); and by connecting 
all of these happenings to our own why (narrator).
▶▹▶

163
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
What’s the relationship between storythinking and narrative 
intelligence?
Narrative intelligence is the application of storythinking to 
solve practical problems and invent practical technologies.
Because storythinking evolved to keep us alive, it tends 
naturally toward intelligent outcomes. But it’s possible for 
storythinking to detach from sustainable biological uses, 
becoming inexact and wish fueled. When that happens, it 
becomes magical thinking.
Narrative intelligence is the conscious manifestation of 
a deeper form of brainpower, motor intelligence, that 
drives the spontaneous problem solving and innovation 
of our bodily limbs, making possible the nonconscious 
improvisation of dancers, athletes, musicians, and other 
physical performers.
The shorthand for motor intelligence is moto. Anytime 
your body has reacted smartly to an unprecedented situa-
tion, you’ve experienced moto.
▶▹▶
No oﬀense, but this book makes a lot of very big claims that 
contradict the mainstream views of most people (philosophers 
or not) who consider themselves rational. What’s the factual 
basis for its idiosyncratic assertions?
This book’s assertions have three bases:
 1. Narrative theory. Narrative theory dates back to Aristotle, 
and its modern practitioners have turned up troves of 
empirical evidence that rebut the popularly held view that 
literature can be reduced to language (which is to say, that 
stories can be analyzed via semiotics). A basic example of 

164
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
this evidence is action verbs, which (as detailed in chap-
ter 5) cannot be processed via symbolic logic, leading to the 
fundamental inability of computer Natural Language Pro-
cessors such as GPT- 4 to comprehend or reproduce nov-
els, screenplays, etc.
 2. Neuroscience. Ever since the pioneering dissections of Nobel 
Laureate Santiago Ramón y Cajal in the late nineteenth cen-
tury, neuroscientists have uncovered the neuron’s anatomi-
cal complexity, a complexity fundamentally unlike the ele-
gant simplicity of computational logic gates. From the 
perspective of storythinking, the most signiﬁcant feature of 
the neuron’s complexity is the synapse, which (as detailed 
in chapter 6) distinguishes our brain from computers by 
providing a nonelectronic architecture that makes possible 
causal thinking and other forms of narrative cognition.
 3. Scientiﬁc experiments. As recommended by Karl Popper 
(see chapter  6), the theories outlined in this book have 
been submitted to tests of falsiﬁability. In collaboration 
with partners from U.S. Special Operations to Midwestern 
public school districts, my lab at Ohio State’s Project Nar-
rative has run randomized controlled trials that have 
shown that narrative training can signiﬁcantly increase 
creative problem solving and psychological resiliency.
None of this proves, of course, that the assertions of the 
preceding pages are true. But some quick self- inspection 
of your own mental processes— which include planning, 
speculating on why events happen, and imagining what 
if— should be enough to demonstrate that storythinking is 
as philosophically plausible as Descartes’s Cogito.
▶▹▶

165
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
The root justiﬁcation for philosophy isn’t just the identiﬁcation 
of intelligence but the improvement of intelligence. Tradi-
tional philosophy has helped students get better at logic. Can 
students also get better at storythinking?
Yes. As described in chapters  2 and 4, students can 
improve their storythinking by consuming and produc-
ing narrative art, from ancient epics to sci- ﬁ comics. And 
as detailed in chapter 7, they can make this training more 
rigorous via methods that replace critical thinking, inter-
pretation, and the other logic- based techniques used to 
analyze literature in modern classrooms with techniques 
derived from the creative mechanisms of biological 
evolution.
▶▹▶
What’s the relationship of narrative intelligence to emotion?
Narrative and emotion are tightly connected in the human 
brain, because both involve action.
Emotion is the instigator of action. We’re more likely to 
act if we feel we should than if we simply think we should. 
That’s because feelings such as desire and fear are more 
potent psychological motivators than beliefs about what’s 
RIGHT or TRUE.
Narrative is the director of action. It tells us where to ﬂee 
when we are scared, and how to chase when we are keen. It 
provides the plans, plots, and strategies for getting what 
we want— and escaping what we hate.
Which is to say: emotion is human behavior’s engine 
and narrative its steering wheel.
▶▹▶

166
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
What’s the relationship of narrative intelligence to emotional 
intelligence?
Emotional intelligence is less a coherent form of intelli-
gence than a catchall term for a wide variety of theories, 
some more scientiﬁcally valid than others, that collectively 
resist the eﬀort to reduce all smart behavior to logic. That 
resistance broadly aligns the proponents of emotional 
intelligence with the researchers of narrative intelligence.
More speciﬁcally, emotional intelligence can include 
mental activities such as empathy and emotional self- 
regulation that (as described in chapters  8, 9, and 10) 
fall under the branch of narrative intelligence known as 
ethics.
▶▹▶
By eschewing logic and metaphysics, doesn’t storythinking set 
philosophy back ﬁve thousand years, eliminating pretty much 
every philosopher we study today (and every book and article 
ever written about them)?
Storythinking doesn’t delete logic or metaphysics; it sim-
ply restricts them to their own domain, distinct from eth-
ics and real- world action.
▶▹▶
That’s the equivalent of saying that philosophy is useless.
Or that philosophy can expand into a huge new domain: 
narrative cognition.
▶▹▶

167
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
Don’t you think that metaphysics and logic are useful for 
anything?
They’re useful for solving metaphysical and logical prob-
lems, just not for solving ethical or biological problems 
such as personal and social growth.
▶▹▶
I don’t see what’s new here. Previous philosophers have already 
spent a lot of time emphasizing uniqueness (e.g., William Ock-
ham’s nominalism) and perspective shifting (e.g., Friedrich 
Nietzsche’s perspectivism).
Previous philosophers have emphasized the uniqueness 
of individual objects and taken the perspective of diﬀer-
ent beliefs. Storythinking emphasizes the uniqueness of 
individual actions and takes the perspective of diﬀerent 
doers.
That’s why Ockham and Nietzsche malfunction logic, 
while the techniques of storythinking— like prioritizing 
the exceptional and stoking narrative conﬂict— function 
creative action, increasing the originality, diversity, and 
sustainability of human plotting.
▶▹▶
How would philosophers go about studying narrative cognition?
They’d apply the same rigor to narrative that they’ve applied 
to logic.
So, narrative would be rigorously studied as a process, 
not a product. Causes would be rigorously treated as 
mechanically unique. The laws of storyworlds would be 

168
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
made rigorously consistent. Narrative conﬂict would be 
rigorously methodized to hit the generative sweet spot 
between sterile peace and destructive strife.
And crucially, narrative would be distinguished from 
logic without being subordinated to it. Students would be 
discouraged from judging stories as RIGHT or WRONG, 
TRUE or FALSE. Instead, they’d be encouraged to value sto-
ries for being original, speciﬁc, and organically coherent.
▶▹▶
What makes narrative conﬂict diﬀerent from dialectic and 
other forms of logical disagreement?
Narrative conﬂict involves a collision of actors, motives, 
rules of action, etc. So, in contrast to logical disagreement, 
which is symmetric and stably directed, narrative conﬂict 
is asymmetric, volatile, and nonteleological, like the clash 
that Clausewitz detected in war and Darwin in life. It’s 
generative of new actions, actors, and plots— until it blows 
apart.
▶▹▶
Why can’t philosophers apply logic to narrative?
Logic un- narratives narrative, creating fables with morals, 
myths with archetypes, heavens with commandments, sto-
ries with symbols, media with representations, and other 
timeless interpretations that evaporate storythinking’s core 
function: the innovation of action.
▶▹▶

169
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
If we knew everything, wouldn’t logic replace storythinking?
Yes, but until we reach that impossible future, we’ll want 
to toggle between logic and storythinking. Logic treats 
rules as absolute, so it’s dependable as long as the rules 
hold. Storythinking treats rules as useful tools, so it’s able 
to invent new rules when the old ones fail.
Logic generates reliability. Storythinking, creativity. Logic 
uses the past to predict the future; storythinking breaks 
from the past to make the future.
Logic is intelligent design. Storythinking is biological 
evolution.
Humans have a long history of valuing intelligent design, 
from Plato’s Timaeus to medieval theology to Stanford’s 
d.school. But the main historical driver of better societies 
and technologies is storythinking’s neural reﬁnement of the 
evolutionary processes that have birthed nature’s myriad 
wonders.
▶▹▶
I understand that this is a book for philosophers, and philoso-
phers are only theoretically pragmatic. But still, I was hoping 
for more speciﬁc, practical tips on improving storythinking.
You can get dozens of speciﬁc, practical tips in other works 
I’ve authored:

Q
The Art of Story (Great Courses)

Q
Wonderworks (Simon and Schuster)

Q
Creative Thinking: A Field Guide (U.S. Army)

Q
“3 Exercises to Boost Your Team’s Creativity” (Harvard Busi-
ness Review)

170
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
▶▹▶
Okay, but if I don’t want to read more of your books, what can 
I do to improve my storythinking?
The key is to develop your brain’s natural capacities for why 
and what if thinking, allowing you to plot, plan, and strat-
egize more creatively, adaptively, and variously. So, to get 
started . . .  

Q
Read stories, like candid memoirs and near- future science 
ﬁction, that enlarge your sense of possible mental and 
physical actions. And read stories, like Shakespearean dra-
mas and subplotted novels, that encourage you to inhabit 
diﬀerent psychologies simultaneously.

Q
Seek out the strange, the unusual, the unconventional— 
and suspend your judgments. Instead of evaluating outliers 
as good or bad, or rationalizing them to ﬁt your existing 
worldview, actively speculate: What new life opportunities 
could they create?

Q
Practice imagining, as precisely as possible, the mechani-
cal steps that would follow from a future action. This 
jumps you into the future without leaping you into magi-
cal thinking.
▶▹▶
Does growth always require conﬂict?
Yes. Growth is the action of life, which is driven by the 
asymmetric conﬂict of evolution by natural selection.
That doesn’t mean that conﬂict is always— or only— a 
source of growth. It can also cause destruction.

171
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
But it does mean that our logic- focused culture— with 
its emphasis on psychological states such as harmony, 
tranquility, happiness, and peace— underrates the beneﬁts 
of conﬂict, both conﬂict with others and conﬂict with 
ourselves.
Conﬂict with others is the inevitable result of a relation-
ship with any person diﬀerent from yourself. And conﬂict 
with oneself is the inevitable result of having a brain, 
because a brain is composed of neurons acting democrati-
cally (see chapter 3).
Both kinds of conﬂict can cause discomfort. Which is 
why our world abounds with putative remedies, like 
curated friend groups and mindfulness apps. But there’s 
nothing intrinsically wrong with conﬂict or its social and 
mental by- products, like tension and anxiety. If the energy 
from those struggles is used to power creative problem 
solving, it can produce ﬂow, earned satisfaction, and 
growth’s other psychological beneﬁts.
▶▹▶
What’s the most eﬀective way to channel conﬂict into growth?
Story.
Story, as every playwright knows, starts with a conﬂict. 
Conﬂict between people, or within people, is the engine 
that drives plots along.
Those plots develop over time. And as they develop, 
they develop our understanding of the consequences of 
diﬀerent actions.
The same story process drives the narrative development 
of every human life and community, powering growth.

172
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
▶▹▶
Do you believe that stories can be TRUE or FALSE?
No. I only believe that they can be helpful or harmful.
▶▹▶
Ha! I knew it! You’re a relativist!
I’m a biologist, so I believe that stories— like teeth and 
eyes and minds— are practical tools. But I don’t subscribe 
to ethical relativism. For starters, even though I don’t 
believe that stories can be true, I do believe that they can be 
honest. Which is to say: they can accurately express the 
memories, feelings, and intentions of the people who 
think and share them.
And I also don’t believe in using stories to manipulate 
others. I believe in using them to grow ourselves.
If you turn propagandist and employ story to incite fear 
and love, you’ll harm the world and do yourself no lasting 
good: the narratives you spin will be fragile, because they 
draw only on your narrow personal experience, forsaking 
the robust diversity of life.
But if you instead feed your brain stories that grow your 
own capacity for curiosity, creativity, and courage, you’ll 
launch a narrative that will outlive you. And if you give 
other people the tools to feed themselves those stories, 
you’ll launch narratives that will live further still.
▶▹▶
I have so many questions, like about whether our natural, 
mental emphasis on consciousness (which, because it’s mostly 

173
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
visual in our brain, is skewed toward the symbolic and the logi-
cal) has narrowed philosophy of mind; whether storythinking 
oﬀers a mechanical explanation for practical intuitions; and 
whether time operates diﬀerently in narrative and logic. Do 
these questions make sense?
Yes, but if I said any more, I’d be guilty of having a conver-
sation with myself.
▶▹▶
If stories make you smarter, then why aren’t TV binge- watchers 
running the world?
What makes you smarter isn’t mass quantities of one nar-
rative formula. It’s stretching your brain to consume sto-
ries outside your current operational range. Which is why 
Disney is dangerous. And why this book doesn’t recycle 
the same story recipe across all its chapters. Instead, it 
models diﬀerent species of plot and character, each of 
which provides diﬀerent challenges and opportunities for 
your brain’s narrative machinery.
▶▹▶
If narrative cognition is a mechanistic process, then couldn’t we 
someday build a noncomputer machine that storythinks?
Yes. See my published work on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
▶▹▶
For someone so inﬂuenced by pessimistic, even cynical, thinkers 
such as Darwin and Machiavelli, your view of ethics and 
human social relations is remarkably optimistic.

174
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
As a child, l learned: the longer we stand in the dark, the 
better our eyes get at detecting glimmers of light.
▶▹▶
Don’t you worry that your exclusion of timeless truths and 
moral principles from ethics and creative action could lead sto-
rythinking to be abused by corporations and militaries?
Storythinking is part of life, and the law of life is growth 
through variety. Go against that law, and you can’t prosper 
for long.
So, yes, corporations and militaries can abuse storythink-
ing, like they can abuse any other tool. And by doing so, they 
can damage lives. But they also seed their own destruction, 
from which life— and storythinking— can rebound.
▶▹▶
You mention in chapter 1 that you studied neuroscience— and 
also narrative theory? I’ve heard of neuroscience. But what 
exactly is narrative theory?
Narrative theory is a diverse body of scholarship published 
today in journals such as Narrative and The Journal of Nar-
rative Theory. My particular branch is rhetorical narrative 
theory, which started with Aristotle’s Poetics (see chapter 2), 
was revived in the 1950s by the Chicago School (see chap-
ter 4), and has been continued by scholars such as Distin-
guished University Professor James Phelan at Ohio State’s 
Project Narrative, where I sit now, writing this book.
▶▹▶

175
CODA: CONVERSATIONS WITH A STORYTHINKER
Maybe I could better grasp your perspective if I knew where 
your story started.
In the 1980s, when I was young, I read J. R. R. Tolkien and 
came to believe in right actions and wrong. After which, I 
went to school and came to believe in good grades and bad.
But then I read William Shakespeare, Frederick Doug-
lass, Charles Darwin, and Maya Angelou. And I changed 
to believe in positive struggle, creative growth, and branch-
ing lives.
▶▹▶
Where do you think our story goes from here?
Hopefully into schools that place as much emphasis on 
story and creative action as on logic and critical thinking.
▶▹▶
And after that?
Anywhere.


Notes
Chapter 1: Quotes from Hamlet taken from The First Folio (London, 1623), lns. 
862, 256– 57, 1710, 143– 44.
Chapter 2: The Sumerian tale quoted from “The Debate between Summer 
and Winter: Composite Text,” available at Oxford University’s The Electronic 
Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature (ETCSL), https:// etcsl . orinst . ox . ac . uk, as 
text number 5.3.3. “I know that I know nothing” is reported in Diogenes Laer-
tius, Lives of the Eminent Philosophers, 2.5.32. Aristotle makes the law of non-
contradiction the ﬁrst principle of metaphysics in Metaphysics 4.4.
Chapter 3: Aristotle expresses his views on why literature is more plausi-
ble and therefore more scientiﬁc than history in Poetics 1451. Cicero discusses 
narratio in Ad Herennium 1.8.11– 1.9.16; De Inventione 1.19– 21; Topica 25.97; and 
De Oratore 2.80.326– 2.81.330. The advice to Harvard MBAs can be found in 
Jill Avery, “Brand Storytelling,” Harvard Business School Technical Note 519- 
049, January 2019. (Revised October 2020.)
Chapter 4: The quotes from the “Language Arts” of the Common Core can 
be found at http:// www . corestandards . org / ELA - Literacy / CCRA / R/. A history 
of the Chicago School is provided in Vincent B. Leitch, “The Chicago School,” 
in American Literary Criticism from the Thirties to the Eighties (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1988), 60– 80. On  I. A. Richards’s method of 
“close reading” and its (complex) relation to New Criticism, see Joseph North, 
“What’s ‘New Critical’ about ‘Close Reading’? I. A. Richards and His New 
Critical Reception,” New Literary History 44 (2013): 141– 57. For the character 

178
NOTES
critics’ reading of Hamlet, see Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s claim that “Hamlet’s 
character is the prevalence of the abstracting and generalizing habit over the 
practical,” from Coleridge’s Lecture on Hamlet (1818), printed in Lectures and 
Notes on Shakspere and Other English Poets, ed. T. Ashe (London: George Bell 
and Sons, 1897), 531. The single use of “abstract” in Hamlet can be found in 
The First Folio, line 1565.
Chapter 5: For my scholarship on why AI cannot process or generate 
original actions, rendering it incapable of writing novels, innovating tech-
nology, or doing science, see (for literary audiences) “Why Computers Will 
Never Read (or Write) Novels: A Logical Proof and a Narrative,” Narrative 
29 (2021): 1– 28, and (for computer science audiences) “Why Computer AI 
Will Never Do What We Imagine It Can,” Narrative 30 (2022): 1– 30. Short 
portions of the latter are reproduced with permission in the “What Semiot-
ics Misses” section of chapter 4. McCulloch and Domarus’s book, Lekton, 
being a belated Introduction by Warren S. McCulloch to The Logical Structure 
of Mind: An inquiry into the philosophical foundation of psychology and psychi-
atry by Eilhard von Domarus, was made publicly available on January 1, 1965, 
and can be located at https:// ntrs . nasa . gov / citations / 19650017787. McCull-
och and Pitts’s coauthored article is “A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immi-
nent in Nervous Activity,” Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5 (1943): 115– 
33. Hobbes’s claim that “Reason is computation . . .  is addition and subtraction,” 
“Per Ratiocinationem autem intelligo computationem . . .  Recidit itaque 
ratiocinatio omnis ad duas operationes animi Additionem & Substractio-
nem,” can be found in “Computation or Logic,” in De Corpore, Book 1, 
Chapter 1, Section 3. Turing’s quote can be found in Alan Turing, “On Com-
putable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem,” Pro-
ceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Series 2 42 (1936– 37): 230– 65; 
corrections, 43 (1937): 544– 46. Claude Shannon’s master’s thesis is “A 
Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits,” Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, 1940.
Chapter  6: For more on the neuroscience of storythinking, see Angus 
Fletcher and Mike Benveniste, “A New Approach to Training Creativity: Nar-
rative as an Alternative to Divergent Thinking,” Annals of the New York Acad-
emy of Science 1512 (2022): 29– 45. I. J. Good’s quote about the two compo-
nents of a computer is: “a ﬁnite set of symbols together with a ﬁnite number 
of rules of transformation for transforming ﬁnite strings of symbols into 
other strings.” I. J. Good, “Logic of Man and Machine,” New Scientist, April 15, 

179
NOTES
1965, 182. On the “war” between the soups and the sparks, see E. S. Valen-
stein, The War of the Soups and the Sparks: The Discovery of Neurotransmitters 
and the Dispute Over How Nerves Communicate (New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 2006). For Herschel’s rethinking of the scientiﬁc method, see A 
Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy (London: Longman, 
Green, Taylor, 1830), 6.171. For Whewell’s claim that Herschel had switched 
the scientiﬁc method from induction to “guessing,” see [William Whewell], 
“Herschel’s Preliminary Discourse,” Quarterly Review 45 (1831): 401. “A beam 
of light as an electromagnetic ﬁeld” is from Albert Einstein (1951), “Autobio-
graphical Notes,” in Albert Einstein- Philosopher Scientist, 2nd  ed., ed. P. A. 
Schilpp (New York: Tudor Publishing, 1951), 52– 53. John Eccles revealed his 
debt to Karl Popper as “I was urged by Popper to formulate the electrical 
hypotheses of synaptic excitation and inhibition in models that invited 
experimental testing and falsiﬁcation,” John C. Eccles, “My Scientiﬁc Odys-
sey,” Annual Review of Physiology 39 (1977): 6. Dale’s remark about Eccles’s 
“newfound enthusiasm” can be found in John C. Eccles, “From Electrical to 
Chemical Transmission in the Central Nervous System,” Notes and Records of 
the Royal Society, London 30 (1976): 219– 30. The natural history of neurons 
and synapses is murky and marked by rival hypotheses, but for a helpful 
introduction, see Tomás J. Ryan and Seth G. N. Grant, “The Origin and Evo-
lution of Synapses,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10 (2009): 701– 12. Carl von 
Clausewitz remarks, “Der Krieg ist das Gebiet der Ungewißheit; drei Vier-
teile derjenigen Dinge, worauf das Handeln im Kriege gebaut wird, liegen 
im Nebel einer mehr oder weniger großen Ungewißheit,” “War is the realm 
of   uncertainty; three- quarters of the things on which action in war is built 
lie in the fog of a greater or lesser degree of uncertainty.” On War, Book 1, 
Chapter 3.
Chapter 7: For “always the one . . .  constant story,” see Joseph Campbell, 
The Hero with a Thousand Faces (New York: Pantheon, 1949), 1. For examples 
of how to translate these three general approaches into speciﬁc training 
exercises, see Angus Fletcher, “3 Exercises to Boost Your Team’s Creativity,” 
Harvard Business Review, March  24, 2022; and Angus Fletcher, Creative 
Thinking: A Field Guide to Building Your Strategic Core (Ft. Leavenworth, KS: 
U.S. Army Command and General Staﬀ College, 2021).
Chapter 8: On Peirce, Dewey wrote: “The course is very mathematical, 
and by Logic, Mr. Peirce means only an account of the physical sciences, put 
in mathematical form as far as possible.” Quoted in George Dykhuizen, The 

180
NOTES
Life and Mind of John Dewey (Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois 
University Press, 1973), 30– 31. For Dewey on the relationship between strug-
gle and growth, see the opening of Democracy and Education (1916): “As long 
as [the living thing] endures, it struggles to use surrounding energies in its 
own behalf. It uses light, air, moisture, and the material of soil. To say that it 
uses them is to say that it turns them into means of its own conservation. As 
long as it is growing, the energy it expends in thus turning the environment 
to account is more than compensated for by the return it gets: it grows.” For 
Dewey on story, see Schools of To- morrow, cowritten with Evelyn Dewey (1915): 
“The story telling and dramatization are very closely connected and (up to the 
age of about ten) take the place of the usual bookwork. Stories of literary 
value, suited in subject matter to the age of the pupils, are told or read to 
them, and they in turn are asked to tell stories they have heard outside of 
school. After the ninth or tenth year, when the children have learned to read, 
they read stories from books either to themselves or aloud, and then the 
whole class discuss them” (35). Hegel discusses becoming [das Werden] in 
Wissenschaft der Logik, book 1, section 1, chapter 1, heading c, e.g., “Das reine 
Seyn und das reine Nichts ist also dasselbe. Was die Wahrheit ist, ist weder 
das Seyn, noch das Nichts, sondern daß das Seyn in Nichts, und das Nichts 
in Seyn . . .  das Werden.” “Pure being and pure nothing are therefore the 
same thing. What the truth is, is neither being nor nothing, but being into 
nothing, and nothing into being . . .  that is, becoming.” Thomas Henry Hux-
ley, Ethics and Evolution (London: Macmillan and Co,, 1893), 81. John Dewey, 
“Evolution and Ethics,” The Monist 8 (1898): 330, 340.
Chapter 9: Machiavelli’s December 10 letter is to Francesco Vettori. His 
quote on actions is: “che gli uomini nel procedere loro, è tanto più nelle azi-
oni grandi, debbono considerare i tempi, e accommodarsi a quegli. E coloro 
che, per cattiva elezione o per naturale inclinazione, si discordono dai tempi, 
vivono, il più delle volte, infelici, ed hanno cattivo esito le azioni loro, al con-
trario l’hanno quegli che si concordano col tempo,” Discorsi 3.8. “Here we see 
the Roman Senate’s great prudence” is 1.38. His anecdotes of Horatius 
Cocles, Cincinnatus, and Manlius Capitolinus are 1.24, 1.25, 1.8. His claim 
that the diversity of republics gives them better fortune than princedoms is 
3.9. Machiavelli’s “The work of this narrative” is “aiutato da coloro che mi 
hanno, ad entrare sotto questo peso, confortato, credo portarlo in modo, che 
ad un altro resterà breve cammino a condurlo a loco destinato,” Preface, book 
1. Francis Bacon, “New Atlantis: A Work Unﬁnished,” in Sylva Sylvarum 

181
NOTES
(London, 1627), 1– 47; the term “diverse” appears dozens of times, especially 
on 32– 47. “Men are born free and yet are everywhere in chains” is “L’homme 
est né libre, & partout il est dans les fers,” Du contrat social; ou, Principes du 
droit politique (Amsterdam: Marc Michel Rey, 1762), book 1, chapter 1, page 3. 
Thomas Paine, Common Sense (Philadelphia: W. T. Bradford, 1776), 129.
Chapter  10: On Leontion, see Diogenes Laertius, Lives of the Eminent 
Philosophers 10.5, 10.23. For Epicurus on happiness, see Diogenes Laertius, 
esp. 10.122– 54. Plato’s myth of Er is Republic, Book 10, 614– 21. George Eliot, 
Middlemarch: A Study of Provincial Life (London: William Blackwood and Sons, 
1871– 72), 8 vols., vol 8, Finale.


Abbasid Golden Age, 23
actions: narrative, 62, 123; original, 
8, 13, 32, 44– 45, 73, 78, 95, 178. 
See also creative action
adaptive learning, 3, 42, 44– 45, 63, 
96– 97, 139
Aesop, 41, 51
algorithms, 7, 9, 28, 62, 68, 71, 118, 
133, 154
allegory, 27, 51– 52, 59, 76
Angelou, Maya, 14, 175
Aquinas, Thomas, 26, 34, 69, 102
archetypes, 12, 69, 101, 117, 168
Aristotle, 6– 7, 11, 17– 18, 26– 28, 
30– 31, 33, 36, 39– 40, 50– 51, 70, 
74, 115, 117– 18; narrative theory, 
163; Organon, 6– 7, 11, 27, 33, 50, 
66– 67, 69, 74– 75, 84, 114; Poetics, 
18, 33, 36– 37, 174, 177; teleology, 117
Arnold, Matthew, 48
Artificial Intelligence, 6– 7, 12, 27, 
62– 63, 72– 73, 75– 76, 79, 96, 
98, 159– 60, 178; future of, 173; 
and philosophy, 116; why it 
cannot process narrative, 73– 76, 
96– 98
Australian Indigenous Peoples, 21, 150
Bacon, Francis, 48, 84– 86, 90, 133, 
180
Bayesian inference, 159
Bayesian software, 71
Benveniste, Mike, 178
Bible, 54, 85
biographies, 80, 158
biological purpose, 32, 125
biology, evolutionary, 72
Boole, George, 70
brain, 2, 8– 14, 22, 32– 34, 41, 45– 46, 
58– 59, 76– 98, 124– 25, 140– 41, 
148– 50, 152, 155– 57, 163– 64, 
170– 71, 173; narrative, 46, 121, 155; 
as proof of narrative intelligence, 
161
Index

184
INDEX
British Empire, 48
business, 10, 18, 45, 68, 72, 96, 116, 
159
Byzantium, ancient, 48, 115
Campbell, Joseph, 100– 103, 105, 
108– 9, 179
Camus, Albert, 14
Cataline, 38– 39
causal thinking, 4, 45, 52, 90, 95, 
105, 134– 35, 159, 162, 164, 170
causes and effects, 4, 13, 24, 45, 
54, 74– 76, 79, 88, 104– 7, 
109, 132
character criticism, 52, 54, 76
Chicago School, 49– 50, 174, 177
Cicero, 37– 41, 177
Clausewitz, Carl von, 98, 168, 179
close reading, 54, 56, 177
cognitive science, 55, 72
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 178
Common Core, 9, 48– 50, 53, 56– 57, 
59, 62, 79, 177
computation, 9, 66, 69, 71, 79, 118, 
178
computational theories of mind, 71
computers, 6– 10, 18, 33, 61– 63, 
70– 71, 73, 75– 76, 78– 79, 96– 98, 
164, 178; Arithmetic Logic Unit, 
7, 70; CPU, 71, 96
computer vs. neuron, 43
conflict, 13, 22, 82, 104, 109, 118– 19, 
122, 136– 39, 151– 52, 170– 71; 
asymmetric, 12, 98, 104, 107, 121, 
160, 168, 170; narrative, 12, 14– 15, 
59, 112, 136– 37, 167– 68
Confucius, 20, 25– 26
convergent thinking, 7, 107, 159
Copernican Revolution, 88
Copernicus, Nicolas, 88, 90
counterfactual thinking, 4, 45, 53, 
135, 160, 162, 170
Crane, Ronald Salmon, 121
creative action, 3– 4, 10, 25, 46, 78, 
102, 133, 152, 155– 56, 167, 174– 75
creative thinking, 92, 94– 97, 103, 
105– 6, 125, 134, 145, 169, 179
creativity, 6– 7, 16, 42, 44– 45, 
78– 79, 105, 108– 9, 156, 159, 169, 
172; and growth, 124; 
neuroscience of. See narrative, 
neuroscience of; and science, 89
creativity training, 178
critical thinking, 6, 10, 53, 56, 62, 
79, 95, 107, 159, 165, 175
Curie, Marie, 15– 16
Darwin, Charles, 15, 89– 90, 95, 97, 
109, 113– 14, 118– 20, 168, 173, 175
Darwinian evolution, 4, 103, 119, 121
Darwinism, social, 120
data, 8, 38, 41, 43, 53, 62, 72– 73, 85, 
89, 95, 98
da Vinci, Leonardo, 6
Delacroix, Charles, 121
Descartes, René, 6, 26, 164
design thinking, 7, 10, 62– 63, 
72– 73, 78, 96– 97, 159, 169
Dewey, John, 112– 13, 116– 22, 134, 
179– 80
Disney, 173
divergent thinking, 159, 178
Domarus, Eilhard von, 63– 65, 68, 
73, 76, 98, 178

185
INDEX
Douglass, Frederick, 175
Du Bois, W. E. B., 112, 121
Eccles, John C., 77, 79– 82, 90, 
92– 94, 97, 179
Eddington, Arthur, 15, 91– 92
Einstein, Albert, 15– 16, 68– 69, 
90– 92, 95, 97, 179
Eliot, George, 158, 181
emotion, 17– 18, 72, 89, 123, 141, 152, 
156, 165
emotional growth, 34, 123– 24
emotional self- regulation, 166
empathy, 104, 166
ENIAC, 70– 71
Enlightenment, 6, 26– 27, 39, 69, 
89
Epicurus, 145– 50, 153, 155, 158, 181
Epicurus’s Garden, 143– 46, 148– 49, 
154– 55, 158
equations, logical, 33, 70, 83, 96, 115
ethics, 21– 23, 25– 27, 33, 118, 121, 133, 
146– 49, 152, 157, 166, 173– 74
evolution: biological, 3, 13, 41– 43, 
53, 103, 108, 119– 21, 161, 165, 
169– 70, 180; natural selection, 
3– 4, 13, 15, 44, 53, 107– 8, 113, 117, 
119, 121, 170
exceptional, the, 12, 14– 15, 98, 160, 
167, 170
exceptional information. See 
exceptional, the
fiction, 1, 5, 12, 17, 53, 57, 102, 104, 
162, 170
Fodor, Jerry, 72
Frazer, James George, 101
freedom, 109, 125, 130– 31, 133, 135, 
137– 39, 144, 146, 157
Frege, Gottlob, 6, 114– 16
Freud, Sigmund, 83, 91, 101
Galileo Galilei, 6
game theory, 116
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 16, 
121
GPT- 4, 164
growth, 4, 79, 104, 111– 12, 117– 20, 
135, 138, 154, 156, 170– 71, 174– 75; 
intellectual, 124– 25, 157; 
personal, 111– 25, 134; social, 125, 
127– 42, 167
happiness, 26, 146, 148– 49, 154– 56, 
171, 181; and growth, 148
Harvey, William, 6
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 6, 
26– 27, 115– 19, 180
Heidegger, Martin, 26, 64
hermeneutics, 7, 50– 51, 55. See also 
interpretation
Hero’s Journey, 100– 102, 109, 134
Herschel, John, 86– 90, 92, 94– 95, 
179
Hesiod, 35
Hobbes, Thomas, 69, 178
Hollywood, 2, 67, 100, 102
Homer, 35
homo economicus, 159
Homo sapiens, 20
Hugo, Victor, 112, 121
human intelligence, 4, 9, 62, 69, 71, 
73, 76, 81, 95– 96, 139
humanities, modern, 7

186
INDEX
Huxley, Thomas Henry, 48, 119– 21, 
180
hydrogen bomb, 71
hypotheses, scientific, 16, 32, 62, 73, 
79, 87– 90, 92, 95, 97
idealism, 101, 107– 8, 117
ideology, 51, 84, 147
imagination, 14, 30, 33, 59, 88, 
90– 91, 97, 101, 125, 170. See also 
creative thinking
imitation, 35– 36, 40, 45
India, Vedic, 7, 21
inference. See narrative jump
innovation, 10– 11, 44, 46, 62, 103, 
108, 121, 129, 133, 163, 168; and 
Artificial Intelligence, 96; and 
narrative intelligence, 5, 159; and 
republics, 139
innovators, 78, 128
intelligence, 28, 30, 41, 62, 66– 67, 
69, 73, 98, 120, 159, 165– 66; 
creative, 34; dualism of, 8; 
emotional, 166; evolution of, 10; 
general, 6. See also IQ; motor, 163
interpretation, 24, 27, 51, 53, 56, 
85– 86, 92, 101, 159, 161, 165; 
origins in logic, 6; performable 
by Artificial Intelligence, 68
IQ, 7, 159. See also intelligence, 
general
James, William, 11, 112
joy, 123, 149
Jung, Carl, 101
justice, 24, 26– 27, 61, 113, 148, 
152– 55
Kant, Immanuel, 6, 26
Kierkegaard, Søren, 114
language, 3, 20, 49– 50, 59, 69, 71, 
76, 114– 15, 118, 163– 64; action 
verbs, 58– 59, 75, 115, 164; nouns, 
58, 115. See also symbolic 
language
Language Arts, 49, 56, 177. See also 
Common Core
Leibniz, Gottfried, 69
Leontion, 143, 146, 148, 158, 181
liberalism, classical, 135
libertarianism, 135
life: the good, 11, 26; origins, 3
literary studies, 18, 52, 54– 55
literature, 2, 10, 48, 50– 52, 54– 55, 
57, 59, 68, 123, 163, 165
Livy, 129– 30, 133
logic, 5– 8, 10– 11, 15– 16, 32– 33, 
48– 76, 81– 82, 85, 89, 92, 113– 15, 
117– 18, 128, 145, 149, 152– 54, 
159– 61, 165– 69; abduction. See 
narrative jump; AND/OR/NOT, 
7, 24, 50, 67– 68, 78, 96; 
Aristotelian, 50; colloquial vs 
formal definition of, 160; 
computation, 78, 89, 96, 178; 
deduction, 6, 27, 53, 68, 84, 86, 
159– 61; dialectic, 6, 13, 27– 28, 33, 
116– 17, 159, 168; Enlightenment, 
6, 27, 69, 89, 121; Hegel, 83, 
116– 19; induction, 6, 27, 53, 68, 
72, 84, 86– 89, 92, 94, 159– 60, 
179; laws, 78, 87; limits, 61– 76; 
new, 84, 86, 116– 17; and 
optimization, 107; not sole 

187
INDEX
origin of philosophy, 20. See also 
symbolic logic
logical utopia, 11, 18, 68, 154
logic and story, 7– 8, 73, 145, 149, 169
logic gates, computational, 96, 164. 
See also NAND/NOR logic gates
Lucas, George, 100
luck, 9, 42, 111, 123, 131, 133
Machiavelli, Niccolò, 127– 35, 139, 
173, 180
magical thinking, 75, 101, 105, 163, 170
Marx, Karl, 83, 91
Marxism, 6, 27, 55, 116
Mayans, 20, 25
McCulloch, Warren Sturgis, 64– 71, 
73, 76, 178
Mendel, Gregor, 15
Mesopotamia, Sumerian, 5, 19
metaphysics, 23, 25, 27, 30, 33– 34, 
36, 51, 113, 147, 153, 166– 67
Michelangelo, 106
Mickiewicz, Adam, 16
Middle Ages, 23, 26– 27, 51, 62, 69, 
75– 76, 84– 86, 88, 128– 30, 154, 
169
monotheism, 152
motives, psychological, 12– 13, 22, 52, 
135, 162, 168
moto, 163
Muses, 35– 36
myth, 13, 18, 36, 59– 60, 99– 101, 150, 
155, 168
NAND/NOR logic gates, 78. See also 
logic gates, computational
narratio, 38, 177
narrative: neuroscience of, 94– 98; 
not reducible to logic, 161
narrative art, 13, 16, 48, 55, 165
narrative cognition, 4, 10– 11, 
33– 34, 46, 96, 161, 164, 
166– 67, 173
narrative intelligence, 9, 92, 102, 
139, 141, 159– 61, 163, 165– 66
narrative jumps, 20, 53, 86– 87, 
89– 90, 170
narrative process, 102, 108, 122, 124, 
133, 136
narrative theory, 2, 163, 174
Natural Language Processors 
(NLPs), 75, 164. See also Artificial 
Intelligence
Neoplatonists, 26
neuron, 3– 4, 32, 42– 44, 77– 78, 
80– 81, 94– 97, 109, 154, 164, 171, 
179; complexity of, 164
neurons and synapses, 78, 179
neuroscience, 2, 80, 164, 174, 178
New Criticism, 55– 56, 177
Newton, Isaac, 6, 84– 85, 88– 89, 
91
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 26, 167
nominalism, 167
Obama, Barack, 39
Ockham, William, 167
Ophelia, 14
opportunity, 4, 62, 103, 121, 124– 25, 
133, 137– 38, 155– 56, 162, 170, 173; 
and growth, 111; from 
imagination, 32
optimism, 109
optimization, 10, 107, 147

188
INDEX
Paine, Thomas, 134, 181
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 52, 117, 179
perspective shifting, 12, 14, 29, 31, 
136, 157, 167
perspective- shifting networks, 
brain, 31, 124
perspectivism, 167
Phelan, James, 174
philosophers, 5, 10– 11, 18, 23, 25– 27, 
35– 37, 39– 40, 145– 47, 152, 
159– 60, 163, 166– 69; and 
Darwin, 113
philosophy, 6– 7, 11, 18– 20, 22– 23, 
27, 64– 65, 72, 113– 15, 118, 145– 48, 
151– 53, 155– 56, 165– 66; analytic, 
6, 27, 54, 116; early, 26– 27, 
151– 52; professional, 22– 26, 28, 
113, 121; Western, 6, 17
physics, relation to logic and 
narrative, 75– 76, 84, 91, 146, 150
Pitts, Walter, 66– 71, 73, 76, 178
Plato, 17– 19, 23, 26– 27, 36, 54, 72, 
101, 139, 143, 153– 56, 169
Plotinus, 26
Popper, Karl, 82– 84, 86, 89– 93, 
164, 179
pragmatism, 11, 131
Precambrian sea, 3
predictions, 15– 16, 71, 83, 88– 89, 91
problem solving, 5, 11, 13, 46, 62, 
103, 163– 64, 171
process psychology, 156
Progressivism, 112, 121
Project Narrative, Ohio State, 164, 
174
Prometheus, 152
psychology, human (see also 
neuroscience), 9, 28, 36, 45, 51, 
65, 83– 84, 112, 149, 155– 56
Ptahhotep, 19– 20, 25, 27
Putnam, Hilary, 72
Pythagoras, 20, 26
Ramón y Cajal, Santiago, 164
rational choice theory, 72, 159
realism, 109
Renaissance, 4, 27, 39, 48, 79, 106, 
112
representations, 8, 55, 57, 59, 74, 76, 
103, 161, 168
republics, 4, 17– 18, 68, 132– 33, 
136– 37, 139, 180– 81
resilience, psychological, 46, 123, 
159
rhetoric, 1, 11, 16, 18, 37
Richards, I. A., 50– 52, 54– 57, 
59– 60, 177
Rigveda, 51
Rockefeller, John D., 112
Romanticism, 6, 16, 26, 52, 54, 112, 
117, 121
Rousseau, Jean- Jacques, 134
Russell, Bertrand, 66– 67, 116
Rutherford, Thomas, 15
Sandberg, Sheryl, 39
Schlegel, Karl Wilhelm Friedrich, 52
science, modern, 15– 16, 41, 79, 84, 
121, 149
scientific method, 2, 86– 89, 91– 92, 
179; proto, 21
self- irony, 29– 31

189
INDEX
Seligman, Martin, 121
semiotics, 7, 27, 50– 52, 54– 55, 57, 
59, 75– 76, 102, 163, 178
Shakespeare, William, 2, 15, 48– 49, 
59, 68, 112, 175; Hamlet, 14– 15, 
52, 54, 59, 177– 78
Shannon, Claude, 70, 178
Sidney, Philip, 48
signification, 75, 118, 121. See also 
symbols, representation
Singularity, the, 61, 105, 154– 55
Socrates, 17, 23, 27– 31, 33, 153
Solomon, 20, 25– 26
Soviet Union, 47, 50
speculation, narrative, 4, 8, 12, 36, 
52– 53, 88– 89, 94, 97, 122, 161, 
170
Star Wars, 100
statistics, 54, 72, 98, 159
STEM, 48– 49
story: literary, 48– 49; origins of, 
35– 46; plausibility of, 37; 
rhetorical potency of, 40– 41
storygiving, 158
storytelling, 1, 40
storythinking, 3, 10, 13, 15, 45– 46, 59, 
61– 62, 64– 98, 157, 161– 67, 
169– 70, 173– 74; benefits of, 109; 
and causal thinking, 8; challenge 
to ethics, 141; definition of, 4, 103, 
161; improvement of, 11, 16, 34; 
improving at, 99, 109, 169; 
neuroscience of, 178; for 
personal growth, 112– 25; and 
planning, 111; for social growth, 
128– 42
storythinking’s account of 
democracy, 135, 137
storyworlds, 4, 103, 106, 124, 162, 
167
struggle, positive, 175, 180
syllogism, 7, 28, 33, 50, 52, 68, 72, 
85, 115– 16
symbolic language, 70, 78, 101
symbolic logic, 50, 68, 71, 96, 159, 
161, 164
symbols, 21, 51, 54, 59, 74– 76, 161, 
168, 178; arithmetic, 114; 
timeless, 79; universal, 69
synapses, 42– 44, 46, 77– 78, 80– 81, 
90, 93– 97, 109, 164, 179
teleology, 118
Tesla, Nikola, 68
thinking. See causal thinking, 
counterfactual thinking, creative 
thinking, critical thinking, 
divergent thinking, 
storythinking
Tolkien, J.R.R., 175
transistors, 78– 79, 96– 98; MOS, 71
truth, 23– 28, 32, 48, 50– 51, 53– 54, 
103, 113, 118– 19, 148, 152, 154– 55
truth and narrative, 2, 11, 18, 91
Turing, Alan, 7, 70, 78, 178
U.S. Army: Command and General 
Staff College, 179; Special 
Operations, 164
U.S. school system, 47, 57, 116. See 
also Common Core
utopia. See logical utopia

190
INDEX
Van Gogh, Vincent, 14, 68, 121
Vedas, 5
war, 61, 98, 168, 179. See also  
conflict
Wertheimer, Max, 64
Whewell, William, 88, 179
wisdom literature, 20, 22– 23, 28, 
33– 34, 60
Zeus, 152
Zoroastrianism, 152

