The Project Gutenberg eBook, The
Theory and Practice of Perspective, by
George Adolphus Storey
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Title: The Theory and Practice of Perspective
Author: George Adolphus Storey
Release Date: December 22, 2006 [eBook #20165]
Language: English
Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1
***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THEORY AND
PRACTICE OF PERSPECTIVE***
E-text prepared by Louise Hope, Suzanne Lybarger, Jonathan Ingram,
and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net/c/)
 
Lines in the sample drawings are not always parallel. In some cases this may
be an artifact of the scanning process, but more often the pictures were not
positioned evenly in the original book. Page numbers shown in brackets [ ]
held illustrations without text. They will sometimes be out of sequence with
adjoining page numbers.
A few typographical errors have been corrected. They have been marked in
the text with mouse-hover popups.
 
 
 
HENRY FROWDE, M.A.
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE
 
 
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
1/161

THE
THEORY AND PRACTICE
OF PERSPECTIVE
 
BY
G. A. STOREY, A.R.A.
TEACHER OF PERSPECTIVE AT THE ROYAL ACADEMY
 
 
‘QUÎ FIT?’
 
OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1910
 
 
OXFORD
PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
BY HORACE HART, M.A.
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY
 
 
DEDICATED
TO
SIR EDWARD J. POYNTER
BARONET
PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY
IN TOKEN OF FRIENDSHIP
AND REGARD
iii
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
2/161

PREFACE
IT is much easier to understand and remember a thing when a reason is given for it, than
when we are merely shown how to do it without being told why it is so done; for in the latter
case, instead of being assisted by reason, our real help in all study, we have to rely upon
memory or our power of imitation, and to do simply as we are told without thinking about it.
The consequence is that at the very first difficulty we are left to flounder about in the dark, or
to remain inactive till the master comes to our assistance.
Now in this book it is proposed to enlist the reasoning faculty from the very first: to let one
problem grow out of another and to be dependent on the foregoing, as in geometry, and so
to explain each thing we do that there shall be no doubt in the mind as to the correctness of
the proceeding. The student will thus gain the power of finding out any new problem for
himself, and will therefore acquire a true knowledge of perspective.
CONTENTS
BOOK I
PAGE
THE NECESSITY OF THE STUDY OF PERSPECTIVE TO PAINTERS, SCULPTORS, AND
ARCHITECTS
1
WHAT IS PERSPECTIVE?
6
THE THEORY OF PERSPECTIVE:
I.
Definitions
13
II.
The Point of Sight, the Horizon, and the Point of Distance.
15
III.
Point of Distance
16
IV.
Perspective of a Point, Visual Rays, &c.
20
V.
Trace and Projection
21
VI.
Scientific Definition of Perspective
22
RULES:
VII.
The Rules and Conditions of Perspective
24
VIII.
A Table or Index of the Rules of Perspective
40
BOOK II
THE PRACTICE OF PERSPECTIVE:
IX.
The Square in Parallel Perspective
42
v
vii
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
3/161

X.
The Diagonal
43
XI.
The Square
43
XII.
Geometrical and Perspective Figures Contrasted
46
XIII.
Of Certain Terms made use of in Perspective
48
XIV.
How to Measure Vanishing or Receding Lines
49
XV.
How to Place Squares in Given Positions
50
XVI.
How to Draw Pavements, &c.
51
XVII.
Of Squares placed Vertically and at Different Heights, or the
Cube in Parallel Perspective
53
XVIII.
The Transposed Distance
53
XIX.
The Front View of the Square and of the Proportions of Figures
at Different Heights
54
XX.
Of Pictures that are Painted according to the Position they are to
Occupy
59
XXI.
Interiors
62
XXII.
The Square at an Angle of 45°
64
XXIII.
The Cube at an Angle of 45°
65
XXIV.
Pavements Drawn by Means of Squares at 45°
66
XXV.
The Perspective Vanishing Scale
68
XXVI.
The Vanishing Scale can be Drawn to any Point on the Horizon
69
XXVII.
Application of Vanishing Scales to Drawing Figures
71
XXVIII.
How to Determine the Heights of Figures on a Level Plane
71
XXIX.
The Horizon above the Figures
72
XXX.
Landscape Perspective
74
XXXI.
Figures of Different Heights. The Chessboard
74
XXXII.
Application of the Vanishing Scale to Drawing Figures at an Angle
when their Vanishing Points are Inaccessible or Outside the
Picture
77
XXXIII.
The Reduced Distance. How to Proceed when the Point of
Distance is Inaccessible
77
XXXIV.
How to Draw a Long Passage or Cloister by Means of the
Reduced Distance
78
XXXV.
How to Form a Vanishing Scale that shall give the Height, Depth,
and Distance of any Object in the Picture
79
XXXVI.
Measuring Scale on Ground
81
XXXVII.
Application of the Reduced Distance and the Vanishing Scale to
Drawing a Lighthouse, &c.
84
XXXVIII.
How to Measure Long Distances such as a Mile or Upwards
85
XXXIX.
Further Illustration of Long Distances and Extended Views.
87
XL.
How to Ascertain the Relative Heights of Figures on an Inclined
viii
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
4/161

Plane
88
XLI.
How to Find the Distance of a Given Figure or Point from the
Base Line
89
XLII.
How to Measure the Height of Figures on Uneven Ground
90
XLIII.
Further Illustration of the Size of Figures at Different Distances
and on Uneven Ground
91
XLIV.
Figures on a Descending Plane
92
XLV.
Further Illustration of the Descending Plane
95
XLVI.
Further Illustration of Uneven Ground
95
XLVII.
The Picture Standing on the Ground
96
XLVIII.
The Picture on a Height
97
BOOK III
XLIX.
Angular Perspective
98
L.
How to put a Given Point into Perspective
99
LI.
A Perspective Point being given, Find its Position on the
Geometrical Plane
100
LII.
How to put a Given Line into Perspective
101
LIII.
To Find the Length of a Given Perspective Line
102
LIV.
To Find these Points when the Distance-Point is Inaccessible
103
LV.
How to put a Given Triangle or other Rectilineal Figure into
Perspective
104
LVI.
How to put a Given Square into Angular Perspective
105
LVII.
Of Measuring Points
106
LVIII.
How to Divide any Given Straight Line into Equal or
Proportionate Parts
107
LIX.
How to Divide a Diagonal Vanishing Line into any Number of
Equal or Proportional Parts
107
LX.
Further Use of the Measuring Point O
110
LXI.
Further Use of the Measuring Point O
110
LXII.
Another Method of Angular Perspective, being that Adopted in
our Art Schools
112
LXIII.
Two Methods of Angular Perspective in one Figure
115
LXIV.
To Draw a Cube, the Points being Given
115
LXV.
Amplification of the Cube Applied to Drawing a Cottage
116
LXVI.
How to Draw an Interior at an Angle
117
LXVII.
How to Correct Distorted Perspective by Doubling the Line of
Distance
118
LXVIII.
How to Draw a Cube on a Given Square, using only One
Vanishing Point
119
ix
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
5/161

LXIX.
A Courtyard or Cloister Drawn with One Vanishing Point
120
LXX.
How to Draw Lines which shall Meet at a Distant Point, by
Means of Diagonals
121
LXXI.
How to Divide a Square Placed at an Angle into a Given Number
of Small Squares
122
LXXII.
Further Example of how to Divide a Given Oblique Square into a
Given Number of Equal Squares, say Twenty-five
122
LXXIII.
Of Parallels and Diagonals
124
LXXIV.
The Square, the Oblong, and their Diagonals
125
LXXV.
Showing the Use of the Square and Diagonals in Drawing
Doorways, Windows, and other Architectural Features
126
LXXVI.
How to Measure Depths by Diagonals
127
LXXVII.
How to Measure Distances by the Square and Diagonal
128
LXXVIII.
How by Means of the Square and Diagonal we can Determine the
Position of Points in Space
129
LXXIX.
Perspective of a Point Placed in any Position within the Square
131
LXXX.
Perspective of a Square Placed at an Angle. New Method
133
LXXXI.
On a Given Line Placed at an Angle to the Base Draw a Square
in Angular Perspective, the Point of Sight, and Distance, being
given
134
LXXXII.
How to Draw Solid Figures at any Angle by the New Method
135
LXXXIII.
Points in Space
137
LXXXIV.
The Square and Diagonal Applied to Cubes and Solids Drawn
Therein
138
LXXXV.
To Draw an Oblique Square in Another Oblique Square without
Using Vanishing-points
139
LXXXVI.
Showing how a Pedestal can be Drawn by the New Method
141
LXXXVII.
Scale on Each Side of the Picture
143
LXXXVIII.
The Circle
145
LXXXIX.
The Circle in Perspective a True Ellipse
145
XC.
Further Illustration of the Ellipse
146
XCI.
How to Draw a Circle in Perspective Without a Geometrical Plan
148
XCII.
How to Draw a Circle in Angular Perspective
151
XCIII.
How to Draw a Circle in Perspective more Correctly, by Using
Sixteen Guiding Points
152
XCIV.
How to Divide a Perspective Circle into any Number of Equal
Parts
153
XCV.
How to Draw Concentric Circles
154
XCVI.
The Angle of the Diameter of the Circle in Angular and Parallel
Perspective
156
XCVII.
How to Correct Disproportion in the Width of Columns
157
x
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
6/161

XCVIII.
How to Draw a Circle over a Circle or a Cylinder
158
XCIX.
To Draw a Circle Below a Given Circle
159
C.
Application of Previous Problem
160
CI.
Doric Columns
161
CII.
To Draw Semicircles Standing upon a Circle at any Angle
162
CIII.
A Dome Standing on a Cylinder
163
CIV.
Section of a Dome or Niche
164
CV.
A Dome
167
CVI.
How to Draw Columns Standing in a Circle
169
CVII.
Columns and Capitals
170
CVIII.
Method of Perspective Employed by Architects
170
CIX.
The Octagon
172
CX.
How to Draw the Octagon in Angular Perspective
173
CXI.
How to Draw an Octagonal Figure in Angular Perspective
174
CXII.
How to Draw Concentric Octagons, with Illustration of a Well
174
CXIII.
A Pavement Composed of Octagons and Small Squares
176
CXIV.
The Hexagon
177
CXV.
A Pavement Composed of Hexagonal Tiles
178
CXVI.
A Pavement of Hexagonal Tiles in Angular Perspective
181
CXVII.
Further Illustration of the Hexagon
182
CXVIII.
Another View of the Hexagon in Angular Perspective
183
CXIX.
Application of the Hexagon to Drawing a Kiosk
185
CXX.
The Pentagon
186
CXXI.
The Pyramid
189
CXXII.
The Great Pyramid
191
CXXIII.
The Pyramid in Angular Perspective
193
CXXIV.
To Divide the Sides of the Pyramid Horizontally
193
CXXV.
Of Roofs
195
CXXVI.
Of Arches, Arcades, Bridges, &c.
198
CXXVII.
Outline of an Arcade with Semicircular Arches
200
CXXVIII.
Semicircular Arches on a Retreating Plane
201
CXXIX.
An Arcade in Angular Perspective
202
CXXX.
A Vaulted Ceiling
203
CXXXI.
A Cloister, from a Photograph
206
CXXXII.
The Low or Elliptical Arch
207
CXXXIII.
Opening or Arched Window in a Vault
208
CXXXIV.
Stairs, Steps, &c.
209
CXXXV.
Steps, Front View
210
xi
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
7/161

CXXXVI.
Square Steps
211
CXXXVII.
To Divide an Inclined Plane into Equal Parts—such as a Ladder
Placed against a Wall
212
CXXXVIII.
Steps and the Inclined Plane
213
CXXXIX.
Steps in Angular Perspective
214
CXL.
A Step Ladder at an Angle
216
CXLI.
Square Steps Placed over each other
217
CXLII.
Steps and a Double Cross Drawn by Means of Diagonals and
one Vanishing Point
218
CXLIII.
A Staircase Leading to a Gallery
221
CXLIV.
Winding Stairs in a Square Shaft
222
CXLV.
Winding Stairs in a Cylindrical Shaft
225
CXLVI.
Of the Cylindrical Picture or Diorama
227
BOOK IV
CXLVII.
The Perspective of Cast Shadows
229
CXLVIII.
The Two Kinds of Shadows
230
CXLIX.
Shadows Cast by the Sun
232
CL.
The Sun in the Same Plane as the Picture
233
CLI.
The Sun Behind the Picture
234
CLII.
Sun Behind the Picture, Shadows Thrown on a Wall
238
CLIII.
Sun Behind the Picture Throwing Shadow on an Inclined Plane
240
CLIV.
The Sun in Front of the Picture
241
CLV.
The Shadow of an Inclined Plane
244
CLVI.
Shadow on a Roof or Inclined Plane
245
CLVII.
To Find the Shadow of a Projection or Balcony on a Wall
246
CLVIII.
Shadow on a Retreating Wall, Sun in Front
247
CLIX.
Shadow of an Arch, Sun in Front
249
CLX.
Shadow in a Niche or Recess
250
CLXI.
Shadow in an Arched Doorway
251
CLXII.
Shadows Produced by Artificial Light
252
CLXIII.
Some Observations on Real Light and Shade
253
CLXIV.
Reflection
257
CLXV.
Angles of Reflection
259
CLXVI.
Reflections of Objects at Different Distances
260
CLXVII.
Reflection in a Looking-glass
262
CLXVIII.
The Mirror at an Angle
264
CLXIX.
The Upright Mirror at an Angle of 45° to the Wall
266
CLXX.
Mental Perspective
269
xii
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
8/161

Index
270
BOOK FIRST
THE NECESSITY OF THE STUDY OF PERSPECTIVE TO PAINTERS,
SCULPTORS, AND ARCHITECTS
LEONARDO DA VINCI tells us in his celebrated Treatise on Painting that the young artist
should first of all learn perspective, that is to say, he should first of all learn that he has to
depict on a flat surface objects which are in relief or distant one from the other; for this is the
simple art of painting. Objects appear smaller at a distance than near to us, so by drawing
them thus we give depth to our canvas. The outline of a ball is a mere flat circle, but with
proper shading we make it appear round, and this is the perspective of light and shade.
‘The next thing to be considered is the effect of the atmosphere and light. If two figures are in
the same coloured dress, and are standing one behind the other, then they should be of
slightly different tone, so as to separate them. And in like manner, according to the distance
of the mountains in a landscape and the greater or less density of the air, so do we depict
space between them, not only making them smaller in outline, but less distinct.’1
Sir Edwin Landseer used to say that in looking at a figure in a picture he liked to feel that he
could walk round it, and this exactly expresses the impression that the true art of painting
should make upon the spectator.
There is another observation of Leonardo’s that it is well I should here transcribe; he says:
‘Many are desirous of learning to draw, and are very fond of it, who are notwithstanding
void of a proper disposition for it. This may be known by their want of perseverance; like
boys who draw everything in a hurry, never finishing or shadowing.’ This shows they do not
care for their work, and all instruction is thrown away upon them. At the present time there is
too much of this ‘everything in a hurry’, and beginning in this way leads only to failure and
disappointment. These observations apply equally to perspective as to drawing and painting.
Unfortunately, this study is too often neglected by our painters, some of them even
complacently confessing their ignorance of it; while the ordinary student either turns from it
with distaste, or only endures going through it with a view to passing an examination, little
thinking of what value it will be to him in working out his pictures. Whether the manner of
teaching perspective is the cause of this dislike for it, I cannot say; but certainly most of our
English books on the subject are anything but attractive.
All the great masters of painting have also been masters of perspective, for they knew that
without it, it would be impossible to carry out their grand compositions. In many cases they
were even inspired by it in choosing their subjects. When one looks at those sunny interiors,
those corridors and courtyards by De Hooghe, with their figures far off and near, one feels
that their charm consists greatly in their perspective, as well as in their light and tone and
colour. Or if we study those Venetian masterpieces by Paul Veronese, Titian, Tintoretto, and
others, we become convinced that it was through their knowledge of perspective that they
1
2
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
9/161

gave such space and grandeur to their canvases.
I need not name all the great artists who have shown their interest and delight in this study,
both by writing about it and practising it, such as Albert Dürer and others, but I cannot leave
out our own Turner, who was one of the greatest masters in this respect that ever lived;
though in his case we can only judge of the results of his knowledge as shown in his pictures,
for although he was Professor of Perspective at the Royal Academy in 1807—over a
hundred years ago—and took great pains with the diagrams he prepared to illustrate his
lectures, they seemed to the students to be full of confusion and obscurity; nor am I aware
that any record of them remains, although they must have contained some valuable teaching,
had their author possessed the art of conveying it.
However, we are here chiefly concerned with the necessity of this study, and of the necessity
of starting our work with it.
Before undertaking a large composition of figures, such as the ‘Wedding-feast at Cana’, by
Paul Veronese, or ‘The School of Athens’, by Raphael, the artist should set out his floors,
his walls, his colonnades, his balconies, his steps, &c., so that he may know where to place
his personages, and to measure their different sizes according to their distances; indeed, he
must make his stage and his scenery before he introduces his actors. He can then proceed
with his composition, arrange his groups and the accessories with ease, and above all with
correctness. But I have noticed that some of our cleverest painters will arrange their figures
to please the eye, and when fairly advanced with their work will call in an expert, to (as they
call it) put in their perspective for them, but as it does not form part of their original
composition, it involves all sorts of difficulties and vexatious alterings and rubbings out, and
even then is not always satisfactory. For the expert may not be an artist, nor in sympathy
with the picture, hence there will be a want of unity in it; whereas the whole thing, to be in
harmony, should be the conception of one mind, and the perspective as much a part of the
composition as the figures.
If a ceiling has to be painted with figures floating or flying in the air, or sitting high above us,
then our perspective must take a different form, and the point of sight will be above our
heads instead of on the horizon; nor can these difficulties be overcome without an adequate
knowledge of the science, which will enable us to work out for ourselves any new problems
of this kind that we may have to solve.
Then again, with a view to giving different effects or impressions in this decorative work, we
must know where to place the horizon and the points of sight, for several of the latter are
sometimes required when dealing with large surfaces such as the painting of walls, or stage
scenery, or panoramas depicted on a cylindrical canvas and viewed from the centre thereof,
where a fresh point of sight is required at every twelve or sixteen feet.
Without a true knowledge of perspective, none of these things can be done. The artist should
study them in the great compositions of the masters, by analysing their pictures and seeing
how and for what reasons they applied their knowledge. Rubens put low horizons to most of
his large figure-subjects, as in ‘The Descent from the Cross’, which not only gave grandeur
to his designs, but, seeing they were to be placed above the eye, gave a more natural
appearance to his figures. The Venetians often put the horizon almost on a level with the
base of the picture or edge of the frame, and sometimes even below it; as in ‘The Family of
Darius at the Feet of Alexander’, by Paul Veronese, and ‘The Origin of the “Via Lactea”’,
by Tintoretto, both in our National Gallery. But in order to do all these things, the artist in
3
4
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
10/161

designing his work must have the knowledge of perspective at his fingers' ends, and only the
details, which are often tedious, should he leave to an assistant to work out for him.
We must remember that the line of the horizon should be as nearly as possible on a level with
the eye, as it is in nature; and yet one of the commonest mistakes in our exhibitions is the bad
placing of this line. We see dozens of examples of it, where in full-length portraits and other
large pictures intended to be seen from below, the horizon is placed high up in the canvas
instead of low down; the consequence is that compositions so treated not only lose in
grandeur and truth, but appear to be toppling over, or give the impression of smallness rather
than bigness. Indeed, they look like small pictures enlarged, which is a very different thing
from a large design. So that, in order to see them properly, we should mount a ladder to get
upon a level with their horizon line (see Fig. 66, double-page illustration).
We have here spoken in a general way of the importance of this study to painters, but we
shall see that it is of almost equal importance to the sculptor and the architect.
A sculptor student at the Academy, who was making his drawings rather carelessly, asked
me of what use perspective was to a sculptor. ‘In the first place,’ I said, ‘to reason out
apparently difficult problems, and to find how easy they become, will improve your mind;
and in the second, if you have to do monumental work, it will teach you the exact size to
make your figures according to the height they are to be placed, and also the boldness with
which they should be treated to give them their full effect.’ He at once acknowledged that I
was right, proved himself an efficient pupil, and took much interest in his work.
I cannot help thinking that the reason our public monuments so often fail to impress us with
any sense of grandeur is in a great measure owing to the neglect of the scientific study of
perspective. As an illustration of what I mean, let the student look at a good engraving or
photograph of the Arch of Constantine at Rome, or the Tombs of the Medici, by
Michelangelo, in the sacristy of San Lorenzo at Florence. And then, for an example of a
mistake in the placing of a colossal figure, let him turn to the Tomb of Julius II in San Pietro
in Vinculis, Rome, and he will see that the figure of Moses, so grand in itself, not only loses
much of its dignity by being placed on the ground instead of in the niche above it, but throws
all the other figures out of proportion or harmony, and was quite contrary to Michelangelo’s
intention. Indeed, this tomb, which was to have been the finest thing of its kind ever done,
was really the tragedy of the great sculptor’s life.
The same remarks apply in a great measure to the architect as to the sculptor. The old
builders knew the value of a knowledge of perspective, and, as in the case of Serlio,
Vignola, and others, prefaced their treatises on architecture with chapters on geometry and
perspective. For it showed them how to give proper proportions to their buildings and the
details thereof; how to give height and importance both to the interior and exterior; also to
give the right sizes of windows, doorways, columns, vaults, and other parts, and the various
heights they should make their towers, walls, arches, roofs, and so forth. One of the most
beautiful examples of the application of this knowledge to architecture is the Campanile of
the Cathedral, at Florence, built by Giotto and Taddeo Gaddi, who were painters as well as
architects. Here it will be seen that the height of the windows is increased as they are placed
higher up in the building, and the top windows or openings into the belfry are about six times
the size of those in the lower story.
5
6
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
11/161

FIG. 1.
FIG. 2.
WHAT IS PERSPECTIVE?
PERSPECTIVE is a subtle form
of geometry; it represents
figures and objects not as
they are but as we see them
in space, whereas geometry
represents figures not as we
see them but as they are.
When we have a front view
of a figure such as a square,
its perspective and
geometrical appearance is the
same, and we see it as it
really is, that is, with all its
sides equal and all its angles
right angles, the perspective
only varying in size according
to the distance we are from
it; but if we place that square
flat on the table and look at it
sideways or at an angle, then we become conscious of certain changes in its form—the side
farthest from us appears shorter than that near to us, and all the angles are different. Thus A
(Fig. 2) is a geometrical square and B is the same square seen in perspective.
The science of perspective gives the dimensions of
objects seen in space as they appear to the eye of the
spectator, just as a perfect tracing of those objects on a
sheet of glass placed vertically between him and them
would do; indeed its very name is derived from
perspicere, to see through. But as no tracing done by
hand could possibly be mathematically correct, the mathematician teaches us how by certain
points and measurements we may yet give a perfect image of them. These images are called
projections, but the artist calls them pictures. In this sketch K is the vertical transparent plane
or picture, O is a cube placed on one side of it. The young student is the spectator on the
other side of it, the dotted lines drawn from the corners of the cube to the eye of the
spectator are the visual rays, and the points on the transparent picture plane where these
visual rays pass through it indicate the perspective position of those points on the picture. To
find these points is the main object or duty of linear perspective.
7
8
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
12/161

FIG. 3.
Perspective up to a certain point is a pure science, not depending upon the accidents of
vision, but upon the exact laws of reasoning. Nor is it to be considered as only pertaining to
the craft of the painter and draughtsman. It has an intimate connexion with our mental
perceptions and with the ideas that are impressed upon the brain by the appearance of all
that surrounds us. If we saw everything as depicted by plane geometry, that is, as a map, we
should have no difference of view, no variety of ideas, and we should live in a world of
unbearable monotony; but as we see everything in perspective, which is infinite in its variety
of aspect, our minds are subjected to countless phases of thought, making the world around
us constantly interesting, so it is devised that we shall see the infinite wherever we turn, and
marvel at it, and delight in it, although perhaps in many cases unconsciously.
In perspective, as in geometry, we deal with parallels, squares, triangles, cubes, circles, &c.;
but in perspective the same figure takes an endless variety of forms, whereas in geometry it
has but one. Here are three equal geometrical squares: they are all alike. Here are three
equal perspective squares, but all varied in form; and the same figure changes in aspect as
often as we view it from a different position. A walk round the dining-room table will
exemplify this.
FIG. 4.
FIG. 5.
It is in proving that, notwithstanding this difference of appearance, the figures do represent
the same form, that much of our work consists; and for those who care to exercise their
reasoning powers it becomes not only a sure means of knowledge, but a study of the
greatest interest.
Perspective is said to have been formed into a science about the fifteenth century. Among
the names mentioned by the unknown but pleasant author of The Practice of Perspective,
written by a Jesuit of Paris in the eighteenth century, we find Albert Dürer, who has left us
some rules and principles in the fourth book of his Geometry; Jean Cousin, who has an
9
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
13/161

express treatise on the art wherein are many valuable things; also Vignola, who altered the
plans of St. Peter’s left by Michelangelo; Serlio, whose treatise is one of the best I have seen
of these early writers; Du Cerceau, Serigati, Solomon de Cause, Marolois, Vredemont;
Guidus Ubaldus, who first introduced foreshortening; the Sieur de Vaulizard, the Sieur
Dufarges, Joshua Kirby, for whose Method of Perspective made Easy (?) Hogarth drew
the well-known frontispiece; and lastly, the above-named Practice of Perspective by a
Jesuit of Paris, which is very clear and excellent as far as it goes, and was the book used by
Sir Joshua Reynolds.2 But nearly all these authors treat chiefly of parallel perspective, which
they do with clearness and simplicity, and also mathematically, as shown in the short treatise
in Latin by Christian Wolff, but they scarcely touch upon the more difficult problems of
angular and oblique perspective. Of modern books, those to which I am most indebted are
the Traité Pratique de Perspective of M. A. Cassagne (Paris, 1873), which is thoroughly
artistic, and full of pictorial examples admirably done; and to M. Henriet’s Cours Rational
de Dessin. There are many other foreign books of excellence, notably M. Thibault's
Perspective, and some German and Swiss books, and yet, notwithstanding this imposing
array of authors, I venture to say that many new features and original problems are
presented in this book, whilst the old ones are not neglected. As, for instance, How to draw
figures at an angle without vanishing points (see p. 141, Fig. 162, &c.), a new method of
angular perspective which dispenses with the cumbersome setting out usually adopted, and
enables us to draw figures at any angle without vanishing lines, &c., and is almost, if not
quite, as simple as parallel perspective (see p. 133, Fig. 150, &c.). How to measure
distances by the square and diagonal, and to draw interiors thereby (p. 128, Fig. 144). How
to explain the theory of perspective by ocular demonstration, using a vertical sheet of glass
with strings, placed on a drawing-board, which I have found of the greatest use (see p. 29,
Fig. 29). Then again, I show how all our perspective can be done inside the picture; that we
can measure any distance into the picture from a foot to a mile or twenty miles (see p. 86,
Fig. 94); how we can draw the Great Pyramid, which stands on thirteen acres of ground, by
putting it 1,600 feet off (Fig. 224), &c., &c. And while preserving the mathematical science,
so that all our operations can be proved to be correct, my chief aim has been to make it easy
of application to our work and consequently useful to the artist.
The Egyptians do not appear to have made any use of linear perspective. Perhaps it was
considered out of character with their particular kind of decoration, which is to be looked
upon as picture writing rather than pictorial art; a table, for instance, would be represented
like a ground-plan and the objects upon it in elevation or standing up. A row of chariots with
their horses and drivers side by side were placed one over the other, and although the
Egyptians had no doubt a reason for this kind of representation, for they were grand artists,
it seems to us very primitive; and indeed quite young beginners who have never drawn from
real objects have a tendency to do very much the same thing as this ancient people did, or
even to emulate the mathematician and represent things not as they appear but as they are,
and will make the top of a table an almost upright square and the objects upon it as if they
would fall off.
No doubt the Greeks had correct notions of perspective, for the paintings on vases, and at
Pompeii and Herculaneum, which were either by Greek artists or copied from Greek
pictures, show some knowledge, though not complete knowledge, of this science. Indeed, it
is difficult to conceive of any great artist making his perspective very wrong, for if he can
draw the human figure as the Greeks did, surely he can draw an angle.
The Japanese, who are great observers of nature, seem to have got at their perspective by
10
11
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
14/161

copying what they saw, and, although they are not quite correct in a few things, they convey
the idea of distance and make their horizontal planes look level, which are two important
things in perspective. Some of their landscapes are beautiful; their trees, flowers, and foliage
exquisitely drawn and arranged with the greatest taste; whilst there is a character and go
about their figures and birds, &c., that can hardly be surpassed. All their pictures are lively
and intelligent and appear to be executed with ease, which shows their authors to be
complete masters of their craft.
The same may be said of the Chinese, although their perspective is more decorative than
true, and whilst their taste is exquisite their whole art is much more conventional and
traditional, and does not remind us of nature like that of the Japanese.
We may see defects in the perspective of the ancients, in the mediaeval painters, in the
Japanese and Chinese, but are we always right ourselves? Even in celebrated pictures by old
and modern masters there are occasionally errors that might easily have been avoided, if a
ready means of settling the difficulty were at hand. We should endeavour then to make this
study as simple, as easy, and as complete as possible, to show clear evidence of its
correctness (according to its conditions), and at the same time to serve as a guide on any
and all occasions that we may require it.
To illustrate what is perspective, and as an experiment that any one can make, whether artist
or not, let us stand at a window that looks out on to a courtyard or a street or a garden, &c.,
and trace with a paint-brush charged with Indian ink or water-colour the outline of whatever
view there happens to be outside, being careful to keep the eye always in the same place by
means of a rest; when this is dry, place a piece of drawing-paper over it and trace through
with a pencil. Now we will rub out the tracing on the glass, which is sure to be rather clumsy,
and, fixing our paper down on a board, proceed to draw the scene before us, using the main
lines of our tracing as our guiding lines.
If we take pains over our work, we shall find that, without troubling ourselves much about
rules, we have produced a perfect perspective of perhaps a very difficult subject. After
practising for some little time in this way we shall get accustomed to what are called
perspective deformations, and soon be able to dispense with the glass and the tracing
altogether and to sketch straight from nature, taking little note of perspective beyond fixing
the point of sight and the horizontal-line; in fact, doing what every artist does when he goes
out sketching.
FIG. 6. This is a much reduced reproduction of a drawing made on my
studio window in this way some twenty years ago, when the builder
12
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
15/161

started covering the fields at the back with rows and rows of houses.
THE THEORY OF PERSPECTIVE
DEFINITIONS
I
Fig. 7. In this figure, AKB represents the picture or transparent vertical plane through which
the objects to be represented can be seen, or on which they can be traced, such as the cube
C.
FIG. 7.
The line HD is the Horizontal-line or Horizon, the chief line in perspective, as upon it are
placed the principal points to which our perspective lines are drawn. First, the Point of
Sight and next D, the Point of Distance. The chief vanishing points and measuring points
are also placed on this line.
Another important line is AB, the Base or Ground line, as it is on this that we measure the
width of any object to be represented, such as ef, the base of the square efgh, on which the
cube C is raised. E is the position of the eye of the spectator, being drawn in perspective, and
is called the Station-point.
Note that the perspective of the board, and the line SE, is not the same as that of the cube in
the picture AKB, and also that so much of the board which is behind the picture plane
partially represents the Perspective-plane, supposed to be perfectly level and to extend
from the base line to the horizon. Of this we shall speak further on. In nature it is not really
level, but partakes in extended views of the rotundity of the earth, though in small areas such
as ponds the roundness is infinitesimal.
13
14
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
16/161

FIG. 8.
Fig. 8. This is a side view of the previous figure, the picture plane K being represented
edgeways, and the line SE its full length. It also shows the position of the eye in front of the
point of sight S. The horizontal-line HD and the base or ground-line AB are represented as
receding from us, and in that case are called vanishing lines, a not quite satisfactory term.
It is to be noted that the cube C is placed close to the transparent picture plane, indeed
touches it, and that the square fj faces the spectator E, and although here drawn in
perspective it appears to him as in the other figure. Also, it is at the same time a perspective
and a geometrical figure, and can therefore be measured with the compasses. Or in other
words, we can touch the square fj, because it is on the surface of the picture, but we cannot
touch the square ghmb at the other end of the cube and can only measure it by the rules of
perspective.
II
THE POINT OF SIGHT, THE HORIZON, AND THE POINT OF DISTANCE
There are three things to be considered and understood before we can begin a perspective
drawing. First, the position of the eye in front of the picture, which is called the Station-
point, and of course is not in the picture itself, but its position is indicated by a point on the
picture which is exactly opposite the eye of the spectator, and is called the Point of Sight,
or Principal Point, or Centre of Vision, but we will keep to the first of these.
FIG. 9.
FIG. 10.
If our picture plane is a sheet of glass, and is so placed that we can see the landscape behind
it or a sea-view, we shall find that the distant line of the horizon passes through that point of
sight, and we therefore draw a line on our picture which exactly corresponds with it, and
which we call the Horizontal-line or Horizon.3 The height of the horizon then depends
entirely upon the position of the eye of the spectator: if he rises, so does the horizon; if he
stoops or descends to lower ground, so does the horizon follow his movements. You may sit
15
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
17/161

FIG. 11.
in a boat on a calm sea, and the horizon will be as low down as you are, or you may go to
the top of a high cliff, and still the horizon will be on the same level as your eye.
This is an important line for the draughtsman to consider, for the effect of his picture greatly
depends upon the position of the horizon. If you wish to give height and dignity to a mountain
or a building, the horizon should be low down, so that these things may appear to tower
above you. If you wish to show a wide expanse of landscape, then you must survey it from a
height. In a composition of figures, you select your horizon according to the subject, and with
a view to help the grouping. Again, in portraits and decorative work to be placed high up,
a low horizon is desirable, but I have already spoken of this subject in the chapter on the
necessity of the study of perspective.
III
POINT OF DISTANCE
Fig. 11. The distance of the
spectator from the picture is of
great importance; as the
distortions and disproportions
arising from too near a view are to
be avoided, the object of drawing
being to make things look natural;
thus, the floor should look level,
and not as if it were running up hill
—the top of a table flat, and not
on a slant, as if cups and what not,
placed upon it, would fall off.
In this figure we have a
geometrical or ground plan of two
squares at different distances from
the picture, which is represented
by the line KK. The spectator is first at A, the corner of the near square Acd. If from A we
draw a diagonal of that square and produce it to the line KK (which may represent the
horizontal-line in the picture), where it intersects that line at A· marks the distance that the
spectator is from the point of sight S. For it will be seen that line SA equals line SA·. In like
manner, if the spectator is at B, his distance from the point S is also found on the horizon by
means of the diagonal BB´, so that all lines or diagonals at 45° are drawn to the point of
distance (see Rule 6).
Figs. 12 and 13. In these two figures the difference is shown between the effect of the short-
distance point A· and the long-distance point B·; the first, Acd, does not appear to lie so flat
on the ground as the second square, Bef.
From this it will be seen how important it is to choose the right point of distance: if we take it
too near the point of sight, as in Fig. 12, the square looks unnatural and distorted. This,
I may note, is a common fault with photographs taken with a wide-angle lens, which throws
everything out of proportion, and will make the east end of a church or a cathedral appear
higher than the steeple or tower; but as soon as we make our line of distance sufficiently
long, as at Fig. 13, objects take their right proportions and no distortion is noticeable.
16
17
18
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
18/161

FIG. 12.
FIG. 13.
In some books on perspective we are told to make the angle of vision 60°, so that the
distance SD (Fig. 14) is to be rather less than the length or height of the picture, as at A. The
French recommend an angle of 28°, and to make the distance about double the length of the
picture, as at B (Fig. 15), which is far more agreeable. For we must remember that the
distance-point is not only the point from which we are supposed to make our tracing on the
vertical transparent plane, or a point transferred to the horizon to make our measurements
by, but it is also the point in front of the canvas that we view the picture from, called the
station-point. It is ridiculous, then, to have it so close that we must almost touch the canvas
with our noses before we can see its perspective properly.
FIG. 14.
FIG. 15.
Now a picture should look right from whatever distance we view it, even across the room or
gallery, and of course in decorative work and in scene-painting a long distance is necessary.
We need not, however, tie ourselves down to any hard and fast rule, but should choose our
distance according to the impression of space we wish to convey: if we have to represent a
domestic scene in a small room, as in many Dutch pictures, we must not make our distance-
point too far off, as it would exaggerate the size of the room.
19
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
19/161

FIG. 17.
FIG. 16. Cattle. By Paul Potter.
The height of the horizon is also an important consideration in the composition of a picture,
and so also is the position of the point of sight, as we shall see farther on.
In landscape and cattle pictures a low horizon often gives space and air, as in this sketch
from a picture by Paul Potter—where the horizontal-line is placed at one quarter the height
of the canvas. Indeed, a judicious use of the laws of perspective is a great aid to
composition, and no picture ever looks right unless these laws are attended to. At the
present time too little attention is paid to them; the consequence is that much of the art of the
day reflects in a great measure the monotony of the snap-shot camera, with its everyday and
wearisome commonplace.
IV
PERSPECTIVE OF A POINT, VISUAL RAYS, &C.
We perceive objects by means of the visual rays, which are imaginary straight lines drawn
from the eye to the various points of the thing we are looking at. As those rays proceed from
the pupil of the eye, which is a circular opening, they form themselves into a cone called the
Optic Cone, the base of which increases in proportion to its distance from the eye, so that
the larger the view which we wish to take in, the farther must we be removed from it. The
diameter of the base of this cone, with the visual rays drawn from each of its extremities to
the eye, form the angle of vision, which is wider or narrower according to the distance of this
diameter.
Now let us suppose a visual ray EA to be
directed to some small object on the floor,
say the head of a nail, A (Fig. 17). If we
interpose between this nail and our eye a
sheet of glass, K, placed vertically on the
floor, we continue to see the nail through
the glass, and it is easily understood that its
perspective appearance thereon is the
point a, where the visual ray passes
through it. If now we trace on the floor a
line AB from the nail to the spot B, just under the eye, and from the point o, where this line
passes through or under the glass, we raise a perpendicular oS, that perpendicular passes
through the precise point that the visual ray passes through. The line AB traced on the floor is
the horizontal trace of the visual ray, and it will be seen that the point a is situated on the
vertical raised from this horizontal trace.
V
TRACE AND PROJECTION
If from any line A or B or C (Fig. 18), &c., we drop perpendiculars from different points of
those lines on to a horizontal plane, the intersections of those verticals with the plane will be
on a line called the horizontal trace or projection of the original line. We may liken these
projections to sun-shadows when the sun is in the meridian, for it will be remarked that the
20
21
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
20/161

trace does not represent the length of the original line, but only so much of it as would be
embraced by the verticals dropped from each end of it, and although line A is the same
length as line B its horizontal trace is longer than that of the other; that the projection of a
curve (C) in this upright position is a straight line, that of a horizontal line (D) is equal to it, and
the projection of a perpendicular or vertical (E) is a point only. The projections of lines or
points can likewise be shown on a vertical plane, but in that case we draw lines parallel to
the horizontal plane, and by this means we can get the position of a point in space; and by
the assistance of perspective, as will be shown farther on, we can carry out the most difficult
propositions of descriptive geometry and of the geometry of planes and solids.
FIG. 18.
The position of a point in space is given by its projection on a vertical and a horizontal plane
—
FIG. 19.
Thus e· is the projection of E on the vertical plane K, and e·· is the projection of E on the
horizontal plane; fe·· is the horizontal trace of the plane fE, and e·f is the trace of the same
plane on the vertical plane K.
VI
SCIENTIFIC DEFINITION OF PERSPECTIVE
The projections of the extremities of a right line which passes through a vertical plane being
given, one on either side of it, to find the intersection of that line with the vertical plane. AE
(Fig. 20) is the right line. The projection of its extremity A on the vertical plane is a·, the
projection of E, the other extremity, is e·. AS is the horizontal trace of AE, and a·e· is its trace
on the vertical plane. At point f, where the horizontal trace intersects the base Bc of the
vertical plane, raise perpendicular fP till it cuts a·e· at point P, which is the point required. For
it is at the same time on the given line AE and the vertical plane K.
22
23
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
21/161

FIG. 20.
This figure is similar to the previous one, except that the extremity A of the given line is raised
from the ground, but the same demonstration applies to it.
FIG. 21.
And now let us suppose the vertical plane K to be a sheet of glass, and the given line AE to
be the visual ray passing from the eye to the object A on the other side of the glass. Then if E
is the eye of the spectator, its projection on the picture is S, the point of sight.
If I draw a dotted line from E to little a, this represents another visual ray, and o, the point
where it passes through the picture, is the perspective of little a. I now draw another line
from g to S, and thus form the shaded figure ga·Po, which is the perspective of aAa·g.
Let it be remarked that in the shaded perspective figure the lines a·P and go are both drawn
towards S, the point of sight, and that they represent parallel lines Aa· and ag, which are at
right angles to the picture plane. This is the most important fact in perspective, and will be
more fully explained farther on, when we speak of retreating or so-called vanishing lines.
RULES
VII
THE RULES AND CONDITIONS OF PERSPECTIVE
The conditions of linear perspective are somewhat rigid. In the first place, we are supposed
to look at objects with one eye only; that is, the visual rays are drawn from a single point,
and not from two. Of this we shall speak later on. Then again, the eye must be placed in a
certain position, as at E (Fig. 22), at a given height from the ground, S·E, and at a given
distance from the picture, as SE. In the next place, the picture or picture plane itself must be
vertical and perpendicular to the ground or horizontal plane, which plane is supposed to be
as level as a billiard-table, and to extend from the base line, ef, of the picture to the horizon,
that is, to infinity, for it does not partake of the rotundity of the earth.
24
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
22/161

FIG. 23. Front view of above figure.
FIG. 24.
FIG. 22.
We can only work out our propositions and figures
in space with mathematical precision by adopting
such conditions as the above. But afterwards the
artist or draughtsman may modify and suit them to a
more elastic view of things; that is, he can make his
figures separate from one another, instead of their
outlines coming close together as they do when we
look at them with only one eye. Also he will allow
for the unevenness of the ground and the roundness
of our globe; he may even move his head and his eyes, and use both of them, and in fact
make himself quite at his ease when he is out sketching, for Nature does all his perspective
for him. At the same time, a knowledge of this rigid perspective is the sure and unerring basis
of his freehand drawing.
RULE 1
All straight lines remain straight in their perspective appearance.4
RULE 2
Vertical lines remain vertical in perspective,
and are divided in the same proportion as AB
(Fig. 24), the original line, and a·b·, the
perspective line, and if the one is divided at O
the other is divided at o· in the same way.
It is not an uncommon error to suppose that
the vertical lines of a high building should
converge towards the top; so they would if
we stood at the foot of that building and
looked up, for then we should alter the
conditions of our perspective, and our point of sight, instead of being on the horizon, would
be up in the sky. But if we stood sufficiently far away, so as to bring the whole of the building
within our angle of vision, and the point of sight down to the horizon, then these same lines
would appear perfectly parallel, and the different stories in their true proportion.
RULE 3
Horizontals parallel to the base of the picture
25
26
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
23/161

FIG. 25.
are also parallel to that base in the picture.
Thus a·b· (Fig. 25) is parallel to AB, and to
GL, the base of the picture. Indeed, the same
argument may be used with regard to
horizontal lines as with verticals. If we look at
a straight wall in front of us, its top and its
rows of bricks, &c., are parallel and
horizontal; but if we look along it sideways,
then we alter the conditions, and the parallel
lines converge to whichever point we direct the eye.
This rule is important, as we shall see when we come to the consideration of the perspective
vanishing scale. Its use may be illustrated by this sketch, where the houses, walls, &c., are
parallel to the base of the picture. When that is the case, then objects exactly facing us, such
as windows, doors, rows of boards, or of bricks or palings, &c., are drawn with their
horizontal lines parallel to the base; hence it is called parallel perspective.
FIG. 26.
RULE 4
All lines situated in a plane that is parallel to the picture plane diminish in proportion as they
become more distant, but do not undergo any perspective deformation; and remain in the
same relation and proportion each to each as the original lines. This is called the front view.
FIG. 27.
RULE 5
All horizontals which are at right angles to the picture plane are drawn to the point of sight.
Thus the lines AB and CD (Fig. 28) are horizontal or parallel to the ground plane, and are
also at right angles to the picture plane K. It will be seen that the perspective lines Ba·, Dc·,
must, according to the laws of projection, be drawn to the point of sight.
27
28
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
24/161

FIG. 29.
FIG. 30.
FIG. 28.
This is the most important rule in perspective (see Fig. 7 at beginning of Definitions).
An arrangement such as there indicated is the best
means of illustrating this rule. But instead of tracing
the outline of the square or cube on the glass, as
there shown, I have a hole drilled through at the point
S (Fig. 29), which I select for the point of sight, and
through which I pass two loose strings A and B, fixing
their ends at S.
As SD represents the distance the spectator is from
the glass or picture, I make string SA equal in length
to SD. Now if the pupil takes this string in one hand
and holds it at right angles to the glass, that is, exactly
in front of S, and then places one eye at the end A (of
course with the string extended), he will be at the
proper distance from the picture. Let him then take
the other string, SB, in the other hand, and apply it to
point b´ where the square touches the glass, and he
will find that it exactly tallies with the side b´f of the
square a·b´fe. If he applies the same string to a·, the
other corner of the square, his string will exactly tally
or cover the side a·e, and he will thus have ocular
demonstration of this important rule.
In this little picture (Fig. 30) in parallel perspective it
will be seen that the lines which retreat from us at
right angles to the picture plane are directed to the
point of sight S.
RULE 6
All horizontals which are at 45°, or half a right angle to the picture plane, are drawn to the
point of distance.
We have already seen that the diagonal of the perspective square, if produced to meet the
horizon on the picture, will mark on that horizon the distance that the spectator is from the
point of sight (see definition, p. 16). This point of distance becomes then the measuring point
for all horizontals at right angles to the picture plane.
29
30
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
25/161

FIG. 31.
Thus in Fig. 31 lines AS and BS are drawn to the point of sight S, and are therefore at right
angles to the base AB. AD being drawn to D (the distance-point), is at an angle of 45° to the
base AB, and AC is therefore the diagonal of a square. The line 1C is made parallel to AB,
consequently A1CB is a square in perspective. The line BC, therefore, being one side of that
square, is equal to AB, another side of it. So that to measure a length on a line drawn to the
point of sight, such as BS, we set out the length required, say BA, on the base-line, then from
A draw a line to the point of distance, and where it cuts BS at C is the length required. This
can be repeated any number of times, say five, so that in this figure BE is five times the length
of AB.
RULE 7
All horizontals forming any other angles but the above are drawn to some other points on the
horizontal line. If the angle is greater than half a right angle (Fig. 32), as EBG, the point is
within the point of distance, as at V´. If it is less, as ABV´´, then it is beyond the point of
distance, and consequently farther from the point of sight.
FIG. 32.
In Fig. 32, the dotted line BD, drawn to the point of distance D, is at an angle of 45° to the
base AG. It will be seen that the line BV´ is at a greater angle to the base than BD; it is
therefore drawn to a point V´, within the point of distance and nearer to the point of sight S.
On the other hand, the line BV´´ is at a more acute angle, and is therefore drawn to a point
some way beyond the other distance point.
Note.—When this vanishing point is a long way outside the picture, the architects make use
of a centrolinead, and the painters fix a long string at the required point, and get their
perspective lines by that means, which is very inconvenient. But I will show you later on how
you can dispense with this trouble by a very simple means, with equally correct results.
RULE 8
Lines which incline upwards have their vanishing points above the horizontal line, and those
31
32
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
26/161

which incline downwards, below it. In both cases they are on the vertical which passes
through the vanishing point (S) of their horizontal projections.
FIG. 33.
This rule is useful in drawing steps, or roads going uphill and downhill.
FIG. 34.
RULE 9
The farther a point is removed from the picture plane the nearer does its perspective
appearance approach the horizontal line so long as it is viewed from the same position. On
the contrary, if the spectator retreats from the picture plane K (which we suppose to be
transparent), the point remaining at the same place, the perspective appearance of this point
will approach the ground-line in proportion to the distance of the spectator.
FIG. 35.
33
34
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
27/161

FIG. 36.
The spectator at two different distances from the picture.
Therefore the position of a given point in perspective above the ground-line or below the
horizon is in proportion to the distance of the spectator from the picture, or the picture from
the point.
FIG. 37.
Figures 38 and 39 are two views of the same gallery from different distances. In Fig. 38,
where the distance is too short, there is a want of proportion between the near and far
objects, which is corrected in Fig. 39 by taking a much longer distance.
The picture at two different distances from the point.
FIG. 38.
FIG. 39.
RULE 10
Horizontals in the same plane which are drawn to the same point on the horizon are parallel
to each other.
35
36
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
28/161

FIG. 40.
This is a very important rule, for all our perspective drawing depends upon it. When we say
that parallels are drawn to the same point on the horizon it does not imply that they meet at
that point, which would be a contradiction; perspective parallels never reach that point,
although they appear to do so. Fig. 40 will explain this.
Suppose S to be the spectator, AB a transparent vertical plane which represents the picture
seen edgeways, and HS and DC two parallel lines, mark off spaces between these parallels
equal to SC, the height of the eye of the spectator, and raise verticals 2, 3, 4, 5, &c., forming
so many squares. Vertical line 2 viewed from S will appear on AB but half its length,
vertical 3 will be only a third, vertical 4 a fourth, and so on, and if we multiplied these spaces
ad infinitum we must keep on dividing the line AB by the same number. So if we suppose
AB to be a yard high and the distance from one vertical to another to be also a yard, then if
one of these were a thousand yards away its representation at AB would be the thousandth
part of a yard, or ten thousand yards away, its representation at AB would be the ten-
thousandth part, and whatever the distance it must always be something; and therefore HS
and DC, however far they may be produced and however close they may appear to get, can
never meet.
FIG. 41.
Fig. 41 is a perspective view of the same figure—but more extended. It will be seen that a
line drawn from the tenth upright K to S cuts off a tenth of AB. We look then upon these two
lines SP, OP, as the sides of a long parallelogram of which SK is the diagonal, as cefd, the
figure on the ground, is also a parallelogram.
The student can obtain for himself a further illustration of this rule by placing a looking-glass
on one of the walls of his studio and then sketching himself and his surroundings as seen
therein. He will find that all the horizontals at right angles to the glass will converge to his own
eye. This rule applies equally to lines which are at an angle to the picture plane as to those
that are at right angles or perpendicular to it, as in Rule 7. It also applies to those on an
inclined plane, as in Rule 8.
37
38
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
29/161

FIG. 42. Sketch of artist in studio.
With the above rules and a clear notion of the definitions and conditions of perspective, we
should be able to work out any proposition or any new figure that may present itself. At any
rate, a thorough understanding of these few pages will make the labour now before us simple
and easy. I hope, too, it may be found interesting. There is always a certain pleasure in
deceiving and being deceived by the senses, and in optical and other illusions, such as
making things appear far off that are quite near, in making a picture of an object on a flat
surface to look as if it stood out and in relief by a kind of magic. But there is, I think, a still
greater pleasure than this, namely, in invention and in overcoming difficulties—in finding out
how to do things for ourselves by our reasoning faculties, in originating or being original, as it
were. Let us now see how far we can go in this respect.
VIII
A TABLE OR INDEX OF THE RULES OF PERSPECTIVE
The rules here set down have been fully explained in the previous pages, and this table is
simply for the student's ready reference.
RULE 1
All straight lines remain straight in their perspective appearance.
RULE 2
Vertical lines remain vertical in perspective.
RULE 3
Horizontals parallel to the base of the picture are also parallel to that base in the picture.
RULE 4
All lines situated in a plane that is parallel to the picture plane diminish in proportion as they
become more distant, but do not undergo any perspective deformation. This is called the
front view.
39
40
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
30/161

RULE 5
All horizontal lines which are at right angles to the picture plane are drawn to the point of
sight.
RULE 6
All horizontals which are at 45° to the picture plane are drawn to the point of distance.
RULE 7
All horizontals forming any other angles but the above are drawn to some other points on the
horizontal line.
RULE 8
Lines which incline upwards have their vanishing points above the horizon, and those which
incline downwards, below it. In both cases they are on the vertical which passes through the
vanishing point of their ground-plan or horizontal projections.
RULE 9
The farther a point is removed from the picture plane the nearer does it appear to approach
the horizon, so long as it is viewed from the same position.
RULE 10
Horizontals in the same plane which are drawn to the same point on the horizon are
perspectively parallel to each other.
BOOK SECOND
THE PRACTICE OF PERSPECTIVE
In the foregoing book we have explained the theory or science of perspective; we now have
to make use of our knowledge and to apply it to the drawing of figures and the various
objects that we wish to depict.
The first of these will be a square with two of its sides parallel to the picture plane and the
other two at right angles to it, and which we call
IX
THE SQUARE IN PARALLEL PERSPECTIVE
From a given point on the base line of the picture draw a line at right angles to that base. Let
P be the given point on the base line AB, and S the point of sight. We simply draw a line
along the ground to the point of sight S, and this line will be at right angles to the base, as
explained in Rule 5, and consequently angle APS will be equal to angle SPB, although it does
not look so here. This is our first difficulty, but one that we shall soon get over.
41
42
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
31/161

FIG. 45.
FIG. 43.
In like manner we can draw any number of lines at right angles to the base, or we may
suppose the point P to be placed at so many different positions, our only difficulty being to
conceive these lines to be parallel to each other. See Rule 10.
FIG. 44.
X
THE DIAGONAL
From a given point on the base line draw a line
at 45°, or half a right angle, to that base. Let P
be the given point. Draw a line from P to the
point of distance D and this line PD will be at an
angle of 45°, or at the same angle as the
diagonal of a square. See definitions.
XI
THE SQUARE
Draw a square in parallel perspective on a given length on the base line. Let ab be the given
length. From its two extremities a and b draw aS and bS to the point of sight S. These two
lines will be at right angles to the base (see Fig. 43). From a draw diagonal aD to point of
distance D; this line will be 45° to base. At point c, where it cuts bS, draw dc parallel to ab
and abcd is the square required.
FIG. 46.
FIG. 47.
We have here proceeded in much the same way as in drawing a geometrical square (Fig.
43
44
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
32/161

FIG. 49.
47), by drawing two lines AE and BC at right angles to a given line, AB, and from A, drawing
the diagonal AC at 45° till it cuts BC at C, and then through C drawing EC parallel to AB. Let it
be remarked that because the two perspective lines (Fig. 48) AS and BS are at right angles to
the base, they must consequently be parallel to each other, and therefore are perspectively
equidistant, so that all lines parallel to AB and lying between them, such as ad, cf, &c., must
be equal.
FIG. 48.
So likewise all diagonals drawn to the point of distance, which are
contained between these parallels, such as Ad, af, &c., must be
equal. For all straight lines which meet at any point on the horizon
are perspectively parallel to each other, just as two geometrical
parallels crossing two others at any angle, as at Fig. 49. Note also
(Fig. 48) that all squares formed between the two vanishing lines
AS, BS, and by the aid of these diagonals, are also equal, and
further, that any number of squares such as are shown in this figure
(Fig. 50), formed in the same way and having equal bases, are
also equal; and the nine squares contained in the square abcd
being equal, they divide each side of the larger square into three
equal parts.
From this we learn how we can measure any number of given lengths, either equal or
unequal, on a vanishing or retreating line which is at right angles to the base; and also how
we can measure any width or number of widths on a line such as dc, that is, parallel to the
base of the picture, however remote it may be from that base.
FIG. 50.
XII
GEOMETRICAL AND PERSPECTIVE FIGURES CONTRASTED
As at first there may be a little difficulty in realizing the resemblance between geometrical and
perspective figures, and also about certain expressions we make use of, such as horizontals,
perpendiculars, parallels, &c., which look quite different in perspective, I will here make a
45
46
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
33/161

note of them and also place side by side the two views of the same figures.
FIG. 51 A. The geometrical view.
FIG. 51 B. The perspective view.
FIG. 51 C. A geometrical square.
FIG. 51 D. A perspective square.
FIG. 51 E. Geometrical parallels.
FIG. 51 F. Perspective parallels.
FIG. 51 G. Geometrical perpendicular.
FIG. 51 H. Perspective perpendicular.
FIG. 51 I. Geometrical equal lines.
FIG. 51 J. Perspective equal lines.
FIG. 51 K. A geometrical circle.
FIG. 51 L. A perspective circle.
47
48
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
34/161

FIG. 52. Horizontals.
FIG. 54.
XIII
OF CERTAIN TERMS MADE USE OF IN PERSPECTIVE
Of course when we speak of Perpendiculars we do not
mean verticals only, but straight lines at right angles to
other lines in any position. Also in speaking of lines a right
or straight line is to be understood; or when we speak of
horizontals we mean all straight lines that are parallel to
the perspective plane, such as those on Fig. 52, no matter
what direction they take so long as they are level. They
are not to be confused with the horizon or horizontal-line.
There are one or two other terms used in perspective which are not satisfactory because
they are confusing, such as vanishing lines and vanishing points. The French term, fuyante or
lignes fuyantes, or going-away lines, is more expressive; and point de fuite, instead of
vanishing point, is much better. I have occasionally called the former retreating lines, but the
simple meaning is, lines that are not parallel to the picture plane; but a vanishing line implies a
line that disappears, and a vanishing point implies a point that gradually goes out of sight.
Still, it is difficult to alter terms that custom has endorsed. All we can do is to use as few of
them as possible.
XIV
HOW TO MEASURE VANISHING OR RECEDING LINES
Divide a vanishing line which is at right angles to the picture plane into any number of given
measurements. Let SA be the given line. From A measure off on the base line the divisions
required, say five of 1 foot each; from each division draw diagonals to point of distance D,
and where these intersect the line AC the corresponding divisions will be found. Note that as
lines AB and AC are two sides of the same square they are necessarily equal, and so also are
the divisions on AC equal to those on AB.
FIG. 53.
The line AB being the base of the picture, it is at the same time a
perspective line and a geometrical one, so that we can use it as a scale
for measuring given lengths thereon, but should there not be enough
room on it to measure the required number we draw a second line,
DC, which we divide in the same proportion and proceed to divide cf.
This geometrical figure gives, as it were, a bird's-eye view or ground-
plan of the above.
49
50
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
35/161

XV
HOW TO PLACE SQUARES IN GIVEN POSITIONS
Draw squares of given dimensions at given distances from the base line to the right or left of
the vertical line, which passes through the point of sight.
FIG. 55.
Let ab (Fig. 55) represent the base line of the picture divided into a certain number of feet;
HD the horizon, VO the vertical. It is required to draw a square 3 feet wide, 2 feet to the right
of the vertical, and 1 foot from the base.
First measure from V, 2 feet to e, which gives the distance from the vertical. Second, from e
measure 3 feet to b, which gives the width of the square; from e and b draw eS, bS, to point
of sight. From either e or b measure 1 foot to the left, to f or f·. Draw fD to point of
distance, which intersects eS at P, and gives the required distance from base. Draw Pg and B
parallel to the base, and we have the required square.
Square A to the left of the vertical is 2½ feet wide, 1 foot from the vertical and 2 feet from
the base, and is worked out in the same way.
Note.—It is necessary to know how to work to scale, especially in architectural drawing,
where it is indispensable, but in working out our propositions and figures it is not always
desirable. A given length indicated by a line is generally sufficient for our requirements. To
work out every problem to scale is not only tedious and mechanical, but wastes time, and
also takes the mind of the student away from the reasoning out of the subject.
XVI
HOW TO DRAW PAVEMENTS, &C.
Divide a vanishing line into parts varying in length. Let BS· be the vanishing line: divide it into
4 long and 3 short spaces; then proceed as in the previous figure. If we draw horizontals
through the points thus obtained and from these raise verticals, we form, as it were, the
interior of a building in which we can place pillars and other objects.
51
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
36/161

FIG. 56.
Or we can simply draw the plan of the pavement as in this figure.
FIG. 57.
And then put it into perspective.
FIG. 58.
XVII
OF SQUARES PLACED VERTICALLY AND AT DIFFERENT HEIGHTS, OR THE CUBE IN PARALLEL
PERSPECTIVE
On a given square raise a cube.
52
53
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
37/161

FIG. 59.
ABCD is the given square; from A and B raise verticals AE, BF, equal to AB; join EF. Draw ES,
FS, to point of sight; from C and D raise verticals CG, DH, till they meet vanishing lines ES, FS,
in G and H, and the cube is complete.
XVIII
THE TRANSPOSED DISTANCE
The transposed distance is a point D· on the vertical VD·, at exactly the same distance from
the point of sight as is the point of distance on the horizontal line.
It will be seen by examining this figure that the diagonals of the squares in a vertical position
are drawn to this vertical distance-point, thus saving the necessity of taking the
measurements first on the base line, as at CB, which in the case of distant objects, such as the
farthest window, would be very inconvenient. Note that the windows at K are twice as high
as they are wide. Of course these or any other objects could be made of any proportion.
FIG. 60.
XIX
THE FRONT VIEW OF THE SQUARE AND OF THE PROPORTIONS OF FIGURES AT DIFFERENT
HEIGHTS
54
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
38/161

According to Rule 4, all lines situated in a plane parallel to the picture plane diminish in length
as they become more distant, but remain in the same proportions each to each as the original
lines; as squares or any other figures retain the same form. Take the two squares ABCD,
abcd (Fig. 61), one inside the other; although moved back from square EFGH they retain the
same form. So in dealing with figures of different heights, such as statuary or ornament in a
building, if actually equal in size, so must we represent them.
FIG. 61.
FIG. 62.
In this square K, with the checker pattern, we should not think of making the top squares
smaller than the bottom ones; so it is with figures.
This subject requires careful study, for, as pointed out in our opening chapter, there are
certain conditions under which we have to modify and greatly alter this rule in large
decorative work.
FIG. 63.
In Fig. 63 the two statues A and B are the same size. So if traced through a vertical sheet of
glass, K, as at c and d, they would also be equal; but as the angle b at which the upper one is
55
56
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
39/161

seen is smaller than angle a, at which the lower figure or statue is seen, it will appear smaller
to the spectator (S) both in reality and in the picture.
FIG. 64.
But if we wish them to appear the same size to the spectator who is viewing them from
below, we must make the angles a and b (Fig. 64), at which they are viewed, both equal.
Then draw lines through equal arcs, as at c and d, till they cut the vertical NO (representing
the side of the building where the figures are to be placed). We shall then obtain the exact
size of the figure at that height, which will make it look the same size as the lower one, N.
The same rule applies to the picture K, when it is of large proportions. As an example in
painting, take Michelangelo’s large altar-piece in the Sistine Chapel, ‘The Last Judgement’;
here the figures forming the upper group, with our Lord in judgement surrounded by saints,
are about four times the size, that is, about twice the height, of those at the lower part of the
fresco. The figures on the ceiling of the same chapel are studied not only according to their
height from the pavement, which is 60 ft., but to suit the arched form of it. For instance, the
head of the figure of Jonah at the end over the altar is thrown back in the design, but owing
to the curvature in the architecture is actually more forward than the feet. Then again, the
prophets and sybils seated round the ceiling, which are perhaps the grandest figures in the
whole range of art, would be 18 ft. high if they stood up; these, too, are not on a flat surface,
so that it required great knowledge to give them their right effect.
Of course, much depends upon the distance we
view these statues or paintings from. In interiors,
such as churches, halls, galleries, &c., we can
make a fair calculation, such as the length of the
nave, if the picture is an altar-piece—or say, half
the length; so also with statuary in niches, friezes,
and other architectural ornaments. The nearer we
are to them, and the more we have to look up, the
larger will the upper figures have to be; but if
these are on the outside of a building that can be
looked at from a long distance, then it is better not
57
58
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
40/161

FIG. 65.
to have too great a difference.
For the farther we recede the more equal are the
angles at which we view the objects at their different stages, so that in each case we may
have to deal with, we must consider the conditions attending it.
These remarks apply also to architecture in a great measure. Buildings that can only be seen
from the street below, as pictures in a narrow gallery, require a different treatment from
those out in the open, that are to be looked at from a distance. In the former case the same
treatment as the Campanile at Florence is in some cases desirable, but all must depend upon
the taste and judgement of the architect in such matters. All I venture to do here is to call
attention to the subject, which seems as a rule to be ignored, or not to be considered of
importance. Hence the many mistakes in our buildings, and the unsatisfactory and mean look
of some of our public monuments.
XX
OF PICTURES THAT ARE PAINTED ACCORDING TO THE POSITION THEY ARE TO OCCUPY
In this double-page illustration of the wall of a picture-gallery, I have, as it were, hung the
pictures in accordance with the style in which they are painted and the perspective adopted
by their painters. It will be seen that those placed on the line level with the eye have their
horizon lines fairly high up, and are not suited to be placed any higher. The Giorgione in the
centre, the Monna Lisa to the right, and the Velasquez and Watteau to the left, are all
pictures that fit that position; whereas the grander compositions above them are so designed,
and are so large in conception, that we gain in looking up to them.
FIG. 66.
Larger View
Note how grandly the young prince on his pony, by Velasquez, tells out against the sky, with
its low horizon and strong contrast of light and dark; nor does it lose a bit by being placed
where it is, over the smaller pictures.
The Rembrandt, on the opposite side, with its burgomasters in black hats and coats and
white collars, is evidently intended and painted for a raised position, and to be looked up to,
which is evident from the perspective of the table. The grand Titian in the centre, an altar-
piece in one of the churches in Venice (here reversed), is also painted to suit its elevated
59
60
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
41/161

FIG. 67.
‘Draw upon part of wall MN
half the figure you mean to
represent, and the other half
upon the cove above (MR).’
Leonardo da Vinci’s Treatise
on Painting.
position, with low horizon and figures telling boldly against the sky. Those placed low down
are modern French pictures, with the horizon high up and almost above their frames, but
placed on the ground they fit into the general harmony of the arrangement.
It seems to me it is well, both for those who paint and for those who hang pictures, that this
subject should be taken into consideration. For it must be seen by this illustration that a
bigger style is adopted by the artists who paint for high places in palaces or churches than by
those who produce smaller easel-pictures intended to be seen close. Unfortunately, at our
picture exhibitions, we see too often that nearly all the works, whether on large or small
canvases, are painted for the line, and that those which happen to get high up look as if they
were toppling over, because they have such a high horizontal line; and instead of the figures
telling against the sky, as in this picture of the ‘Infant’ by Velasquez, the Reynolds, and the
fat man treading on a flag, we have fields or sea or distant landscape almost to the top of the
frame, and all, so methinks, because the perspective is not sufficiently considered.
Note.—Whilst on this subject, I may note that the painter in his large decorative work often
had difficulties to contend with, which arose from the form of the building or the shape of the
wall on which he had to place his frescoes. Painting on the ceiling was no easy task, and
Michelangelo, in a humorous sonnet addressed to Giovanni da Pistoya, gives a burlesque
portrait of himself while he was painting the Sistine Chapel:—
“I’ho già fatto un gozzo in questo stento.”
Now have I such a goitre ’neath my chin
That I am like to some Lombardic cat,
My beard is in the air, my head i’ my back,
My chest like any harpy’s, and my face
Patched like a carpet by my dripping brush.
Nor can I see, nor can I budge a step;
My skin though loose in front is tight behind,
And I am even as a Syrian bow.
Alas! methinks a bent tube shoots not well;
So give me now thine aid, my Giovanni.
At present that difficulty is got over by using large strong
canvas, on which the picture can be painted in the studio
and afterwards placed on the wall.
However, the other difficulty of form has to be got over
also. A great portion of the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel,
and notably the prophets and sibyls, are painted on a
curved surface, in which case a similar method to that
explained by Leonardo da Vinci has to be adopted.
In Chapter CCCI he shows us how to draw a figure
twenty-four braccia high upon a wall twelve braccia high.
(The braccia is 1 ft. 10⅞ in.). He first draws the figure
upright, then from the various points draws lines to a
point F on the floor of the building, marking their
intersections on the profile of the wall somewhat in the
manner we have indicated, which serve as guides in
making the outline to be traced.
61
62
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
42/161

XXI
INTERIORS
FIG. 68. Interior by de Hoogh.
To draw the interior of a cube we must suppose the side facing us to be removed or
transparent. Indeed, in all our figures which represent solids we suppose that we can see
through them, and in most cases we mark the hidden portions with dotted lines. So also with
all those imaginary lines which conduct the eye to the various vanishing points, and which the
old writers called ‘occult’.
FIG. 69.
When the cube is placed below the horizon (as in Fig. 59), we see the top of it; when on the
horizon, as in the above (Fig. 69), if the side facing us is removed we see both top and
bottom of it, or if a room, we see floor and ceiling, but otherwise we should see but one side
(that facing us), or at most two sides. When the cube is above the horizon we see
underneath it.
We shall find this simple cube of great use to us in architectural subjects, such as towers,
houses, roofs, interiors of rooms, &c.
In this little picture by de Hoogh we have the application of the perspective of the cube and
other foregoing problems.
63
64
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
43/161

XXII
THE SQUARE AT AN ANGLE OF 45°
When the square is at an angle of 45° to the base line, then its sides are drawn respectively
to the points of distance, DD, and one of its diagonals which is at right angles to the base is
drawn to the point of sight S, and the other ab, is parallel to that base or ground line.
FIG. 70.
To draw a pavement with its squares at this angle is but an amplification of the above figure.
Mark off on base equal distances, 1, 2, 3, &c., representing the diagonals of required
squares, and from each of these points draw lines to points of distance DD´. These lines will
intersect each other, and so form the squares of the pavement; to ensure correctness, lines
should also be drawn from these points 1, 2, 3, to the point of sight S, and also horizontals
parallel to the base, as ab.
FIG. 71.
XXIII
THE CUBE AT AN ANGLE OF 45°
Having drawn the square at an angle of 45°, as shown in the previous figure, we find the
length of one of its sides, dh, by drawing a line, SK, through h, one of its extremities, till it
cuts the base line at K. Then, with the other extremity d for centre and dK for radius,
describe a quarter of a circle Km; the chord thereof mK will be the geometrical length of dh.
At d raise vertical dC equal to mK, which gives us the height of the cube, then raise verticals
at a, h, &c., their height being found by drawing CD and CD´ to the two points of distance,
and so completing the figure.
FIG. 72.
65
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
44/161

FIG. 75.
XXIV
PAVEMENTS DRAWN BY MEANS OF SQUARES AT 45°
The square at 45° will be found of great use in drawing
pavements, roofs, ceilings, &c. In Figs. 73, 74 it is shown
how having set out one square it can be divided into four or
more equal squares, and any figure or tile drawn therein.
Begin by making a geometrical or ground plan of the required
design, as at Figs. 73 and 74, where we have bricks placed at
right angles to each other in rows, a common arrangement in
brick floors, or tiles of an octagonal form as at Fig. 75.
FIG. 73.
FIG. 74.
XXV
THE PERSPECTIVE VANISHING SCALE
The vanishing scale, which we shall find of infinite use in our perspective, is founded on the
facts explained in Rule 10. We there find that all horizontals in the same plane, which are
drawn to the same point on the horizon, are perspectively parallel to each other, so that if we
measure a certain height or width on the picture plane, and then from each extremity draw
lines to any convenient point on the horizon, then all the perpendiculars drawn between these
lines will be perspectively equal, however much they may appear to vary in length.
66
67
68
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
45/161

FIG. 77.
FIG. 76.
Let us suppose that in this figure (76) AB and A·B· each represent 5 feet. Then in the first
case all the verticals, as e, f, g, h, drawn between AO and BO represent 5 feet, and in the
second case all the horizontals e, f, g, h, drawn between A·O and B·O also represent 5 feet
each. So that by the aid of this scale we can give the exact perspective height and width of
any object in the picture, however far it may be from the base line, for of course we can
increase or diminish our measurements at AB and A·B· to whatever length we require.
As it may not be quite evident at first that the points O may be taken at random, the
following figure will prove it.
XXVI
THE VANISHING SCALE CAN BE DRAWN TO ANY POINT ON THE HORIZON
From AB (Fig. 77) draw AO, BO, thus forming the
scale, raise vertical C. Now form a second scale
from AB by drawing AO· BO·, and therein raise
vertical D at an equal distance from the base. First,
then, vertical C equals AB, and secondly vertical D
equals AB, therefore C equals D, so that either of
these scales will measure a given height at a given
distance.
(See axioms of geometry.)
XXVII
APPLICATION OF VANISHING SCALES TO DRAWING FIGURES
In this figure we have marked off on a level plain three or four points a, b, c, d, to indicate
the places where we wish to stand our figures. AB represents their average height, so we
have made our scale AO, BO, accordingly. From each point marked we draw a line parallel
to the base till it reaches the scale. From the point where it touches the line AO, raise
perpendicular as a, which gives the height required at that distance, and must be referred
back to the figure itself.
69
71
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
46/161

FIG. 78.
XXVIII
HOW TO DETERMINE THE HEIGHTS OF FIGURES ON A LEVEL PLANE
First Case.
This is but a repetition of the previous figure, excepting that we have substituted these
schoolgirls for the vertical lines. If we wish to make some taller than the others, and some
shorter, we can easily do so, as must be evident (see Fig. 79).
FIG. 79. Schoolgirls.
Note that in this first case the scale is below the horizon, so that we see over the heads of the
figures, those nearest to us being the lowest down. That is to say, we are looking on this
scene from a slightly raised platform.
Second Case.
To draw figures at different distances when their heads are above the horizon, or as they
would appear to a person sitting on a low seat. The height of the heads varies according to
the distance of the figures (Fig. 80).
[70a]
72
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
47/161

FIG. 80. Cavaliers.
Third Case.
How to draw figures when their heads are about the height of the horizon, or as they appear
to a person standing on the same level or walking among them.
FIG. 81.
In this case the heads or the eyes are on a level with the horizon, and we have little necessity
for a scale at the side unless it is for the purpose of ascertaining or marking their distances
from the base line, and their respective heights, which of course vary; so in all cases
allowance must be made for some being taller and some shorter than the scale measurement.
XXIX
THE HORIZON ABOVE THE FIGURES
In this example from De Hoogh the doorway to the left is higher up than the figure of the
lady, and the effect seems to me more pleasing and natural for this kind of domestic subject.
This delightful painter was not only a master of colour, of sunlight effect, and perfect
composition, but also of perspective, and thoroughly understood the charm it gives to a
picture, when cunningly introduced, for he makes the spectator feel that he can walk along
his passages and courtyards. Note that he frequently puts the point of sight quite at the side
of his canvas, as at S, which gives almost the effect of angular perspective whilst it preserves
the flatness and simplicity of parallel or horizontal perspective.
[70b]
73
74
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
48/161

FIG. 82. Courtyard by De Hoogh.
XXX
LANDSCAPE PERSPECTIVE
In an extended view or landscape seen from a height, we have to consider the perspective
plane as in a great measure lying above it, reaching from the base of the picture to the
horizon; but of course pierced here and there by trees, mountains, buildings, &c. As a rule in
such cases, we copy our perspective from nature, and do not trouble ourselves much about
mathematical rules. It is as well, however, to know them, so that we may feel sure we are
right, as this gives certainty to our touch and enables us to work with freedom. Nor must we,
when painting from nature, forget to take into account the effects of atmosphere and the
various tones of the different planes of distance, for this makes much of the difference
between a good picture and a bad one; being a more subtle quality, it requires a keener
artistic sense to discover and depict it. (See Figs. 95 and 103.)
If the landscape painter wishes to test his knowledge of perspective, let him dissect and
work out one of Turner's pictures, or better still, put his own sketch from nature to the same
test.
XXXI
FIGURES OF DIFFERENT HEIGHTS
THE CHESSBOARD
In this figure the same principle is applied as in the previous one, but the chessmen being of
different heights we have to arrange the scale accordingly. First ascertain the exact height of
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
49/161

each piece, as Q, K, B, which represent the queen, king, bishop, &c. Refer these dimensions
to the scale, as shown at QKB, which will give us the perspective measurement of each
piece according to the square on which it is placed.
FIG. 83. Chessboard and Men.
This is shown in the above drawing (Fig. 83) in the case of the white queen and the black
queen, &c. The castle, the knight, and the pawn being about the same height are measured
from the fourth line of the scale marked C.
FIG. 84.
XXXII
APPLICATION OF THE VANISHING SCALE TO DRAWING FIGURES AT AN ANGLE WHEN THEIR
VANISHING POINTS ARE INACCESSIBLE OR OUTSIDE THE PICTURE
This is exemplified in the drawing of a fence (Fig. 84). Form scale aS, bS, in accordance with
[75]
76
77
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
50/161

the height of the fence or wall to be depicted. Let ao represent the direction or angle at
which it is placed, draw od to meet the scale at d, at d raise vertical dc, which gives the
height of the fence at oo·. Draw lines bo·, eo, ao, &c., and it will be found that all these lines
if produced will meet at the same point on the horizon. To divide the fence into spaces,
divide base line af as required and proceed as already shown.
XXXIII
THE REDUCED DISTANCE. HOW TO PROCEED WHEN THE POINT OF DISTANCE IS INACCESSIBLE
It has already been shown that too near a point of distance is objectionable on account of
the distortion and disproportion resulting from it. At the same time, the long distance-point
must be some way out of the picture and therefore inconvenient. The object of the reduced
distance is to bring that point within the picture.
FIG. 85.
In Fig. 85 we have made the distance nearly twice the length of the base of the picture, and
consequently a long way out of it. Draw Sa, Sb, and from a draw aD to point of distance,
which cuts Sb at o, and determines the depth of the square acob. But we can find that same
point if we take half the base and draw a line from ½ base to ½ distance. But even this ½
distance-point does not come inside the picture, so we take a fourth of the base and a fourth
of the distance and draw a line from ¼ base to ¼ distance. We shall find that it passes
precisely through the same point o as the other lines aD, &c. We are thus able to find the
required point o without going outside the picture.
Of course we could in the same way take an 8th or even a 16th distance, but the great use
of this reduced distance, in addition to the above, is that it enables us to measure any depth
into the picture with the greatest ease.
It will be seen in the next figure that without having to extend the base, as is usually done, we
can multiply that base to any amount by making use of these reduced distances on the
horizontal line. This is quite a new method of proceeding, and it will be seen is
mathematically correct.
XXXIV
HOW TO DRAW A LONG PASSAGE OR CLOISTER BY MEANS OF THE REDUCED DISTANCE
78
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
51/161

FIG. 86.
In Fig. 86 we have divided the base of the first square into four equal parts, which may
represent so many feet, so that A4 and Bd being the retreating sides of the square each
represents 4 feet. But we found point ¼ D by drawing 3D from ¼ base to ¼ distance, and
by proceeding in the same way from each division, A, 1, 2, 3, we mark off on SB four
spaces each equal to 4 feet, in all 16 feet, so that by taking the whole base and the ¼
distance we find point O, which is distant four times the length of the base AB. We can
multiply this distance to any amount by drawing other diagonals to 8th distance, &c. The
same rule applies to this corridor (Fig. 87 and Fig. 88).
FIG. 87.
FIG. 88.
XXXV
HOW TO FORM A VANISHING SCALE THAT SHALL GIVE THE HEIGHT, DEPTH, AND DISTANCE OF
ANY OBJECT IN THE PICTURE
If we make our scale to vanish to the point of sight, as in Fig. 89, we can make SB, the lower
line thereof, a measuring line for distances. Let us first of all divide the base AB into eight
parts, each part representing 5 feet. From each division draw lines to 8th distance; by their
intersections with SB we obtain measurements of 40, 80, 120, 160, &c., feet. Now divide
the side of the picture BE in the same manner as the base, which gives us the height of 40
feet. From the side BE draw lines 5S, 15S, &c., to point of sight, and from each division on
the base line also draw lines 5S, 10S, 15S, &c., to point of sight, and from each division on
SB, such as 40, 80, &c., draw horizontals parallel to base. We thus obtain squares 40 feet
wide, beginning at base AB and reaching as far as required. Note how the height of the
flagstaff, which is 140 feet high and 280 feet distant, is obtained. So also any buildings or
other objects can be measured, such as those shown on the left of the picture.
79
80
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
52/161

FIG. 89.
XXXVI
MEASURING SCALE ON GROUND
A simple and very old method of drawing buildings, &c., and giving them their right width
and height is by means of squares of a given size, drawn on the ground.
FIG. 90.
In the above sketch (Fig. 90) the squares on the ground represent 3 feet each way, or one
square yard. Taking this as our standard measure, we find the door on the left is 10 feet high,
81
84
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
53/161

that the archway at the end is 21 feet high and 12 feet wide, and so on.
Fig. 91 is a sketch made at Sandwich, Kent, and shows a somewhat similar subject to
Fig. 84, but the irregularity and freedom of the perspective gives it a charm far beyond the
rigid precision of the other, while it conforms to its main laws. This sketch, however, is the
real artist's perspective, or what we might term natural perspective.
FIG. 91. Natural Perspective.
XXXVII
APPLICATION OF THE REDUCED DISTANCE AND THE VANISHING SCALE TO DRAWING A
LIGHTHOUSE, &C.
In the drawing of Honfleur (Fig. 92) we divide the base AB as in the previous figure, but the
spaces measure 5 feet instead of 3 feet: so that taking the 8th distance, the divisions on the
vanishing line BS measure 40 feet each, and at point O we have 400 feet of distance, but we
require 800. So we again reduce the distance to a 16th. We thus multiply the base by 16.
Now let us take a base of 50 feet at f and draw line fD to 16th distance; if we multiply 50
feet by 16 we obtain the 800 feet required.
[82]
85
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
54/161

FIG. 92. Honfleur.
The height of the lighthouse is found by means of the vanishing scale, which is 15 feet below
and 15 feet above the horizon, or 30 feet from the sea-level. At L we raise a vertical LM,
which shows the position of the lighthouse. Then on that vertical measure the height required
as shown in the figure.
Perspective of a lighthouse 135 feet high at 800 feet distance.
FIG. 93. Key to Fig. 92, Honfleur.
The 800 feet could be obtained at once by drawing line fD, or 50 feet, to 16th distance. The
other measurements obtained by 8th distance serve for nearer buildings.
XXXVIII
HOW TO MEASURE LONG DISTANCES SUCH AS A MILE OR UPWARDS
The wonderful effect of distance in Turner's pictures is not to be achieved by mere
measurement, and indeed can only be properly done by studying Nature and drawing her
perspective as she presents it to us. At the same time it is useful to be able to test and to set
out distances in arranging a composition. This latter, if neglected, often leads to great
difficulties and sometimes to repainting.
[83]
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
55/161

To show the method of measuring very long distances we have to work with a very small
scale to the foot, and in Fig. 94 I have divided the base AB into eleven parts, each part
representing 10 feet. First draw AS and BS to point of sight. From A draw AD to ¼ distance,
and we obtain at 440 on line BS four times the length of AB, or 110 feet × 4 = 440 feet.
Again, taking the whole base and drawing a line from S to 8th distance we obtain eight times
110 feet or 880 feet. If now we use the 16th distance we get sixteen times 110 feet, or
1,760 feet, one-third of a mile; by repeating this process, but by using the base at 1,760,
which is the same length in perspective as AB, we obtain 3,520 feet, and then again using the
base at 3,520 and proceeding in the same way we obtain 5,280 feet, or one mile to the
archway. The flags show their heights at their respective distances from the base. By the
scale at the side of the picture, BO, we can measure any height above or any depth below the
perspective plane.
FIG. 94.
larger view
Note.—This figure (here much reduced) should be drawn large by the student, so that the
numbering, &c., may be made more distinct. Indeed, many of the other figures should be
copied large, and worked out with care, as lessons in perspective.
XXXIX
FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OF LONG DISTANCES AND EXTENDED VIEWS
An extended view is generally taken from an elevated position, so that the principal part of
the landscape lies beneath the perspective plane, as already noted, and we shall presently
treat of objects and figures on uneven ground. In the previous figure is shown how we can
measure heights and depths to any extent. But when we turn to a drawing by Turner, such as
the ‘View from Richmond Hill’, we feel that the only way to accomplish such perspective as
this, is to go and draw it from nature, and even then to use our judgement, as he did, as to
how much we may emphasize or even exaggerate certain features.
86
87
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
56/161

FIG. 95. Turner's View from Richmond Hill.
Note in this view the foreground on which the principal figures stand is on a level with the
perspective plane, while the river and surrounding park and woods are hundreds of feet
below us and stretch away for miles into the distance. The contrasts obtained by this
arrangement increase the illusion of space, and the figures in the foreground give as it were a
standard of measurement, and by their contrast to the size of the trees show us how far away
those trees are.
XL
HOW TO ASCERTAIN THE RELATIVE HEIGHTS OF FIGURES ON AN INCLINED PLANE
The three figures to the right marked f, g, b (Fig. 96) are on level ground, and we measure
them by the vanishing scale aS, bS. Those to the left, which are repetitions of them, are on an
inclined plane, the vanishing point of which is S·; by the side of this plane we have placed
another vanishing scale a·S·, b·S·, by which we measure the figures on that incline in the same
way as on the level plane. It will be seen that if a horizontal line is drawn from the foot of one
of these figures, say G, to point O on the edge of the incline, then dropped vertically to o·,
then again carried on to o·· where the other figure g is, we find it is the same height and also
that the other vanishing scale is the same width at that distance, so that we can work from
either one or the other. In the event of the rising ground being uneven we can make use of
the scale on the level plane.
FIG. 96.
XLI
HOW TO FIND THE DISTANCE OF A GIVEN FIGURE OR POINT FROM THE BASE LINE
88
89
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
57/161

Let P be the given figure. Form scale ACS, S being the point of sight and D the distance.
Draw horizontal do through P. From A draw diagonal AD to distance point, cutting do in o,
through o draw SB to base, and we now have a square AdoB on the perspective plane; and
as figure P is standing on the far side of that square it must be the distance AB, which is one
side of it, from the base line—or picture plane. For figures very far away it might be
necessary to make use of half-distance.
FIG. 97.
XLII
HOW TO MEASURE THE HEIGHT OF FIGURES ON UNEVEN GROUND
In previous problems we have drawn figures on level planes, which is easy enough. We have
now to represent some above and some below the perspective plane.
FIG. 98.
Form scale bS, cS; mark off distances 20 feet, 40 feet, &c. Suppose figure K to be 60 feet
off. From point at his feet draw horizontal to meet vertical On, which is 60 feet distant. At the
point m where this line meets the vertical, measure height mn equal to width of scale at that
distance, transfer this to K, and you have the required height of the figure in black.
For the figures under the cliff 20 feet below the perspective plane, form scale FS, GS, making
it the same width as the other, namely 5 feet, and proceed in the usual way to find the height
of the figures on the sands, which are here supposed to be nearly on a level with the sea, of
90
91
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
58/161

course making allowance for different heights and various other things.
XLIII
FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OF THE SIZE OF FIGURES AT DIFFERENT DISTANCES AND ON UNEVEN
GROUND
Let ab be the height of a figure, say 6 feet. First form scale aS, bS, the lower line of which,
aS, is on a level with the base or on the perspective plane. The figure marked C is close to
base, the group of three is farther off (24 feet), and 6 feet higher up, so we measure the
height on the vanishing scale and also above it. The two girls carrying fish are still farther off,
and about 12 feet below. To tell how far a figure is away, refer its measurements to the
vanishing scale (see Fig. 96).
FIG. 99.
XLIV
FIGURES ON A DESCENDING PLANE
In this case (Fig. 100) the same rule applies as in the previous problem, but as the road on
the left is going down hill, the vanishing point of the inclined plane is below the horizon at
point S·; AS, BS is the vanishing scale on the level plane; and A·S·, B·S·, that on the incline.
FIG. 100.
92
[93a]
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
59/161

FIG. 101. This is an outline of above figure to show the working more plainly.
Note the wall to the left marked W and the manner in which it appears to drop at certain
intervals, its base corresponding with the inclined plane, but the upper lines of each division
being made level are drawn to the point of sight, or to their vanishing point on the horizon; it
is important to observe this, as it aids greatly in drawing a road going down hill.
XLV
FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OF THE DESCENDING PLANE
In the centre of this picture (Fig. 102) we suppose the road to be descending till it reaches a
tunnel which goes under a road or leads to a river (like one leading out of the Strand near
Somerset House). It is drawn on the same principle as the foregoing figure. Of course to see
the road the spectator must get pretty near to it, otherwise it will be out of sight. Also a level
plane must be shown, as by its contrast to the other we perceive that the latter is going down
hill.
FIG. 102.
XLVI
FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OF UNEVEN GROUND
An extended view drawn from a height of about 30 feet from a road that descends about 45
feet.
[93b]
95
[94]
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
60/161

FIG. 103. Farningham.
In drawing a landscape such as Fig. 103 we have to bear in mind the height of the horizon,
which being exactly opposite the eye, shows us at once which objects are below and which
are above us, and to draw them accordingly, especially roofs, buildings, walls, hedges, &c.;
also it is well to sketch in the different fields figures of men and cattle, as from the size of
these we can judge of the rest.
XLVII
THE PICTURE STANDING ON THE GROUND
Let K represent a frame placed vertically and at a given distance in front of us. If stood on
the ground our foreground will touch the base line of the picture, and we can fix up a
standard of measurement both on the base and on the side as in this sketch, taking 6 feet as
about the height of the figures.
FIG. 104. Toledo.
96
97
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
61/161

XLVIII
THE PICTURE ON A HEIGHT
If we are looking at a scene from a height, that is from a terrace, or a window, or a cliff, then
the near foreground, unless it be the terrace, window-sill, &c., would not come into the
picture, and we could not see the near figures at A, and the nearest to come into view would
be those at B, so that a view from a window, &c., would be as it were without a foreground.
Note that the figures at B would be (according to this sketch) 30 feet from the picture plane
and about 18 feet below the base line.
FIG. 105.
BOOK THIRD
XLIX
ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
Hitherto we have spoken only of parallel perspective, which is comparatively easy, and in
our first figure we placed the cube with one of its sides either touching or parallel to the
transparent plane. We now place it so that one angle only (ab), touches the picture.
FIG. 106.
98
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
62/161

Its sides are no longer drawn to the point of sight as in Fig. 7, nor its diagonal to the point of
distance, but to some other points on the horizon, although the same rule holds good as
regards their parallelism; as for instance, in the case of bc and ad, which, if produced, would
meet at V, a point on the horizon called a vanishing point. In this figure only one vanishing
point is seen, which is to the right of the point of sight S, whilst the other is some distance to
the left, and outside the picture. If the cube is correctly drawn, it will be found that the lines
ae, bg, &c., if produced, will meet on the horizon at this other vanishing point. This far-away
vanishing point is one of the inconveniences of oblique or angular perspective, and therefore
it will be a considerable gain to the draughtsman if we can dispense with it. This can be easily
done, as in the above figure, and here our geometry will come to our assistance, as I shall
show presently.
L
HOW TO PUT A GIVEN POINT INTO PERSPECTIVE
Let us place the given point P on a geometrical plane, to show how far it is from the base
line, and indeed in the exact position we wish it to be in the picture. The geometrical plane is
supposed to face us, to hang down, as it were, from the base line AB, like the side of a table,
the top of which represents the perspective plane. It is to that perspective plane that we now
have to transfer the point P.
FIG. 107.
From P raise perpendicular Pm till it touches the base line at m. With centre m and radius mP
describe arc Pn so that mn is now the same length as mP. As point P is opposite point m, so
must it be in the perspective, therefore we draw a line at right angles to the base, that is to
the point of sight, and somewhere on this line will be found the required point P·. We now
have to find how far from m must that point be. It must be the length of mn, which is the
same as mP. We therefore from n draw nD to the point of distance, which being at an angle
of 45°, or half a right angle, makes mP· the perspective length of mn by its intersection with
mS, and thus gives us the point P·, which is the perspective of the original point.
LI
A PERSPECTIVE POINT BEING GIVEN, FIND ITS POSITION ON THE GEOMETRICAL PLANE
To do this we simply reverse the foregoing
problem. Thus let P be the given perspective
point. From point of sight S draw a line through P
till it cuts AB at m. From distance D draw another
line through P till it cuts the base at n. From m
99
100
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
63/161

FIG. 108.
drop perpendicular, and then with centre m and
radius mn describe arc, and where it cuts that
perpendicular is the required point P·. We often
have to make use of this problem.
LII
HOW TO PUT A GIVEN LINE INTO PERSPECTIVE
This is simply a question of putting two points into perspective, instead of one, or like doing
the previous problem twice over, for the two points represent the two extremities of the line.
Thus we have to find the perspective of A and B, namely a·b·. Join those points, and we
have the line required.
FIG. 109.
If one end touches the base, as at A (Fig. 110), then we have but to find one point, namely
b. We also find the perspective of the angle mAB, namely the shaded triangle mAb. Note
also that the perspective triangle equals the geometrical triangle.
FIG. 110.
When the line required is parallel to the base line of the picture, then the perspective of it is
also parallel to that base (see Rule 3).
101
102
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
64/161

FIG. 112.
FIG. 111.
LIII
TO FIND THE LENGTH OF A GIVEN PERSPECTIVE LINE
A perspective line AB being given, find its actual length and the angle at which it is placed.
This is simply the reverse of the previous
problem. Let AB be the given line. From
distance D through A draw DC, and from S,
point of sight, through A draw SO. Drop OP at
right angles to base, making it equal to OC. Join
PB, and line PB is the actual length of AB.
This problem is useful in finding the position of
any given line or point on the perspective plane.
LIV
TO FIND THESE POINTS WHEN THE DISTANCE-POINT IS INACCESSIBLE
If the distance-point is a long way out of the picture, then the same result can be obtained by
using the half distance and half base, as already shown.
FIG. 113.
From a, half of mP·, draw quadrant ab, from b (half base), draw line from b to half Dist.,
which intersects Sm at P, precisely the same point as would be obtained by using the whole
distance.
LV
HOW TO PUT A GIVEN TRIANGLE OR OTHER RECTILINEAL FIGURE INTO PERSPECTIVE
Here we simply put three points into perspective to obtain the given triangle A, or five points
to obtain the five-sided figure at B. So can we deal with any number of figures placed at any
angle.
103
104
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
65/161

FIG. 114.
Both the above figures are placed in the same diagram, showing how any number can be
drawn by means of the same point of sight and the same point of distance, which makes
them belong to the same picture.
It is to be noted that the figures appear reversed in the perspective. That is, in the
geometrical triangle the base at ab is uppermost, whereas in the perspective ab is
lowermost, yet both are nearest to the ground line.
LVI
HOW TO PUT A GIVEN SQUARE INTO ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
Let ABCD (Fig. 115) be the given square on the geometrical plane, where we can place it as
near or as far from the base and at any angle that we wish. We then proceed to find its
perspective on the picture by finding the perspective of the four points ABCD as already
shown. Note that the two sides of the perspective square dc and ab being produced, meet
at point V on the horizon, which is their vanishing point, but to find the point on the horizon
where sides bc and ad meet, we should have to go a long way to the left of the figure, which
by this method is not necessary.
FIG. 115.
LVII
OF MEASURING POINTS
We now have to find certain points by which to measure those vanishing or retreating lines
105
106
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
66/161

which are no longer at right angles to the picture plane, as in parallel perspective, and have to
be measured in a different way, and here geometry comes to our assistance.
FIG. 116.
Note that the perspective square P equals the geometrical square K, so that side AB of the
one equals side ab of the other. With centre A and radius AB describe arc Bm· till it cuts the
base line at m·. Now AB = Am·, and if we join bm· then triangle BAm· is an isosceles
triangle. So likewise if we join m·b in the perspective figure will m·Ab be the same isosceles
triangle in perspective. Continue line m·b till it cuts the horizon in m, which point will be the
measuring point for the vanishing line AbV. For if in an isosceles triangle we draw lines across
it, parallel to its base from one side to the other, we divide both sides in exactly the same
quantities and proportions, so that if we measure on the base line of the picture the spaces
we require, such as 1, 2, 3, on the length Am·, and then from these divisions draw lines to
the measuring point, these lines will intersect the vanishing line AbV in the lengths and
proportions required. To find a measuring point for the lines that go to the other vanishing
point, we proceed in the same way. Of course great accuracy is necessary.
Note that the dotted lines 1,1, 2,2, &c., are parallel in the perspective, as in the geometrical
figure. In the former the lines are drawn to the same point m on the horizon.
LVIII
HOW TO DIVIDE ANY GIVEN STRAIGHT LINE INTO EQUAL OR PROPORTIONATE PARTS
Let AB (Fig. 117) be the given straight line that we wish to divide into five equal parts. Draw
AC at any convenient angle, and measure off five equal parts with the compasses thereon, as
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. From 5C draw line to 5B. Now from each division on AC draw lines 4, 4, 3, 3,
&c., parallel to 5,5. Then AB will be divided into the required number of equal parts.
FIG. 117.
LIX
HOW TO DIVIDE A DIAGONAL VANISHING LINE INTO ANY NUMBER OF EQUAL OR
PROPORTIONAL PARTS
In a previous figure (Fig. 116) we have shown how to find a measuring point when the exact
107
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
67/161

measure of a vanishing line is required, but if it suffices merely to divide a line into a given
number of equal parts, then the following simple method can be adopted.
We wish to divide ab into five equal parts. From a, measure off on the ground line the five
equal spaces required. From 5, the point to which these measures extend (as they are taken
at random), draw a line through b till it cuts the horizon at O. Then proceed to draw lines
from each division on the base to point O, and they will intersect and divide ab into the
required number of equal parts.
FIG. 118.
The same method applies to a given line to be divided into various proportions, as shown in
this lower figure.
FIG. 119.
LX
FURTHER USE OF THE MEASURING POINT O
One square in oblique or angular perspective being given, draw any number of other squares
equal to it by means of this point O and the diagonals.
FIG. 120.
Let ABCD (Fig. 120) be the given square; produce its sides AB, DC till they meet at point V.
From D measure off on base any number of equal spaces of any convenient length, as 1, 2,
3, &c.; from 1, through corner of square C, draw a line to meet the horizon at O, and from O
draw lines to the several divisions on base line. These lines will divide the vanishing line DV
into the required number of parts equal to DC, the side of the square. Produce the diagonal
108
110
[109a]
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
68/161

of the square DB till it cuts the horizon at G. From the divisions on line DV draw diagonals to
point G: their intersections with the other vanishing line AV will determine the direction of the
cross-lines which form the bases of other squares without the necessity of drawing them to
the other vanishing point, which in this case is some distance to the left of the picture. If we
produce these cross-lines to the horizon we shall find that they all meet at the other vanishing
point, to which of course it is easy to draw them when that point is accessible, as in Fig. 121;
but if it is too far out of the picture, then this method enables us to do without it.
FIG. 121.
Figure 121 corroborates the above by showing the two vanishing points and additional
squares. Note the working of the diagonals drawn to point G , in both figures.
LXI
FURTHER USE OF THE MEASURING POINT O
Suppose we wish to divide the side of a building, as in Fig. 123, or to draw a balcony,
a series of windows, or columns, or what not, or, in other words, any line above the horizon,
as AB. Then from A we draw AC parallel to the horizon, and mark thereon the required
divisions 5, 10, 15, &c.: in this case twenty-five (Fig. 122). From C draw a line through B till
it cuts the horizon at O. Then proceed to draw the other lines from each division to O, and
thus divide the vanishing line AB as required.
FIG. 122 is a front view of the portico, Fig. 123.
In this portico there are thirteen triglyphs with twelve spaces between them, making twenty-
five divisions. The required number of parts to draw the columns can be obtained in the
same way.
[109b]
111
112
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
69/161

FIG. 123.
LXII
ANOTHER METHOD OF ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE, BEING THAT ADOPTED IN OUR ART SCHOOLS
In the previous method we have drawn our squares by means of a geometrical plan, putting
each point into perspective as required, and then by means of the perspective drawing thus
obtained, finding our vanishing and measuring points. In this method we proceed in exactly
the opposite way, setting out our points first, and drawing the square (or other figure)
afterwards.
FIG. 124.
Having drawn the horizontal and base lines, and fixed upon the position of the point of sight,
we next mark the position of the spectator by dropping a perpendicular, S ST, from that
point of sight, making it the same length as the distance we suppose the spectator to be from
the picture, and thus we make ST the station-point.
To understand this figure we must first look upon it as a ground-plan or bird’s-eye view, the
line V2V1 or horizon line representing the picture seen edgeways, because of course the
station-point cannot be in the picture itself, but a certain distance in front of it. The angle at
ST, that is the angle which decides the positions of the two vanishing points V1, V2, is always
a right angle, and the two remaining angles on that side of the line, called the directing line,
are together equal to a right angle or 90°. So that in fixing upon the angle at which the square
or other figure is to be placed, we say ‘let it be 60° and 30°, or 70° and 20°’, &c. Having
decided upon the station-point and the angle at which the square is to be placed, draw TV1
and TV2, till they cut the horizon at V1 and V2. These are the two vanishing points to which
the sides of the figure are respectively drawn. But we still want the measuring points for these
two vanishing lines. We therefore take first, V1 as centre and V1T as radius, and describe arc
of circle till it cuts the horizon in M1, which is the measuring point for all lines drawn to V1.
Then with radius V2T describe arc from centre V2 till it cuts the horizon in M2, which is the
measuring point for all vanishing lines drawn to V2. We have now set out our points. Let us
113
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
70/161

proceed to draw the square Abcd. From A, the nearest angle (in this instance touching the
base line), measure on each side of it the equal lengths AB and AE, which represent the width
or side of the square. Draw EM2 and BM1 from the two measuring points, which give us, by
their intersections with the vanishing lines AV1 and AV2, the perspective lengths of the sides
of the square Abcd. Join b and V1 and dV2, which intersect each other at C, then Adcb is the
square required.
This method, which is easy when you know it, has certain drawbacks, the chief one being
that if we require a long-distance point, and a small angle, such as 10° on one side, and 80°
on the other, then the size of the diagram becomes so large that it has to be carried out on
the floor of the studio with long strings, &c., which is a very clumsy and unscientific way of
setting to work. The architects in such cases make use of the centrolinead, a clever
mechanical contrivance for getting over the difficulty of the far-off vanishing point, but by the
method I have shown you, and shall further illustrate, you will find that you can dispense with
all this trouble, and do all your perspective either inside the picture or on a very small margin
outside it.
Perhaps another drawback to this method is that it is not self-evident, as in the former one,
and being rather difficult to explain, the student is apt to take it on trust, and not to trouble
about the reasons for its construction: but to show that it is equally correct, I will draw the
two methods in one figure.
LXIII
TWO METHODS OF ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE IN ONE FIGURE
It matters little whether the station-point is placed above or below the horizon, as the result is
the same. In Fig. 125 it is placed above, as the lower part of the figure is occupied with the
geometrical plan of the other method.
FIG. 125.
In each case we make the square K the same size and at the same angle, its near corner
being at A. It must be seen that by whichever method we work out this perspective, the
114
115
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
71/161

result is the same, so that both are correct: the great advantage of the first or geometrical
system being, that we can place the square at any angle, as it is drawn without reference to
vanishing points.
We will, however, work out a few figures by the second method.
LXIV
TO DRAW A CUBE, THE POINTS BEING GIVEN
As in a previous figure (124) we found the various working points of angular perspective, we
need now merely transfer them to the horizontal line in this figure, as in this case they will
answer our purpose perfectly well.
FIG. 126.
Let A be the nearest angle touching the base. Draw AV1, AV2. From A, raise vertical Ae, the
height of the cube. From e draw eV1, eV2, from the other angles raise verticals bf, dh, cg, to
meet eV1, eV2, fV2, &c., and the cube is complete.
LXV
AMPLIFICATION OF THE CUBE APPLIED TO DRAWING A COTTAGE
Note that we have started this figure with the cube Adhefb. We have taken three times AB,
its width, for the front of our house, and twice AB for the side, and have made it two cubes
high, not counting the roof. Note also the use of the measuring-points in connexion with the
measurements on the base line, and the upper measuring line TPK.
FIG. 127.
LXVI
HOW TO DRAW AN INTERIOR AT AN ANGLE
Here we make use of the same points as in a previous figure, with the addition of the point G,
which is the vanishing point of the diagonals of the squares on the floor.
116
117
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
72/161

FIG. 128.
From A draw square Abcd, and produce its sides in all directions; again from A, through the
opposite angle of the square C, draw a diagonal till it cuts the horizon at G. From G draw
diagonals through b and d, cutting the base at o, o, make spaces o, o, equal to Ao all along
the base, and from them draw diagonals to G; through the points where these diagonals
intersect the vanishing lines drawn in the direction of Ab, dc and Ad, bc, draw lines to the
other vanishing point V1, thus completing the squares, and so cover the floor with them; they
will then serve to measure width of door, windows, &c. Of course horizontal lines on wall 1
are drawn to V1, and those on wall 2 to V2.
In order to see this drawing properly, the eye should be placed about 3 inches from it, and
opposite the point of sight; it will then stand out like a stereoscopic picture, and appear as
actual space, but otherwise the perspective seems deformed, and the angles exaggerated. To
make this drawing look right from a reasonable distance, the point of distance should be at
least twice as far off as it is here, and this would mean altering all the other points and
sending them a long way out of the picture; this is why artists use those long strings referred
to above. I would however, advise them to make their perspective drawing on a small scale,
and then square it up to the size of the canvas.
LXVII
HOW TO CORRECT DISTORTED PERSPECTIVE BY DOUBLING THE LINE OF DISTANCE
Here we have the same interior as the foregoing, but drawn with double the distance, so that
the perspective is not so violent and the objects are truer in proportion to each other.
FIG. 129.
118
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
73/161

To redraw the whole figure double the size, including the station-point, would require a very
large diagram, that we could not get into this book without a folding plate, but it comes to the
same thing if we double the distances between the various points. Thus, if from S to G in the
small diagram is 1 inch, in the larger one make it 2 inches. If from S to M2 is 2 inches, in the
larger make it 4, and so on.
Or this form may be used: make AB twice the length of AC (Fig. 130), or in any other
proportion required. On AC mark the points as in the drawing you wish to enlarge. Make AB
the length that you wish to enlarge to, draw CB, and then from each division on AC draw lines
parallel to CB, and AB will be divided in the same proportions, as I have already shown (Fig.
117).
FIG. 130.
There is no doubt that it is easier to work direct from the vanishing points themselves,
especially in complicated architectural work, but at the same time I will now show you how
we can dispense with, at all events, one of them, and that the farthest away.
LXVIII
HOW TO DRAW A CUBE ON A GIVEN SQUARE, USING ONLY ONE VANISHING POINT
ABCD is the given square (Fig. 131). At A raise vertical Aa equal to side of square AB·, from
a draw ab to the vanishing point. Raise Bb. Produce VD to E to touch the base line. From E
raise vertical EF, making it equal to Aa. From F draw FV. Raise Dd and Cc, their heights
being determined by the line FV. Join da and the cube is complete. It will be seen that the
verticals raised at each corner of the square are equal perspectively, as they are drawn
between parallels which start from equal heights, namely, from EF and Aa to the same point
V, the vanishing point. Any other line, such as OO·, can be directed to the inaccessible
vanishing point in the same way as ad, &c.
FIG. 131.
Note. This is only one of many original figures and problems in this book which have been
called up by the wish to facilitate the work of the artist, and as it were by necessity.
LXIX
A COURTYARD OR CLOISTER DRAWN WITH ONE VANISHING POINT
119
120
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
74/161

In this figure I have first drawn the pavement by means of the diagonals GA, Go, Go, &c., and
the vanishing point V, the square at A being given. From A draw diagonal through opposite
corner till it cuts the horizon at G. From this same point G draw lines through the other
corners of the square till they cut the ground line at o, o. Take this measurement Ao and
mark it along the base right and left of A, and the lines drawn from these points o to point G
will give the diagonals of all the squares on the pavement. Produce sides of square A, and
where these lines are intersected by the diagonals Go draw lines from the vanishing point V to
base. These will give us the outlines of the squares lying between them and also guiding
points that will enable us to draw as many more as we please. These again will give us our
measurements for the widths of the arches, &c., or between the columns. Having fixed the
height of wall or dado, we make use of V point to draw the sides of the building, and by
means of proportionate measurement complete the rest, as in Fig. 128.
FIG. 132.
LXX
HOW TO DRAW LINES WHICH SHALL MEET AT A DISTANT POINT, BY MEANS OF DIAGONALS
This is in a great measure a repetition of the foregoing figure, and therefore needs no further
explanation.
FIG. 133.
I must, however, point out the importance of the point G. In angular perspective it in a
measure takes the place of the point of distance in parallel perspective, since it is the
vanishing point of diagonals at 45° drawn between parallels such as AV, DV, drawn to a
vanishing point V. The method of dividing line AV into a number of parts equal to AB, the side
of the square, is also shown in a previous figure (Fig. 120).
LXXI
HOW TO DIVIDE A SQUARE PLACED AT AN ANGLE INTO A GIVEN NUMBER OF SMALL SQUARES
ABCD is the given square, and only one vanishing point is accessible. Let us divide it into
sixteen small squares. Produce side CD to base at E. Divide EA into four equal parts. From
121
122
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
75/161

each division draw lines to vanishing point V. Draw diagonals BD and AC, and produce the
latter till it cuts the horizon in G. Draw the three cross-lines through the intersections made by
the diagonals and the lines drawn to V, and thus divide the square into sixteen.
FIG. 134.
This is to some extent the reverse of the previous problem. It also shows how the long
vanishing point can be dispensed with, and the perspective drawing brought within the
picture.
LXXII
FURTHER EXAMPLE OF HOW TO DIVIDE A GIVEN OBLIQUE SQUARE INTO A GIVEN NUMBER OF
EQUAL SQUARES, SAY TWENTY-FIVE
Having drawn the square ABCD, which is enclosed, as will be seen, in a dotted square in
parallel perspective, I divide the line EA into five equal parts instead of four (Fig. 135), and
have made use of the device for that purpose by measuring off the required number on line
EF, &c. Fig. 136 is introduced here simply to show that the square can be divided into any
number of smaller squares. Nor need the figure be necessarily a square; it is just as easy to
make it an oblong, as ABEF (Fig. 136); for although we begin with a square we can extend it
in any direction we please, as here shown.
FIG. 135.
123
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
76/161

FIG. 137 A.
FIG. 137 B.
FIG. 136.
LXXIII
OF PARALLELS AND DIAGONALS
To find the centre of a square or other rectangular figure we have
but to draw its two diagonals, and their intersection will give us
the centre of the figure (see 137 A). We do the same with
perspective figures, as at B. In Fig. C is shown how a diagonal,
drawn from one angle of a square B through the centre O of the
opposite side of the square, will enable us to find a second square
lying between the same parallels, then a third, a fourth, and so on.
At figure K lying on the ground, I have divided the farther side of
the square mn into ¼, ⅓, ½. If I draw a diagonal from G (at the
base) through the half of this line I cut off on FS the lengths or
sides of two squares; if through the quarter I cut off the length of
four squares on the vanishing line FS, and so on. In Fig. 137 D is
shown how easily any number of objects at any equal distances
apart, such as posts, trees, columns, &c., can be drawn by means
of diagonals between parallels, guided by a central line GS.
FIG. 137 C.
FIG. 137 D.
LXXIV
THE SQUARE, THE OBLONG, AND THEIR DIAGONALS
Having found the centre of a square or oblong, such as Figs. 138 and 139, if we draw a
third line through that centre at a given angle and then at each of its extremities draw
perpendiculars AB, DC, we divide that square or oblong into three parts, the two outer
portions being equal to each other, and the centre one either larger or smaller as desired; as,
for instance, in the triumphal arch we make the centre portion larger than the two outer sides.
When certain architectural details and spaces are to be put into perspective, a scale such as
that in Fig. 123 will be found of great convenience; but if only a ready division of the
principal proportions is required, then these diagonals will be found of the greatest use.
124
125
126
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
77/161

FIG. 138.
FIG. 139.
LXXV
SHOWING THE USE OF THE SQUARE AND DIAGONALS IN DRAWING DOORWAYS, WINDOWS, AND
OTHER ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES
This example is from Serlio's Architecture (1663), showing what excellent proportion can
be obtained by the square and diagonals. The width of the door is one-third of the base of
square, the height two-thirds. As a further illustration we have drawn the same figure in
perspective.
FIG. 140.
FIG. 141.
LXXVI
HOW TO MEASURE DEPTHS BY DIAGONALS
If we take any length on the base of a square, say from A to g, and from g raise a
perpendicular till it cuts the diagonal AB in O, then from O draw horizontal Og·, we form a
square AgOg·, and thus measure on one side of the square the distance or depth Ag·. So can
we measure any other length, such as fg, in like manner.
FIG. 142.
FIG. 143.
127
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
78/161

To do this in perspective we pursue precisely the same method, as shown in this figure
(143).
To measure a length Ag on the side of square AC, we draw a line from g to the point of sight
S, and where it crosses diagonal AB at O we draw horizontal Og, and thus find the required
depth Ag in the picture.
LXXVII
HOW TO MEASURE DISTANCES BY THE SQUARE AND DIAGONAL
It may sometimes be convenient to have a ready method by which to measure the width and
length of objects standing against the wall of a gallery, without referring to distance-points,
&c.
FIG. 144.
In Fig. 144 the floor is divided into two large squares with their diagonals. Suppose we wish
to draw a fireplace or a piece of furniture K, we measure its base ef on AB, as far from B as
we wish it to be in the picture; draw eo and fo to point of sight, and proceed as in the
previous figure by drawing parallels from Oo, &c.
Let it be observed that the great advantage of this method is, that we can use it to measure
such distant objects as XY just as easily as those near to us.
There is, however, a still further advantage arising from it, and that is that it introduces us to a
new and simpler method of perspective, to which I have already referred, and it will, I hope,
be found of infinite use to the artist.
Note.—As we have founded many of these figures on a given square in angular perspective,
it is as well to have a ready and certain means of drawing that square without the elaborate
setting out of a geometrical plan, as in the first method, or the more cumbersome and
128
129
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
79/161

extended system of the second method. I shall therefore show you another method equally
correct, but much simpler than either, which I have invented for our use, and which indeed
forms one of the chief features of this book.
LXXVIII
HOW BY MEANS OF THE SQUARE AND DIAGONAL WE CAN DETERMINE THE POSITION OF POINTS
IN SPACE
Apart from the aid that perspective affords the draughtsman, there is a further value in it, in
that it teaches us almost a new science, which we might call the mystery of aspect, and how
it is that the objects around us take so many different forms, or rather appearances, although
they themselves remain the same. And also that it enables us, with, I think, great pleasure to
ourselves, to fathom space, to work out difficult problems by simple reasoning, and to
exercise those inventive and critical faculties which give strength and enjoyment to mental life.
And now, after this brief excursion into philosophy, let us come down to the simple question
of the perspective of a point.
Fig. 145.
Here, for instance, are two aspects of the same thing: the geometrical square A, which is
facing us, and the perspective square B, which we suppose to lie flat on the table, or rather
on the perspective plane. Line A·C· is the perspective of line AC. On the geometrical square
we can make what measurements we please with the compasses, but on the perspective
square B· the only line we can actually measure is the base line. In both figures this base line
is the same length. Suppose we want to find the perspective of point P (Fig. 146), we make
use of the diagonal CA. From P in the geometrical square draw PO to meet the diagonal in O;
through O draw perpendicular fe; transfer length fB, so found, to the base of the perspective
square; from f draw fS to point of sight; where it cuts the diagonal in O, draw horizontal OP·,
which gives us the point required. In the same way we can find the perspective of any
number of points on any side of the square.
130
131
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
80/161

Fig. 146.
LXXIX
PERSPECTIVE OF A POINT PLACED IN ANY POSITION WITHIN THE SQUARE
Let the point P be the one we wish to put into perspective. We have but to repeat the
process of the previous problem, making use of our measurements on the base, the
diagonals, &c.
Fig. 147.
Indeed these figures are so plain and evident that further description of them is hardly
necessary, so I will here give two drawings of triangles which explain themselves. To put a
triangle into perspective we have but to find three points, such as fEP, Fig. 148 A, and then
transfer these points to the perspective square 148 B, as there shown, and form the
perspective triangle; but these figures explain themselves. Any other triangle or rectilineal
figure can be worked out in the same way, which is not only the simplest method, but it
carries its mathematical proof with it.
FIG. 148 A.
FIG. 148 B.
132
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
81/161

FIG. 149 A.
FIG. 149 B.
LXXX
PERSPECTIVE OF A SQUARE PLACED AT AN ANGLE NEW METHOD
As we have drawn a triangle in a square so can we draw an oblique square in a parallel
square. In Figure 150 A we have drawn the oblique square GEPn. We find the points on the
base Am, as in the previous figures, which enable us to construct the oblique perspective
square n·G·E·P· in the parallel perspective square Fig. 150 B. But it is not necessary to
construct the geometrical figure, as I will show presently. It is here introduced to explain the
method.
FIG. 150 A.
FIG. 150 B.
Fig. 150 B. To test the accuracy of the above, produce sides G·E· and n·P· of perspective
square till they touch the horizon, where they will meet at V, their vanishing point, and again
produce the other sides n·G· and P·E· till they meet on the horizon at the other vanishing
point, which they must do if the figure is correctly drawn.
In any parallel square construct an oblique square from a given point—given the parallel
square at Fig. 150 B, and given point n· on base. Make A·f· equal to n·m·, draw f·S and n·S
to point of sight. Where these lines cut the diagonal AC draw horizontals to P· and G·, and so
find the four points G·E·P·n· through which to draw the square.
LXXXI
ON A GIVEN LINE PLACED AT AN ANGLE TO THE BASE DRAW A SQUARE IN ANGULAR
PERSPECTIVE, THE POINT OF SIGHT, AND DISTANCE, BEING GIVEN.
Let AB be the given line, S the point of sight, and D the distance (Fig. 151, 1). Through A
draw SC from point of sight to base (Fig. 151, 2 and 3). From C draw CD to point of
distance. Draw Ao parallel to base till it cuts CD at o, through O draw SP, from B mark off BE
equal to CP. From E draw ES intersecting CD at K, from K draw KM, thus completing the
outer parallel square. Through F, where PS intersects MK, draw AV till it cuts the horizon in V,
its vanishing point. From V draw VB cutting side KE of outer square in G, and we have the
four points AFGB, which are the four angles of the square required. Join FG, and the figure is
complete.
133
134
135
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
82/161

FIG. 151.
Any other side of the square might be given, such as AF. First through A and F draw SC, SP,
then draw Ao, then through o draw CD. From C draw base of parallel square CE, and at M
through F draw MK cutting diagonal at K, which gives top of square. Now through K draw
SE, giving KE the remaining side thereof, produce AF to V, from V draw VB. Join FG, GB, and
BA, and the square required is complete.
The student can try the remaining two sides, and he will find they work out in a similar way.
LXXXII
HOW TO DRAW SOLID FIGURES AT ANY ANGLE BY THE NEW METHOD
As we can draw planes by this method so can we draw solids, as shown in these figures.
The heights of the corners of the triangles are obtained by means of the vanishing scales AS,
OS, which have already been explained.
FIG. 152.
FIG. 153.
In the same manner we can draw a cubic figure (Fig. 154)—a box, for instance—at any
required angle. In this case, besides the scale AS, OS, we have made use of the vanishing
lines DV, BV, to corroborate the scale, but they can be dispensed with in these simple
objects, or we can use a scale on each side of the figure as a·o·S, should both vanishing
points be inaccessible. Let it be noted that in the scale AOS, AO is made equal to BC, the
height of the box.
136
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
83/161

FIG. 157.
FIG. 154.
By a similar process we draw these two figures, one on the square, the other on the circle.
FIG. 155.
FIG. 156.
LXXXIII
POINTS IN SPACE
The chief use of these figures is to show how by means of diagonals, horizontals, and
perpendiculars almost any figure in space can be set down. Lines at any slope and at any
angle can be drawn by this descriptive geometry.
The student can examine these figures for himself,
and will understand their working from what has
gone before. Here (Fig. 157) in the geometrical
square we have a vertical plane AabB standing on
its base AB. We wish to place a projection of this
figure at a certain distance and at a given angle in
space. First of all we transfer it to the side of the
cube, where it is seen in perspective, whilst at its
side is another perspective square lying flat, on which we have to stand our figure. By means
of the diagonal of this flat square, horizontals from figure on side of cube, and lines drawn
from point of sight (as already explained), we obtain the direction of base line AB, and also
by means of lines aa· and bb· we obtain the two points in space a·b·. Join Aa·, a·b· and Bb·,
and we have the projection required, and which may be said to possess the third dimension.
In this other case (Fig. 158) we have a wedge-
shaped figure standing on a triangle placed on the
ground, as in the previous figure, its three corners
being the same height. In the vertical geometrical
square we have a ground-plan of the figure, from
which we draw lines to diagonal and to base, and
137
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
84/161

FIG. 158.
notify by numerals 1, 3, 2, 1, 3; these we transfer
to base of the horizontal perspective square, and
then construct shaded triangle 1, 2, 3, and raise to the height required as shown at 1·, 2·, 3·.
Although we may not want to make use of these special figures, they show us how we could
work out almost any form or object suspended in space.
LXXXIV
THE SQUARE AND DIAGONAL APPLIED TO CUBES AND SOLIDS DRAWN THEREIN
As we have made use of the square and diagonal to draw figures at various angles so can we
make use of cubes either in parallel or angular perspective to draw other solid figures within
them, as shown in these drawings, for this is simply an amplification of that method. Indeed
we might invent many more such things. But subjects for perspective treatment will
constantly present themselves to the artist or draughtsman in the course of his experience,
and while I endeavour to show him how to grapple with any new difficulty or subject that
may arise, it is impossible to set down all of them in this book.
FIG. 159.
FIG. 160.
LXXXV
TO DRAW AN OBLIQUE SQUARE IN ANOTHER OBLIQUE SQUARE WITHOUT USING VANISHING
POINTS
It is not often that both vanishing points are inaccessible, still it is well to know how to
proceed when this is the case. We first draw the square ABCD inside the parallel square, as
in previous figures. To draw the smaller square K we simply draw a smaller parallel square h
h h h, and within that, guided by the intersections of the diagonals therewith, we obtain the
four points through which to draw square K. To raise a solid figure on these squares we can
make use of the vanishing scales as shown on each side of the figure, thus obtaining the
upper square 1 2 3 4, then by means of the diagonal 1 3 and 2 4 and verticals raised from
each corner of square K to meet them we obtain the smaller upper square corresponding to
K.
It might be said that all this can be done by using the two vanishing points in the usual way. In
the first place, if they were as far off as required for this figure we could not get them into a
page unless it were three or four times the width of this one, and to use shorter distances
results in distortion, so that the real use of this system is that we can make our figures look
138
139
140
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
85/161

quite natural and with much less trouble than by the other method.
FIG. 161.
LXXXVI
SHOWING HOW A PEDESTAL CAN BE DRAWN BY THE NEW METHOD
This is a repetition of the previous problem, or rather the application of it to architecture,
although when there are many details it may be more convenient to use vanishing points or
the centrolinead.
FIG. 162.
LXXXVII
141
143
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
86/161

SCALE ON EACH SIDE OF THE PICTURE
As one of my objects in writing this book is to facilitate the working of our perspective,
partly for the comfort of the artist, and partly that he may have no excuse for neglecting it,
I will here show you how you may, by a very simple means, secure the general correctness
of your perspective when sketching or painting out of doors.
FIG. 163. Honfleur.
Let us take this example from a sketch made at Honfleur (Fig. 163), and in which my eye
was my only guide, but it stands the test of the rule. First of all note that line HH, drawn from
one side of the picture to the other, is the horizontal line; below that is a wall and a pavement
marked aV, also going from one side of the picture to the other, and being lower down at a
than at V it runs up as it were to meet the horizon at some distant point. In order to form our
scale I take first the length of Ha, and measure it above and below the horizon, along the side
to our left as many times as required, in this case four or five. I now take the length HV on the
right side of the picture and measure it above and below the horizon, as in the other case;
and then from these divisions obtain dotted lines crossing the picture from one side to the
other which must all meet at some distant point on the horizon. These act as guiding lines,
and are sufficient to give us the direction of any vanishing lines going to the same point. For
those that go in the opposite direction we proceed in the same way, as from b on the right to
V· on the left. They are here put in faintly, so as not to interfere with the drawing. In the
sketch of Toledo (Fig. 164) the same thing is shown by double lines on each side to separate
the two sets of lines, and to make the principle more evident.
[142]
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
87/161

FIG. 164. Toledo.
LXXXVIII
THE CIRCLE
If we inscribe a circle in a square we find that it touches that square at four points which are
in the middle of each side, as at a b c d. It will also intersect the two diagonals at the four
points o (Fig. 165). If, then, we put this square and its diagonals, &c., into perspective we
shall have eight guiding points through which to trace the required circle, as shown in Fig.
166, which has the same base as Fig. 165.
FIG. 165.
FIG. 166.
LXXXIX
THE CIRCLE IN PERSPECTIVE A TRUE ELLIPSE
Although the circle drawn through certain points must be a freehand drawing, which requires
[144]
145
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
88/161

a little practice to make it true, it is sufficient for ordinary purposes and on a small scale, but
to be mathematically true it must be an ellipse. We will first draw an ellipse (Fig. 167). Let ee
be its long, or transverse, diameter, and db its short or conjugate diameter. Now take half of
the long diameter eE, and from point d with cE for radius mark on ee the two points ff, which
are the foci of the ellipse. At each focus fix a pin, then make a loop of fine string that does
not stretch and of such a length that when drawn out the double thread will reach from f to e.
Now place this double thread round the two pins at the foci ff· and distend it with the pencil
point until it forms triangle fdf·, then push the pencil along and right round the two foci, which
being guided by the thread will draw the curve, which is a true ellipse, and will pass through
the eight points indicated in our first figure. This will be a sufficient proof that the circle in
perspective and the ellipse are identical curves. We must also remember that the ellipse is an
oblique projection of a circle, or an oblique section of a cone. The difference between the
two figures consists in their centres not being in the same place, that of the perspective circle
being at c, higher up than e the centre of the ellipse. The latter being a geometrical figure, its
long diameter is exactly in the centre of the figure, whereas the centre c and the diameter of
the perspective are at the intersection of the diagonals of the perspective square in which it is
inscribed.
FIG. 167.
XC
FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OF THE ELLIPSE
In order to show that the ellipse drawn by a loop as in the previous figure is also a circle in
perspective we must reconstruct around it the square and its eight points by means of which
it was drawn in the first instance. We start with nothing but the ellipse itself. We have to find
the points of sight and distance, the base, &c. Let us start with base AB, a horizontal tangent
to the curve extending beyond it on either side. From A and B draw two other tangents so
that they shall touch the curve at points such as TT· a little above the transverse diameter and
on a level with each other. Produce these tangents till they meet at point S, which will be the
point of sight. Through this point draw horizontal line H. Now draw tangent CD parallel to
AB. Draw diagonal AD till it cuts the horizon at the point of distance, this will cut through
diameter of circle at its centre, and so proceed to find the eight points through which the
perspective circle passes, when it will be found that they all lie on the ellipse we have drawn
with the loop, showing that the two curves are identical although their centres are distinct.
146
147
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
89/161

FIG. 169.
FIG. 170.
FIG. 168.
XCI
HOW TO DRAW A CIRCLE IN PERSPECTIVE WITHOUT A GEOMETRICAL PLAN
Divide base AB into four equal parts. At B drop
perpendicular Bn, making Bn equal to Bm, or one-
fourth of base. Join mn and transfer this measurement
to each side of d on base line; that is, make df and df·
equal to mn. Draw fS and f·S, and the intersections of
these lines with the diagonals of square will give us the
four points o o o o.
The reason of this is that ff· is the measurement on the
base AB of another square o o o o which is exactly half
of the outer square. For if we inscribe a circle in a
square and then inscribe a second square in that circle,
this second square will be exactly half the area of the
larger one; for its side will be equal to half the diagonal
of the larger square, as can be seen by studying the
following figures. In Fig. 170, for instance, the side of
small square K is half the diagonal of large square o.
In Fig. 171, CB represents half of diagonal EB of the
outer square in which the circle is inscribed. By taking a
fourth of the base mB and drawing perpendicular mh
we cut CB at h in two equal parts, Ch, hB. It will be
seen that hB is equal to mn, one-quarter of the
diagonal, so if we measure mn on each side of D we
get ff· equal to CB, or half the diagonal. By drawing ff,
f·f passing through the diagonals we get the four points
148
149
150
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
90/161

FIG. 171.
o o o o through which to draw the smaller square.
Without referring to geometry we can see at a glance
by Fig. 172, where we have simply turned the square o
o o o on its centre so that its angles touch the sides of
the outer square, that it is exactly half of square ABEF,
since each quarter of it, such as EoCo, is bisected by its
diagonal oo.
FIG. 172.
FIG. 173.
XCII
HOW TO DRAW A CIRCLE IN ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
Let ABCD be the oblique square. Produce VA till it cuts the base line at G.
FIG. 174.
Take mD, the fourth of the base. Find mn as in Fig. 171, measure it on each side of E, and
so obtain Ef and Ef·, and proceed to draw fV, EV, f·V and the diagonals, whose intersections
with these lines will give us the eight points through which to draw the circle. In fact the
process is the same as in parallel perspective, only instead of making our divisions on the
actual base AD of the square, we make them on GD, the base line.
To obtain the central line hh passing through O, we can make use of diagonals of the half
151
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
91/161

squares; that is, if the other vanishing point is inaccessible, as in this case.
XCIII
HOW TO DRAW A CIRCLE IN PERSPECTIVE MORE CORRECTLY, BY USING SIXTEEN GUIDING
POINTS
First draw square ABCD. From O, the middle of the base, draw semicircle AKB, and divide it
into eight equal parts. From each division raise perpendiculars to the base, such as 2 O, 3 O,
5 O, &c., and from divisions O, O, O draw lines to point of sight, and where these lines cut
the diagonals AC, DB, draw horizontals parallel to base AB. Then through the points thus
obtained draw the circle as shown in this figure, which also shows us how the circumference
of a circle in perspective may be divided into any number of equal parts.
FIG. 175.
XCIV
HOW TO DIVIDE A PERSPECTIVE CIRCLE INTO ANY NUMBER OF EQUAL PARTS
This is simply a repetition of the previous figure as far as its construction is concerned, only in
this case we have divided the semicircle into twelve parts and the perspective into twenty-
four.
152
153
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
92/161

FIG. 176.
FIG. 177.
We have raised perpendiculars from the divisions on the semicircle, and proceeded as
before to draw lines to the point of sight, and have thus by their intersections with the
circumference already drawn in perspective divided it into the required number of equal
parts, to which from the centre we have drawn the radii. This will show us how to draw
traceries in Gothic windows, columns in a circle, cart-wheels, &c.
The geometrical figure (177) will explain the construction of the perspective one by showing
how the divisions are obtained on the line AB, which represents base of square, from the
divisions on the semicircle AKB.
XCV
HOW TO DRAW CONCENTRIC CIRCLES
First draw a square with its diagonals (Fig. 178), and from its centre O inscribe a circle; in
this circle inscribe a square, and in this again inscribe a second circle, and so on. Through
their intersections with the diagonals draw lines to base, and number them 1, 2, 3, 4, &c.;
transfer these measurements to the base of the perspective square (Fig. 179), and proceed
to construct the circles as before, drawing lines from each point on the base to the point of
sight, and drawing the curves through the inter-sections of these lines with the diagonals.
FIG. 178.
FIG. 179.
Should it be required to make the circles at equal distances, as for steps for instance, then
the geometrical plan should be made accordingly.
Or we may adopt the method shown at Fig. 180, by taking quarter base of both outer and
inner square, and finding the measurement mn on each side of C, &c.
154
155
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
93/161

FIG. 180.
XCVI
THE ANGLE OF THE DIAMETER OF THE CIRCLE IN ANGULAR AND PARALLEL PERSPECTIVE
The circle, whether in angular or parallel perspective, is always an ellipse. In angular
perspective the angle of the circle's diameter varies in accordance with the angle of the
square in which it is placed, as in Fig. 181, cc is the diameter of the circle and ee the
diameter of the ellipse. In parallel perspective the diameter of the circle always remains
horizontal, although the long diameter of the ellipse varies in inclination according to the
distance it is from the point of sight, as shown in Fig. 182, in which the third circle is much
elongated and distorted, owing to its being outside the angle of vision.
FIG. 181.
FIG. 182.
XCVII
HOW TO CORRECT DISPROPORTION IN THE WIDTH OF COLUMNS
The disproportion in the width of columns in Fig. 183 arises from the point of distance being
too near the point of sight, or, in other words, taking too wide an angle of vision. It will be
seen that column 3 is much wider than column 1.
FIG. 183.
156
157
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
94/161

FIG. 185.
FIG. 186.
In our second figure (184) is shown how this defect is remedied, by doubling the distance, or
by counting the same distance as half, which is easily effected by drawing the diagonal from
O to ½-D, instead of from A, as in the other figure, O being at half base. Here the squares lie
much more level, and the columns are nearly the same width, showing the advantage of a
long distance.
FIG. 184.
XCVIII
HOW TO DRAW A CIRCLE OVER A CIRCLE OR A CYLINDER
First construct square and circle ABE, then draw
square CDF with its diagonals. Then find the various
points O, and from these raise perpendiculars to meet
the diagonals of the upper square at points P, which,
with the other points will be sufficient guides to draw
the circle required. This can be applied to towers,
columns, &c. The size of the circles can be varied so
that the upper portion of a cylinder or column shall be
smaller than the lower.
XCIX
TO DRAW A CIRCLE BELOW A GIVEN CIRCLE
Construct the upper square and circle as before, then by
means of the vanishing scale POV, which should be made
the depth required, drop perpendiculars from the various
points marked O, obtained by the diagonals, making them
the right depth by referring them to the vanishing scale, as
shown in this figure. This can be used for drawing garden
fountains, basins, and various architectural objects.
C
158
159
160
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
95/161

APPLICATION OF PREVIOUS PROBLEM
That is, to draw a circle above a circle. In Fig. 187 can be seen how by means of the
vanishing scale at the side we obtain the height of the verticals 1, 2, 3, 4, &c., which
determine the direction of the upper circle; and in this second figure, how we resort to the
same means to draw circular steps.
FIG. 187.
FIG. 188.
CI
DORIC COLUMNS
It is as well for the art student to study the different orders of architecture, whether architect
or not, as he frequently has to introduce them into his pictures, and at least must know their
proportions, and how columns diminish from base to capital, as shown in this illustration.
161
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
96/161

FIG. 189.
CII
TO DRAW SEMICIRCLES STANDING UPON A CIRCLE AT ANY ANGLE
Given the circle ACBH, on diagonal AB draw semicircle AKB, and on the same line AB draw
rectangle AEFB, its height being determined by radius OK of semicircle. From centre O draw
OF to corner of rectangle. Through f·, where that line intersects the semicircle, draw mn
parallel to AB. This will give intersection O· on the vertical OK, through which all such
horizontals as m·n·, level with mn, must pass. Now take any other diameter, such as GH, and
thereon raise rectangle GghH, the same height as the other. The manner of doing this is to
produce diameter GH to the horizon till it finds its vanishing point at V. From V through K
draw hg, and through O· draw n·m·. From O draw the two diagonals og and oh, intersecting
m·n· at O, O, and thus we have the five points GOKOH through which to draw the required
semicircle.
162
163
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
97/161

FIG. 190.
CIII
A DOME STANDING ON A CYLINDER
This figure is a combination of the two preceding it. A cylinder is first raised on the circle,
and on the top of that we draw semicircles from the different divisions on the circumference
of the upper circle. This, however, only represents a small half-globular object. To draw the
dome of a cathedral, or other building high above us, is another matter. From outside, where
we can get to a distance, it is not difficult, but from within it will tax all our knowledge of
perspective to give it effect.
We shall go more into this subject when we come to archways and vaulted roofs, &c.
FIG. 191.
CIV
164
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
98/161

FIG. 192.
SECTION OF A DOME OR NICHE
First draw outline of the niche GFDBA (Fig.
193), then at its base draw square and
circle GOA, S being the point of sight, and
divide the circumference of the circle into
the required number of parts. Then draw
semicircle FOB, and over that another
semicircle EOC. The manner of drawing
them is shown in Fig. 192. From the
divisions on the circle GOA raise verticals to
semicircle FOB, which will divide it in the
same way. Divide the smaller semicircle
EOC into the same number of parts as the
others, which divisions will serve as guiding
points in drawing the curves of the dome that are drawn towards D, but the shading must
assist greatly in giving the effect of the recess.
FIG. 193.
In Fig. 192 will be seen how to draw semicircles in perspective. We first draw the half
squares by drawing from centres O of their diameters diagonals to distance-point, as OD,
which cuts the vanishing line BS at m, and gives us the depth of the square, and in this we
draw the semicircle in the usual way.
CV
A DOME
165
166
167
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
99/161

FIG. 194. A Dome.
First draw a section of the dome ACEDB (Fig. 194) the
shape required. Draw AB at its base and CD at some
distance above it. Keeping these as central lines, form
squares thereon by drawing SA, SB, SC, SD, &c., from
point of sight, and determining their lengths by
diagonals fh, f·h· from point of distance, passing
through O. Having formed the two squares, draw
perspective circles in each, and divide their
circumferences into twelve or whatever number of
parts are needed. To complete the figure draw from
each division in the lower circle curves passing through
the corresponding divisions in the upper one, to the
apex. But as these are freehand lines, it requires some
taste and knowledge to draw them properly, and of
course in a large drawing several more squares and
circles might be added to aid the draughtsman. The
interior of the dome can be drawn in the same way.
CVI
HOW TO DRAW COLUMNS STANDING IN A CIRCLE
In Fig. 195 are sixteen cylinders or columns standing in a circle. First draw the circle on the
ground, then divide it into sixteen equal parts, and let each division be the centre of the circle
on which to raise the column. The question is how to make each one the right width in
accordance with its position, for it is evident that a near column must appear wider than the
opposite one. On the right of the figure is the vertical scale A, which gives the heights of the
columns, and at its foot is a horizontal scale, or a scale of widths B. Now, according to the
line on which the column stands, we find its apparent width marked on the scale. Thus take
the small square and circle at 15, without its column, or the broken column at 16; and note
that on each side of its centre O I have measured oa, ob, equal to spaces marked 3 on the
same horizontal in the scale B. Through these points a and b I have drawn lines towards
point of sight S. Through their intersections with diagonal e, which is directed to point of
distance, draw the farther and nearer sides of the square in which to describe the circle and
the cylinder or column thereon. I have made all the squares thus obtained in parallel
perspective, but they do not represent the bases of columns arranged in circles, which should
converge towards the centre, and I believe in some cases are modified in form to suit that
169
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
100/161

design.
FIG. 195.
CVII
COLUMNS AND CAPITALS
This figure shows the application of the square and diagonal in drawing and placing columns
in angular perspective.
FIG. 196.
CVIII
METHOD OF PERSPECTIVE EMPLOYED BY ARCHITECTS
The architects first draw a plan and elevation of the building to be put into perspective.
Having placed the plan at the required angle to the picture plane, they fix upon the point of
sight, and the distance from which the drawing is to be viewed. They then draw a line SP at
right angles to the picture plane VV·, which represents that distance so that P is the station-
point. The eye is generally considered to be the station-point, but when lines are drawn to
that point from the ground-plan, the station-point is placed on the ground, and is in fact the
trace or projection exactly under the point at which the eye is placed. From this station-point
P, draw lines PV and PV· parallel to the two sides of the plan ba and ad (which will be at right
angles to each other), and produce them to the horizon, which they will touch at points V and
[168]
170
171
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
101/161

V·. These points thus obtained will be the two vanishing points.
The next operation is to draw lines from the principal points of the plan to the station-point P,
such as bP, cP, dP, &c., and where these lines intersect the picture plane (VV· here
represents it as well as the horizon), drop perpendiculars b·B, aA, d·D, &c., to meet the
vanishing lines AV, AV·, which will determine the points A, B, C, D, 1, 2, 3, &c., and also the
perspective lengths of the sides of the figure AB, AD, and the divisions B, 1, 2, &c. Taking
the height of the figure AE from the elevation, we measure it on Aa; as in this instance A
touches the ground line, it may be used as a line of heights.
FIG. 197. A method of angular Perspective employed by architects.
[To face p. 171]
Larger View
I have here placed the perspective drawing under the ground plan to show the relation
between the two, and how the perspective is worked out, but the general practice is to find
the required measurements as here shown, to mark them on a straight edge of card or paper,
and transfer them to the paper on which the drawing is to be made.
This of course is the simplest form of a plan and elevation. It is easy to see, however, that we
could set out an elaborate building in the same way as this figure, but in that case we should
not place the drawing underneath the ground-plan, but transfer the measurements to another
sheet of paper as mentioned above.
CIX
THE OCTAGON
To draw the geometrical figure of an octagon contained in a
square, take half of the diagonal of that square as radius, and
from each corner describe a quarter circle. At the eight points
where they touch the sides of the square, draw the eight sides
of the octagon.
To put this into perspective take the base of the square AB and
172
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
102/161

FIG. 198.
FIG. 199.
thereon form the perspective square ABCD. From either
extremity of that base (say B) drop perpendicular BF, draw
diagonal AF, and then from B with radius BO, half that diagonal,
describe arc EOE. This will give us the measurement AE. Make
GB equal to AE. Then draw lines from G and E towards S, and
by means of the diagonals find the transverse lines KK, hh,
which will give us the eight points through which to draw the
octagon.
CX
HOW TO DRAW THE OCTAGON IN ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
Form square ABCD (new method), produce sides BC and AD to the horizon at V, and
produce VA to a· on base. Drop perpendicular from B to F the same length as a·B, and
proceed as in the previous figure to find the eight points on the oblique square through which
to draw the octagon.
FIG. 200.
It will be seen that this operation is very much the same as in parallel perspective, only we
make our measurements on the base line a·B as we cannot measure the vanishing line BA
otherwise.
CXI
HOW TO DRAW AN OCTAGONAL FIGURE IN ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
In this figure in angular perspective we do precisely the same thing as in the previous
problem, taking our measurements on the base line EB instead of on the vanishing line BA. If
we wish to raise a figure on this octagon the height of EG we form the vanishing scale EGO,
173
174
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
103/161

and from the eight points on the ground draw horizontals to EO and thus find all the points
that give us the perspective height of each angle of the octagonal figure.
FIG. 201.
CXII
HOW TO DRAW CONCENTRIC OCTAGONS, WITH ILLUSTRATION OF A WELL
The geometrical figure 202 A shows how by means of diagonals AC and BD and the radii
1 2 3, &c., we can obtain smaller octagons inside the larger ones. Note how these are
carried out in the second figure (202 B), and their application to this drawing of an octagonal
well on an octagonal base.
FIG. 202 A.
FIG. 202 B.
FIG. 203.
[175]
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
104/161

CXIII
A PAVEMENT COMPOSED OF OCTAGONS AND SMALL SQUARES
To draw a pavement with octagonal tiles we will begin with an octagon contained in a square
abcd. Produce diagonal ac to V. This will be the vanishing point for the sides of the small
squares directed towards it. The other sides are directed to an inaccessible point out of the
picture, but their directions are determined by the lines drawn from divisions on base to V2
(see back, Fig. 133).
FIG. 204.
I have drawn the lower figure to show how the squares which contain the octagons are
obtained by means of the diagonals, BD, AC, and the central line OV2. Given the square
ABCD. From D draw diagonal to G, then from C through centre o draw CE, and so on all the
way up the floor until sufficient are obtained. It is easy to see how other squares on each side
of these can be produced.
FIG. 205.
CXIV
THE HEXAGON
The hexagon is a six-sided figure which, if inscribed in a circle, will have each of its sides
equal to the radius of that circle (Fig. 206). If inscribed in a rectangle ABCD, that rectangle
will be equal in length to two sides of the hexagon or two radii of the circle, as EF, and its
width will be twice the height of an equilateral triangle mon.
176
177
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
105/161

FIG. 206.
FIG. 207.
To put the hexagon into perspective, draw base of quadrilateral AD, divide it into four equal
parts, and from each division draw lines to point of sight. From h drop perpendicular ho,
and form equilateral triangle mno. Take the height ho and measure it twice along the base
from A to 2. From 2 draw line to point of distance, or from 1 to ½ distance, and so find
length of side AB equal to A2. Draw BC, and EF through centre o·, and thus we have the six
points through which to draw the hexagon.
CXV
A PAVEMENT COMPOSED OF HEXAGONAL TILES
In drawing pavements, except in the cases of square tiles, it is necessary to make a plan of
the required design, as in this figure composed of hexagons. First set out the hexagon as at
A, then draw parallels 1 1, 2 2, &c., to mark the horizontal ends of the tiles and the
intermediate lines oo. Divide the base into the required number of parts, each equal to one
side of the hexagon, as 1, 2, 3, 4, &c.; from these draw perpendiculars as shown in the
figure, and also the diagonals passing through their intersections. Then mark with a strong line
the outlines of the hexagonals, shading some of them; but the figure explains itself.
FIG. 208.
It is easy to put all these parallels, perpendiculars, and diagonals into perspective, and then
to draw the hexagons.
178
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
106/161

First draw the hexagon on AD as in the previous figure, dividing AD into four, &c., set off
right and left spaces equal to these fourths, and from each division draw lines to point of
sight. Produce sides me, nf till they touch the horizon in points V, V·; these will be the two
vanishing points for all the sides of the tiles that are receding from us. From each division on
base draw lines to each of these vanishing points, then draw parallels through their
intersections as shown on the figure. Having all these guiding lines it will not be difficult to
draw as many hexagons as you please.
FIG. 209.
Note that the vanishing points should be at equal distances from S, also that the
parallelogram in which each tile is contained is oblong, and not square, as already pointed
out.
We have also made use of the triangle omn to ascertain the length and width of that oblong.
Another thing to note is that we have made use of the half distance, which enables us to
make our pavement look flat without spreading our lines outside the picture.
CXVI
A PAVEMENT OF HEXAGONAL TILES IN ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
This is more difficult than the previous figure, as we only make use of one vanishing point;
but it shows how much can be done by diagonals, as nearly all this pavement is drawn by
their aid. First make a geometrical plan A at the angle required. Then draw its perspective K.
Divide line 4b into four equal parts, and continue these measurements all along the base:
from each division draw lines to V, and draw the hexagon K. Having this one to start with we
produce its sides right and left, but first to the left to find point G, the vanishing point of the
diagonals. Those to the right, if produced far enough, would meet at a distant vanishing point
not in the picture. But the student should study this figure for himself, and refer back to Figs.
204 and 205.
179
[180]
181
182
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
107/161

FIG. 210.
CXVII
FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OF THE HEXAGON
To draw the hexagon in perspective we must first find the rectangle in which it is inscribed,
according to the view we take of it. That at A we have already drawn. We will now work
out that at B. Divide the base AD into four equal parts and transfer those measurements to
the perspective figure C, as at AD, measuring other equal spaces along the base. To find the
depth An of the rectangle, make DK equal to base of square. Draw KO to distance-point,
cutting DO at O, and thus find line LO. Draw diagonal Dn, and through its intersections with
the lines 1, 2, 3, 4 draw lines parallel to the base, and we shall thus have the framework, as it
were, by which to draw the pavement.
FIG. 211 A.
FIG. 211 B.
183
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
108/161

FIG. 213.
FIG. 212.
CXVIII
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HEXAGON IN ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
Given the rectangle ABCD in angular
perspective, produce side DA to E on base line.
Divide EB into four equal parts, and from each
division draw lines to vanishing point, then by
means of diagonals, &c., draw the hexagon.
In Fig. 214 we have first drawn a geometrical
plan, G, for the sake of clearness, but the one
above shows that this is not necessary.
FIG. 214.
To raise the hexagonal figure K we have made use of the vanishing scale O and the vanishing
point V. Another method could be used by drawing two hexagons one over the other at the
required height.
CXIX
APPLICATION OF THE HEXAGON TO DRAWING A KIOSK
This figure is built up from the hexagon standing on a rectangular base, from which we have
raised verticals, &c. Note how the jutting portions of the roof are drawn from o·. But the
figure explains itself, so there is no necessity to repeat descriptions already given in the
foregoing problems.
184
185
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
109/161

FIG. 216.
FIG. 215.
CXX
THE PENTAGON
The pentagon is a figure with five equal sides, and if
inscribed in a circle will touch its circumference at five
equidistant points. With any convenient radius describe
circle. From half this radius, marked 1, draw a line to
apex, marked 2. Again, with 1 as centre and 1 2 as
radius, describe arc 2 3. Now with 2 as centre and 2 3
as radius describe arc 3 4, which will cut the
circumference at point 4. Then line 2 4 will be one of
the sides of the pentagon, which we can measure round
the circle and so produce the required figure.
To put this pentagon into parallel perspective inscribe
the circle in which it is drawn in a square, and from its
five angles 4, 2, 4, &c., drop perpendiculars to base
and number them as in the figure. Then draw the perspective square (Fig. 217) and transfer
these measurements to its base. From these draw lines to point of sight, then by their aid and
the two diagonals proceed to construct the pentagon in the same way that we did the
triangles and other figures. Should it be required to place this pentagon in the opposite
position, then we can transfer our measurements to the far side of the square, as in Fig. 218.
186
187
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
110/161

FIG. 217.
FIG. 218.
Or if we wish to put it into angular perspective we adopt the same method as with the
hexagon, as shown at Fig. 219.
FIG. 219.
FIG. 220.
Another way of drawing a pentagon (Fig. 220) is to draw an isosceles triangle with an angle
of 36° at its apex, and from centre of each side of the triangle draw perpendiculars to meet
at o, which will be the centre of the circle in which it is inscribed. From this centre and with
radius OA describe circle A 3 2, &c. Take base of triangle 1 2, measure it round the circle,
and so find the five points through which to draw the pentagon. The angles at 1 2 will each
be 72°, double that at A, which is 36°.
CXXI
THE PYRAMID
Nothing can be more simple than to put a pyramid into perspective. Given the base (abc),
raise from its centre a perpendicular (OP) of the required height, then draw lines from the
corners of that base to a point P on the vertical line, and the thing is done. These pyramids
can be used in drawing roofs, steeples, &c. The cone is drawn in the same way, so also is
any other figure, whether octagonal, hexangular, triangular, &c.
188
189
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
111/161

FIG. 221.
FIG. 222.
FIG. 223.
CXXII
THE GREAT PYRAMID
This enormous structure stands on a square base of over thirteen acres, each side of which
measures, or did measure, 764 feet. Its original height was 480 feet, each side being an
equilateral triangle. Let us see how we can draw this gigantic mass on our little sheet of
paper.
In the first place, to take it all in at one view we must put it very far back, and in the second
the horizon must be so low down that we cannot draw the square base of thirteen acres on
the perspective plane, that is on the ground, so we must draw it in the air, and also to a very
small scale.
FIG. 224.
Divide the base AB into ten equal parts, and suppose each of these parts to measure 10 feet,
S, the point of sight, is placed on the left of the picture near the side, in order that we may get
a long line of distance, S ½ D; but even this line is only half the distance we require. Let us
therefore take the 16th distance, as shown in our previous illustration of the lighthouse (Fig.
92), which enables us to measure sixteen times the length of base AB, or 1,600 feet. The
base ef of the pyramid is 1,600 feet from the base line of the picture, and is, according to
our 10-foot scale, 764 feet long.
The next thing to consider is the height of the pyramid. We make a scale to the right of the
picture measuring 50 feet from B to 50 at point where BP intersects base of pyramid, raise
191
[190]
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
112/161

perpendicular CG and thereon measure 480 feet. As we cannot obtain a palpable square on
the ground, let us draw one 480 feet above the ground. From e and f raise verticals eM and
fN, making them equal to perpendicular G, and draw line MN, which will be the same length
as base, or 764 feet. On this line form square MNK parallel to the perspective plane, find its
centre O· by means of diagonals, and O· will be the central height of the pyramid and exactly
over the centre of the base. From this point O· draw sloping lines O·f, O·e, O·Y, &c., and the
figure is complete.
Note the way in which we find the measurements on base of pyramid and on line MN. By
drawing AS and BS to point of sight we find Te, which measures 100 feet at a distance of
1,600 feet. We mark off seven of these lengths, and an additional 64 feet by the scale, and
so obtain the required length. The position of the third corner of the base is found by
dropping a perpendicular from K, till it meets the line eS.
Another thing to note is that the side of the pyramid that faces us, although an equilateral
triangle, does not appear so, as its top angle is 382 feet farther off than its base owing to its
leaning position.
CXXIII
THE PYRAMID IN ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
In order to show the working of this proposition I have taken a much higher horizon, which
immediately detracts from the impression of the bigness of the pyramid.
FIG. 225.
We proceed to make our ground-plan abcd high above the horizon instead of below it,
drawing first the parallel square and then the oblique one. From all the principal points drop
perpendiculars to the ground and thus find the points through which to draw the base of the
pyramid. Find centres OO· and decide upon the height OP. Draw the sloping lines from P to
the corners of the base, and the figure is complete.
CXXIV
TO DIVIDE THE SIDES OF THE PYRAMID HORIZONTALLY
Having raised the pyramid on a given oblique square, divide the vertical line OP into the
required number of parts. From A through C draw AG to horizon, which gives us G, the
192
193
194
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
113/161

vanishing point of all the diagonals of squares parallel to and at the same angle as ABCD.
From G draw lines through the divisions 2, 3, &c., on OP cutting the lines PA and PC, thus
dividing them into the required parts. Through the points thus found draw from V all those
sides of the squares that have V for their vanishing point, as ab, cd, &c. Then join bd, ac,
and the rest, and thus make the horizontal divisions required.
FIG. 226.
FIG. 227.
The same method will apply to drawing steps, square blocks, &c., as shown in Fig. 227,
which is at the same angle as the above.
CXXV
OF ROOFS
The pyramidal roof (Fig. 228) is so simple that it explains itself. The chief thing to be noted is
the way in which the diagonals are produced beyond the square of the walls, to give the
width of the eaves, according to their position.
FIG. 228.
FIG. 229.
Another form of the pyramidal roof is here given (Fig. 229). First draw the cube edcba at
195
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
114/161

the required height, and on the side facing us, adcb, draw triangle K, which represents the
end of a gable roof. Then draw similar triangles on the other sides of the cube (see Fig. 159,
LXXXIV). Join the opposite triangles at the apex, and thus form two gable roofs crossing
each other at right angles. From o, centre of base of cube, raise vertical OP, and then from P
draw sloping lines to each corner of base a, b, &c., and by means of central lines drawn
from P to half base, find the points where the gable roofs intersect the central spire or
pyramid. Any other proportions can be obtained by adding to or altering the cube.
FIG. 230.
To draw a sloping or hip-roof which falls back at each end we must first draw its base,
CBDA (Fig. 230). Having found the centre O and central line SP, and how far the roof is to
fall back at each end, namely the distance Pm, draw horizontal line RB through m. Then from
B through O draw diagonal BA, and from A draw horizontal AD, which gives us point n.
From these two points m and n raise perpendiculars the height required for the roof, and
from these draw sloping lines to the corners of the base. Join ef, that is, draw the top line of
the roof, which completes it. Fig. 231 shows a plan or bird's-eye view of the roof and the
diagonal AB passing through centre O. But there are so many varieties of roofs they would
take almost a book to themselves to illustrate them, especially the cottages and farm-
buildings, barns, &c., besides churches, old mansions, and others. There is also such
irregularity about some of them that perspective rules, beyond those few here given, are of
very little use. So that the best thing for an artist to do is to sketch them from the real
whenever he has an opportunity.
FIG. 231.
CXXVI
OF ARCHES, ARCADES, BRIDGES, &C.
For an arcade or cloister (Fig. 232) first set up the outer frame ABCD according to the
proportions required. For round arches the height may be twice that of the base, varying to
one and a half. In Gothic arches the height may be about three times the width, all of which
proportions are chosen to suit the different purposes and effects required. Divide the base
AB into the desired number of parts, 8, 10, 12, &c., each part representing 1 foot. (In this
case the base is 10 feet and the horizon 5 feet.) Set out floor by means of ¼ distance. Divide
196
197
199
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
115/161

it into squares of 1 foot, so that there will be 8 feet between each column or pilaster,
supposing we make them to stand on a square foot. Draw the first archway EKF facing us,
and its inner semicircle gh, with also its thickness or depth of 1 foot. Draw the span of the
archway EF, then central line PO to point of sight. Proceed to raise as many other arches as
required at the given distances. The intersections of the central line with the chords mn, &c.,
will give the centres from which to describe the semicircles.
FIG. 232.
CXXVII
OUTLINE OF AN ARCADE WITH SEMICIRCULAR ARCHES
This is to show the method of drawing a long passage, corridor, or cloister with arches and
columns at equal distances, and is worked in the same way as the previous figure, using ¼
distance and ¼ base. The floor consists of five squares; the semicircles of the arches are
described from the numbered points on the central line OS, where it intersects the chords of
the arches.
[198]
200
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
116/161

FIG. 233.
CXXVIII
SEMICIRCULAR ARCHES ON A RETREATING PLANE
First draw perspective square abcd. Let ae· be the height of the figure. Draw ae·f·b and
proceed with the rest of the outline. To draw the arches begin with the one facing us, Eo·F
enclosed in the quadrangle Ee·f·F. With centre O describe the semicircle and across it draw
the diagonals e·F, Ef·, and through nn, where these lines intersect the semicircle, draw
horizontal KK and also KS to point of sight. It will be seen that the half-squares at the side are
the same size in perspective as the one facing us, and we carry out in them much the same
operation; that is, we draw the diagonals, find the point O, and the points nn, &c., through
which to draw our arches. See perspective of the circle (Fig. 165).
FIG. 234.
If more points are required an additional diagonal from O to K may be used, as shown in the
figure, which perhaps explains itself. The method is very old and very simple, and of course
can be applied to any kind of arch, pointed or stunted, as in this drawing of a pointed arch
(Fig. 235).
201
202
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
117/161

FIG. 235.
CXXIX
AN ARCADE IN ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
First draw the perspective square ABCD at the angle required, by new method. Produce
sides AD and BC to V. Draw diagonal BD and produce to point G, from whence we draw the
other diagonals to cfh. Make spaces 1, 2, 3, &c., on base line equal to B 1 to obtain sides
of squares. Raise vertical BM the height required. Produce DA to O on base line, and from O
raise vertical OP equal to BM. This line enables us to dispense with the long vanishing point
to the left; its working has been explained at Fig. 131. From P draw PRV to vanishing point V,
which will intersect vertical AR at R. Join MR, and this line, if produced, would meet the
horizon at the other vanishing point. In like manner make O2 equal to B2·. From 2 draw line
to V, and at 2, its intersection with AR, draw line 2 2, which will also meet the horizon at the
other vanishing point. By means of the quarter-circle A we can obtain the points through
which to draw the semicircular arches in the same way as in the previous figure.
FIG. 236.
CXXX
A VAULTED CEILING
From the square ceiling ABCD we have, as it were, suspended two arches from the two
diagonals DB, AC, which spring from the four corners of the square EFGH, just underneath it.
203
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
118/161

The curves of these arches, which are not semicircular but elongated, are obtained by means
of the vanishing scales mS, nS. Take any two convenient points P, R, on each side of the
semicircle, and raise verticals Pm, Rn to AB, and on these verticals form the scales. Where
mS and nS cut the diagonal AC drop perpendiculars to meet the lower line of the scale at
points 1, 2. On the other side, using the other scales, we have dropped perpendiculars in the
same way from the diagonal to 3, 4. These points, together with EOG, enable us to trace the
curve E 1 2 O 3 4 G. We draw the arch under the other diagonal in precisely the same way.
FIG. 237.
FIG. 238.
The reason for thus proceeding is that the cross arches, although elongated, hang from their
diagonals just as the semicircular arch EKF hangs from AB, and the lines mn, touching the
circle at PR, are represented by 1, 2, hanging from the diagonal AC.
Figure 238, which is practically the same as the preceding only differently shaded, is drawn
in the following manner. Draw arch EGF facing us, and proceed with the rest of the corridor,
but first finding the flat ceiling above the square on the ground ABcd. Draw diagonals ac, bd,
and the curves pending from them. But we no longer see the clear arch as in the other
drawing, for the spaces between the curves are filled in and arched across.
CXXXI
A CLOISTER, FROM A PHOTOGRAPH
This drawing of a cloister from a photograph shows the correctness of our perspective, and
the manner of applying it to practical work.
204
205
206
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
119/161

FIG. 239.
CXXXII
THE LOW OR ELLIPTICAL ARCH
Let AB be the span of the arch and Oh its height. From centre O, with OA, or half the span,
for radius, describe outer semicircle. From same centre and oh for radius describe the inner
semicircle. Divide outer circle into a convenient number of parts, 1, 2, 3, &c., to which draw
radii from centre O. From each division drop perpendiculars. Where the radii intersect the
inner circle, as at gkmo, draw horizontals op, mn, kj, &c., and through their intersections
with the perpendiculars f, j, n, p, draw the curve of the flattened arch. Transfer this to the
lower figure, and proceed to draw the tunnel. Note how the vanishing scale is formed on
either side by horizontals ba, fe, &c., which enable us to make the distant arches similar to
the near ones.
FIG. 240.
207
208
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
120/161

FIG. 241.
CXXXIII
OPENING OR ARCHED WINDOW IN A VAULT
First draw the vault AEB. To introduce the window K, the upper part of which follows the
form of the vault, we first decide on its width, which is mn, and its height from floor Ba. On
line Ba at the side of the arch form scales aa·S, bb·S, &c. Raise the semicircular arch K,
shown by a dotted line. The scale at the side will give the lengths aa·, bb·, &c., from
different parts of this dotted arch to corresponding points in the curved archway or window
required.
FIG. 242.
Note that to obtain the width of the window K we have used the diagonals on the floor and
width m n on base. This method of measurement is explained at Fig. 144, and is of ready
application in a case of this kind.
CXXXIV
STAIRS, STEPS, &C.
Having decided upon the incline or angle, such as CBA, at which the steps are to be placed,
and the height Bm of each step, draw mn to CB, which will give the width. Then measure
along base AB this width equal to DB, which will give that for all the other steps. Obtain
length BF of steps, and draw EF parallel to CB. These lines will aid in securing the exactness
of the figure.
FIG. 243.
FIG. 244.
209
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
121/161

CXXXV
STEPS, FRONT VIEW
In this figure the height of each step is measured on the vertical line AB (this line is sometimes
called the line of heights), and their depth is found by diagonals drawn to the point of
distance D. The rest of the figure explains itself.
FIG. 245.
CXXXVI
SQUARE STEPS
Draw first step ABEF and its two diagonals. Raise vertical AH, and measure thereon the
required height of each step, and thus form scale. Let the second step CD be less all round
than the first by Ao or Bo. Draw oC till it cuts the diagonal, and proceed to draw the second
step, guided by the diagonals and taking its height from the scale as shown. Draw the third
step in the same way.
FIG. 246.
CXXXVII
TO DIVIDE AN INCLINED PLANE INTO EQUAL PARTS—SUCH AS A LADDER PLACED AGAINST A
WALL
Divide the vertical EC into the required number of parts, and draw lines from point of sight S
through these divisions 1, 2, 3, &c., cutting the line AC at 1, 2, 3, &c. Draw parallels to AB,
such as mn, from AC to BD, which will represent the steps of the ladder.
210
211
212
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
122/161

FIG. 247.
CXXXVIII
STEPS AND THE INCLINED PLANE
In Fig. 248 we treat a flight of steps as if it were an inclined plane. Draw the first and second
steps as in Fig. 245. Then through 1, 2, draw 1V, AV to V, the vanishing point on the vertical
line SV. These two lines and the corresponding ones at BV will form a kind of vanishing scale,
giving the height of each step as we ascend. It is especially useful when we pass the
horizontal line and we no longer see the upper surface of the step, the scale on the right
showing us how to proceed in that case.
FIG. 248.
In Fig. 249 we have an example of steps ascending and descending. First set out the
ground-plan, and find its vanishing point S (point of sight). Through S draw vertical BA, and
make SA equal to SB. Set out the first step CD. Draw EA, CA, DA, and GA, for the ascending
guiding lines. Complete the steps facing us, at central line OO. Then draw guiding line FB for
the descending steps (see Rule 8).
213
214
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
123/161

FIG. 249.
CXXXIX
STEPS IN ANGULAR PERSPECTIVE
First draw the base ABCD (Fig. 251) at the required angle by the new method (Fig. 250).
Produce BC to the horizon, and thus find vanishing point V. At this point raise vertical VV·.
Construct first step AB, refer its height at B to line of heights hI on left, and thus obtain height
of step at A. Draw lines from A and F to V·. From n draw diagonal through O to G. Raise
vertical at O to represent the height of the next step, its height being determined by the scale
of heights at the side. From A and F draw lines to V·, and also similar lines from B, which will
serve as guiding lines to determine the height of the steps at either end as we raise them to
the required number.
FIG. 250.
FIG. 251.
CXL
215
216
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
124/161

A STEP LADDER AT AN ANGLE
First draw the ground-plan G at the required angle, using vanishing and measuring points.
Find the height hH, and width at top HH·, and draw the sides HA and H·E. Note that AE is
wider than HH·, and also that the back legs are not at the same angle as the front ones, and
that they overlap them. From E raise vertical EF, and divide into as many parts as you require
rounds to the ladder. From these divisions draw lines 1 1, 2 2, &c., towards the other
vanishing point (not in the picture), but having obtained their direction from the ground-plan
in perspective at line Ee, you may set up a second vertical ef at any point on Ee and divide it
into the same number of parts, which will be in proportion to those on EF, and you will obtain
the same result by drawing lines from the divisions on EF to those on ef as in drawing them to
the vanishing point.
FIG. 252.
CXLI
SQUARE STEPS PLACED OVER EACH OTHER
This figure shows the other method of drawing steps, which is simple enough if we have
sufficient room for our vanishing points.
FIG. 253.
The manner of working it is shown at Fig. 124.
CXLII
STEPS AND A DOUBLE CROSS DRAWN BY MEANS OF DIAGONALS AND ONE VANISHING POINT
217
218
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
125/161

Although in this figure we have taken a longer distance-point than in the previous one, we are
able to draw it all within the page.
FIG. 254.
Begin by setting out the square base at the angle required. Find point G by means of
diagonals, and produce AB to V, &c. Mark height of step Ao, and proceed to draw the
steps as already shown. Then by the diagonals and measurements on base draw the second
step and the square inside it on which to stand the foot of the cross. To draw the cross, raise
verticals from the four corners of its base, and a line K from its centre. Through any point on
this central line, if we draw a diagonal from point G we cut the two opposite verticals of the
shaft at mn (see Fig. 255), and by means of the vanishing point V we cut the other two
verticals at the opposite corners and thus obtain the four points through which to draw the
other sides of the square, which go to the distant or inaccessible vanishing point. It will be
seen by carefully examining the figure that by this means we are enabled to draw the double
cross standing on its steps.
FIG. 255.
CXLIII
A STAIRCASE LEADING TO A GALLERY
In this figure we have made use of the devices already set forth in the foregoing figures of
steps, &c., such as the side scale on the left of the figure to ascertain the height of the steps,
the double lines drawn to the high vanishing point of the inclined plane, and so on; but the
principal use of this diagram is to show on the perspective plane, which as it were runs under
the stairs, the trace or projection of the flights of steps, the landings and positions of other
objects, which will be found very useful in placing figures in a composition of this kind. It will
be seen that these underneath measurements, so to speak, are obtained by the half-distance.
219
221
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
126/161

FIG. 256.
CXLIV
WINDING STAIRS IN A SQUARE SHAFT
Draw square ABCD in parallel perspective. Divide each side into four, and raise verticals
from each division. These verticals will mark the positions of the steps on each wall, four in
number. From centre O raise vertical OP, around which the steps are to wind. Let AF be the
height of each step. Form scale AB, which will give the height of each step according to its
position. Thus at mn we find the height at the centre of the square, so if we transfer this
measurement to the central line OP and repeat it upwards, say to fourteen, then we have the
height of each step on the line where they all meet. Starting then with the first on the right,
draw the rectangle gD1f, the height of AF, then draw to the central line go, f1, and 1 1, and
thus complete the first step. On DE, measure heights equal to D 1. Draw 2 2 towards central
line, and 2n towards point of sight till it meets the second vertical nK. Then draw n2 to
centre, and so complete the second step. From 3 draw 3a to third vertical, from 4 to fourth,
and so on, thus obtaining the height of each ascending step on the wall to the right,
completing them in the same way as numbers 1 and 2, when we come to the sixth step, the
other end of which is against the wall opposite to us. Steps 6, 7, 8, 9 are all on this wall, and
are therefore equal in height all along, as they are equally distant. Step 10 is turned towards
us, and abuts on the wall to our left; its measurement is taken on the scale AB just underneath
it, and on the same line to which it is drawn. Step 11 is just over the centre of base mo, and
is therefore parallel to it, and its height is mn. The widths of steps 12 and 13 seem gradually
to increase as they come towards us, and as they rise above the horizon we begin to see
underneath them. Steps 13, 14, 15, 16 are against the wall on this side of the picture, which
we may suppose has been removed to show the working of the drawing, or they might be an
open flight as we sometimes see in shops and galleries, although in that case they are
[220]
222
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
127/161

generally enclosed in a cylindrical shaft.
FIG. 257.
CXLV
WINDING STAIRS IN A CYLINDRICAL SHAFT
First draw the circular base CD. Divide the circumference into equal parts, according to the
number of steps in a complete round, say twelve. Form scale ASF and the larger scale ASB,
on which is shown the perspective measurements of the steps according to their positions;
raise verticals such as ef, Gh, &c. From divisions on circumference measure out the central
line OP, as in the other figure, and find the heights of the steps 1, 2, 3, 4, &c., by the
corresponding numbers in the large scale to the left; then proceed in much the same way as
in the previous figure. Note the central column OP cuts off a small portion of the steps at that
end.
[223]
225
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
128/161

FIG. 258.
In ordinary cases only a small portion of a winding staircase is actually seen, as in this sketch.
FIG. 259. Sketch of Courtyard in Toledo.
CXLVI
[224]
226
227
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
129/161

OF THE CYLINDRICAL PICTURE OR DIORAMA
Although illusion is by no means the highest form of art, there is no picture painted on a flat
surface that gives such a wonderful appearance of truth as that painted on a cylindrical
canvas, such as those panoramas of ‘Paris during the Siege’, exhibited some years ago; ‘The
Battle of Trafalgar’, only lately shown at Earl's Court; and many others. In these pictures the
spectator is in the centre of a cylinder, and although he turns round to look at the scene the
point of sight is always in front of him, or nearly so. I believe on the canvas these points are
from 12 to 16 feet apart.
FIG. 260.
The reason of this look of truth may be explained thus. If we place three globes of equal size
in a straight line, and trace their apparent widths on to a straight transparent plane, those at
the sides, as a and b, will appear much wider than the centre one at c. Whereas, if we trace
them on a semicircular glass they will appear very nearly equal and, of the three, the central
one c will be rather the largest, as may be seen by this figure.
We must remember that, in the first case, when we are looking at a globe or a circle, the
visual rays form a cone, with a globe at its base. If these three cones are intersected by a
straight glass GG, and looked at from point S, the intersection of C will be a circle, as the cone
is cut straight across. The other two being intersected at an angle, will each be an ellipse. At
the same time, if we look at them from the station point, with one eye only, then the three
globes (or tracings of them) will appear equal and perfectly round.
Of course the cylindrical canvas is necessary for panoramas; but we have, as a rule, to paint
our pictures and wall-decorations on flat surfaces, and therefore must adapt our work to
these conditions.
In all cases the artist must exercise his own judgement both in the arrangement of his design
and the execution of the work, for there is perspective even in the touch—a painting to be
looked at from a distance requires a bold and broad handling; in small cabinet pictures that
we live with in our own rooms we look for the exquisite workmanship of the best masters.
228
229
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
130/161

BOOK FOURTH
CXLVII
THE PERSPECTIVE OF CAST SHADOWS
There is a pretty story of two lovers which is sometimes told as the origin of art; at all events,
I may tell it here as the origin of sciagraphy. A young shepherd was in love with the daughter
of a potter, but it so happened that they had to part, and were passing their last evening
together, when the girl, seeing the shadow of her lover's profile cast from a lamp on to some
wet plaster or on the wall, took a metal point, perhaps some sort of iron needle, and traced
the outline of the face she loved on to the plaster, following carefully the outline of the
features, being naturally anxious to make it as like as possible. The old potter, the father of
the girl, was so struck with it that he began to ornament his wares by similar devices, which
gave them increased value by the novelty and beauty thus imparted to them.
Here then we have a very good illustration of our present subject and its three elements.
First, the light shining on the wall; second, the wall or the plane of projection, or plane of
shade; and third, the intervening object, which receives as much light on itself as it deprives
the wall of. So that the dark portion thus caused on the plane of shade is the cast shadow of
the intervening object.
We have to consider two sorts of shadows: those cast by a luminary a long way off, such as
the sun; and those cast by artificial light, such as a lamp or candle, which is more or less
close to the object. In the first case there is no perceptible divergence of rays, and the
outlines of the sides of the shadows of regular objects, as cubes, posts, &c., will be parallel.
In the second case, the rays diverge according to the nearness of the light, and consequently
the lines of the shadows, instead of being parallel, are spread out.
CXLVIII
THE TWO KINDS OF SHADOWS
In Figs. 261 and 262 is seen the shadow cast by the sun by parallel rays.
FIG. 261.
FIG. 262.
Fig. 263 shows the shadows cast by a candle or lamp, where the rays diverge from the point
of light to meet corresponding diverging lines which start from the foot of the luminary on the
ground.
230
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
131/161

FIG. 263.
The simple principle of cast shadows is that the rays coming from the point of light or
luminary pass over the top of the intervening object which casts the shadow on to the plane
of shade to meet the horizontal trace of those rays on that plane, or the lines of light proceed
from the point of light, and the lines of the shadow are drawn from the foot or trace of the
point of light.
Fig. 264 shows this in profile. Here the sun is on the same plane as the picture, and the
shadow is cast sideways.
FIG. 264.
FIG. 265.
Fig. 265 shows the same thing, but the sun being behind the object, casts its shadow
forwards. Although the lines of light are parallel, they are subject to the laws of perspective,
and are therefore drawn from their respective vanishing points.
CXLIX
SHADOWS CAST BY THE SUN
Owing to the great distance of the sun, we have to consider the rays of light proceeding from
it as parallel, and therefore subject to the same laws as other parallel lines in perspective, as
already noted. And for the same reason we have to place the foot of the luminary on the
231
232
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
132/161

horizon. It is important to remember this, as these two things make the difference between
shadows cast by the sun and those cast by artificial light.
The sun has three principal positions in relation to the picture. In the first case it is supposed
to be in the same plane either to the right or to the left, and in that case the shadows will be
parallel with the base of the picture. In the second position it is on the other side of it, or
facing the spectator, when the shadows of objects will be thrown forwards or towards him.
In the third, the sun is in front of the picture, and behind the spectator, so that the shadows
are thrown in the opposite direction, or towards the horizon, the objects themselves being in
full light.
CL
THE SUN IN THE SAME PLANE AS THE PICTURE
Besides being in the same plane, the sun in this figure is at an angle of 45° to the horizon,
consequently the shadows will be the same length as the figures that cast them are high. Note
that the shadow of step No. 1 is cast upon step No. 2, and that of No. 2 on No. 3, the top
of each of these becoming a plane of shade.
FIG. 266.
FIG. 267.
When the shadow of an object such as A, Fig. 268, which would fall upon the plane, is
interrupted by another object B, then the outline of the shadow is still drawn on the plane, but
being interrupted by the surface B at C, the shadow runs up that plane till it meets the rays
1, 2, which define the shadow on plane B. This is an important point, but is quite explained
by the figure.
FIG. 268.
Although we have said that the rays pass over the top of the object casting the shadow, in
the case of an archway or similar figure they pass underneath it; but the same principle holds
good, that is, we draw lines from the guiding points in the arch, 1, 2, 3, &c., at the same
angle of 45° to meet the traces of those rays on the plane of shade, and so get the shadow of
the archway, as here shown.
233
234
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
133/161

FIG. 269.
CLI
THE SUN BEHIND THE PICTURE
We have seen that when the sun's altitude is at an angle of 45° the shadows on the horizontal
plane are the same length as the height of the objects that cast them. Here (Fig. 270), the sun
still being at 45° altitude, although behind the picture, and consequently throwing the shadow
of B forwards, that shadow must be the same length as the height of cube B, which will be
seen is the case, for the shadow C is a square in perspective.
FIG. 270.
To find the angle of altitude and the angle of the sun to the picture, we must first find the
distance of the spectator from the foot of the luminary.
From point of sight S (Fig. 270) drop perpendicular to T, the
[235]
236
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
134/161

FIG. 271.
station-point. From T draw TF at 45° to meet horizon at F.
With radius FT make FO equal to it. Then O is the position of
the spectator. From F raise vertical FL, and from O draw a
line at 45° to meet FL at L, which is the luminary at an altitude
of 45°, and at an angle of 45° to the picture.
Fig. 272 is similar to the foregoing, only the angles of altitude
and of the sun to the picture are altered.
FIG. 272.
Note.—The sun being at 50° to the picture instead of 45°, is nearer the point of sight; at 90°
it would be exactly opposite the spectator, and so on. Again, the elevation being less (40°
instead of 45°) the shadow is longer. Owing to the changed position of the sun two sides of
the cube throw a shadow. Note also that the outlines of the shadow, 1 2, 2 3, are drawn to
the same vanishing points as the cube itself.
It will not be necessary to mark the angles each time we make a drawing, as it must be seen
we can place the luminary in any position that suits our convenience.
CLII
SUN BEHIND THE PICTURE, SHADOWS THROWN ON A WALL
As here we change the conditions we must also change our procedure. An upright wall now
becomes the plane of shade, therefore as the principle of shadows must always remain the
same we have to change the relative positions of the luminary and the foot thereof.
[237]
238
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
135/161

At S (point of sight) raise vertical SF·, making it equal to fL. F· becomes the foot of the
luminary, whilst the luminary itself still remains at L.
FIG. 273.
We have but to turn this page half round and look at it from the right, and we shall see that
SF· becomes as it were the horizontal line. The luminary L is at the right side of point S
instead of the left, and the foot thereof is, as before, the trace of the luminary, as it is just
underneath it. We shall also see that by proceeding as in previous figures we obtain the same
results on the wall as we did on the horizontal plane. Fig. B being on the horizontal plane is
treated as already shown. The steps have their shadows partly on the wall and partly on the
horizontal plane, so that the shadows on the wall are outlined from F· and those on the
ground from f. Note shadow of roof A, and how the line drawn from F· through A is met by
the line drawn from the luminary L, at the point P, and how the lower line of the shadow is
directed to point of sight S.
Fig. 274 is a larger drawing of the steps, &c., in further illustration of the above.
FIG. 274.
239
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
136/161

FIG. 275.
FIG. 277.
CLIII
SUN BEHIND THE PICTURE THROWING SHADOW ON AN INCLINED PLANE
The vanishing point of the shadows on an
inclined plane is on a vertical dropped from the
luminary to a point (F) on a level with the
vanishing point (P) of that inclined plane. Thus P
is the vanishing point of the inclined plane K.
Draw horizontal PF to meet fL (the line drawn
from the luminary to the horizon). Then F will be
the vanishing point of the shadows on the
inclined plane. To find the shadow of M draw
lines from F through the base eg to cd. From
luminary L draw lines through ab, also to cd,
where they will meet those drawn from F. Draw
CD, which determines the length of the shadow
egcd.
CLIV
THE SUN IN FRONT OF THE PICTURE
When the sun is in front of the picture we have exactly the
opposite effect to that we have just been studying. The
shadows, instead of coming towards us, are retreating from
us, and the objects throwing them are in full light,
consequently we have to reverse our treatment. Let us
suppose the sun to be placed above the horizon at L·, on the
right of the picture and behind the spectator (Fig. 276). If we
transport the length L·f· to the opposite side and draw the
vertical downwards from the horizon, as at FL, we can then
suppose point L to be exactly opposite the sun, and if we
make that the vanishing point for the sun's rays we shall find that we obtain precisely the
same result. As in Fig. 277, if we wish to find the length of C, which we may suppose to be
the shadow of P, we can either draw a line from A through O to B, or from B through O to A,
for the result is the same. And as we cannot make use of a point that is behind us and out of
the picture, we have to resort to this very ingenious device.
240
241
242
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
137/161

FIG. 276.
In Fig. 276 we draw lines L1, L2, L3 from the luminary to the top of the object to meet those
drawn from the foot F, namely F1, F2, F3, in the same way as in the figures we have already
drawn.
Fig. 278 gives further illustration of this problem.
FIG. 278.
CLV
THE SHADOW OF AN INCLINED PLANE
The two portions of this inclined plane which cast the shadow are first the side fbd, and
second the farther end abcd. The points we have to find are the shadows of a and b. From
luminary L draw La, Lb, and from F, the foot, draw Fc, Fd. The intersection of these lines will
be at a·b·. If we join fb· and db· we have the shadow of the side fbd, and if we join ca· and
a·b· we have the shadow of abcd, which together form that of the figure.
243
244
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
138/161

FIG. 279.
CLVI
SHADOW ON A ROOF OR INCLINED PLANE
To draw the shadow of the figure M on the inclined plane K (or a chimney on a roof). First
find the vanishing point P of the inclined plane and draw horizontal PF to meet vertical raised
from L, the luminary. Then F will be the vanishing point of the shadow. From L draw L1, L2,
L3 to top of figure M, and from the base of M draw 1F, 2F, 3F to F, the vanishing point of the
shadow. The intersections of these lines at 1, 2, 3 on K will determine the length and form of
the shadow.
FIG. 280.
CLVII
TO FIND THE SHADOW OF A PROJECTION OR BALCONY ON A WALL
To find the shadow of the object K on the wall W, drop verticals OO till they meet the base
line B·B· of the wall. Then from the point of sight S draw lines through OO, also drop verticals
Dd·, Cc·, to meet these lines in d·c·; draw c·F and d·F to foot of luminary. From the points xx
where these lines cut the base B raise perpendiculars xa·, xb·. From D, A, and B draw lines
to the luminary L. These lines or rays intersecting the verticals raised from xx at a·b· will give
the respective points of the shadow.
245
246
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
139/161

FIG. 281.
The shadow of the eave of a roof can be obtained in the same way. Take any point thereon,
mark its trace on the ground, and then proceed as above.
CLVIII
SHADOW ON A RETREATING WALL, SUN IN FRONT
Let L be the luminary. Raise vertical LF. F will be the vanishing point of the shadows on the
ground. Draw Lf· parallel to FS. Drop Sf· from point of sight; f· (so found) is the vanishing
point of the shadows on the wall. For shadow of roof draw LE and f·B, giving us e, the
shadow of E. Join Be, &c., and so draw shadow of eave of roof.
For shadow of K draw lines from luminary L to meet those from f· the foot, &c.
The shadow of D over the door is found in a similar way to that of the roof.
247
248
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
140/161

FIG. 282.
Figure 283 shows how the shadow of the old man in the preceding drawing is found.
FIG. 283.
CLIX
SHADOW OF AN ARCH, SUN IN FRONT
Having drawn the arch, divide it into a certain number of parts, say five. From these divisions
drop perpendiculars to base line. From divisions on AB draw lines to F the foot, and from
those on the semicircle draw lines to L the luminary. Their intersections will give the points
through which to draw the shadow of the arch.
FIG. 284.
CLX
SHADOW IN A NICHE OR RECESS
In this figure a similar method to that just explained is adopted. Drop perpendiculars from the
divisions of the arch 1 2 3 to the base. From the foot of each draw 1S, 2S, 3S to foot of
luminary S, and from the top of each, A 1 2 3 B, draw lines to L as before. Where the former
intersect the curve on the floor of the niche raise verticals to meet the latter at P 1 2 B, &c.
These points will indicate about the position of the shadow; but the niche being semicircular
and domed at the top the shadow gradually loses itself in a gradated and somewhat
serpentine half-tone.
249
250
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
141/161

FIG. 285.
CLXI
SHADOW IN AN ARCHED DOORWAY
This is so similar to the last figure in many respects that I need not repeat a description of the
manner in which it is done. And surely an artist after making a few sketches from the actual
thing will hardly require all this machinery to draw a simple shadow.
FIG. 286.
251
252
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
142/161

CLXII
SHADOWS PRODUCED BY ARTIFICIAL LIGHT
Shadows thrown by artificial light, such as a candle or lamp, are found by drawing lines from
the seat of the luminary through the feet of the objects to meet lines representing rays of light
drawn from the luminary itself over the tops or the corners of the objects; very much as in
the cases of sun-shadows, but with this difference, that whereas the foot of the luminary in
this latter case is supposed to be on the horizon an infinite distance away, the foot in the case
of a lamp or candle may be on the floor or on a table close to us. First draw the table and
chair, &c. (Fig. 287), and let L be the luminary. For objects on the table such as K the foot
will be at f on the table. For the shadows on the floor, of the chair and table itself, we must
find the foot of the luminary on the floor. Draw So, find trace of the edge of the table, drop
vertical oP, draw PS to point of sight, drop vertical from foot of candlestick to meet PS in F.
Then F is the foot of the luminary on the floor. From this point draw lines through the feet or
traces of objects such as the corners of the table, &c., to meet other lines drawn from the
point of light, and so obtain the shadow.
FIG. 287.
CLXIII
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON REAL LIGHT AND SHADE
Although the figures we have been drawing show the principles on which sun-shadows are
shaped, still there are so many more laws to be considered in the great art of light and shade
that it is better to observe them in Nature herself or under the teaching of the real sun. In the
study of a kitchen and scullery in an old house in Toledo (Fig. 288) we have an example of
the many things to be considered besides the mere shapes of shadows of regular forms. It
will be seen that the light is dispersed in all directions, and although there is a good deal of
half-shade there are scarcely any cast shadows except on the floor; but the light on the white
walls in the outside gallery is so reflected into the cast shadows that they are extremely faint.
The luminosity of this part of the sketch is greatly enhanced by the contrast of the dark legs
of the bench and the shadows in the roof. The warm glow of all this portion is contrasted by
the grey door and its frame.
253
254
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
143/161

FIG. 288.
Note that the door itself is quite luminous, and lighted up by the reflection of the sun from the
tiled floor, so that the bars in the upper part throw distinct shadows, besides the mystery of
colour thus introduced. The little window to the left, though not admitting much direct
sunlight, is evidence of the brilliant glare outside; for the reflected light is very conspicuous on
the top and on the shutters on each side; indeed they cast distinct shadows up and down,
while some clear daylight from the blue sky is reflected on the window-sill. As to the sink,
the table, the wash-tubs, &c., although they seem in strong light and shade they really receive
little or no direct light from a single point; but from the strong reflected light re-reflected into
them from the wall of the doorway. There are many other things in such effects as this which
the artist will observe, and which can only be studied from real light and shade. Such is the
character of reflected light, varying according to the angle and intensity of the luminary and a
hundred other things. When we come to study light in the open air we get into another
region, and have to deal with it accordingly, and yet we shall find that our sciagraphy will be
a help to us even in this bewilderment; for it will explain in a manner the innumerable shapes
of sun-shadows that we observe out of doors among hills and dales, showing up their forms
and structure; its play in the woods and gardens, and its value among buildings, showing all
their juttings and abuttings, recesses, doorways, and all the other architectural details. Nor
must we forget light's most glorious display of all on the sea and in the clouds and in the
sunrises and the sunsets down to the still and lovely moonlight.
These sun-shadows are useful in showing us the principle of light and shade, and so also are
the shadows cast by artificial light; but they are only the beginning of that beautiful study, that
exquisite art of tone or chiaro-oscuro, which is infinite in its variety, is full of the deepest
mystery, and is the true poetry of art. For this the student must go to Nature herself, must
study her in all her moods from early dawn to sunset, in the twilight and when night sets in.
No mathematical rules can help him, but only the thoughtful contemplation, the silent
watching, and the mental notes that he can make and commit to memory, combining them
255
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
144/161

with the sentiments to which they in turn give rise. The plein air, or broad daylight effects,
are but one item of the great range of this ever-changing and deepening mystery—from the
hard reality to the soft blending of evening when form almost disappears, even to the merging
of the whole landscape, nay, the whole world, into a dream—which is felt rather than seen,
but possesses a charm that almost defies the pencil of the painter, and can only be expressed
by the deep and sweet notes of the poet and the musician. For love and reverence are
necessary to appreciate and to present it.
There is also much to learn about artificial light. For here, again, the study is endless: from the
glare of a hundred lights—electric and otherwise—to the single lamp or candle. Indeed a
whole volume could be filled with illustrations of its effects. To those who aim at producing
intense brilliancy, refusing to acknowledge any limitations to their capacity, a hundred or a
thousand lights commend themselves; and even though wild splashes of paint may sometimes
be the result, still the effort is praiseworthy. But those who prefer the mysterious lighting of a
Rembrandt will find, if they sit contemplating in a room lit with one lamp only, that an endless
depth of mystery surrounds them, full of dark recesses peopled by fancy and sweet thought,
whilst the most beautiful gradations soften the forms without distorting them; and at the same
time he can detect the laws of this science of light and shade a thousand times repeated and
endless in its variety.
Note.—Fig. 288 must be looked upon as a rough sketch which only gives the general effect
of the original drawing; to render all the delicate tints, tones and reflections described in the
text would require a highly-finished reproduction in half-tone or in colour.
As many of the figures in this book had to be re-drawn, not a light task, I must here thank
Miss Margaret L. Williams, one of our Academy students, for kindly coming to my
assistance and volunteering her careful co-operation.
CLXIV
REFLECTION
Reflections in still water can best be illustrated by placing some simple object, such as a
cube, on a looking-glass laid horizontally on a table, or by studying plants, stones, banks,
trees, &c., reflected in some quiet pond. It will then be seen that the reflection is the
counterpart of the object reversed, and having the same vanishing points as the object itself.
FIG. 289.
Let us suppose R (Fig. 289) to be standing on the water or reflecting plane. To find its
reflection make square [R] equal to the original square R. Complete the reversed cube by
256
257
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
145/161

FIG. 290.
drawing its other sides, &c. It is evident that this lower cube is the reflection of the one
above it, although it differs in one respect, for whereas in figure R the top of the cube is seen,
in its reflection [R] it is hidden, &c. In figure A of a semicircular arch we see the underneath
portion of the arch reflected in the water, but we do not see it in the actual object. However,
these things are obvious. Note that the reflected line must be equal in length to the actual
one, or the reflection of a square would not be a square, nor that of a semicircle a semicircle.
The apparent lengthening of reflections in water is owing to the surface being broken by
wavelets, which, leaping up near to us, catch some of the image of the tree, or whatever it is,
that it is reflected.
In this view of an arch (Fig. 290) note that the
reflection is obtained by dropping
perpendiculars from certain points on the arch,
1, 0, 2, &c., to the surface of the reflecting
plane, and then measuring the same lengths
downwards to corresponding points, 1, 0, 2,
&c., in the reflection.
CLXV
ANGLES OF REFLECTION
In Fig. 291 we take a side view of the reflected object in order to show that at whatever
angle the visual ray strikes the reflecting surface it is reflected from it at the same angle.
FIG. 291.
We have seen that the reflected line must be equal to the original line, therefore mB must
equal Ma. They are also at right angles to MN, the plane of reflection. We will now draw the
visual ray passing from E, the eye, to B, which is the reflection of A; and just underneath it
passes through MN at O, which is the point where the visual ray strikes the reflecting surface.
Draw OA. This line represents the ray reflected from it. We have now two triangles, OAm
and OmB, which are right-angled triangles and equal, therefore angle a equals angle b. But
angle b equals angle c. Therefore angle EcM equals angle Aam, and the angle at which the
ray strikes the reflecting plane is equal to the angle at which it is reflected from it.
CLXVI
258
259
260
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
146/161

REFLECTIONS OF OBJECTS AT DIFFERENT DISTANCES
In this sketch the four posts and other objects are represented standing on a plane level or
almost level with the water, in order to show the working of our problem more clearly. It will
be seen that the post A is on the brink of the reflecting plane, and therefore is entirely
reflected; B and C being farther back are only partially seen, whereas the reflection of D is
not seen at all. I have made all the posts the same height, but with regard to the houses,
where the length of the vertical lines varies, we obtain their reflections by measuring from the
points oo upwards and downwards as in the previous figure.
FIG. 292.
Of course these reflections vary according to the position they are viewed from; the lower
we are down, the more do we see of the reflections of distant objects, and vice versa. When
the figures are on a higher plane than the water, that is, above the plane of reflection, we
have to find their perspective position, and drop a perpendicular AO (Fig. 293) till it comes
in contact with the plane of reflection, which we suppose to run under the ground, then
measure the same length downwards, as in this figure of a girl on the top of the steps. Point o
marks the point of contact with the plane, and by measuring downwards to a· we get the
length of her reflection, or as much as is seen of it. Note the reflection of the steps and the
sloping bank, and the application of the inclined plane ascending and descending.
261
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
147/161

FIG. 294.
FIG. 293.
CLXVII
REFLECTION IN A LOOKING-GLASS
I had noticed that some of the figures in Titian’s pictures were
only half life-size, and yet they looked natural; and one day,
thinking I would trace myself in an upright mirror, I stood at
arm’s length from it and with a brush and Chinese white, I made
a rough outline of my face and figure, and when I measured it I
found that my drawing was exactly half as long and half as wide
as nature. I went closer to the glass, but the same outline fitted
me. Then I retreated several paces, and still the same outline
surrounded me. Although a little surprising at first, the reason is
obvious. The image in the glass retreats or advances exactly in
the same measure as the spectator.
Suppose him to represent one end of a parallelogram e·s·, and
his image a·b· to represent the other. The mirror AB is a perpendicular half-way between
them, the diagonal e·b· is the visual ray passing from the eye of the spectator to the foot of
his image, and is the diagonal of a rectangle, therefore it cuts AB in the centre o, and AO
represents a·b· to the spectator. This is an experiment that any one may try for himself.
Perhaps the above fact may have something to do with the remarks I made about Titian at
the beginning of this chapter.
262
263
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
148/161

FIG. 295.
FIG. 296.
CLXVIII
THE MIRROR AT AN ANGLE
If an object or line AB is inclined at an angle of 45° to the mirror RR, then the angle BAC will
be a right angle, and this angle is exactly divided in two by the reflecting plane RR. And
whatever the angle of the object or line makes with its reflection that angle will also be
exactly divided.
FIG. 297.
FIG. 298.
Now suppose our mirror to be standing on a horizontal plane and on a pivot, so that it can
be inclined either way. Whatever angle the mirror is to the plane the reflection of that plane in
the mirror will be at the same angle on the other side of it, so that if the mirror OA (Fig. 298)
is at 45° to the plane RR then the reflection of that plane in the mirror will be 45° on the other
side of it, or at right angles, and the reflected plane will appear perpendicular, as shown in
Fig. 299, where we have a front view of a mirror leaning forward at an angle of 45° and
reflecting the square aob with a cube standing upon it, only in the reflection the cube appears
to be projecting from an upright plane or wall.
264
265
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
149/161

FIG. 299.
If we increase the angle from 45° to 60°, then the reflection of the plane and cube will lean
backwards as shown in Fig. 300. If we place it on a level with the original plane, the cube
will be standing upright twice the distance away. If the mirror is still farther tilted till it makes
an angle of 135° as at E (Fig. 298), or 45° on the other side of the vertical Oc, then the plane
and cube would disappear, and objects exactly over that plane, such as the ceiling, would
come into view.
In Fig. 300 the mirror is at 60° to the plane mn, and the plane itself at about 15° to the plane
an (so that here we are using angular perspective, V being the accessible vanishing point).
The reflection of the plane and cube is seen leaning back at an angle of 60°. Note the way
the reflection of this cube is found by the dotted lines on the plane, on the surface of the
mirror, and also on the reflection.
FIG. 300.
CLXIX
THE UPRIGHT MIRROR AT AN ANGLE OF 45° TO THE WALL
In Fig. 301 the mirror is vertical and at an angle of 45° to the wall opposite the spectator, so
that it reflects a portion of that wall as though it were receding from us at right angles; and the
wall with the pictures upon it, which appears to be facing us, in reality is on our left.
266
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
150/161

FIG. 301.
An endless number of complicated problems could be invented of the inclined mirror, but
they would be mere puzzles calculated rather to deter the student than to instruct him. What
we chiefly have to bear in mind is the simple principle of reflections. When a mirror is vertical
and placed at the end or side of a room it reflects that room and gives the impression that we
are in one double the size. If two mirrors are placed opposite to each other at each end of a
room they reflect and reflect, so that we see an endless number of rooms.
Again, if we are sitting in a gallery of pictures with a hand mirror, we can so turn and twist
that mirror about that we can bring any picture in front of us, whether it is behind us, at the
side, or even on the ceiling. Indeed, when one goes to those old palaces and churches where
pictures are painted on the ceiling, as in the Sistine Chapel or the Louvre, or the palaces at
Venice, it is not a bad plan to take a hand mirror with us, so that we can see those elevated
works of art in comfort.
There are also many uses for the mirror in the studio, well known to the artist. One is to look
at one's own picture reversed, when faults become more evident; and another, when the
model is required to be at a longer distance than the dimensions of the studio will admit, by
drawing his reflection in the glass we double the distance he is from us.
The reason the mirror shows the fault of a work to which the eye has become accustomed is
that it doubles it. Thus if a line that should be vertical is leaning to one side, in the mirror it
will lean to the other; so that if it is out of the perpendicular to the left, its reflection will be
out of the perpendicular to the right, making a double divergence from one to the other.
[267]
268
269
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
151/161

CLXX
MENTAL PERSPECTIVE
Before we part, I should like to say a word about mental perspective, for we must
remember that some see farther than others, and some will endeavour to see even into the
infinite. To see Nature in all her vastness and magnificence, the thought must supplement and
must surpass the eye. It is this far-seeing that makes the great poet, the great philosopher,
and the great artist. Let the student bear this in mind, for if he possesses this quality or even a
share of it, it will give immortality to his work.
To explain in detail the full meaning of this suggestion is beyond the province of this book,
but it may lead the student to think this question out for himself in his solitary and imaginative
moments, and should, I think, give a charm and virtue to his work which he should
endeavour to make of value, not only to his own time but to the generations that are to
follow. Cultivate, therefore, this mental perspective, without forgetting the solid foundation of
the science I have endeavoured to impart to you.
Footnotes
1. Leonardo da Vinci's Treatise on Painting.
2. There is another book called The Jesuit's Perspective which I have not yet seen,
but which I hear is a fine work.
3. In a sea-view, owing to the rotundity of the earth, the real horizontal line is slightly
below the sea line, which is noted in Chapter I.
4. Some will tell us that Nature abhors a straight line, that all long straight lines in
space appear curved, &c., owing to certain optical conditions; but this is not
apparent in short straight lines, so if our drawing is small it would be wrong to curve
them; if it is large, like a scene or diorama, the same optical condition which applies
to the line in space would also apply to the line in the picture.
INDEX
Index citations in the original book referred to page numbers. Where
possible, links will lead directly to a chapter header or illustration. Note that
the last two entries for Toledo are figure numbers rather than pages; these
have not been corrected.
A
Albert Dürer, 2, 9.
Angles of Reflection, 259.
Angular Perspective, 98-123, 133, 170.
Ang"lar Persp"ctive, New Method, 133, 134, 135, 136.
Arches, Arcades, &c., 198, 200-208.
Architect's Perspective, 170, 171.
270
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
152/161

Art Schools Perspective, 112-118, 217.
Atmosphere, 1, 74.
B
Balcony, Shadow of, 246.
Base or groundline, 89.
C
Campanile Florence, 5, 59.
Cast Shadows, 229-253.
Centre of Vision, 15.
Chessboard, 74.
Chinese Art, 11.
Circle, 145, 151-156, 159.
Columns, 157, 159, 161, 169, 170.
Conditions of Perspective, 24, 25.
Cottage in Angular Perspective, 116.
Cube, 53, 65, 115, 119.
Cylinder, 158, 159.
Cylindrical picture, 227.
D
De Hoogh, 2, 62, 73.
Depths, How to measure by diagonals, 127, 128.
Descending plane, 92-95.
Diagonals, 45, 124, 125, 126.
Disproportion, How to correct, 35, 118, 157.
Distance, 16, 77, 78, 85, 87, 103, 128.
Distorted perspective, How to correct, 118.
Dome, 163-167.
Double Cross, 218.
E
Ellipse, 145, 146, 147.
Elliptical Arch, 207.
F
Farningham, 95.
Figures on descending plane, 92, 93, 94, 95.
Fig"res "n an inclined plane, 88.
Fig"res "n a level plane, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75.
Fig"res "n uneven ground, 90, 91.
G
Geometrical and Perspective figures contrasted, 46-48.
Geom"trical plane, 99.
Giovanni da Pistoya, Sonnet to, by Michelangelo, 60.
Great Pyramid, 190.
H
Hexagon, 177, 183, 185.
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
153/161

Hogarth, 9.
Honfleur, 83, 142.
Horizon, 3, 4, 15, 20, 59, 60.
Horizontal line, 13, 15.
Horizontals, 30, 31, 36.
I
Inaccessible vanishing points, 77, 78, 136, 140-144.
Inclined plane, 33, 118, 213, 244, 245.
Interiors, 62, 117, 118, 128.
J
Japanese Art, 11.
Jesuit of Paris, Practice of Perspective by, 9.
K
Kiosk, Application of Hexagon, 185.
Kirby, Joshua, Perspective made Easy (?), 9.
L
Ladder, Step, 212, 216.
Landscape Perspective, 74.
Landseer, Sir Edwin, 1.
Leonardo da Vinci, 1, 61.
Light, Observations on, 253.
Light-house, 84.
Long distances, 85, 87.
M
Measure distances by square and diagonal, 89, 128, 129.
Mea"ure vanishing lines, How to, 49, 50.
Measuring points, 106, 113.
Meas"ring point O, 108, 109, 110.
Mental Perspective, 269.
Michelangelo, 5, 57, 58, 60.
N
Natural Perspective, 12, 82, 95, 142, 144.
New Method of Angular Perspective, 133, 134, 135, 141, 215, 219.
Niche, 164, 165, 250.
O
Oblique Square, 139.
Octagon, 172-175.
O, measuring point, 110.
Optic Cone, 20.
P
Parallels and Diagonals, 124-128.
Paul Potter, cattle, 19.
Paul Veronese, 4.
271
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
154/161

Pavements, 64, 66, 176, 178, 180, 181, 183.
Pedestal, 141, 161.
Pentagon, 186, 187, 188.
Perspective, Angular, 98-123.
Persp"ctive, Definitions, 13-23.
Persp"ctive, Necessity of, 1.
Persp"ctive, Parallel, 42-97.
Persp"ctive, Rules and Conditions of, 24-41.
Persp"ctive, Scientific definition of, 22.
Persp"ctive, Theory of, 13-24.
Persp"ctive, What is it? 6-12.
Pictures painted according to positions they are to occupy, 59.
Point of Distance, 16-21.
Po"nt "f Sight, 12, 15.
Points in Space, 129, 137.
Portico, 111.
Projection, 21, 137.
Pyramid, 189, 190, 191, 193-196.
R
Raphael, 3.
Reduced distance, 77, 78, 79, 84.
Reflection, 257-268.
Rembrandt, 59, 256.
Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 9, 60.
Rubens, 4.
Rules of Perspective, 24-41.
S
Scale on each side of Picture, 141, 142-144.
Sc"le Vanishing, 69, 71, 81, 84.
Serlio, 5, 126.
Shadows cast by sun, 229-252.
Sha"ows ca"st "y artificial light, 252.
Sight, Point of, 12, 15.
Sistine Chapel, 60.
Solid figures, 135-140.
Square in Angular Perspective, 105, 106, 109, 112, 114, 121, 122, 123, 133,
134, 139.
Sq"are and diagonals, 125, 138, 139, 141.
Sq"are of the hypotenuse (fig. 170), 149.
Sq"are in Parallel Perspective, 42, 43, 50, 53, 54.
Sq"are at 45°, 64-66.
Staircase leading to a Gallery, 221.
Stairs, Winding, 222, 225.
Station Point, 13.
Steps, 209-218.
T
Taddeo Gaddi, 5.
Terms made use of, 48.
272
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
155/161

Tiles, 176, 178, 181.
Tintoretto, 4.
Titian, 59, 262.
Toledo, 96, 144, 259, 288.
Trace and projection, 21.
Transposed distance, 53.
Triangles, 104, 106, 132, 135, 138.
Turner, 2, 87.
U
Ubaldus, Guidus, 9.
V
Vanishing lines, 49.
Vani"hing point, 119.
Vani"hing scale, 68-72, 74, 77, 79, 84.
Vaulted Ceiling, 203.
Velasquez, 59.
Vertical plane, 13.
Visual rays, 20.
W
Winding Stairs, 222-225.
Water, Reflections in, 257, 258, 260, 261.
 
 
***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THEORY AND PRACTICE
OF PERSPECTIVE***
******* This file should be named 20165-h.txt or 20165-h.zip *******
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/1/6/20165
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one owns a United
States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in
the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if
you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge
anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this
eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances
and research. They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do practically
ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
156/161

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
157/161

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
158/161

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
159/161

electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact
For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
160/161

works.
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
http://www.gutenberg.org
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/etext06/
    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)
EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/2/3/10234
or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/6/8/24689
An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/GUTINDEX.ALL
*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
161/161

G
Geometrical and Perspective figures contrasted, 46-48.
Geom"trical plane, 99.
Giovanni da Pistoya, Sonnet to, by Michelangelo, 60.
Great Pyramid, 190.
H
Hexagon, 177, 183, 185.
Hogarth, 9.
Honfleur, 83, 142.
Horizon, 3, 4, 15, 20, 59, 60.
Horizontal line, 13, 15.
Horizontals, 30, 31, 36.
I
Inaccessible vanishing points, 77, 78, 136, 140-144.
Inclined plane, 33, 118, 213, 244, 245.
Interiors, 62, 117, 118, 128.
J
Japanese Art, 11.
Jesuit of Paris, Practice of Perspective by, 9.
K
Kiosk, Application of Hexagon, 185.
Kirby, Joshua, Perspective made Easy (?), 9.
L
Ladder, Step, 212, 216.
Landscape Perspective, 74.
Landseer, Sir Edwin, 1.
Leonardo da Vinci, 1, 61.
Light, Observations on, 253.
Light-house, 84.
Long distances, 85, 87.
M
Measure distances by square and diagonal, 89, 128, 129.
Mea"ure vanishing lines, How to, 49, 50.
Measuring points, 106, 113.
Meas"ring point O, 108, 109, 110.
Mental Perspective, 269.
Michelangelo, 5, 57, 58, 60.
N
Natural Perspective, 12, 82, 95, 142, 144.
New Method of Angular Perspective, 133, 134, 135, 141, 215, 219.
Niche, 164, 165, 250.
271
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
162/161

O
Oblique Square, 139.
Octagon, 172-175.
O, measuring point, 110.
Optic Cone, 20.
P
Parallels and Diagonals, 124-128.
Paul Potter, cattle, 19.
Paul Veronese, 4.
Pavements, 64, 66, 176, 178, 180, 181, 183.
Pedestal, 141, 161.
Pentagon, 186, 187, 188.
Perspective, Angular, 98-123.
Persp"ctive, Definitions, 13-23.
Persp"ctive, Necessity of, 1.
Persp"ctive, Parallel, 42-97.
Persp"ctive, Rules and Conditions of, 24-41.
Persp"ctive, Scientific definition of, 22.
Persp"ctive, Theory of, 13-24.
Persp"ctive, What is it? 6-12.
Pictures painted according to positions they are to occupy, 59.
Point of Distance, 16-21.
Po"nt "f Sight, 12, 15.
Points in Space, 129, 137.
Portico, 111.
Projection, 21, 137.
Pyramid, 189, 190, 191, 193-196.
R
Raphael, 3.
Reduced distance, 77, 78, 79, 84.
Reflection, 257-268.
Rembrandt, 59, 256.
Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 9, 60.
Rubens, 4.
Rules of Perspective, 24-41.
S
Scale on each side of Picture, 141, 142-144.
Sc"le Vanishing, 69, 71, 81, 84.
Serlio, 5, 126.
Shadows cast by sun, 229-252.
Sha"ows ca"st "y artificial light, 252.
Sight, Point of, 12, 15.
Sistine Chapel, 60.
Solid figures, 135-140.
Square in Angular Perspective, 105, 106, 109, 112, 114, 121, 122, 123, 133,
272
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
163/161

134, 139.
Sq"are and diagonals, 125, 138, 139, 141.
Sq"are of the hypotenuse (fig. 170), 149.
Sq"are in Parallel Perspective, 42, 43, 50, 53, 54.
Sq"are at 45°, 64-66.
Staircase leading to a Gallery, 221.
Stairs, Winding, 222, 225.
Station Point, 13.
Steps, 209-218.
T
Taddeo Gaddi, 5.
Terms made use of, 48.
Tiles, 176, 178, 181.
Tintoretto, 4.
Titian, 59, 262.
Toledo, 96, 144, 259, 288.
Trace and projection, 21.
Transposed distance, 53.
Triangles, 104, 106, 132, 135, 138.
Turner, 2, 87.
U
Ubaldus, Guidus, 9.
V
Vanishing lines, 49.
Vani"hing point, 119.
Vani"hing scale, 68-72, 74, 77, 79, 84.
Vaulted Ceiling, 203.
Velasquez, 59.
Vertical plane, 13.
Visual rays, 20.
W
Winding Stairs, 222-225.
Water, Reflections in, 257, 258, 260, 261.
 
 
***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THEORY AND PRACTICE
OF PERSPECTIVE***
******* This file should be named 20165-h.txt or 20165-h.zip *******
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/1/6/20165
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
164/161

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one owns a United
States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in
the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if
you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge
anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this
eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances
and research. They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do practically
ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
165/161

Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
166/161

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
167/161

receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact
For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
168/161

Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
http://www.gutenberg.org
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/etext06/
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
169/161

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)
EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/2/3/10234
or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/6/8/24689
An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/GUTINDEX.ALL
*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
7/1/2010
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Th…
file:///C:/downloads/20165-h.htm
170/161

