
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089 
Also by Tore Bjørgo
POLITISK KOMMUNIKASJON: INTRODUKSJON TIL SEMIOTIKK 
OG RETORIKK  (with Daniel Heradstveit; Norwegian, Danish, Swedish and 
Bulgarian editions)
POLITISK TERRORISME (with Daniel Heradstvei; in Norwegian)
RACIST VIOLENCE IN EUROPE (co-edited, with Rob Witte; English and 
Norwegian editions)
TERROR FROM THE EXTREME RIGHT (editor) 
RACIST AND RIGHT-WING VIOLENCE IN SCANDINAVIA: Patterns, 
Perpetrators, and Responses 
NATION AND RACE: The Developing Euro-American Racist Subculture 
(co-editor, with Jeffrey Kaplan)
VOLD, RASISME OG UNGDOMSGJENGER: Forebygging og 
­bekjempelse (with Yngve Carlsson; in Norwegian)
GENERALISERT HAT – POLARISERTE FELLESSKAP: Om konflikter 
mellom ungdomsmiljøer i en norsk by (with Y. Carlsson & T. Haaland;  
in Norwegian)
ROOT CAUSES OF TERRORISM (editor)
LEAVING TERRORISM BEHIND: Individual and Collective 
Disengagement (co-editor, with John Horgan)
POLICE SCIENCE PERSPECTIVES: Towards a European Approach  
(with five co-authors)

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing 
Terrorism
Tore Bjørgo
Professor of Police Science, Norwegian Police 
University College

Tore Bjørgo © 2013
Foreword © Alex P. Schmid 2013
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this 
publication may be made without written permission.
No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted 
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the  
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence  
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication 
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The author has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published 2013 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited,  
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC,  
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, 
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
ISBN: 978–1–137–35509–6  EPUB
ISBN: 978–1–137–35508–9  PDF
ISBN: 978–1–137–35507–2  Hardback
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
www.palgrave.com/pivot
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Contents
Foreword by Alex P. Schmid
vii
Preface
ix
Part I  A Theory for Practice 
1	
Introduction
2
	
Definitions of concepts and analytical  
approaches 
4
	
Theoretical considerations on preventive 
mechanisms 
6
	
Models of crime prevention 
9
	
Nine generic mechanisms for  
preventing crime 
12
	
From model to strategy 
24
Part II  The Preventive Mechanisms Applied 
2	
Norm Setting against Violence and  
Terrorism
31
3	
Reducing the Emergence of Terrorism and 
Violent Radicalisation
38
4	
Deterring Involvement in Terrorism
49

vi 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089 
Contents
  5	 Disrupting Planned Terrorist Attacks
55
  6	 Protecting Vulnerable Targets
64
  7	 Reducing the Harmful Consequences of  
Terrorist Attacks
71
  8	 Reducing the Rewards from Acts of Terrorism	

76
  9	 Incapacitation – Eliminating the Capacity  
of (Potential) Terrorists to Cause Harm
81
10	 Disengagement from Terrorism
86
11	 Some Conclusions 	

95
Bibliography
99
Index
110

vii
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Foreword
An enormous amount of money has been spent in the last 
12 years by governments on reacting to terrorism. However, 
this is not adequately reflected in the commensurate 
amount of analyses evaluating how wisely hundreds of 
billions of dollars have been spent on dealing with terror-
ism. Many of the government efforts have often focused 
on military operations, including pre-emption and tar-
geted killings or the disruption of terrorist activities by 
intelligence-led operations. Sometimes this has been done 
under the label of prevention even though there are indi-
cations that some of these very same actions have fanned 
rather than prevented terrorist activities.
Prevention is a concept and policy that is used in 
many fields, e.g. health care and epidemiology. There its 
exploration and practice is more developed than when it 
comes to the control of violence in general or terrorism 
in particular. This is, for instance, reflected in the fact 
that some epidemiological researchers make a distinction 
between various levels of prevention, e.g. primary, second-
ary and tertiary prevention. Others even add more levels, 
including ‘primordial prevention’ (actions inhibiting the 
emergence of risk factors) and, at the other far end, even 
‘quaternary prevention’ actions (meant to deal with the 
negative consequences of excessive counter-measures).
While there are many good books on crime preven-
tion as well as conflict prevention, there is, strangely 
enough, no really good volume on the prevention of ter-
rorism. There have been some laudable attempts in this 

viii 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089 
Foreword
direction, including a volume by Ronald Clark and Graeme Newman on 
Outsmarting the Terrorists (2006) in which they tried to take principles 
from situational crime prevention and apply them to the prevention of 
terrorism. Key to this approach is to reduce opportunities and rewards 
for terrorist crimes.
Building on their work but going well beyond it, we now have this 
new study by Tore Bjørgo, Professor at the Norwegian Police University 
College in Oslo. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism introduces a new 
generic and systematic model of terrorism prevention. It has been said 
that nothing is as practical as a good theory and while this is not always 
true, it certainly applies to this short but powerful study. Already in his 
past work on Root Causes of Terrorism (2005) and Leaving Terrorism Behind 
(2009) Prof. Bjørgo has shown himself to be an original thinker and this 
is again confirmed in this monograph which breaks new ground. The 
beauty of this study lies in its logic and simplicity. With great clarity, he 
introduces nine preventive mechanisms, outlines the measures that need 
to be taken to implement them, explains who has to take them against 
whom and what the pros and cons of each of the proposed measures 
are. The book is an eye-opener – once you have read it you wonder how 
we could fail to see the problem of prevention of terrorism in any other 
terms. It should be on the desk of every counter-terrorism professional.
Alex P. Schmid
Director, Terrorism Research Initiative
Editor, Perspectives on Terrorism

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
ix
Preface
The purpose of this study is to put society’s fight against 
terrorism into a comprehensive crime prevention perspec-
tive with a clear, understandable theoretical foundation. 
The analysis results in a general model for the prevention 
of crime, which in principle is applicable to almost all 
types of crime. Traditionally, both the police and other 
social actors have tended to think of the prevention of 
crime/terrorism and responses to crime/terrorism as two 
separate tracks or activities. The model presented in this 
book goes beyond this division by also looking at sanctions 
and harm reduction within a comprehensive prevention 
perspective. Thus, this study considers terrorism a serious 
form of crime and discusses counter-terrorism within the 
framework of crime prevention.
When I started to work on this model1 back in 2006, it 
was prompted by a frustration with the fact that official 
action plans and counter-terrorism strategies in my home  
country Norway and elsewhere largely appeared to be sum- 
maries of measures which had already been introduced or 
established. There was, and still is, a general lack of stra-
tegic analyses of what one can and ought to do to reduce 
the problem of terrorism based on a clear and analytical 
understanding of how different measures can have such an 
effect.
The British CONTEST (COuNter-TErrorism STrategy) 
represents a step forward in this respect. Although not 

x 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089 
Preface
without problematic aspects (Kundnani 2009), it does at least have a 
clear, analytical thread. The strategy is based around four Ps:
Pursue – 
▸▸
to stop terrorist attacks
Prevent – 
▸▸
to stop people from becoming terrorists or supporting 
violent extremism
Protect – 
▸▸
to strengthen our protection against terrorist attack
Prepare – 
▸▸
where an attack cannot be stopped, to mitigate its impact
The idea is that Pursue, Prevent, Protect and Prepare should reinforce and 
complement each other such that the overall effect is a reduction in 
the terrorist threat (HM Government 2009; 2011). This strategy guides 
Britain’s counter-terrorism efforts to such a great degree that the activities 
are largely organised and institutionalised on the basis of these four Ps.
This study attempts to construct a model similar to CONTEST, but 
with a different theoretical starting point: The entire counter-terrorism 
effort is seen from the perspective of crime prevention and with “pre-
venting mechanisms” as the theoretical foundation and organising 
principle.
Another cause of frustration that motivated this study is that existing 
models of crime prevention (such as the social, situational and criminal 
justice crime prevention models) are quite narrow in scope and far 
from being comprehensive. Even though they overlap to some degree, 
the various prevention models fail to integrate key aspects of the other 
models. They come across as competing prevention models that cannot 
easily be integrated with each other, either theoretically or as practical 
strategies for action.
This study aims, based on the development of theory and policy in 
the fields of both counter-terrorism and crime prevention, to construct 
a comprehensive, integrated and generic model for crime prevention 
that is here applied to terrorism. In a forthcoming book, I will apply 
the same model to different types of crime, such as burglary, domestic 
violence, drunken driving, piracy in Somalia and organised crime linked 
to motorcycle gangs.
I would like to thank the Research Council of Norway’s Societal 
Security and Risk (SAMRISK) programme, which provided financial 
support for this project. Earlier phases of my work on the book projects 
Root Causes of Terrorism and Leaving Terrorism Behind (from which 
the main thematic perspectives are closely related to two of the sub-
strategies in this study) received financial support from the Norwegian 

xi
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Preface
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which also helped to disseminate the results 
to users at a high level internationally. The Norwegian Consortium 
for Research on Terrorism and International Crime has supported the 
work by co-funding my part-time post at the Norwegian Institute of 
International Affairs (NUPI), where my job primarily involves research 
into terrorism. I would also like to thank my good colleagues at the 
Norwegian Police University College for their useful contributions, and 
Ole A. Lindaas, Envor M. Bjørgo Skårdalsmo, Alex P. Schmid and an 
anonymous reviewer, who read the manuscript with a critical eye and 
provided much constructive feedback. Haavard Reksten, Håkon Skulstad 
and Bjørg Ofstad have provided invaluable support and encouragement. 
Through the years several good colleagues have generously shared their 
ideas, knowledge and data with me, among whom I will in particular 
mention Yngve Carlsson, Tor-Geir Myhrer, Anders Romarheim, Daniel 
Heradstreit, Petter Nesser, Brynjar Lia, Thomas Hegghammer, Ingvild 
Magnæs Gjelsvik, Cato Hemmingby, Asbjørn Rachlew, Morten Løw 
Hansen and John Horgan.
Note
An earlier version (in Norwegian) of the study was published in the 
1	
conference report after the Norwegian Police University College’s 2007 
research conference (PHS Forskning 2007: 7, 85–109). A much expanded and 
revised version was published as Part 1 of the report Tore Bjørgo (2011, ed.). 
Forebygging av terrorisme og annen kriminalitet. Oslo: PHS Forskning 2011: 1. 
The present book is a further development and expansion.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089 

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Part I
A Theory for Practice

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
2 
1
Introduction
Abstract: This study argues that terrorist violence 
is a serious form of crime and should be treated as 
such, applying the full repertoire of crime prevention 
mechanisms and measures. The Introduction outlines the 
theoretical model, consisting of nine different preventive 
mechanisms. To serve as a basis for crime prevention 
strategies, we need to specify these generic mechanisms 
for each particular crime type, asking: what kinds of 
measures can be used to activate these mechanisms, who 
will be the principal actors in charge of implementing the 
measures, and who are the target groups for the measures. 
And further, what are the strengths and weaknesses, as 
well as the limitations and side effects, of the various 
measures used to activate the preventive mechanisms. In 
the following chapters, this model of crime prevention is 
applied to the crime type terrorism.
Keywords: counter-terrorism; crime prevention; means; 
measure; preventive mechanism; preventive model; 
strategy 
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

3
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
The primary objective of counter-terrorism is to prevent acts of terrorism 
from taking place and from causing harm to people, property and soci-
ety. This study aims to clarify the basic strategies that can be employed 
to prevent the carrying out of acts of terrorism. Prevention is used here in 
a broad sense: i.e. preventing (new) acts of terrorism from occurring in 
the future or reducing the number and severity of such acts. The objec-
tive is to develop a comprehensive model for preventing terrorism in 
which various sub-strategies can interact and complement each other, 
and in which the prevention roles performed by different actors within 
the various sub-strategies are clarified. Another goal is for the model to 
be as intuitive and self-evident as possible.
The need for more comprehensive thinking with regard to fighting 
terrorism became clear in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on 11 
September 2001. For the first five years, the Bush administration’s War on 
Terror one-sidedly focused on strategies based on the use of military force, 
repression and control.1 This undermined more long-term strategies that 
were aiming at doing something about the factors that give rise to and 
sustain terrorism in a society, and why individuals and groups become 
radicalised and allow themselves to be recruited for terrorist activities. 
Some critics of the “War on Terror” line have asserted that only social 
and political changes and measures can, at a more fundamental level, 
eliminate or reduce the root causes of terrorism and that everything else 
is just treating the symptoms. However, even though this argument may 
have its merits it usually takes a long time before such changes result 
in a reduction or elimination of terrorism. In the intervening period 
acute threat situations will arise in which it will be necessary to prevent 
terrorist acts from taking place. The challenge therefore is to find a bal-
ance and constructive synergy between the short-term, repressive and 
controlling strategies and the more long-term, constructive strategies. 
This study attempts to contribute to this. At the same time, the study also 
aims at developing a more comprehensive model of crime prevention – a 
generic model which can be applied to most types of crime.
However, a word of caution is needed: There is no magic silver bul-
let which can eradicate terrorism, as there is none for crime in general. 
The history of terrorism teaches us that this phenomenon – in different 
shapes and manifestations – has been with humanity for a long time, and 
will be with us in the future. It is a problem we have to learn to live with 
and handle in sensible ways (English 2009: 132–133). It is futile to declare, 
as President G.W. Bush did after 9–11, that “Our War on Terror … will 

4 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
not end until every terrorist group of global reach has been found, 
stopped and defeated” (quoted in Guelke 2006: 32). The greatest danger 
posed by terrorists is their capacity to provoke ill-judged, extraordinary 
and counter-productive state responses, rather than the relatively limited 
violent direct actions they are able to produce themselves (English 2009: 
119; Hobsbawn 2007: 132, 152–3). However, through considered and 
comprehensive policies, specific terrorist campaigns may be contained, 
reduced or brought to an end (Richardson 2006: 10–11). Emerging prob-
lems of violent extremism can sometimes be nipped in the bud before 
they develop into full-fledged terrorism.
This book argues that a broad and holistic preventive approach, 
employing a multiple of preventive mechanisms and measures, will 
construct more barriers that can stop potential terrorists and prevent 
terrorist acts. This means that every measure alone does not need to be 
as heavy for the total effect to produce adequate protection. This broad 
and holistic approach may serve to lighten the pressure from the more 
repressive prevention measures and to reduce the negative side effects.
Definitions of concepts and analytical approaches
This study will analyse strategies for preventing or reducing acts of ter-
rorism by describing the different mechanisms that can bring about such 
a reduction. The study describes nine different preventive mechanisms. 
These can be specified into nine strategy components or sub-strategies, 
which together constitute a single comprehensive, overall strategy for 
preventing terrorism. It is by specifying for one specific crime type (e.g. 
a particular form of terrorism) which measures can be used to activate 
each of the mechanisms that we may move from a generic model of crime 
prevention into a strategy for reducing that specific crime problem. The 
main questions are: which mechanisms are the different preventive sub-
strategies based on, what kinds of measures can be used to activate these 
mechanisms, who will be the principal actors in charge of implementing 
the measures, and who are the target groups for the measures. The study 
also examines the strengths and weaknesses, as well as the limitations 
and side effects, of the various measures used to activate the preventive 
mechanisms. Finally, it discusses the need to balance and coordinate the 
various strategies and measures to ensure they complement and reinforce 
each other as much as possible, rather than the short-term and long-term 

5
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
strategies undermining and counteracting each other. This study looks 
only at crisis management, harm reduction or investigations in the after-
math of a terrorist incident in those contexts where these aspects may 
also have preventive effects.
Key analytical terms in this study are terrorism, prevention, strategy, 
mechanisms and measures. Terrorism can be seen as a set of strategies for 
action in which violence and threats of violence are systematically used 
to create a state of fear, gain attention for a cause, or coerce someone 
into giving in to certain demands, and achieve an effect on people and 
institutions other than just the direct victim or target of the violent act.2 
In this context, prevention refers to reducing future acts of terrorism or 
other crimes, or reducing the harmful consequences of such acts, by 
proactive measures. Strategy is here about putting the available measures 
and resources into an action plan to achieve a specified effect, e.g. to 
reduce a specified actor’s capacity to carry out specific actions, such as 
acts of terrorism. Strategies are therefore based on conceptions of cer-
tain mechanisms – a process in which some factors or means influence 
other elements and bring about a specific effect (Elster 1998; Eck 2005: 
707–712; Tilley 2009: 4–6). In other words, a preventive mechanism is an 
explanatory model which is intended to describe how certain measures 
can create a specific effect or outcome. The theory behind the social 
mechanism concept and how it can be applied in crime prevention is 
discussed in more detail below.
Measures are the methods or deliberate courses of action implemented 
to activate a specific mechanism and through this they achieve an 
intended effect. However, it is important to note that such measures 
may have unintended side effects as they may also activate mechanisms 
other than the intended ones (Elster 1998). For example, heavy-handed 
repressive measures to deter violent activism or incapacitate activists 
may provoke anger and increase recruitment to violent extremist groups. 
It is important to differentiate between a strategy/mechanism and the 
measures used to activate it. The same measures (e.g. arrest) can trigger 
different mechanisms (e.g. deterrence, disruption or incapacitation) and 
thus be included in several prevention strategies at the same time, but 
have a different preventive function in each of these strategies. Similarly, 
different measures can activate the same mechanisms, e.g. both arrest 
and exposure in the media can help to disrupt a terror plot. Another 
reason why it is important to distinguish between measures, preventive 
mechanisms and effects is that politicians or other prevention actors 

6 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
have a tendency, based on their interests or ideological standpoints, to 
promote one specific type of measure. This is often done without a clear 
conception of how this particular measure will bring about the desired 
outcome, and without evaluating the potential negative side effects. The 
visibility of the measures often becomes more important than the results 
they produce and how the measures might produce these results.3
Theoretical considerations on preventive mechanisms
A mechanism is an explanatory model which is intended to explain 
which causal relationships we regard as being active, or how a measure 
brings about an outcome (Hedstrøm & Swedberg 1998: 7–9, 22–23; Elster 
1998). Social mechanisms are usually not directly observable. Instead it 
is rather a postulate based on a theory that establishes the probability 
of how something affects something else. Social mechanisms do not fol-
low laws of physical necessity: they are more likely to work under some 
conditions and less likely under others.
One example of this is the assumption that the threat of punishment 
deters individuals from committing crimes because they (presumably) will 
make a rational assessment, weighting up the costs against any benefits, 
which in turn can reduce motivation. The actual mechanism here is a 
mental process – a calculation that takes place in the heads of the actors. 
However, it is far from certain that everyone will end up making the same 
decision. Other mechanisms may be generated by specific types of social 
interaction such as pressure to conform and loyalty within an extremist 
group, which may result in individuals taking part in actions they would 
normally not want to get involved in. Some mechanisms lie in the inter-
action between individuals and their social or physical environment and 
may be more directly observable. For example, a motivated terrorist may 
be deprived of the capacity to commit an act of terrorism by detaining him 
behind prison walls, which effectively prevents him from carrying out acts 
of terror in society. Correspondingly, a rifle bullet fired by a police sniper 
can prevent a terrorist from achieving his intention of killing a hostage 
or stopping him in the act of committing a massacre. In these cases the 
preventive mechanism is relatively observable and tangible. While some 
types of mechanism can be abstract or mental, other types of mechanism 
can be more concrete and observable.

7
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
Another example from the field of reducing car accidents shows that 
preventive mechanisms can also be both mental and physical, and that 
various measures and mechanisms can be used to achieve the same 
effect: signs stating “Overtaking prohibited” can be set up together 
with an unbroken line painted on the road to prevent head-on colli-
sions in traffic. This measure triggers two preventive mechanisms that 
prevent most people from attempting to overtake: the establishment of 
a normative barrier that it is wrong and thoughtless to overtake here, and 
deterrence in that one refrains from performing the act out of a fear of 
being fined by the police. These mechanisms will be sufficient for most 
drivers, but some will still not allow themselves to be stopped by these. 
Therefore, a physical barrier can be constructed between the lanes, 
which makes it almost impossible to overtake even if you want to. In this 
case the mechanism is a form of incapacitation. It eliminates someone’s 
ability to carry out an undesirable act. The first “barrier” against crossing 
the centre line consists of mental mechanisms; the second barrier is a 
physical mechanism. In this case the physical mechanism is probably 
more effective at preventing undesirable behaviour in traffic, though the 
inherent measure (construction of partitions in the road) is significantly 
more expensive than setting up a sign and painting an unbroken line 
on the asphalt. Social (and mental) mechanisms are not “mechanical” 
in the sense of producing a predictable effect every time – the degree 
to which they “work” is often uncertain. They therefore often need to 
be supplemented and reinforced by more barriers to make the desired 
outcome more certain.
One of the main points in Jon Elster’s (1989; 1998) theories about 
social mechanisms is that an action (e.g. a crime prevention measure) 
will often activate several social mechanisms simultaneously, and that 
these may work in different directions. This makes it impossible to 
predict with certainty what the net effect will be. Contextual factors or 
personal dispositions can result in one mechanism producing a stronger 
effect than the others, such that the final outcome is other than expected 
(see also Tilley 2009: 5–6, 26–49). Elster also asserts that wishful thinking 
is a common social mechanism: people often have strong assumptions 
about how means and outcomes are connected based on their values and 
preferences – even though there may be stronger theoretical and empiri-
cal reasons to doubt this simple relationship. This is of great relevance 
in the field of crime prevention in which perceptions of what reduces 
crime are often strong and very simplified: “more youth clubs will result 

8 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
in less juvenile crime!”; “harsher punishments reduce violent crime!” 
The challenge is to determine how likely it is that such measures will 
produce the desired effect, or why it is likely that they will not. Another 
variety of the same are policies which are not primarily meant to have an 
instrumental effect in reducing terrorism but rather serve as “symbolic 
politics”, serving mainly to express support for our allies, confirm our 
adherence to international agreements and obligations, or impress voters 
(Nordenhaug & Engene 2008: 97ff; Bjørgo & Heradstveit 1993: 104–109; 
de Graaf 2011: 7–8). The mechanism concept is a tool that can be used to 
think more systematically about such measures and policies with a criti-
cal perspective. Is it likely that this measure will activate a mechanism 
which may reduce the problem of terrorism, or is it rather intended to 
produce other outcomes that are quite unrelated to the “official” issue at 
hand?
As an extension of Elster’s point that mechanisms often come in pairs 
or combinations that can operate in opposite directions, it should also 
be pointed out that an action can trigger multiple different mechanisms 
that can all work in the same direction and thus reinforce each other. 
Thus detention of a group preparing to commit an act of terrorism may 
give rise to both a disruption mechanism (as their attempt to carry out a 
specific act of terrorism is stopped) and an incapacitation mechanism (as 
the detention denies them the ability to commit new acts of terrorism). 
The detention may also deter other potential terrorists to some degree 
(in that they choose to refrain from committing acts because they fear 
being detained). Tilley (2008: 5) asserts that
in any particular project the outcomes that are produced will be a func-
tion of the balance of mechanisms activated in that context among those 
touched by the intervention, some of which may be preventing crime and 
some of which may be fostering it.
In principle one cannot directly measure or evaluate the effect of a pre-
ventive mechanism as such. What one can measure or evaluate is whether 
or not concrete prevention measures have the intended preventive effects 
in the relevant context and how the measures have been implemented. 
In this case, the preventive mechanism is a theoretical explanation of 
why and how the measure actually produces a specific effect. However, 
as Elster and Tilley point out, opposing mechanisms will usually play a 
role and contextual factors affect the net result. This may give us cause to 
moderate our expectations that because a measure produces a positive 

9
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
effect in one context it will therefore also produce equally good results 
in another. Crime prevention efforts always take place in complex social 
situations in which a large number of events, factors and processes are 
taking place at the same time and which all to varying degrees can influ-
ence the outcome. Designing evaluation procedures able to isolate the 
effects of the measure one wants to evaluate is therefore a major meth-
odological challenge. If several independent evaluations of the same 
measure implemented in different contexts demonstrate that the effects 
are moving in the same direction, this strengthens the reliability of the 
evaluation. As Tilley (2009: 42) points out, “it does not make much 
sense to ask whether or not [a specific prevention strategy or preventive 
mechanism] per se reduces crime. A better set of questions would relate 
to the circumstances in which the preventive mechanisms targeted as a 
result of [the specific methods] do or do not reduce crime.” Since this 
study focuses on the actual preventive mechanisms and strategies, and 
not on the many measures that can be included in each strategy, the 
study will look only at evaluation to a limited degree. This certainly does 
not imply that evaluating prevention measures is not important!4
Models of crime prevention
One of the aims of this study is to demonstrate how two research tra-
ditions that usually appear to exist in quite different spheres, general 
crime prevention and counter-terrorism, can have a mutually beneficial 
effect on each other. A rare example of theories and models from crime 
prevention literature being applied to counter-terrorism can be found in 
Clarke and Newman (2006).5 However, they use only one of the theo-
retical approaches in the field of crime prevention, namely situational 
prevention, while other prevention models are not included in their 
analysis. This is typical of the field. Several models exist for crime pre-
vention and other security threats. These models overlap to some extent, 
but also appear to a great degree to be competing ways of thinking. Since 
they have very different theoretical bases and concerns, they can to some 
extent appear incompatible, both theoretically and practically.
The criminal justice crime prevention model is based on the preven-
tive effects of punishment. In its simple form it differentiates between 
“individual prevention” and “general prevention”. On an individual 
level, punishment can have at least two effects: first, by imposing an 

10 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
uncomfortable sanction on the perpetrator in the form of imprisonment 
or other punishment, the intention is for the person concerned to learn 
his lesson and not put himself in such a situation again. Second, by 
sentencing a person to prison, the perpetrator will be denied the oppor-
tunity to commit new criminal acts for as long as the person concerned 
is locked up. The punishment’s general preventive function consists of 
two main parts: the law establishing a norm that some acts are so unac-
ceptable that contravening this norm will result in punishment; and the 
threat of punishment deterring potential perpetrators from committing 
punishable acts due to a fear of the consequences. To serve as an effective 
deterrence against committing crime, punishment must be perceived as 
likely, severe and swift (Andenes 1994; Myhrer 2011).
The social crime prevention model attempts to influence the factors that 
make people criminals or get them involved in crime (Hebberecht & 
Baillergeau 2012; Egge & Gundhus 2012). Criminal behaviour is often 
understood to be caused by social marginalisation, poor living conditions 
and tough childhoods, though the exposure of individuals to unfortunate 
influences from negative social environments, peer groups, media or 
intoxicants are also cited as causes. Prevention measures can therefore be 
introduced at a societal level, group level or individual level. It is common 
to differentiate between primary prevention directed at entire populations 
(e.g. vaccinations and child benefit), secondary prevention directed at 
risk groups (e.g. follow-up of youths who drop out of school) and tertiary 
prevention directed at groups and individuals who exhibit actual problem 
behaviour (e.g. participation in criminal gangs). An understanding of 
vulnerability and protection factors is of great importance when it comes 
to prevention efforts directed at risk groups. Reducing as many of the vul-
nerability factors as possible and reinforcing protection factors minimises 
the risk of a young person ending up in a criminal career.
The situational crime prevention model aims to change those situations in 
which criminal acts occur and to remove opportunities. The strategy seeks 
to intervene against those factors that make it possible to carry out a crimi-
nal act. The principles, originally developed and systematised by Ronald V. 
Clarke (1980; 1997), involve introducing measures intended to help
increase the effort necessary to carry out a specific criminal act
▸▸
increase the risk of being discovered and stopped
▸▸
reduce the rewards from a specific criminal act
▸▸
reduce the provocations that could trigger a specific criminal act
▸▸
remove the excuses for committing the criminal act
▸▸

11
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
These mechanisms are intended, separately and together, to change the 
calculations of potential perpetrators such that they refrain from com-
mitting a specific criminal act against a specific target.
The risk management model of crime prevention is based on ensuring the 
prevention efforts are, insofar as possible, tailored to reduce threats to 
an acceptable level. This is cost-effective, but at the same time requires 
knowledge of what the threat consists of. Threats are understood to be 
the product of the perpetrator’s motive (intention) and ability (capac-
ity) to carry out the intention. When either the intention or the capacity 
approaches zero, the threat also approaches zero. On the other hand, 
strong intentions and a high level of capacity will increase the probabil-
ity of an act being carried out. The risk similarly increases because risk 
may be seen as the product of the probability of an event occurring and 
the consequences should an event occur. Capacity is closely related to 
a specific target’s vulnerability. The easier it is to hit, the less capacity is 
required to attack it. Reducing vulnerability can also make a target less 
attractive. Risk can therefore be reduced by reducing intention, capacity, 
vulnerability or consequences.6
Even though some of these models overlap to some extent, these 
prevention models still appear to be different approaches and do not fit 
well together. Nonetheless, this study aims to disassemble these differ-
ent (and to some extent competing) prevention models and put the key 
elements back together again in a way that appears more comprehensive 
and logical. This can be done by identifying and systematising the key 
preventive mechanisms the different sub-strategies are based on. Based 
on this approach a general model for crime prevention could contain the 
following nine elements:
Establishing and maintaining normative barriers 
▸▸
to committing 
criminal acts
Reducing recruitment
▸▸
 to criminal social environments and 
activities by eliminating or reducing the social root causes and 
individual processes that lead to criminality
Deterrence
▸▸
 by getting potential perpetrators to refrain from 
criminal acts through the threat of punishment.
Disruption
▸▸
 by stopping criminal acts before they are carried out
Protecting vulnerable targets
▸▸
 against criminal acts by reducing 
opportunities
Reducing the harmful consequences 
▸▸
of criminal acts
Reducing the rewards 
▸▸
from criminal acts

12 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
Incapacitation
▸▸
 (or neutralisation) by denying perpetrators the 
ability (capacity) to carry out new criminal acts
Desistance and rehabilitation
▸▸
 by making it possible for people who 
have been involved in or punished for crime to settle back into a 
normal life
From a purely analytical perspective this list depicts a successive chain of 
prevention barriers in which those not stopped by the first barrier may 
be stopped by the next, or the one after that. It begins with the most basic 
mechanism: the vast majority of people refrain from violence because 
they view it as morally wrong, finding it inexcusable and unthinkable 
to hurt other people. Those who are not stopped by this normative bar-
rier may perhaps be deterred by the threat of punishment. If deterrence 
does not work either, they may be stopped before they can carry out the 
act (disruption), and so on. In practice these mechanisms (with their 
relevant measures) will be implemented simultaneously and not in a 
particular sequence.
Thus, this ordering merely represents one way of illustrating a possible 
logic. When the model is applied to other forms of crime (e.g. criminal 
youth gangs) it might be more natural to set up the elements in a differ-
ent order which may make more sense analytically, e.g. by starting with 
reducing recruitment. Neither does this division into nine preventive 
mechanisms represent an absolute or natural number: the categories 
could have been either more refined or cruder.7 For example, one pos-
sible additional mechanism could have been diversion,8 which would be 
very relevant to reduce some types of crime but less relevant to other 
forms. The aim is for these nine mechanisms to be sufficiently distinct 
and relevant to function as good analytical tools in the field of crime 
prevention in general and preventing terrorism in particular.
Nine generic mechanisms for preventing crime
Normative barriers to committing criminal acts
Most people refrain from carrying out most types of criminal acts not out 
of a fear of punishment but because it is wrong, and because they usually 
do not perceive committing a criminal act to be an “action alternative” 
(Wikström, Tseloni & Karlis 2011). Self-control, their conscience and a 
capacity to feel compassion for others who could become the victims 

13
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
of harmful acts mean that committing such acts is beyond their action 
horizon. Positive socialisation during one’s upbringing, interaction in 
social situations and integrating moral systems into one’s personality 
help to build and internalise these normative barriers to committing 
crime. Most of us occasionally feel our conscience fighting against our 
giving into temptation that could result in an offence. However, most 
often the notion of committing a crime is simply out of the question.
At the same time, most of us have strong normative barriers to com-
mitting most types of criminal acts but far weaker barriers to other types 
of offences, e.g. breaking speed limits, tax rules, bans on illicit distill-
ing of alcohol or customs regulations. The strength of these normative 
barriers in relation to the type of offence varies considerably between 
different social environments. Some subcultures or communities accept 
the breaking of certain regulations that in other environments would 
be considered serious breaches of the normal rules that apply, e.g. using 
illegal intoxicants, inside information in share trading or violence to 
resolve conflicts.
It should also be kept in mind that criminal acts are committed not 
only by those with links to marginal social environments. Typically, 
every third young man has been charged with at least one offence before 
they turn 25 (Skarðhamar 2004).9 In other words, committing an offence 
or two during your youth is quite common.
Parents, schools and positive role models are important prevention 
actors when it comes to building normative barriers to crime, although 
legislators, the criminal justice system, the media, religious authorities 
and others also play central roles in defining right and wrong. Providing 
children and young people with good role models who represent cred-
ible moral systems is a powerful means to reduce future acts of crime.
However, legislation can also help to establish normative barriers. 
Many acts that used to be permitted have, in the not too distant past, 
been criminalised and over time come to be considered immoral acts 
by most people. Examples of explicit criminalisation that have helped 
to change society’s norms include prohibitions against parents smacking 
their children, smoking in public places, and companies giving bribes to 
win contracts abroad. Up until 1995 Norwegian companies could claim 
tax deductions for paid bribes abroad and it was not until 1999 that brib-
ing foreign officials became a criminal offence!
Normative barriers are probably the mechanism that prevents the larg-
est number of criminal acts (although these non-acts are hard to count!). 

14 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
However, at the same time, these are fragile barriers. Some people are 
more poorly equipped with normative barriers and empathy than other 
people, and some appear to be completely devoid of moral scruples and 
compassion for others. Even people who have normal inhibitions against 
inflicting harm and suffering on other people can under certain circum-
stances bring themselves to carry out gruesome acts. External events 
can shake a person’s (or a group of people’s) perceptions of the social, 
political and moral order, which can turn customary notions and norms 
upside down (Wiktorowicz 2005; Bjørgo 2005: 3–4). Research conducted 
by social psychologists shows that falling under the influence of strong 
leaders, groups or organisational structures can result in normally moral 
people inflicting pain and suffering on other people (Milgram 1974).10
Reducing recruitment to criminal social environments  
and activities
One key prevention mechanism is to prevent people getting involved in 
crime because this can easily result in them continuing to be involved. 
When someone commits a criminal act for the first time it does not nec-
essarily mean that the person concerned has thus embarked on a crimi-
nal career. However, committing an offence does increase the likelihood 
of the person repeating the act.11 There are a number of mechanisms 
that together can reinforce a person’s propensity to continue commit-
ting criminal acts. When someone has first broken through a normative 
barrier it is easier from an emotional perspective to break the barrier 
next time. If the person gets away with the criminal act (perhaps with 
a reward), they may learn to associate crime with something positive, 
i.e. crime pays. Meanwhile, paradoxically enough, being caught and 
imprisoned can also increase the risk of recidivism (Gendreau, Goggin 
& Cullen 1999) since prison sentences have many negative side effects. 
If the person concerned gets involved in a social environment in which 
crime is viewed as normal and positive, this strongly increases the likeli-
hood of them continuing their criminal activities (Sutherland 1939). 
Some forms of crime are also highly group based. This is particularly 
true with regard to violence and other crimes associated with gangs and 
extremist social environments. The vast majority of repeat offenders 
debut at an early age (Moffitt 1993).
There is therefore good reason to focus heavily on preventing 
people – especially young people – from starting to commit criminal 
acts or getting involved in criminal or violent extremist social scenes. 

15
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
Prevention measures can be introduced at a community (macro) level, 
group (meso) level or individual (micro) level. Measures at a community 
level aim to mitigate negative social conditions that contribute to social 
marginalisation and ostracism, which in turn provide fertile ground 
for the development of crime. Poor environments for children to grow 
up in, high unemployment, social divisions and economic inequality, 
and a lack of future prospects are factors that contribute to a high level 
of crime in society (see Brown, Esbensen & Geis 1998: 261–289 for a 
review). It follows that reducing such risk factors through social and 
economic measures (at the levels of community, group or individual) is 
likely to lead to a reduction in crime level. At a group level, attempting 
to dissolve destructive social environments in which young people are 
involved or guiding them in more positive directions are relevant means. 
Similarly, one can intervene in problematic local environments such as 
schools with a serious bullying problem, which can, for example, lead to 
vulnerable young people seeking refuge in criminal gangs and extrem-
ist groups (Bjørgo & Carlsson 1999: 88–89; Olsen 2011: 61–63). A broad 
range of special prevention measures can be introduced at an individual 
level to prevent this unwanted development, especially with respect to 
children and young people (e.g. child welfare authorities, multisystemic 
therapy (MST), follow-up teams, the police’s empowerment conversa-
tions or preventive dialogues and much more). The primary target group 
for this mechanism is those who are categorised as being at risk of end-
ing up pursuing a criminal (or extremist) career, although some efforts 
may also be directed at broader population groups in addition to those 
who are already involved in crime. In a welfare state, a large number of 
different prevention actors possess a broad range of social prevention 
means for combating the marginalisation of children, young people and 
adults, and stopping various forms of problem behaviour developing 
(Hebberecht & Baillergeau 2012).
Deterrence through threats of punishment or  
other negative sanctions
Deterrence uses punitive sanctions to dissuade persons from commit-
ting criminal offences in the future due to fear of the resulting reactions 
and consequences. This mechanism takes place on the mental level as a 
rational calculation that weighs costs and risks against rewards. Specific 
deterrence works on those who have personally experienced the conse-
quences of punishment and choose to refrain from crime in the future, to 

16 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
“teach them a lesson”. General deterrence works on those who see others 
being prosecuted and who therefore choose to refrain from carrying out 
a criminal act themselves because they regard the risk of punishment 
as too great (Brown, Esbensen & Geis 1998: 47, 171–222; Myhrer 2011: 
95–100; Sarnecki 2003: 360–370).
Deterrence is only a relevant prevention mechanism for those who 
are actually disposed or tempted to commit a specific criminal act. 
Committing such an act is out of the question for the vast majority of 
people, and consequently the level of punishment or risk of discovery 
is of little significance vis-à-vis their behaviour. On the other hand, the 
perception of the risk of being caught and punished is of far greater 
importance to those who are not governed by self-control and internal-
ised norms but rather by weighing up the potential costs and rewards of 
committing a criminal act (Wikström, Tseloni & Karlis 2011). In other 
words, the target group for this prevention mechanism is groups at risk 
and problem groups (secondary and tertiary prevention).
Two factors in particular can aid deterrence: the risk of discovery and 
the severity of punishment (Wikström et al. 2011: 403; Andenes 1994; 
Myhrer 2011: 95). Many people with a propensity to commit crime will 
not be deterred by severe punishments if they think the chances of being 
caught and having to pay for their actions are small. On the other hand, 
if they think they face a realistic chance of being caught, the severity of 
the punishment is of greater relevance. The formal level of punishment 
is about the length of prison sentence, level of fine, seizures, loss of rights 
and so on. The principal actors with respect to formal sanctions are pri-
marily the police and criminal justice system. The courts and legislators 
determine the severity of the punishment, while the efforts of the police 
affect the risk of discovery (together with other control bodies, security 
guards, the media and the general public). However, informal sanctions 
can be just as serious and deterring as formal ones, e.g. the negative 
social consequences associated with crime and scandal. The seriousness 
of these can vary in relation to both the type of crime and social position. 
For many people the social costs of being found guilty of drunk driving 
or being fined for purchasing sexual services will be far more destructive 
for their career and private life – and thus more of a deterrent – than 
the formal sanctions. Family, friends, employer, news media and “busy 
bodies” are key actors in relation to informal social sanctions. For some 
types of crime, the loss of rights will be more of a deterrence than prison 
or fines. This is particularly true with respect to financial crime where 

17
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
the loss of an alcohol license, the right to run a business, or the right to 
bid for tenders can have major consequences for a company that breaks 
the law and rules.
Disrupting criminal acts
When neither normative barriers nor the deterrent effect of punishment 
can persuade someone to refrain from wanting to commit a criminal act, 
a planned or ongoing criminal act can still be halted through disruption. 
This mechanism often involves two phases in which the first phase is 
usually quite similar in most cases, while the second can differ greatly 
from case to case. The first phase of disruption is discovery, i.e. a planned 
or ongoing criminal act is revealed by someone or something observ-
ing that something is afoot. This could be a burglar alarm going off, a 
guard discovering something out of the ordinary, or the security services 
uncovering preparations for an act of terrorism. In the next phase the 
offender could choose to abort the attempt and run off, he could receive 
a warning that gets him to back off (i.e. a form of deterrence), he could 
be chased from the scene by a furious homeowner, or he could be hand-
cuffed and put in a cell by the police (incapacitation or neutralisation).
In other words, a number of different actors have quite different 
means that can activate the disruption mechanism. The target group for 
the disruption mechanism is problem groups (tertiary prevention), i.e. 
those who are in the process of preparing or committing a criminal act. 
Successful disruption can in the next phase activate other prevention 
mechanisms such as incapacitation (through imprisonment), deterrence 
(by demonstrating that the risk of discovery is real and that the conse-
quence will be punishment) or even the building of normative barriers 
(empowerment conversations with a young, first time offender who 
realises stealing is wrong).
The police and the security services may in specific circumstances use 
a number of special investigation methods (or coercive measures) with 
the aim of disrupting preparations for especially serious crimes, which 
are particularly relevant when it comes to organised crime and terrorism. 
These include the use of monitoring communications, covert searches 
and seizures, technological tracking, bugging rooms and hidden CCTV 
surveillance. In most Western countries, the police require a court war-
rant in order to employ these methods, especially when it comes to the 
more intrusive methods which violate privacy to a large extent (Myhrer 
2011: 37–40), whereas in other countries the police and security services 

18 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
are able to employ such intrusive methods at their own discretion with 
very limited judicial control or regulation.
Protecting vulnerable targets
One key crime prevention mechanism is identifying and eliminating 
opportunities to commit specific types of criminal act by protecting vul-
nerable targets. This is what the “situational prevention strategy” seeks 
to address (Clarke 1980; 1997; Clarke & Newman 2006). This section 
combines two central elements of the situational prevention strategy: 
implementing measures that increase the risk of discovery and make 
it more difficult and demanding for malicious actors to carry out their 
actions.12
While most prevention measures try to influence criminal actors 
directly, situational prevention measures try to influence actors indirectly 
by changing the situations in which the unwanted actions take place. 
The means are intended, both separately and together, to change the 
criminal actors’ rational calculations of the costs and rewards of carrying 
out specific actions such that they refrain from doing so. They can partly 
work by increasing the demands on capacity such that the relative ability 
to carry out specific actions is reduced. At the same time the motivations 
for attacking these specific targets can be reduced. In other words, the 
target group is people who are disposed to committing criminal acts, or 
who could be tempted in the right situation. This is thus secondary and 
tertiary prevention. At the same time it is paradoxical that some of the 
measures impose a burden of control on everyone, including those with 
no malicious intent (Kleinig 2000).
The situational prevention strategy provides space for an enormous 
range of potential means, which in turn are at the disposal of a very 
large number of different prevention actors. One main principle is that 
each owner of the location or “problem” bears primary responsibility 
for protecting their area with suitable measures (Clarke & Eck 2003: 38). 
Homeowners must sort out locks and alarms, shopping centres must hire 
security guards, nightclubs must have doormen, the airport authorities 
are responsible for security at airports, while the police bear primary 
responsibly for safety in the streets, albeit together with other prevention 
actors.
One weakness of situational prevention measures is that protecting 
a potential target (“target hardening”) may instead cause criminals to 

19
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
choose other, less well-protected targets (“soft targets”), e.g. a house in 
the neighbourhood that does not have a burglar alarm. This displace-
ment effect is real, although researchers disagree on its magnitude and 
how it varies between different types of crime. Some research indicates 
that the displacement effect is generally less than the reduction in crime 
where the measure is introduced, in other words the net effect is posi-
tive (Clarke & Eck 2003: 13). In addition to this, a positive redistribution 
effect can also occur sometimes due to the measure having a crime 
reducing effect beyond the area where the measure was actually intro-
duced (Clarke 2005: 49–53). Another disadvantage of situational preven-
tion is that there is no limit to how many places can be protected against 
potential crime and the costs can be enormous. At the same time, it is a 
well-documented fact that many protection measures actually work as 
intended (Clarke 1997).
Reducing the harmful consequences of crime
It is impossible to prevent all criminal acts – some of these types of 
acts will be carried out despite numerous prevention barriers. But even 
if criminal acts are carried out, this does not mean that prevention no 
longer has a role to play in these cases. Advance preparations make it 
possible to prevent or reduce the subsequent harm caused by criminal 
acts. Such harm reducing measures can help to save lives, lessen suf-
fering and fear, minimise losses, and restore normality as quickly and 
completely as possible. However, this generally means the measures have 
to be in place before the incident occurs so they work instantly or can be 
put into action quickly and efficiently. The content of the harm reducing 
measures and who they will be implemented by varies strongly depend-
ing on the type of crime. The primary target group for this prevention 
mechanism is the direct and indirect victims.
Examples of harm reducing measures include insurance coverage for 
theft from your home, rapid access to ambulances and intensive medical 
treatment in the event of violent acts, crisis centres for abused women, 
supervised injecting rooms for drug abusers, joint training exercises 
for emergency services in advance of terrorism incidents, and the use 
of safety belts when joyriding or drunk driving in cars. None of these 
measures prevents the criminal act occurring, but they reduce the 
negative consequences of the incident. It is when these measures are pre-
pared and/or implemented in advance that they become preventive and 

20 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
proactive rather than just a reactive response. Harm reduction is aimed 
at reducing the adverse effects of crime on the victims, which is the main 
target group, but paradoxically it is often the potential victims who are 
among the most important prevention actors. Frequently, it is those who 
regard themselves as the potential victims of criminal acts who decide to 
implement measures that could reduce both the risk and harm of these 
potential criminal acts. This depends on the crime type, though.
It is in the area of drugs that harm reduction research and policies have 
developed the furthest as an alternative to the more repressive forms of 
combating drugs,13 but they are also attracting increasing interest in more 
general crime prevention. Examples of this include prostitution (Rekart 
2005) and anti-social behaviour (Innes & Weston 2010: 43–46). Some 
versions of harm reduction are controversial strategies when applied to 
certain crime problems, such as regulating drug use and prostitution 
rather than banning it, as it is perceived as giving up to fight the actual 
problem and just manage the harm it is causing. However, harm reduc-
tion is nevertheless an underdeveloped strategy in crime prevention, 
with a great potential for being applied to many crime problems, and in 
uncontroversial ways too.
Reducing the rewards from crime
Even it if has not been possible to prevent the commission of criminal 
acts it is still possible to prevent (or reduce the likelihood of) repetition. 
In this case, one important mechanism is to show that “crime doesn’t 
pay” by reducing or eliminating the rewards. This can in turn reduce the 
motivation of the perpetrator (or others with a propensity to commit 
crime) to repeat the act because they see that the rewards are small. This 
then is a form of tertiary prevention directed at those who are involved 
in crime, as well as at those who are contemplating becoming involved. 
It is important to keep in mind that the rewards of some types of crime 
may be intangible, such as social status or political benefits.
A number of actors have effective ways of reducing the rewards from 
criminal acts. The police and criminal justice system can seize financial 
profits (often in cooperation with financial institutions and the tax 
authorities) or property acquired through criminal activities, e.g. status 
symbols or stolen goods. Measures against receiving can also undermine 
the market for stolen goods. Customs and excise authorities can discover 
and seize drugs or other smuggled goods. Banks and security compa-
nies can ensure that banknotes are destroyed by coloured dyes when 

21
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
stolen from an armoured vehicle or by blowing up a cash machine. Car 
manufacturers can install original car stereos that do not work if they are 
removed from the car. Anti-money laundering can reduce opportunities 
for criminals to enjoy the fruits of their criminal income. Municipalities 
and landlords can ensure graffiti is removed quickly. The authorities and 
general public can avoid behaving like terrorists want them to.
All of these means are intended to minimise the rewards of commit-
ting offences such that the actors themselves (and possibly others) lose 
their motivation to repeat an act. Future crime is thus reduced.
Incapacitation – denying people the ability to carry out 
criminal acts
Incapacitation is about neutralisation – a mechanism for denying 
malicious actors the capacity to commit criminal acts (Sarnecki 2003: 
371–377). The means we usually think of is the use of incarceration in 
prison, but there are also a number of other measures to activate the 
same mechanism. When the police force a threatening person to the 
ground and handcuff them, this is incapacitation. The same is true when 
a drunk driver loses his driving license or a wife takes the car keys from 
her drunken husband. In the USA, incapacitation has become the most 
important justification for both the extensive use of prison sentences 
and the death penalty: people who are kept locked up or killed are in 
an effective manner prevented from committing criminal acts in society 
(Zimring & Hawkins 1997).
One primary target group for this mechanism is those who have 
committed an illegal act and thus can be incapacitated through impris-
onment to prevent them committing new criminal acts. However, inca-
pacitation is in many cases also used against those whom the police or 
security services think may commit an unwanted action, but before the 
criminal act has taken place, i.e. as part of disruption. Detention for 
the purpose of preventing repeated criminal acts has a long tradition 
in criminal law. However, the scope of so-called proactive criminal law 
has in recent times been expanded in many countries (Myhrer 2011: 
37–40, 102–105; Husabø 2003). For example, people can now be made 
subject to a restraining order or banning order to prevent them threat-
ening or using violence against a former spouse or partner. A prohibi-
tion against carrying a knife or firearm in a public place also enables 
the police to intervene proactively by seizing these items or issuing a 
fine – before any violent situation occurs. The aim is to remove access 

22 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
to weapons in places where violent conflicts can easily occur so that the 
capacity to inflict fatal harm on others is reduced. Another effect can be 
to reduce the mutual fear and “arms race” in some young people’s social 
environments (Bjørgo, Haaland & Carlsson 2001: 155–156). This again 
illustrates the close relationship between incapacitation and disrup-
tion. A number of countries, both democratic and undemocratic, are 
using administrative detention for security reasons, that is, arrest and 
detention without trial and often even without a charge. The reasoning 
is usually based upon contentions that the suspect is likely to pose a 
threat in the future. Thus, when people are detained, it is meant to be 
preventive rather than punitive. This practice is customary in many of 
the countries that belonged to the British Empire, including the UK. 
However, administrative detention is widely considered a breach of 
civil liberties and rights and contradicting fundamental principles of 
the rule of law.14
Quitting crime: desistance and rehabilitation
When a person who has participated in criminal acts and groups ceases 
this involvement, this represents a key crime prevention mechanism: 
the person commits no (or possibly fewer) criminal acts in the future. 
In recent years these processes have garnered greater interest in both 
criminological academic communities and among crime prevention 
actors, and are described using the terms desistance, disengagement, 
deradicalisation or exit processes.
One way of understanding these processes into and out of crime is to 
view them from a career perspective over the life cycle of the career. It is 
a well-established finding in criminology that most persistent offenders 
started committing criminal acts in their early teens or before. Offences 
usually peak at the end of people’s teens and in their early twenties before 
they decrease. Around 85 per cent of offenders have stopped commit-
ting criminal acts by the time they turn 28 years old (Maruna 2001: 20; 
Sampson & Laub 1995). This tendency to grow out of crime is one of the 
most robust findings in modern criminology, although much research 
remains to be done when it comes to understanding why and how this 
happens. It has been hypothesised that as you age your personality 
matures and you become less driven by impulse and less of a thrill seeker 
(Gottfredson & Hirschi 1986), or that one stops socialising with criminal 
friends (Sutherland 1939). The most promising perspective is to explain 
it as being due to turning points in life resulting in new social networks 

23
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
and obligations, like getting married and having children, or getting an 
education or job. These impact the former offender’s values, priorities 
and rational choices, at the same time as they expose themselves to new 
forms of social control (Sampson & Laub 1995; Laub & Sampson 2001; 
2003; Maruna 2001).
A parallel research tradition has studied how people involved in 
extremist groups and violent gangs disengage from these groups (Bjørgo 
1997: 193–246; 2011; Bjørgo & Horgan 2009; Decker & Lauritzen 1996; 
Pyrooz & Decker 2011).15 These exit or disengagement processes can be 
described as an interaction between push factors (negative factors and 
circumstances that make remaining in the violent group unattractive) 
and pull factors (positive opportunities that pull the person in the direc-
tion of a more satisfying alternative).
These processes out of crime are in principle “natural” social mecha-
nisms that, to some extent, happen organically. If these natural push and 
pull processes are to be used actively in crime prevention, one must seek 
to reinforce and support them without undermining them, while at the 
same time trying to reduce the barriers these former offenders face with 
regard to their rehabilitation and integration into normal society.
The correctional services, including prisons and parole officers, are of 
course a key actor in the work of guiding convicted people back into 
society. Job training and educational provision and other measures in 
prisons and various forms of aftercare are core elements. Employment 
services, schools, police and other public institutions can also contribute 
their means. This may also include alternative ways of reacting to young 
offenders such as various forms of restorative justice, mediation boards 
and follow-up teams. Voluntary organisations can play important roles 
in integration by helping ex-convicts connect with new prosocial net-
works where they can find new friends and perhaps also a life partner. 
Sometimes private companies take on former offenders as labour and 
help them gain a footing in working life. Self-help groups run by former 
offenders or extremists may have a particular role to play due to their 
street credibility: “I have been where you are now”.16
A sub-variant of this strategy could be called “diversion”. This involves 
getting offenders to swap a criminal and harmful activity for a legal, 
acceptable activity without them having to give up everything associ-
ated with what they were doing. This could, for example, involve getting 
young people who commit crime or get high for the thrill of it interested 
in an exciting sport that it becomes a dominant life activity for them 

24 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
(Minken 1998). Another example is getting extremist groups that have 
used sabotage or terroristic methods to instead become involved in 
political processes such as negotiations or the use of non-violent media 
strategies to realise their political goals.
From model to strategy
So far we have looked at prevention models and mechanisms from a 
relatively abstract perspective. To develop the prevention models into 
prevention strategies they must be concretised with regard to more spe-
cific types of crime and preferably down to specific crime problems at 
a national or local level. Each of the nine sub-strategies must thus be 
specified for the actual type of crime or crime problem. Even though the 
basic structure of the model will be the same, the contents with regard 
to measures, prevention actors and target groups will be quite different 
depending on whether the strategies are aimed at preventing terrorism, 
drugs crime, domestic violence or youth gangs. Questions that should be 
clarified are:
How do the various 
▸▸
preventive mechanisms work to reduce a 
specific crime problem?
Which 
▸▸
measures or methods can be used to activate these 
mechanisms?
Who are the 
▸▸
principal actors in the implementation of the various 
methods?
Who are the 
▸▸
target groups for the various strategies and their 
relevant measures?
What are the 
▸▸
strengths and the positive side effects of the various 
measures?
What are the 
▸▸
limitations, costs and negative side effects of the 
various measures?
Principal actors are those responsible for implementing the most relevant 
measures within the various strategies. In addition to the principal actors 
there may also be some actors who play supporting roles within the 
strategy. The police are one of the principal actors in several of the pre-
vention strategies (especially deterrence, disruption and incapacitation), 
but play a less prominent role in strategies where other prevention agents 

25
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
play the principal roles. When it comes to protecting vulnerable targets, 
reducing the rewards of crime, reducing adverse effects, constructing 
normative barriers to crime, preventing recruitment, or rehabilitation, 
the security companies, criminal justice systems, prison services, news 
media, various political authorities, voluntary organisations, social 
networks, schools, political activists or religious leaders may play more 
central roles. Therefore, it is important to ensure constructive interac-
tion between the various actors within and across different prevention 
strategies in which different actors understand and respect the actors’ 
roles and measures.
However, one recurrent problem is the tendency for some actors to 
attribute the greatest importance to their own role and to prefer one or 
a few strategies (with the appropriate measures) in efforts to counter 
terrorism (or other crime) rather than making use of the entire toolbox. 
It is perhaps not surprising that specialist actors primarily focus on strat-
egies and measures based on their own capacity to implement certain 
types of measures. Differences in professional cultures, political cultures 
and core values also have a strong influence on the prevention strate-
gies that are preferred. The USA, which has both an enormous military 
capacity and a certain cultural tradition of resolving problems through 
the use of violent force, focused in its “War on Terror” on incapacitation 
and deterrence through the use of military force – both to crush terror 
organisations physically (“kill or capture”) and to deter individuals and 
states from supporting terrorists. In Europe, the authorities have placed 
far greater importance on preventing terrorism by addressing the root 
causes behind the growth of terrorism and attempting to intervene in 
radicalisation processes (Coolsaet & Struye de Swielande 2007; Bjørgo 
2005). To the degree they employ incapacitation and deterrence, most 
European countries prefer to rely on the police and criminal justice 
system rather than military force.
Some people appear to believe that one single strategy, e.g. situational 
prevention, is the only strategy worth focusing on (cf. Clarke & Newman 
2006). I will argue here that different strategies both could and should 
complement each other. The different strategies are not mutually exclu-
sive, but significant tensions can exist between them. It is important to 
understand how and under which conditions some strategies can under-
mine other strategies (e.g. “kill or capture” versus “winning hearts and 
minds”), so that these undesirable side effects can be minimised.

26 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
The target groups for the various prevention strategies can be grouped 
into four main categories:17
Prevention targeted at whole population groups
▸▸
 or everyone 
within a broad category, e.g. x-raying the hand luggage of all 
passengers travelling by air. This is also called “primary prevention”.
Prevention targeted at defined risk groups 
▸▸
who are vulnerable 
of developing in a negative direction or towards acts that could 
potentially represent a danger. One example of this is reporting 
suspicious bank transactions (“anti-money laundering reports”). 
This is called “secondary prevention”.
Prevention targeted at problem groups
▸▸
 and individuals who 
exhibit actual problem behaviour, e.g. participation in gangs, 
violent extremist groups or terror organisations. This is called 
“tertiary prevention”.
Prevention targeted at victims
▸▸
 of crime: individuals who are 
affected, their relatives and society as a whole. Victims are often 
forgotten and neglected!
Some prevention strategies target only one of these categories, while 
others target more than one. For example, incapacitation targets only 
active problem groups, while deterrence seeks to deter both active and 
potential perpetrators from criminal acts. However, it should be kept in 
mind that the “official” target group for a set of measures are not neces-
sarily the only ones the measures are intended to impact, or sometimes 
not even the most important one. In counter-terrorism as well as in 
crime policies in general, it is common that tough policies are mainly 
intended to impress voters for the next election or political and military 
allies. Such considerations may sometimes override the official motive 
and may actually cause unintended side effects which may aggravate the 
original problem (de Graaf 2011: 6–8).
Measures are, as mentioned previously, the methods or deliberate courses 
of action implemented to activate a specific mechanism and through this 
achieve an intended effect. However, they can also have unintended side 
effects of both a positive and negative nature. As Enders and Sandler (1993: 
843) remind us, “… the unintended consequences of an antiterrorism 
policy may be far more costly than the intended consequences, and must 
be anticipated.” Therefore, when choosing between possible measures 
the strengths and benefits ought to be weighed against the limitations, 
costs and possible negative side effects. In a disruption strategy such 

27
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
considerations can, for example, result in deciding for early intervention 
involving dialogue and warnings rather than waiting for someone to have 
committed acts that are serious enough to be prosecuted.
The following section will specify the general prevention model for 
the types of crime defined as acts of terrorism.
Establishing norms 
▸▸
against the acceptance of violence and 
terrorism
Reducing the causes and motivations 
▸▸
that lead people to get 
involved in terrorism
Deterrence
▸▸
 through the threat of punishment or other negative 
consequences
Disruption
▸▸
 of planned terrorist attacks
Protecting vulnerable targets
▸▸
 by making terrorist attacks more 
difficult and risky
Reducing the harmful consequences
▸▸
 of terrorist attacks
Reducing the rewards
▸▸
 from terrorist attacks
Incapacitation
▸▸
 by eliminating the capacity of (potential) terrorists 
to carry out acts of terrorism
Disengagement
▸▸
 from terrorism – as individuals or groups
Notes
A marked shift in policy occurred in the Bush administration in 2006 when 
1	
the limitations of a one-sided military strategy approach to the problem 
of terrorism were realised. A search for alternatives commenced, such as 
addressing the root causes of terrorism, trying to “turn” groups involved in 
insurgency and terrorism, and developing “counter-narratives”.
For a broader discussion of definitions and terroristic strategies, see Bjørgo 
2	
and Heradstveit (1993) and Schmid (2011, ch. 2). There is broad agreement on 
the core meaning of the term terrorism, but considerable disagreement about 
its limits. Some analysts want to reserve the term for non-state actors, while 
others want to include state terrorism. Some want to define acts as terrorism 
only if the acts are directed at civilian targets, while others want to include all 
non-combatants (i.e. also military targets not involved in the combat). Some 
analysts want to explicitly define the purpose of acts of terrorism as political, 
while others want to assert that criminals and other actors can also use 
terroristic methods. Meanwhile, the prevention strategies discussed in this 
article can also be applied to these different definitions.

28 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
One striking example of how means can become a goal in themselves is the 
3	
Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ Foreign Policy Strategy for Combating 
International Terrorism (Utenriksdepartementet 2006), a document that lists 
everything Norway is doing in the international arena in this field (including 
ratifying a long series of counter-terrorism conventions and various forms 
of aid). However, it is very difficult to discern a clear strategic idea in this 
strategy document. The unanswered question is: how will everything Norway 
is doing help reduce the problems associated with terrorism? In politics, it is 
apparently more important to show that something is being done than the 
actual effects of these actions.
See Beatrice de Graaf’s (2011) excellent study 
4	
Evaluating Counterterrorism 
Performance: A Comparative Study for a thorough analysis of what kinds of 
successes and impacts different counter-terrorist policies have produced in 
four different case studies (from the Netherlands, the Federal Republic of 
Germany, the USA and Italy).
A follow-up study is Newman and Clarke (2008). A more recent example 
5	
is Freilich and Newman (2009), applying the situational prevention model 
to several forms of terrorism. For a critique of Newman and Clarke, see 
Weemink (2012), pointing out that their perspective is too narrow, a view I 
share.
The key concepts in the risk-based crime prevention model are discussed in 
6	
NOU (Norwegian Official Report) 2006: 6, 35–36. However, the “probability” 
parameter is highly contested (Aven 2008), as it involves a high degree of 
uncertainty.
Nick Tilley (2008, ch. 2) also analyses crime prevention on the basis of 
7	
preventive mechanisms. He uses five forms of “direct crime prevention”: 
incapacitation, specific deterrence, general deterrence, restorative justice 
(like mediation boards) and disruption. He also mentions five indirect 
mechanisms: collaboration, information and expertise, leverage, victim 
services, and incentives for treatment. In my views, these are better described 
as means rather than as mechanisms.
The “diversion” mechanism would describe how possible perpetrators 
8	
could be diverted away from certain harmful criminal activities by offering 
harmless but attractive alternatives, e.g. organised motor sport on safe racing 
circuits as a substitute to speeding in the streets. In the present model, 
“diversion” can be seen as a sub-mechanism under “reducing recruitment” as 
well as under “rehabilitation”.
In Norway, 33 per cent of all young men have been charged with something 
9	
before they turn 25 but the patterns are probably quite similar elsewhere. 
If young women are also included, 20 per cent will have been charged. 
These figures do not include fines. http://www.ssb.no/sosiale-forhold-

29
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Introduction
og-kriminalitet/artikler-og-publikasjoner/noen-faa-veier-tungt-i-
kriminalitetsbildet [accessed 22.03.2013].
The limitations of the normative prevention mechanism are discussed 
10	
in more detail in the next chapter, which also describes the Milgram 
experiment.
Of those under 25 years old who have been charged with a crime, just under 
11	
half (42 per cent) have been charged for just one offence, while the majority 
(58 per cent) have been charged with more than one offence. More than half 
of the crimes were committed by 10 per cent of the registered offenders. 
http://www.ssb.no/samfunnsspeilet/utg/200403/04/art-2004–06–16–01.html 
[accessed 06.03.2013].
Ronald Clarke’s situational prevention model also contains three other 
12	
elements: reducing the rewards, reducing provocations, removing excuses. 
In the model presented here, these elements are either separated out as 
separate mechanisms (reducing the rewards) or are incorporated in other 
mechanisms (reducing recruitment and building normative barriers).
See the open access 
13	
Harm Reduction Journal, http://www.
harmreductionjournal.com/content [accessed 06.03.2013].
For an overview of the practice and critique of administrative detention, 
14	
see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Administrative_detention [accessed 
06.03.2013].
For a more detailed review of the literature about 
15	
desistance and 
disengagement from different type of criminal and extremist groups, see 
Bjørgo and Horgan (2009: 5–10).
Scandinavian examples include KRIS (Criminals’ Return Into Society), 
16	
WayBack, Exit (for former right-wing extremists), TBM (Former Gang 
Members) and Passus (also for and by former gang members).
It is customary to include only the first three target groups for prevention 
17	
efforts, while here victims are included as a separate target group.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Part II
The Preventive 
Mechanisms Applied

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
31
2
Norm Setting against 
Violence and Terrorism
Abstract: Moral barriers against inflicting death and 
suffering on other people is probably what keeps most 
people from engaging in terrorism, even if they may 
hold serious grievances. Basic upbringing, socialisation 
and education are the principal ways such norms are 
internalised among children and young people. Parents, 
teachers and other moral authorities are main preventive 
actors but peers and other role models may increasingly 
play leading roles in forming attitudes. Although norms 
and moral values is probably the most effective barrier 
against participation in terrorism and violence, some 
individuals have few scruples against causing suffering to 
others. Even among “normal people” morality is a fragile 
barrier which may crumble under certain circumstances. 
Nevertheless, building and maintaining such norms is one 
of the most important strategies for preventing terrorism.
Keywords: attitudes; empathy; moral values; normative 
barriers; role models; scruples; socialisation  
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

32 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
For most people it would, under normal circumstances, be almost 
unthinkable to carry out acts of violence and inflict death or suffering 
upon other people to promote a political cause. The idea partly goes 
against their conscience and moral values of right and wrong, and they 
partly react emotionally to the idea of inflicting pain on other people 
because they are capable of feeling empathy and compassion for others.1 
For the vast majority of those who might be angry or frustrated by politi-
cal injustice, this normative barrier will be sufficient to refrain from get-
ting involved in political violence and terrorism (Myhrer 2011: 77–80).
Normative questions about legitimacy and illegitimacy immediately 
arise when someone makes use of violence. The terms “violence” and 
“terrorism” are fundamentally speaking moral concepts, in the sense 
that they carry negative connotations, as opposed to terms like “force” or 
“resistance” (Riches 1986; Bjørgo & Carlsson 1999: 14–18). Most people 
accept that the use of violent force may be legitimate in some contexts, 
e.g. in self-defence situations, whether it concerns an attack against an 
individual or against a foreign invasion or occupying force. The state has 
given the police and military armed forces a monopoly on the legitimate 
use of force – within specified limits. These limits may vary significantly 
from country to country, even though some international norms and 
conventions concerning the use of force exist. However, if the state’s 
machinery of power exceeds these legal limits it can result in what we 
consider as police brutality, war crimes or state terrorism. When non-
state actors use violence for political purposes, they will often be accused 
of carrying out terrorism. This is another way of saying the violence is 
illegitimate and unacceptable. The violent actors and their supporters 
will naturally dispute this – hence the saying “One man’s terrorist is 
another man’s freedom fighter”. They will refer to their violent attacks 
as responses to injustice, as reprisals, as acts of defence, or to superior 
moral, political or religious principles which they assert legitimise their 
actions. They want to put their methods in a context that gives their 
violence legitimacy and a just cause. Thus the fight against terrorism is 
to a great degree a normative battle to win “hearts and minds”, both of 
the population they claim to be fighting for and of their supporters. In 
the best case scenario this may also sow seeds of doubt in the minds of 
terrorists themselves that they may be on the wrong path.
Within militant movements, there are also different degrees of accept-
ance of various forms of violence and targets (Hoffman 2006: 229ff). 
Some groups will accept only violence against material targets, not 

33
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Norm Setting against Violence and Terrorism 
human beings. Other groups condone violent attacks on specific catego-
ries of people, e.g. on police and military personnel or on political lead-
ers but not on “ordinary people”. And still others promote mass murder 
against broad categories of people as long as it serves their cause. But 
hardly any terrorists, not even the most ruthless ones, will operate with-
out any kind of restraints.2 Typically, terrorist movements may progress 
from a more restrictive towards a less restrictive use of brutal violence as 
the group undergoes a process of radicalisation, although few militant 
groups will go all the way towards total brutality. In most cases there 
will be divergent views within the movement on how ruthless the means 
they may employ are, and to what extent they should be restrained by 
moral and strategic considerations. Such discord is frequently a source 
of defection, splits and fragmentation in militant movements, serving to 
limit their violence and weaken their capacity. This may provide oppor-
tunities which informed counter-terrorist policies should make use of.
The preventive mechanism here consists of reinforcing objections and 
normative barriers to the use of violence and terrorism, and eliminating 
excuses and reasons for using violence.
Many different actors can play important roles when it comes to 
establishing normative barriers to violence and terrorism, and through 
different measures. Parents, schools and religious communities play 
leading roles in instilling moral attitudes in children and in helping 
them develop empathy for other people. This can be consolidated, 
developed further or changed through interaction and socialising with 
other people, especially those who are close to you, such as friends and 
workmates. Our individual moral compass is not set when we leave 
childhood behind – it can develop and change throughout life. Norms 
concerning crime and violence can also change over time at a societal 
level as well.3 Politicians can pass laws that criminalise certain activities 
such as providing financial or other support to terrorist organisations. 
Religious leaders can demonstrate that terrorism targeted at the civilian 
population is contrary to Islam or other religious moral systems. Other 
figures of authority and opinion makers can also have a big impact – not 
least when it comes to reducing recruitment to violent extremism. People 
who are already close to someone, and share many of the same (radical) 
values as them, often have the most influence – both positive and nega-
tive. Violent radicalisation often occurs via an entire peer group becom-
ing adherents to a violent doctrine (Sageman 2004, ch. 4). Awareness 
campaigns aimed at influencing population groups have been tried as a 

34 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
measure of constructing normative barriers to terrorism, but these cam-
paigns need to be very sophisticated to avoid smacking of propaganda.4 
Attitude formation that takes place in natural social contexts (such as 
schools, workplaces, peer groups, youth clubs or social media such as 
Facebook) has, as a rule, far greater impact. Strong, popular mobilisation 
and demonstrations against violence and terrorism can in some cases 
send an important message to violent groups and potential recruits, 
especially if terrorists have wrongly judged the mood of their public and 
carried out acts of terrorism that even “their own people” find unaccept-
able (cf. the Omagh bombing carried out by “The Real IRA” in 1998, see 
Cronin 2009: 57). However, it is even more important to prevent violent 
extremists winning “the street” and being allowed to portray themselves 
as heroes in the population group they claim to be fighting for.
The target group for the normative strategy is primarily the entire 
population or specific population groups. In some contexts it may be 
the population the terrorists claim to be fighting for or on behalf of, and 
from whom they may be able to obtain material support and normative 
legitimacy. Second, it may also be important to construct or reinforce 
normative barriers to violence in people and groups who might poten-
tially allow themselves to become radicalised and recruited to a militant 
movement, i.e. the risk groups. And ultimately it might in some cases 
also be possible to influence the norms of people and groups who are 
already actively involved in terrorism, i.e. the problem groups. This is 
looked at in more detail later in this study under the headings “Reducing 
the Emergence of Terrorism and Violent Radicalisation” (Chapter 3) and 
“Disengagement from Terrorism and Violent Extremism” (Chapter 10).
The advantages of this normative preventive mechanism are that it 
is uncontroversial, the measures are not repressive, and they do not 
contravene the principles of democracy or the rule of law. They largely 
involve general socialisation and integration into society, and do not 
need to be justified on the basis that they will prevent some people from 
becoming terrorists – even if this is a positive side effect. Nonetheless, 
empathy and moral norms against inflicting suffering and injury on 
other people are the barriers that make most of us view terroristic vio-
lence as both repugnant and something we could not envisage getting 
involved in. However, paradoxically enough these are still very fragile 
barriers to terrorism.
The disadvantages and limitations of the normative preventive mecha-
nism include the fact that some people are more poorly equipped with 

35
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Norm Setting against Violence and Terrorism 
normative barriers and empathy than most others, and some individuals 
appear to be completely devoid of moral scruples and compassion for 
others.5 A few individuals like this can usually be found in both criminal 
circles and terrorist movements in which their indifference and brutality 
can be an asset to the group. Nonetheless, such psychopaths are more 
the exception than the rule in terrorist organisations (Horgan 2005: 
49–53). The research literature shows that most of those who participate 
in terrorist groups and activities appear to be relatively normal and 
have personality types that are basically little different from those of 
the majority of people. Participation in terror activities cannot be sat-
isfactorily explained by the fact that terrorists have deviant individual 
personality traits (Horgan 2005: 53–79).6 However, being involved in 
terrorism and having committed killings or other atrocities is also likely 
to have an impact on the person’s mental normative boundaries and 
ability to suppress feelings of empathy. When Anders Behring Breivik 
massacred 68 people at UtØya, including children and women, he stated 
that the first killings were extremely difficult to get himself to carry out. 
The subsequent killings became increasingly easy.7
The other principal limitation of the normative preventive mechanism 
is that people who are basically equipped with normal inhibitions against 
inflicting harm and suffering on other people can under certain circum-
stances bring themselves to carry out horrible acts of terrorism. What 
might explain this? Researchers have pointed to at least two important 
circumstances or processes.
One of the processes is triggered by external events that shake a per-
son’s (or a group of people’s) perceptions of the social, political and moral 
order, something which creates a “cognitive opening” to turn upside 
down customary notions and norms (Wiktorowicz 2005; Bjørgo 2005: 
3–4). These could be dramatic events such as military invasions, mas-
sacres, police brutality, or the publication of blasphemous caricatures. 
There are also many examples of traumatic events on a personal level 
leading people into terroristic circles (Nesser 2010: 90–91). Personal 
experience of ethnic or religious discrimination or a close relative’s illness 
or death have been described as triggering events propelling individuals 
into a personal crisis and a radicalisation process.
The other main process that can cause completely normal people to 
carry out gruesome acts are socio-psychological mechanisms associ-
ated with coming under the influence of strong leaders, groups or 
organisational structures. A well-known series of laboratory experiments 

36 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
concerning obedience to authority figures (Milgram 1974) showed that 
normal people could be put in situations in which an authority figure got 
them to inflict powerful electric shocks on other people that (seemingly) 
caused great pain.8 In the experiments the majority of the participants 
allowed themselves to be persuaded to inflict a shock of up to 450 volts 
on a person in a neighbouring room. Only a minority refused or broke 
off their participation in the experiment.9 Similar results were obtained 
in the so-called Stanford Prison Experiment.10 Knowledge about the 
processes involved in obedience to authority figures and repressive 
organisational structures is obviously of great relevance when it comes to 
explaining why people can break their earlier moral norms and harden 
themselves against the suffering of others by participating in acts of ter-
rorism, torture and war crimes see also (Bauman 1989).
Research into terrorism has also shown that acts of terrorism are in 
most cases a group phenomenon. Violent radicalisation and involve-
ment in terrorist activities often occur through peer groups becoming 
radicalised together, typically by one of the friends being more ideo-
logical, politically motivated and charismatic than the others. The others 
follow him into militant activism primarily due to strong social bonds 
of friendship and group loyalty (Sageman 2004; Nesser 2010). Over 
time they absorb the militant ideology themselves – more as a conse-
quence of, rather than the reason for, joining the violent extremist group 
(Bjørgo 1997: 245; Bjørgo & Horgan 2009: 3). The chapter “Reducing the 
Emergence of Terrorism and Violent Radicalisation” later in this study 
looks at these processes in more detail.
It is more challenging to understand how and to what extent indi-
vidual solo terrorists are able to radicalise on their own to the point of 
committing themselves to preparing and carrying out terrorist atrocities 
without the moral support of a group. There seems to be very few cases 
of this, as most solo terrorists at least communicate with other militants 
on social media on the Internet and find some kind of moral support in 
their radicalisation process in these virtual communities.
Even if normative barriers cause the vast majority of people to view 
acts of terrorism as both repugnant and a completely unacceptable 
measure of achieving political change, we have nonetheless seen that this 
can be a fragile barrier that is not strong enough to prevent some people 
being willing to get involved in terroristic violence. Perhaps these people 
can be stopped by some of the other preventive mechanisms?

37
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Norm Setting against Violence and Terrorism 
Notes
It has been shown that even in battles in wartime most soldiers have a 
1	
deep-seated inhibition against killing enemy soldiers when they have the 
opportunity. It takes extensive military training to get soldiers to overcome 
these natural inhibitions against killing and injuring other people (Grossman 
1996).
In a forthcoming article, Cato Hemmingby and Tore Bjørgo, “The constraints 
2	
of a ruthless terrorist: The case of Anders Behring Breivik and the 22 July 
attacks in Norway”, analyse a number of ethical, strategic and operational 
considerations and factors which restrained the actions of the man who 
murdered 77 persons. An early version was presented at a conference on 
“Cultural Constraints on Terrorism” in London on 7 November 2012.
A good example of this is the change in attitudes to the corporal punishment 
3	
of children.
One example of this is an advertising campaign that ran in newspapers and 
4	
on TV channels in a number of European counties (including Aftenposten 
and TV2) in 2003, funded by an (ostensibly) private group of concerned 
citizens who went under the name the European Security Advocacy Group 
(ESAG Foundation), though there were strong indications they had links 
to the USA (see Kjos-Fonn & Romarheim 2004). Other forms of public 
diplomacy can now and then smack of covert media campaigns in which 
“good stories” are planted in local media (ibid; Rampton & Stauber 2006; 
Sletteland 2008).
Such psychopathic or anti-social traits are probably caused by a combination 
5	
of a number of factors such as genetic disposition, damage to the nervous 
system and an early failure of care (Seligman et al. 2001).
Similarly, research into who participated in Nazi Germany’s genocide found 
6	
that very many were normal, “decent” people who followed the rules and 
performed their functions in an inhuman system (Bauman 1989; Christie 
1972).
Statement from the head of the police interrogation team: http://www.nrk.
7	
no/nyheter/norge/1.7745203 [accessed 28.02.13].
Milgram’s first experiment was conducted three months after the trial 
8	
of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann in 1961, and the problem was 
characterised by this: how could a seemingly decent person participate in the 
bestial acts that took place in Nazi Germany’s concentration camps?
Milgram’s experiment is described here: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
9	
Milgram_experiment#cite_note-ObedStudy-0 [Accessed 28.02.2013].
See http://www.prisonexp.org/ and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
10	
Stanford_prison_experiment [Accessed 28.02.2013].

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
38 
3
Reducing the Emergence 
of Terrorism and Violent 
Radicalisation
Abstract: A social and political prevention strategy 
is based on reducing the driving forces behind and 
motivation for adopting the use of terroristic violence, by 
trying to eliminate or reduce the root causes and sources 
of frustration and anger, and stopping radicalisation 
processes at as early a stage as possible. Measures may 
address processes and conditions at the (macro) level of 
society, state, international relations or trans-national 
developments, at the (meso) level of social movements, 
institutions, organisations, and groups, or at the (micro) 
level of individuals and face-to-face interaction. Many 
kinds of political and social actors have relevant measures 
at their disposal. The social and political crime prevention 
strategy goes to the root of the problem and may bring 
positive effects in more problem areas than just terrorism. 
However, some root causes are difficult to change and 
positive impact may take a long time to achieve.
Keywords:  conflict resolution; precipitants; preconditions; 
radicalisation; root causes; social prevention
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

39
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Reducing the Emergence of Terrorism 
Terrorism does not arise in a vacuum. Social and political conditions can 
provide fertile ground for the growth of terrorism and violent radicalisa-
tion in a society, and provocative events can trigger a violent radicalisa-
tion process at an individual and a group level. The question then is the 
degree to which it is possible to prevent this by eliminating or changing 
the conditions that give rise to such a negative development. This has its 
counterpart within general crime prevention in what may be called the 
social crime prevention strategy1 – efforts to prevent individuals and groups 
from getting pushed in a criminal direction by doing something about 
the root causes of this development, or by reducing the risk factors and 
strengthening the protection factors (Hebberecht and Baillergeau 2012).2 
In the context of terrorism, a social and political prevention strategy 
will attempt to prevent individuals and groups from being radicalised in 
the direction of adopting violence for political purposes. The preventive 
mechanism is, in other words, reducing the driving forces behind and 
motivation for adopting the use of terroristic violence by eliminating or 
reducing the root causes and sources of frustration, and stopping any 
radicalisation process at as early a stage as possible.
Research and policy development in this field has involved two partly 
overlapping perspectives. One of the perspectives focuses on the root 
causes behind the emergence of terrorism in a society (Bjørgo 2005; 
Pedahzur 2006; English 2009: 123–127). The second perspective looks 
at violent radicalisation3 as processes and motivations at an individual 
and a group level (Coolsaet 2008; Alonso et al. 2008; Ranstorp 2010). 
Nonetheless, there is a close connection between the processes at a group 
and an individual level, and the fundamental idea is the same: that it is 
possible to reduce the problem of terrorism by doing something about 
the causes or processes behind the emergence of the problem.
Here it is useful to make a distinction between macro, meso and micro 
levels of analysis. Macro factors relate to systemic conditions at the level 
of society, state, international relations or trans-national developments. 
Examples could be civil war or deep-rooted conflicts, invasion and 
occupation by foreign military forces, economic underdevelopment, bad 
governance and corruption penetrating the state at all levels, rapid mod-
ernisation or technological developments like the rise of the internet and 
social media. Root causes of terrorism are often to be identified at this 
macro level (Bjørgo 2005: 1–4).
Meso factors are conditions, developments and processes at the inter-
mediate level, such as social movements, institutions, organisations 

40 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
and groups. Examples could be the activities of terrorist organisations, 
charismatic leaders who mobilise a mass following, intelligence services 
or peace movements.
Micro factors relate to individuals and face-to-face interaction in small 
groups. At this level of analysis we would be interested in understand-
ing why and how individuals and cliques of friends get radicalised into 
engaging in violent activism – and what can be done to prevent this 
negative development.
The boundaries between these three levels are not sharp. Moreover, it 
is important to understand how developments at the macro level (e.g. a 
military invasion or other major political development) may impact the 
meso and micro levels, such as giving rise to militant movements and 
individual radicalisation (della Porta 2009: 67–68). Sometimes, events at 
meso (or even micro) levels may also have a macro level impact, such as 
the publication of the Mohammed cartoons in a Danish newspaper (see 
further discussion below).
This idea of addressing root causes (at the macro level in particular) has 
been very popular among politicians and humanitarian organisations, 
not least in Europe, because it appears to be a peaceful alternative to the 
more repressive, military strategies typical of the USA’s “War on Terror”. 
Poverty and bad governance have often been singled out as alleged root 
causes of terrorism. Correspondingly, the American authorities under 
the Bush administration were for a long time negative towards the “root 
causes of terrorism” perspective because they perceived it as criticism of 
the USA’s policy and that it could afford legitimacy to the terrorists.4
If we can understand the root causes and social mechanisms behind 
the emergence of terrorism at macro, meso and micro levels, this insight 
might help us eliminate or limit these causes and thus reduce the ter-
rorism problem. At least, the idea has motivated much research in this 
field. However, a review of the status of knowledge on root causes of ter-
rorism (Bjørgo 2005) produced a complex picture. As anticipated, there 
is no single root cause behind the emergence of terrorism. For example, 
poverty is not a particularly important direct cause of terrorism. Even 
though there are several connections, the causation between poverty 
and terrorism is generally of a more indirect kind. Poverty may also be 
part of a broader cluster of systemic factors which together may provide 
a fertile ground for the emergence of terrorism: corrupt governments, 
nepotism, repression, discrimination and failure to integrate minorities 
or emerging classes, etc. These are conditions which, at least in principle, 

41
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Reducing the Emergence of Terrorism 
are possible to address and change. However, there are other macro fac-
tors, such as globalisation and rapid modernisation, which are neither 
possible nor desirable to simply “eliminate”, even if they may prove to 
be important conditions or driving forces behind the emergence of ter-
rorism (Lia 2005). Nor is it necessarily the same root causes and factors 
that gave rise to a terrorist movement that sustain it; sometimes terror-
ist groups or campaigns are sustained by factors or motivations other 
than what originally caused them to emerge (Bjørgo 2005: 260–261). 
These sustaining factors are mainly at meso and micro levels, such as 
the group’s desire to have comrades released from jail by carrying out 
kidnappings; illegal economic enterprises which provide a handsome 
profit; or individual “sunk costs” (e.g. having acquired a criminal record) 
with no prospects of an acceptable exit.
We can further differentiate between two different types of causes 
behind terrorism: preconditions and precipitants. Preconditions are the 
conditions that provide fertile ground for terrorism. These are mainly 
macro level factors, usually relatively general and structural in character 
and can help to produce a range of social phenomena and expressions, 
of which terrorism is only one. Even if the preconditions exist, these are 
not in themselves sufficient to cause an outbreak of terrorism. Examples 
of the preconditions which may facilitate the emergence of terrorism 
include a lack of democracy, civil liberties and the rule of law, illegiti-
mate and corrupt authorities (which have often been backed by the USA 
or other Western countries), discrimination based on ethnic or religious 
origin, and the perception of social injustice.
Precipitants are a type of causes that far more directly influence the 
emergence of terrorism. These are the more specific incidents and situ-
ations that directly motivate or trigger an outbreak of terrorism. Such 
trigger events may be identified at macro as well as meso and micro 
levels. One important precipitant at the meso level is the existence of 
charismatic leaders able to translate widespread discontent and frustra-
tion into a political agenda for a violent struggle. Provocative incidents 
and actions at the macro or meso level can also be the triggering precipi-
tants behind violent radicalisation and acts of terrorism. One example 
is how the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq provoked young Muslims 
in countries such as the UK and Denmark into planning and, on occa-
sion, carrying out acts of terrorism. A similar provocative event which 
started at the meso level was the publication of the Muhammad cartoons 
in Denmark (and later in other countries). This small event turned out 

42 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
to have macro level impact, triggering a wave of riots and acts of ter-
rorism in large parts of the Muslim world and in Scandinavia, targeting 
Denmark, the Jyllandsposten newspaper and the cartoonists in particular. 
This is unlikely to have happened without the existence of some precon-
ditions at the macro level, including built up frustration about how the 
West treats the Muslim world. In addition, a number of different actors 
saw they could benefit from whipping up and exploiting this atmosphere 
for their own purposes by inciting to riots and terrorist attacks. The pub-
lication of the Mohammed cartoons5 can explain how the Scandinavian 
countries – from being one of the least terrorism-exposed regions in the 
world – is by the turn of the decade among the parts of Europe most at 
risk (Hegghammer 2012: 9).
The question is to what degree is it possible to counter negative trends 
towards violence by reducing some of the preconditions and precipi-
tants for violent radicalisation and the emergence of terrorism? Is this 
preventive mechanism plausible and realistic, or is it wishful thinking? 
It is possible to do something about some of the preconditions, e.g. a 
lack of democracy and the rule of law, illegitimate and corrupt authori-
ties, discrimination and social injustice, or social and political conflicts. 
However, it might take time for such measures to make a sufficient 
impact to produce a reduction in terrorist radicalisation and recruit-
ment to violent activism. Sometimes, settlements of conflicts are not 
perfect but sufficient to reduce the level of violence considerably, as seen 
in Northern Ireland after the peace process. Moreover, it is also possible 
to avoid some of the provocative actions and incidents that can trigger 
radicalisation and terrorism.
In the years around 1981, there was an intense conflict between the 
government and the major indigenous population group in Norway, the 
Sámi people, concerning the construction of a large hydro-electric dam 
in the Sámi heartland in the far north of Norway. When the government 
had decided to move on with the plans, a coalition of Sámi and envi-
ronmentalist activists tried to block the road to the construction area, 
chaining themselves to the ground. They were removed by large police 
forces. However, during the conflict the Norwegian authorities were 
highly conscious about avoiding any brutal or violent actions by the 
police in relation to the demonstrators. Had a Sámi activist been killed, 
this could have easily triggered Sámi terrorism, for which some fertile 
ground no doubt existed.6 The establishment of the Sámediggi (Sámi 
Assembly) a short time after the construction of the Alta dam started 

43
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Reducing the Emergence of Terrorism 
was undoubtedly a way of reducing the anger and frustrations among 
the Sámi people following their defeat. This was probably an important 
and successful means in damping down the conflict and avoiding violent 
radicalisation among the Sámi people.
Conversely, when newspaper editors decided to publish – and publish 
again several times – the Muhammad cartoons, it was known that the 
drawings were likely to trigger anger, aggression and violence. One 
option which could have helped avoid acts of terrorism and suffer-
ing could be to abstain from publishing the cartoons a second round. 
However, this must of course be weighed against the consequences of 
giving in to attacks on press freedoms and freedom of expression.
The measures within this social and political crime prevention strategy 
are many and complex: conflict resolution, political processes, social 
development, equal opportunities, integrating minorities, developing a 
society where democracy and the rule of law prevails, avoiding provo-
cations and violent confrontations, and many others. Key actors are in 
particular youth and social workers, teachers, NGOs, religious leaders, 
politicians, various authorities, mediators and ordinary people who can 
contribute to political and social solutions all the parties involved can 
live with – even if they are not entirely satisfied. The police can also play 
an important role in detecting individuals and groups influenced by 
militant tendencies, and use early intervention methods to stop a proc-
ess of violent radicalisation.
The target groups are primarily the risk groups most vulnerable to 
violent radicalisation, e.g. frustrated young men in Muslim minority 
populations, or “white” youth who feel threatened by immigrant gangs. 
These can be individuals, but more often than not it involves groups 
of friends and loose social scenes. However, entire population groups 
affected by a conflict or a political and social situation that could provide 
fertile ground for violent radicalisation may also be included in the 
target group. In other words, this approach involves both primary and 
secondary prevention.
Studies of people who become radicalised and are recruited into 
terroristic activism show that there is no consistent profile that char-
acterises them. However, some researchers (Willems 1995; Bjørgo 
1997: 48–53; 2011; Nesser 2010) have demonstrated that three or four 
main types of people can be identified (or at least constructed as “ideal 
types”), each type characterised by different backgrounds and motiva-
tions for involving themselves in violent extremism and various roles 

44 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
in militant groups.7 The “ideological activists” are typically resourceful 
and idealistic, and primarily driven by political and ideological motives. 
They could succeed in many social arenas and often gain leadership 
roles. They will often be the people who radicalise their friends and who 
establish contact with militant activists and organisations. The “fellow 
travellers” may have a more mixed background, but they are first and 
foremost driven by a need for belonging, friendship and acceptance. 
They are easily led into participating in militant activities to fulfill their 
need for recognition and acceptance, and they often gradually become 
radicalised as a consequence of (rather than it being the reason for) 
participation in the group and its militant activities. The “socially frus-
trated” often have problematic social backgrounds, personal experience 
of discrimination and marginalisation, little social capital, and personal 
experience as both victims and perpetrators of violence and crime. They 
are basically not particularly ideologically oriented, but have a lot of 
anger and aggression that can be channelled at an enemy. They are also 
often seekers of action and excitement. They can find roles in a militant 
group in which they receive recognition for their violent and criminal 
competence.
Obviously a diverse range of measures are needed to prevent the 
radicalisation processes in such different types of people, as “one size 
does not fit them all” (Bjørgo 2011). In the case of the ideologically 
motivated activists it may be possible to confront their ideology or to 
enter into a dialogue about their political complaints (see below). To 
prevent them radicalising others it will often be desirable to deny them 
the opportunity to do this through some form of incapacitation or by 
undermining their status and standing (provided that is legally possible 
and ethically acceptable to do so). In the case of those who primarily 
are members of the group based on their need to belong and for com-
pany, it may be possible to introduce them to an alternative network of 
friends and companions. One of the most common reasons why such 
young people withdraw from extremist social environments is that they 
get a girlfriend/boyfriend or have children. Their new obligations and 
attachments become stronger than their loyalty to the militant group.8 In 
the case of the socially frustrated and marginalised youths, integrating 
them into society and working life by various educational, social and 
economic measures could help distract them from militant and criminal 
activities. However, the distance some of them have to travel to return to 
a law-abiding life is considerable.

45
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Reducing the Emergence of Terrorism 
Given that the root causes and processes behind radicalisation are 
complex, the prevention measures also have to be. Both social integration 
and political measures can be important contributing factors. During the 
crisis of the Muhammad caricatures in the winter of 2006, the Norwegian 
authorities took several initiatives that probably helped to reduce the level 
of conflict and demonstrate respect for Muslim feelings. They also helped 
to build constructive dialogues and relations.9 Muslim organisations and 
individuals in Norway also made constructive contributions to damping 
down the conflict. However, it is impossible to know afterwards whether 
or not this actually had any decisive preventive effect.
Muslim leaders and theological experts have in a number of countries 
played important roles in curbing trends towards violent radicalisation 
by confronting the jihadist ideology.
Al-Qaida and related jihadist movements promote a very particular 
interpretation of some of Islam’s core concepts (such as Jihad, Shaheed or 
martyr, taqfir or declaring other Muslims as unbelievers), which stand 
in stark contrast to the mainstream interpretations in Islam and among 
Islamic theologians. Some scholars have entered into a theological 
dialogue with the members and leaders of Islamist terror movements in 
order to convince them that their interpretations conflict with the Qur’an 
and Islamic tradition, and that through their actions they are on the path 
to damnation. For example, Sheik Tantawi, Grand Sheikh of al-Azhar 
University, Cairo, has stated the following:
Suicide is an act that is strongly forbidden in the Quran and in Haddith. 
Allah has granted you a body. Only Allah can decide when the body will be 
taken back. There are no justifications for exceptions to this rule. Lives are 
sacred and must be honoured. Whoever commits suicide will be considered 
eternally committed to Hell-Fire. Once in hell, the individual will spend 
the rest of eternity dying again in the same way they committed suicide. 
Therefore, suicide bombers will spend the rest of eternity having their arms, 
legs and head pulled off.10
There is reason to believe that statements such as this from such an 
authoritative theological figure11 can at least sow certain doubts about 
the message of the terror leaders who entice suicide bombers with the 
promise of paradise and 72 virgins. In Muslim countries such as Egypt, 
Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Singapore, theological dialogues have become 
an important element of the authorities’ counter-terrorism strategy.
The advantage of the social and political crime prevention strategy is 
that it can have positive effects in more problem areas than just terrorism. 

46 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
Conflict resolution, democratisation, social development and integrat-
ing minorities and individuals have their own intrinsic value beyond 
preventing violent radicalisation and terrorism. To the extent that it has 
a reducing effect on terrorism, the effect is primarily achieved through 
reducing the motivation to employ violence and not just by reducing the 
capacity or opportunities to do so.
However, the social and political prevention strategy also has its 
weaknesses and limitations. At a societal level this is a long-term strategy 
in which it often takes years or even decades before the measures have 
results in the form of less fertile ground for violence and terrorism. 
Many of the root causes are difficult to do anything about because they 
are rooted in conflicts and deep social and structural problems. It can 
also be difficult to evaluate the effects of the measures directly because 
they work slowly and in combination with many other factors. And 
often a terrorist movement or campaign is sustained by completely dif-
ferent causes to those that caused the outbreak of terrorism (e.g. finan-
cial self-interest, freeing imprisoned comrades, or a lack of alternatives 
other than death or life imprisonment). However, on an individual and a 
group level such integration measures can have a more immediate effect 
because they may disrupt a radicalisation process that otherwise could 
have ended with the use of terrorist violence.
It is also problematic if measures to promote social development and 
integration among minority populations are primarily motivated and 
justified as part of a strategy to prevent radicalisation and terrorism. This 
is one of the most serious critiques raised against the British CONTEST 
strategy (Kundnani 2009). Such an instrumental linkage may under-
mine the legitimacy of otherwise positive measures and alienate these 
populations by presenting them as “suspect communities” rather than as 
an integral part of society.
Notes
Some analysts prefer to make a further distinction between individual 
1	
oriented crime prevention, looking at individual risk and protection factors, 
and a social prevention approach addressing root causes of crime at a macro 
level of society, such as unemployment and poverty levels, urbanisation, 
political developments, etc.
A social crime prevention approach addressing for example participation 
2	
in criminal gangs or other problem behaviour will usually give weight to 

47
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Reducing the Emergence of Terrorism 
risk factors as well as protection factors. See, for example, http://faculty.
missouristate.edu/M/MichaelCarlie/SOLUTIONS/ISSUE/risk_protective.
htm [Accessed 28.02.13].
“Radicalisation” is problematic as an analytic concept because it muddles 
3	
the distinction between acquiring radical views and participating in violent 
activities, often due to mistaken assumptions that the former necessarily 
leads to the latter. Research has found that the direction of causation is often 
the other way around (Bjørgo & Horgan 2009: 3; Sageman 2004; Festinger 
1957).
This was the message from a diplomat representing the US Embassy in 
4	
Oslo in May 2003, when this author was preparing an international expert 
meeting on “Root Causes of Terrorism” on assignment for the Norwegian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Prime Minister’s Office. The diplomat 
turned up unexpectedly at this author’s office at the Norwegian Institute of 
International Affairs to communicate that “the US Government does not 
approve of this conference” (which would take place a few weeks later). 
Interestingly, from around 2006 the Bush administration became more 
well disposed towards addressing the root causes of terrorism, probably 
because they had by this time realised that military force would not alone be 
sufficient to reduce the problem of terrorism.
The Mohammed Cartoons were published the first time in the Danish 
5	
Jyllandsposten on 30 September 2005. It was later reprinted in more than 50 
countries. As a response to an alleged plot in 2008 to assassinate the most 
controversial cartoonist, Kurt Westergaard, Danish (and some foreign) 
newspapers reprinted his Bomb in the Turban cartoon. This was followed by 
an outburst of violence and even terrorist attacks in a number of countries. 
For an (incomplete) overview, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jyllands-
Posten_Muhammad_cartoons_controversy [Accessed 28.02.2013].
Some Sámi militants had contacts, visitors and offers for training in the use 
6	
of explosives from ETA and the Provisional IRA. There were also several 
sabotage attacks involving the use of explosives to destroy bridges leading 
into the dam construction area (Arnesen, Bjørgo & Mærli 2004: 12–13).
Willems (1995) and Nesser (2010) both describe four types, three of which 
7	
are almost identical. In my analysis (Bjørgo 2011), I consider their divergent 
forth types as either a sub-type or as specific to one particular form of 
extremism, and end up with three generic types of people recruited into 
violent extremism, described here.
The Saudi Arabian programme for rehabilitating militant Islamists has used 
8	
this insight as an element of its programme by helping the young men in 
the process of establishing themselves with their own family, including by 
arranging marriages for rehabilitated ex-jihadists (Boucek 2009: 217). This 
method could hardly be directly transferred to European countries, but here 

48 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
too it is possible to facilitate meeting people of the opposite sex from other 
social environments.
By contrast, the Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen had a more 
9	
dismissive approach, and was very reluctant to express any understanding 
about the hurt feelings the publication of the cartoons might have caused 
to Muslims. Arguably, this might have contributed to the high level of 
frustration among many Danish Muslims and the violent radicalisation 
among a few of them.
Sheik Tantawi, Grand Sheikh of al-Azhar University, Cairo, at the “Inaugural 
10	
Muis Lecture” on 26 May 2006 at the Ritz-Carlton Millenia Hotel, Singapore. 
Quoted from the presentation by Tom Quiggin at the EENeT Conference, 
The Hague, 15–18 October 2008 (the quote was kindly made available by Tom 
Quiggin).
Even though Grand Sheik Tantawi and other al-Azhar theologians possess 
11	
substantial authority in mainstream Sunni Islam, they have been closely 
linked to the Mubarak regime and are thus unlikely to enjoy the same 
authority among more oppositional and militant Islamist circles who view 
them as the corrupt government’s obedient lackeys.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
49
4
Deterring Involvement 
in Terrorism
Abstract: The deterrence mechanism is based on increasing 
the costs of terrorism or other crimes by (threat of) 
punishment, retaliation or other social sanctions, aiming at 
reducing the motivation to carry out such acts. Measures 
are generally repressive, such as imprisonment, violent 
force and other sanctions. The police, criminal justice 
system and military forces are main actors. However, 
diplomatic and economic sanctions have also been used 
against states sponsoring terrorists. Deterrence has 
generally been more effective against such states than 
against highly motivated terrorists, whose decision making 
is often based on different rationalities. The use of military 
reprisals after terrorist attacks has frequently been justified 
as means of deterrence but the side effects are grave and 
have often turned out to be counter-productive, reinforcing 
a spiral of violence.
Keywords: criminal justice; deterrence; increasing costs; 
military force; punishment; repression; sanctions 
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

50 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
Deterrence refers to the use of punishment or other negative sanctions 
as a threat to make someone refrain from carrying out acts of crime, 
terrorism or other forms of aggression due to fear of the responses and 
negative consequences they would result in. Criminal justice theory dif-
ferentiates between two main forms of deterrence. Specific deterrence 
works on those who have personally experienced the consequences of 
punishment and choose to refrain from crime in the future. General 
deterrence works on those who see others being prosecuted and who 
therefore choose to refrain from a criminal act because they regard the 
risk of being punished themselves as too great (Myhrer 2011: 99–100). In 
studies of security politics, “deterrence is the persuasion of one’s oppo-
nent that the cost and/or risk of a given course of action […] outweigh 
the benefits” (George & Smoke 1974: 1). The question is to what extent 
deterrence is effective as a counter-terrorist tool.
According to Miller (2013: 132–133), scholars have argued that deter-
rence policies may be ineffective in counter-terrorism because a) terror-
ists are not rational (a claim many experts dismiss); b) terrorists are so 
highly motivated that they do not fear punishment, be it prison or death; 
c) terrorists possess little that is of value against which states can retaliate 
as a form of punishment; or d) that tough policies may radicalise mod-
erates, so that even if deterrence “works” temporarily, it leads to more 
terrorism in the end. The National Security Policy of the United States of 
America (2002: 14; 2006: 12; 2010: 17) has stated consistently that since 
deterrence cannot work against terrorists, pre-emptive action by military 
means is necessary to stop the terrorists before they strike against us.
However, rather than dismiss completely that deterrence may have a 
role in preventing terrorism it is more fruitful to ask, under what cir-
cumstances may deterrence influence terrorist behaviour, and when will 
it not? Miller (2013) argues that although deterrence has its limitations 
because terrorist decisions are not always the product of fully rational, 
unitary decision making, governments can nevertheless deter some 
forms of terrorism. Deterrence is most likely to be effective against uni-
fied movements and groups, and against individuals who act egoistically. 
It is least likely to be effective against fragmented movements, decen-
tralised groups and idealistic individuals who act on behalf of a larger 
community or cause (Miller 2013: 144).
The preventive mechanism in the deterrence strategy is to reduce the 
motivation of the terrorists or their supporters through threats of pun-
ishment, reprisals or other negative consequences. The premise is that 

51
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Deterring Involvement in Terrorism 
terrorists are rational actors who calculate the costs of committing acts 
of terrorism and weigh them against the benefits. The knowledge that 
they risk a harsh punishment is intended to change this calculation in 
a negative direction such that they choose to refrain from carrying out 
the act. The deterrence strategy is most successful when the measures 
do not have to be used, but instead simply appear a credible threat that 
will be triggered if the terrorists are not deterred from carrying out the 
act. Threats of punishments will often be communicated via the media, 
though their credibility may be reinforced if the authorities occasion-
ally demonstrate that they have both the willingness and the capacity to 
implement them. Threats of punishment can be directed at individuals, 
organisations or states.
As a strategy for preventing terrorism, deterrence is based on measures 
such as various forms of the use of force, primarily prison sentences but 
sometimes also other forms of physical or military force. In most Western 
countries, the Penal Code reserves most severe prison sentences for seri-
ous acts of terrorism. Obviously, the intention behind having the option of 
imposing such a severe sentence is that it will act as a deterrent, although 
retribution may also be an important aspect (Silke 2003; 2005). However, 
the possibility of the authorities employing deadly violence, e.g. through 
the deployment of specially trained counter-terrorism forces, may also be 
intended to have a deterrent effect. Military reprisals as a response to acts 
of terrorism have been used quite frequently as a deterrent (or at least as 
punishment) by countries such as the USA and Israel. For years, Israel had 
a policy of demolishing the family houses of those who had been involved 
in terrorist attacks. In the period from 1967 until September 2004, 2,449 
houses were demolished as a punitive measure in the occupied territories 
(Schnayderman 2004). According to statistics from the Israeli human 
rights organisation B’Tselem, 32 per cent of the suspected offenders were in 
detention at the time of demolition, 21 per cent were “wanted,” and 47 per 
cent were dead. The declared purpose of the punitive house demolitions 
was to deter potential attackers by harming the relatives of Palestinians 
suspected of carrying out attacks against Israelis (Schnayderman 2004: 
7–8). Such measures of collective punishment have been widely criticized 
for being a violation of international law.
Most European countries have generally argued for a criminal justice 
approach rather than a military approach to terrorism. They have also 
been more inclined to promote economic and diplomatic sanctions as 
the main measures in a deterrence strategy against terrorism, particularly 

52 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
directed against states sponsoring terrorist activities. English (2009: 
127–128) argues for the importance of avoiding over-militarization of 
responses to terrorism: “…the history of terrorism [is] teaching us in 
particular that large-scale military force used against civilians has tended 
to be counter-productive.”
The actors in the deterrence strategy are primarily police detectives 
and the criminal justice system, though the police’s counter-terrorism 
forces, military forces and political authorities may also play key roles, 
depending on the measures chosen. Some countries, such the USA 
and Israel, have relied more heavily on the military for retaliation after 
terrorist attacks and as a pre-emptive measure. When economic or dip-
lomatic sanctions are used, a wide range of public agencies and private 
companies may get involved in the implementation of such policies.
The target groups for deterrence are people and groups considering 
committing acts of terrorism, or who are already involved in terror-
ism. In other words, deterrence is secondary and tertiary prevention. 
However, the target group has also included states that sponsor or make 
use of terrorism as a political instrument.
The advantage of the deterrence strategy in particular is that it appears 
to have been relatively effective against state sponsors of terrorism 
(Ganor 2005: 64). While in the 1970s and 1980s there were a number 
of states that openly or covertly supported terrorist groups, providing 
bases, sanctuary, weapons, practical assistance and political support, 
such state support has been significantly reduced in the last decade. 
This is undoubtedly linked to the fact that both international economic 
and political sanctions and direct military strikes have made it far more 
costly for states to support or make use of terrorist groups. Countries 
such as Libya, Syria, Iran and North Korea have more or less ceased sup-
porting or using terrorist groups (although Syria and Iran has continued 
supporting Hizballah with weapons in the struggle against Israel). One 
of the examples of “successful” deterrence that is often mentioned is the 
USA’s air strike on Tripoli and the residence of Libyan leader Colonel 
Gaddafi in 1986 as punishment for the Libyan supported bombing of a 
nightclub full of American soldiers in Berlin (Prunckun & Mohr 1997). 
However, there is much to suggest that the USA’s air strike on Tripoli had 
the opposite effect and resulted in a marked increase in Libya’s support 
for terrorism, one of the results of which was probably the bombing of 
a Pan Am aeroplane above Lockerbie in Scotland in 1988.1 On the other 
hand, it is quite clear that the UN’s diplomatic and economic sanctions 

53
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Deterring Involvement in Terrorism 
were an important reason behind Libya subsequently assuming respon-
sibility for the Lockerbie bombing and abandoning its ABC weapons 
programmes in 2003. Military reprisals after terrorist attacks have also 
been very popular with the general public in countries such as the USA 
and Israel, not least because they portray an image of the authorities and 
politicians taking action and not being cowed by terrorists. Herein also 
lies a great temptation to resort to punishment strikes even if it is highly 
doubtful that they will impact those behind an act of terrorism or if they 
will have a deterrent effect.
Herein also lie some of the most serious limitations and negative side 
effects of the deterrence strategy. First and foremost, it is questionable 
whether deterrence has a genuine effect on very motivated terrorists, 
either at an individual or at a group level (Ganor 2005: 64). This is espe-
cially true with regard to suicide activists who do not allow themselves 
to be deterred by the risk of being killed and achieving martyr status. It is 
also a problem that terrorists are often not unitary actors. Self-interested 
behaviour at one level of an organisation may be inconsistent with the 
interests of another level, or a different wing of a larger movement (Miller 
2012: 136). Although deterrence may have a certain impact on leaders or 
the political wing of a movement, other sub-groups or hot-heads may 
act on their own. Miller argues that:
There are several situations where terrorist decisions are the product of less-
than-fully-rational decision making, and therefore are the most difficult to 
deter. Three of the most common are: (1) when there are multiple, compet-
ing groups within a movement; (2) when a group is decentralized; and (3) 
when individuals engage in selfless acts for the benefit of some larger com-
munity. In contrast, deterrence is most likely to be effective when a single 
group is organized in a hierarchical way and controls an entire movement. 
Even then, members of the group will have different interests, so even if 
deterrence works on some level it will not prevent all individuals from using 
violence. (Miller 2012: 137)
It is also difficult to impact actors who cannot be located (e.g. the people 
behind suicide actions) and who thus avoid punishment. This can easily 
result in reprisals, especially military punitive attacks, becoming rela-
tively random and impacting innocent third parties. Israel’s practice of 
establishing as a standard procedure to blow up the family home of peo-
ple who have carried out suicide or other terrorist attacks (as described 
above) is one example. Bombing offices, houses and villages allegedly 
used by terrorists has also been shown to frequently impact innocent 

54 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
civilians. In this way, such reprisals have frequently led to a new round 
of violence and revenge, and fostered constant new acts of terrorism and 
reprisals. Several empirical studies have shown that such reprisals do not 
lead to a reduction in the number of acts of terrorism, rather they result 
in an escalation in terror activities (Hoffman 2006: 263–267; Silke 2005; 
Parker 2007). Revenge and reprisals are one of the key driving forces 
behind terrorism. They are also one of the driving forces behind states’ 
retaliations for acts of terrorism. The idea that reprisals have a deterrent 
effect on terrorists appears to be based on an illusion that terrorists and 
their sympathisers react to punishment actions involving massive vio-
lence differently to us and that they can be cowed while we cannot (cf. 
Silke 2005). Therefore, the state can become a mirror image of the terror-
ists and get caught in their vengeful mindset. Besides this, provoking the 
state into overreacting is one of the classic terrorist strategies. The aim of 
terrorists is generally to provoke governments to react in ways in which 
they weaken themselves, including by undermining their own legitimacy 
and increasing people’s willingness to resist and support the terrorists’ 
cause. The alternative way authorities can react is to strictly adhere to 
the principles of human rights and the rule of law, and respond to acts 
of terrorism as ordinary crimes that must be dealt with by the police and 
criminal justice system. The dilemma of course is that some terrorists 
and the people behind them are beyond the jurisdiction of the attacked 
states’ criminal justice systems and treaties for extraditing and prosecut-
ing terrorists and other criminals, as was the case with al-Qaida’s leaders 
in Afghanistan following the attacks on 11 September 2001. Meanwhile, 
international treaties intended to ensure the prosecution of aeroplane 
hijackers – regardless of which country they flee to – have proved to be 
an important measure for reducing the number of hijackings (Dugan, 
LaFree, & Piquero 2005).
Not all potential terrorists allow themselves to be deterred from 
attempting to carry out violent acts. In these circumstances disruption 
may be the next prevention barrier.
Note
See Hoffman (2006: 263–267); Silke (2005); Parker (2007); LaFree (2011). 
1	
Similarly, the result of Israeli military punishment strikes against Palestinian 
targets has been seen to be an increase in counter-strikes (Enders et al. 1990; 
Lum et al. 2006; Parker 2007).

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
55
5
Disrupting Planned 
Terrorist Attacks
Abstract: The preventive mechanism in disruption is 
to stop terrorists from carrying out their attacks by 
discovering and exposing preparations for attack in 
advance, and through various means prevent the actions 
from being carrying out. Thus, disruption has two phases: 
detection and intervention. The principal actors in the 
disruption strategy are the security and intelligence 
services, and the police, although the general public may 
also play an important role by providing information about 
suspicious activities and people. The target group for the 
measures are people actively planning and preparing acts 
of terrorism. Means may be to arrest suspects but warnings 
and preventive dialogue may also be used as means of early 
intervention to disrupt possible involvement in terrorism.
Keywords: arrest; detection; disruption; intelligence; 
intervention; preventive dialogue; security services; 
warning
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

56 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
During the ten-year period from 2001 until 2010, there were 58 more or 
less well-documented terrorist attacks which Islamist extremists planned 
to carry out in Europe. Among these, only three were carried through 
successfully, 11 were undetected but failed due to incompetence or other 
reasons, whereas 44 (76 per cent of the total) were detected and disrupted 
by the police and/or security services.1 Several of these disrupted attacks 
were of a scope that – had they been carried out – probably would have 
been just as deadly as the train bombings in Madrid in March 2004 
(in which 191 died and 1,800 were injured) and the suicide actions on 
the underground and buses in London in July 2005 (56 died and 800 
injured). Thus, detection and disruption of planned terrorist attacks 
saves lives.
The preventive mechanism in disruption is to stop terrorists from car-
rying out their attacks by discovering and exposing preparations for 
attack in advance, and through various means prevent the actions from 
being carrying out. The principal actors in the disruption strategy are in 
particular the security and intelligence services and the police, though 
the general public may also play an important role by providing infor-
mation about suspicious activities and people. In some cases journalists 
and the news media have helped uncover and disrupt planned acts of 
terrorism.2 The target group for the measures are people actively planning 
and preparing acts of terrorism, i.e. it is a form of tertiary prevention. 
However, in practice some surveillance measures (and perhaps arrests) 
could impact people who the security services deem to be in the “at risk 
of becoming involved in terrorism” category, even though subsequently 
it may be proved that there are no grounds for such suspicions. In this 
case, this may (at best) be seen as a form of secondary prevention.
The measures in a disruption strategy will vary from phase to phase. In 
the initial phase, information is received that provides a basis for carry-
ing out further checks on whether there are grounds for suspicion and 
further investigation. These may be tip-offs from the general public to 
the police or security services about suspicious activities and behaviour, 
reports from banks about suspicious transactions, information from 
routine checks by the police, or surplus information from investigations 
into other criminal acts. They may also be alerts from foreign cooperat-
ing security services about, for example, some of their cases having links 
to local activists. If there prove to be grounds for taking a closer look at 
the matter, the security services will in the next phase start some form 
of active information gathering or monitoring of the relevant people 

57
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Disrupting Planned Terrorist Attacks 
and activities. If their suspicions are further aroused, it may also be 
relevant to initiate surveillance or special investigation methods such 
as monitoring communications or planting listening devices in rooms. 
Some countries have very restrictive regulations and judicial control on 
the use of communication control (“wire tapping”) or audio surveillance 
of rooms (“bugging”);3 in other countries the police and security services 
can use such methods with few restrictions. The security services may 
in some cases use infiltrators from their own agency or external agents 
with close ties to the suspicious group or who are themselves members.4 
If the surveillance provides grounds for believing that preparations are 
being made to carry out a serious act of terrorism, intervening by mak-
ing arrests in order to disrupt it will be considered. Incapacitation (dis-
cussed more in detail in a later chapter) may be seen as the second stage 
of a disruption process. A recurrent dilemma in these circumstances is 
whether there is sufficient evidence to convict the people concerned or 
whether the risk of serious consequences is too great and that the police 
or security service might lose control if they choose to await develop-
ments with the expectation of gaining conclusive evidence. In a number 
of cases in Europe in recent years, the accused have been acquitted or 
cases dropped and suspects released because the police or security serv-
ice intervened at such an early stage the actors had yet to commit any 
criminal acts.
One scenario that can occur is that the security services receive a tip-
off from cooperating services or other reliable sources that a terrorist 
group is in the country to carry out actions without knowing the loca-
tion of these actors. In 1973, the Norwegian police sounded the alarm 
through the mass media and other channels that Arab terrorists were in 
the country to carry out an act of sabotage on Norway’s main oil refinery. 
This happened in connection with Arab oil producers halting oil produc-
tion and creating the first oil crisis. No action occurred and nobody was 
arrested, but a short time later a Palestinian group carried out a bombing 
against an oil storage tank in Singapore. The police’s alerting of the gen-
eral public with an appeal to be vigilant combined with stronger security 
measures around relevant terrorist targets probably helped to keep the 
activists in check and subsequently leave the country with unfinished 
business.
Another example of successful disruption involved the Palestinian 
group Force 17, known as Yasser Arafat’s bodyguard unit. Two men 
from Force 17 came to Oslo and kept under surveillance the flat of the 

58 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
former Israeli Mossad agent Sylvia Raphael, who had played a role in 
(and been convicted for) the Lillehammer assassination in 1973, when 
Mossad operatives mistook a Moroccan waiter for a Black September 
leader. The two Palestinians were closely monitored by the Norwegian 
Police Surveillance Agency (POT) after a tip-off from a cooperating 
service. The two left Norway without doing anything, but it was assumed 
that they were making preparations for an assassination of the former 
Mossad agent, who was now married to her Norwegian defence counsel. 
The Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs contacted Yasser Arafat and 
informed him of the incident. He claimed to be unaware of any assassi-
nation plans, but the preparations for the assassination of Sylvia Raphael 
were nonetheless stopped.5 Both of these Norwegian examples show 
that acts of terrorism can be effectively disrupted by means other than 
arrest – in this case by diplomatic intervention.
In other words, the arrest and imprisonment of suspected terror-
ists are not the only possible measures of disruption. Another form of 
disruption is when investigative journalists uncover plans for violent 
actions and “blow” the plans with massive publicity in the news media.6 
This makes it almost impossible to carry out the plans, because it results 
in extra security measures and efforts by the police.
In some cases it is sufficient that the security services make themselves 
known to people and groups who are carrying out suspicious activities, 
such that they become aware that an eye is being kept on them. This 
will in many cases be sufficient to stop them from moving forward with 
any plans for illegal actions. This can take the form of visible and open 
surveillance or a dialogue in which the police/security services initiate 
talks with the potential terrorists, warn them against moving forward in 
a violent direction, and make it clear that if they do they will be stopped 
and possibly prosecuted. It can also take the form of disturbing in which 
the police/security services constantly visit individuals or social scenes 
assumed to represent a potential problem. In its more extreme form this 
method can assume the characteristics of pure harassment.
A “softer” variety of disruption is early intervention in a radicalisa-
tion process. When the police or security service discover that young 
people have become involved in an extreme social environment and are 
undergoing a process of violent radicalisation, inviting the young people 
and their parents in for a preventive talk has proven beneficial.7 When 
this method has been used with youths involved in neo-Nazi move-
ments it has resulted in most of them severing their links with this social 

59
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Disrupting Planned Terrorist Attacks 
environment.8 The same method can also be used with youth who have 
had dealings with violence-oriented Islamist movements. In this case 
the purpose is to initiate a dialogue with these young people and their 
parents in order to stop a dangerous trend discretely before they have 
committed criminal acts. This allows them to avoid both a criminal case 
and stigmatisation due to exposure in the news media.9
Another form of disruption can be security checks (e.g. of hand lug-
gage at airports) that discover weapons, or other means terrorists can use 
to hijack or bomb an aeroplane, and prevent the weapons (and possibly 
the passengers themselves) from getting onboard. Checking the identity 
of passengers against a list of suspected terrorists upon departure or 
in passport control upon arrival can also disrupt acts of terrorism, but 
can also result in innocent people falling under suspicion and being 
prevented from travelling without a real reason. There are a few known 
cases in which concrete, planned acts of terrorism have been disrupted 
by this type of security check. In the aftermath of the 9–11 attacks there 
are also examples where ordinary citizens, fellow passengers or security 
guards have disrupted hijackings or other acts of terrorism by interven-
ing against the culprits as the actions get underway.
The advantage of the disruption strategy is that it is targeted and 
specific once a terrorist threat has been identified. When it can be estab-
lished that a prepared act of terrorism has actually been disrupted, it 
becomes very clear that lives have been saved and suffering avoided. The 
disruption strategy therefore enjoys a high degree of legitimacy among 
the general public and politicians. If it can be demonstrated that the 
strategy has had positive results, this can boost confidence in the police 
and authorities. Successful disruption can help to break the potential 
spirals of violence and escalations that could easily have been the result 
had major acts of terrorism not been disrupted. One can imagine what 
the relations between Muslim minorities and the majority populations 
in Europe would be like if 30–40 more acts of terrorism of the type seen 
in London and Madrid had been carried out in the past few years.
The limitations and side effects of the disruption strategy are nevertheless 
substantial. It is likely that some planned actions will not be discovered. 
As mentioned above, only about three-quarters of terrorist plots by 
Jihadi groups (N = 57) were detected and disrupted by police and security 
services in Europe during the period 2001–2010. That also means that 
every fourth terrorist plot went undetected. Fortunately, most of these  
attempts failed. Still, the high number of failed attacks is in itself very 

60 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
unsettling, because of the fact that they passed undiscovered “below the 
radar”, and failed mainly because of the terrorists’ bad luck or incompe-
tence. If the number of terror plots is significant, some are bound to slip 
through and if they succeed they can cause great harm. Terrorists may 
learn from their own mistakes or from the mistakes committed by oth-
ers and improve their success rate. In any case, three very serious Jihadi 
attacks slipped through and were completed successfully with devastat-
ing consequences in Europe during this period: The Madrid bombings 
the killing of Theo van Gogh in Madrid in 2004, and the 7/7 bombings 
in London in 2005.
Solo terrorists or “lone wolfs”10 are particularly challenging to detect 
and disrupt. For example, during the two-year period from October 
2009 until October 2011, there were at least eight known terror plots 
prepared in Scandinavia (these figures include all types of terrorism). 
Three of these plots were group based, and all were detected and dis-
rupted. Five plots were prepared by solo terrorists; none of these was 
detected but three failed due to poor preparation. Two plots succeeded 
and caused extensive death and suffering.11 What makes solo terrorists 
difficult to detect and stop is mainly that by preparing their attacks in 
isolation, communication with others is reduced to a minimum, thereby 
limiting opportunities for security services to detect and monitor suspi-
cious behaviour.
This strategic advantage of acting alone has clearly been acknowl-
edged and exploited by some terrorists, like Anders Behring Breivik 
when masterminding the 22 July 2011 attacks in Oslo and Utøya. In his 
compendium, he weighted the advantages and disadvantages of acting 
alone versus working with 2–6 partners in terms of risk of apprehension 
and time required to complete tasks. His conclusion was clear: involv-
ing more people (i.e. increasing capacity) was not worth the increased 
risk (Behring Breivik12 2011: 1472). He described a number of methods 
to avoid attracting the attention of the police and security services, and 
demonstrated with deadly efficiency on July 22 how such ambitious plans 
could be carried through by a solo terrorist without being detected.13
In order to uncover terror plots for which preparations are being 
made, the security services must in some way or another obtain indica-
tions that something is in the wind. This can be very demanding, both 
with respect to catching and correctly interpreting such information. 
The American 9/11 Commission Report demonstrated that sufficient 
indications existed to substantiate that preparations were underway for a 

61
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Disrupting Planned Terrorist Attacks 
major terrorist attack, but that both a lack of analytical imagination and 
organisational barriers meant that the pieces of information were not 
coordinated and collated into a picture that made it possible to disrupt 
the attacks on 11 September 2001.
The most serious side effect of the disruption strategy is that in order 
to catch the genuine threats, a large number of people will be subjected 
to various forms of checks, monitoring and interventions, and in some 
cases their personal integrity will be significantly violated. In a number 
of cases people have been wrongly monitored and arrested with sig-
nificant negative consequences for them, both in the short-term and the 
long-term. One example is the Non Fly Lists with thousands of names of 
people who should be denied to board aircrafts flights in and out of the 
USA. A large number of “false positives” have mistakenly been denied 
access and lost their flights.14 Some types of control measures are not 
particularly targeted and result in a great many people – or everyone – 
being subjected to some form or other of checks or monitoring, e.g. 
storing telecommunications data or airlines sending information about 
their passengers to American intelligence. Other measures are more 
targeted and will to a great extent (and often justifiably) be perceived 
as discriminatory and stigmatising for specific population groups, espe-
cially Muslims at the moment. Paradoxically both the targeting and the 
lack of targeting are problematic.
Notes
Figures are based on data from Petter Nesser’s (2008; 2010) “Chronology of 
1	
Jihadism in Western Europe 1994–2007: Planned, Prepared and Executed 
Terrorist Attacks” and his update “Chronology of Jihadism in Western 
Europe 2008–2010”. Coding of the events and descriptive statistics was 
done by this author. Nesser records his cases according to three levels 
of documentation: Category 1 cases are strongly documented with hard 
evidence, usually from guilty verdict in court. Category 2 cases have weaker 
documentation, e.g. from non-completed criminal cases or media reports, 
whereas category 3 cases have very limited and vague documentation. The 
figures stated above are based on category 1 and 2 cases only. Events are 
limited to the ten-year period from January 2001 until December 2010. If 
only category 1 cases should be included, the figures would be 3 successful 
attacks, 15 disrupted attacks and 7 failed attacks.

62 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
There are a number of examples of investigative journalists and publications, 
2	
such as the anti-fascist magazines Searchlight (in the UK) and Expo (in 
Sweden), as well as the Norwegian left-wing newspaper Klassekampen, having 
uncovered violent actions planned by right-wing extremist groups, most 
often by using infiltrators and informants in these social environments. 
Some of these political publications have almost operated as sort of private 
intelligence services with systematic information gathering and an extensive 
network of sources and infiltrators in the adversary’s camp. Some of these 
publications have had regular contact people in the official security services 
and communicated important information to them. This was true, for 
example, with regard to Klassekampen and the Norwegian Police Surveillance 
Agency (POT) in the 1980s. This was at a time when relations between these 
two were not particularly warm otherwise, but Klassekampen had better 
intelligence on right-wing extremists than POT had at the time.
In Norway this requires an order from Oslo District Court in a process 
3	
involving judges and lawyers with a security clearance.
This happened in some cases such as the so-called Vollsmose Case in 
4	
Odense in Denmark in 2006 in which the Danish Security and Intelligence 
Service (PET) paid a civilian agent to participate in a group in which he, 
among other things, helped to procure chemicals that could be used to 
produce homemade explosives. One of the main issues during the trial was 
whether this was an illegal way of provoking a crime which might not have 
happened otherwise. http://jp.dk/indland/krimi/article1083958.ece [Accessed 
19.02.2013].
The incident is described in NRK’s programme Spekter 
5	
Forhindret: 
Terroraksjoner stoppet i Oslo, broadcast on 28.11.07.
One example of this was the leader of “The People’s Movement Against 
6	
Immigration” (FMI) Arne Myrdal’s plans to blow up an asylum centre in 
Norway in 1989. The plan was “blown” by the left-wing daily Klassekampen, 
which had an informant in Myrdal’s group. Myrdal was sentenced to a year’s 
imprisonment.
This method of preventive dialogue was developed in a systematic way by 
7	
preventive police officers at Manglerud Police Station in Oslo during the 
mid-1990s (initially in relation to violent racist and right-wing youth groups) 
and was later adopted by the Norwegian Police Security Service (PST) as one 
of their main tools against extremism and violent radicalisation in general. 
Security services in Sweden and Denmark have also adopted the method as a 
useful early intervention tool.
“Vigrid offensive produces good results”. Press release from the Norwegian 
8	
Police Security Service (PST) dated 16.01.2004 (until recently available on 
the PST web page). According to Winsnes (2005), PST and the local police 
spoke to 95 young people aged between 15 and 25 (and also the parents of 

63
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Disrupting Planned Terrorist Attacks 
the youngest). Eleven of these young people had already broken off contact 
before they were called in for a chat, while 44 said they wanted to break 
contact with Vigrid because of the concerned chat. Meanwhile, 17 people 
wanted to maintain their contact with or remain members of Vigrid, while 
12 people wanted to think about it (all based on information from PST). 
Another study (Olsen 2011) based on qualitative interviews with nine former 
participants in Norwegian neo-Nazi groups documented that eight out of 
nine had been in preventive dialogues with the police, and all of them felt 
that this had played a role in their decisions to disengage from the extremist 
scene.
“Wanted to stop terror plans quietly” (in Norwegian), 
9	
Aftenposten, 20 
February 2008. Statements from the head of the Norwegian Police Security 
Service (PST), Jørn Holme, in connection with the publication of the PST’s 
threat assessment for 2008.
Some analysts and security services make a distinction between “solo 
10	
terrorists” and “lone wolfs” (PET/CTA 2011). The former term refers to 
individuals who carry out the actual attack alone but have been in contact 
with an extremist organisation and may have received orders or training. 
A “lone wolf”, on the other hand, operates completely alone without any 
contact with extremist organisations. In practice, solo terrorists and “lone 
wolfs” may rather be seen as ends of a continuum. In this study, the term 
“solo terrorist” is used to cover all varieties of individual terrorists operating 
more or less alone.
The two successful plots were the 22 July attacks in Norway and the 
11	
“pistol man” Peter Mangs in Malmö who committed a series of shooting 
at foreigners. Both of these solo terrorists were influenced by right-wing 
extremist or xenophobic ideas, whereas the six remaining plots were all 
inspired by a militant Islamist agenda.
In the compendium Anders Behring Breivik distributed on the Internet in 
12	
the day of 22 July attacks, he used the pen name “Andrew Berwick”. I use his 
real name in the bibliographical reference.
However, solo terrorism is not a new phenomenon. Historical examples 
13	
includes the anarchist who assassinated president William McKinley in 1901, 
and the co-called “Unabomber” who operated in the USA from 1978 until 
1995. Around 1990, American right-wing extremists developed the doctrine 
on ”leaderless resistance”, whereas the al-Qaida ideologist Abu Musab al-Suri 
developed the doctrine on  “individual Jihad” during the mid-2000. See 
http://www.stratfor.com/weekly/20110921-cutting-through-lone-wolf-hype 
and http://www.stratfor.com/weekly/20090603_lone_wolf_lessons [Accessed 
19.02.2013].
For examples of false positives on the No Fly List, see http://en.wikipedia.
14	
org/wiki/No_Fly_List [Accessed 19.02.2013].

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
64 
6
Protecting Vulnerable Targets
Abstract: This approach is based on the theory of 
situational prevention. The preventive mechanism is to 
identify and remove opportunities for specific types of 
terrorist action, thereby making it more difficult to carry 
through attacks. This may mean to increase the efforts 
needed to carry through a specific attack (e.g. by target 
hardening, control access to facilities, control weapons and 
other tools and substances), or to increase the risks for 
detection (e.g. by natural or formal surveillance). Some of 
the measures have had proven effects of reducing certain 
forms of terrorist attacks, such as hijacking of airplanes. 
However, protecting certain targets has sometimes led 
terrorists to attack other, less protected targets. This 
displacement effect is one of the main drawbacks of this 
strategy. Protective measures may also be costly and 
intrusive.
Keywords: detection; displacement; protection; reducing 
opportunities; situational prevention; target hardening 
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

65
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Protecting Vulnerable Targets 
Some potential terrorist targets are especially attractive to terrorists 
because of what they represent (e.g. embassies, government buildings, 
symbols of “the system”) or because of the major adverse effects an attack 
could cause (e.g. on air traffic or other important infrastructure, or how 
many people might be hurt). In our context it will therefore be important 
to try and identify and eliminate opportunities for specific types of acts 
of terrorism against such particularly attractive targets and reduce the 
target’s vulnerability. This is what the “situational prevention strategy” 
seeks to address (Clarke 1980; 1997; Clarke & Newman 2006; Freilich 
& Newman 2009). This section combines two central elements of the 
situational prevention strategy: implementing measures that increase 
the risk of detection, and making it more difficult and demanding for 
malicious actors to carry out their actions.1
While most prevention measures try to influence terroristic or other 
criminal actors directly, situational prevention measures try to influ-
ence actors indirectly by changing the situations in which the unwanted 
actions take place. The means are intended, both separately and together, 
to change the terrorists’ rational calculations of the costs and benefits 
of carrying out specific actions such that they decide to refrain from 
their intended actions. The measures work by increasing the demands 
on capacity such that the relative ability to carry out specific actions is 
reduced. As a consequence, the motivations for attacking these specific 
targets can be reduced.
The situational prevention strategy provides room for an enormous 
spectrum of possible measures, in relation to both ordinary crime and 
terrorism. For example, a familiar measure of increasing the effort 
required by terrorists to hijack an aeroplane is the introduction of access 
controls and the x-raying of hand luggage before boarding an aircraft. 
This contributed to the number of aeroplane hijackings decreasing heav-
ily during the 1970s and 1980s. Another measure is reducing terrorists’ 
access to the tools of their trade such as weapons, explosives or chemical 
substances that can be used to produce explosives. If the objective is to 
prevent terrorists from being able to develop simple nuclear bombs, the 
most effective measure is to ensure the safe storage of highly enriched 
uranium (Bremer Mærli 2004).2 Without highly enriched uranium, ter-
rorists have no option but to give up trying to develop their own nuclear 
weapons – regardless of how motivated they may be. A remaining 
question is whether they give up the entire plan, or find another way 

66 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
of committing mass murder, though. CCTV surveillance is a typical 
example of measures that increase the risk of detection. It has clearly 
helped to solve terrorist attacks as well as other crimes. It is more disput-
able whether CCTV surveillance actually prevents terrorist attacks from 
taking place, although there are great efforts to develop surveillance 
technologies to improve possibilities for averting attacks. Reviewing the 
impact of CCTV on several terrorist incidents, Peter Fussey concludes:
For example, in the aftermath of the violent Jihadi extremist attacks in 
London between 2005–2007, CCTV proved very useful in helping the police 
to reconstruct the sequence of events leading up to the actual or failed 
attacks. While this remains a clearly valuable application, these different 
examples indicate the post-event utility of CCTV strategies in countering 
terrorism which, ultimately, represents a very different function to its per-
ceived deterrence applications. Indeed, none of the above attacks were at all 
deterred by the presence of CCTV. (Fussey 2011: 176)
Building a more robust infrastructure can reduce the effects of sabotage, 
and require greater effort and capacity from terrorists who consider 
an attack. All of this can help to change the terrorists’ calculations of 
whether or not trying to carry out specific acts of terrorism is worth the 
effort (Felson 1998).
A very large number of different actors can, each in their own way, 
contribute to a situational prevention strategy against terrorism and 
through a multitude of measures. These could be private and public 
institutions that make important infrastructure less vulnerable to being 
put out of action, security companies that enforce access controls, banks 
that report suspicious financial transactions, public control bodies that 
regulate access to hazardous substances, imams and committee lead-
ers in Muslim congregations who prevent violence-oriented Islamists 
recruiting young Muslims for Jihad on their premises, to mention just a 
few examples. One main principle of the situational prevention strategy 
is that all “place managers” bear a primary responsibility for securing 
their facilities against terrorism or other crimes.
The target groups for situational prevention are also complex. Most of 
the measures aim to modify the behaviour of malicious actors in order 
to get them to refrain from doing what they want to do, i.e. this is a form 
of tertiary prevention. At the same time, many of the situational meas-
ures are targeted in a way that impacts everyone in a category, e.g. all air 
passengers or others who have to adapt to control measures, even if they 
do not have the remotest desire to commit any acts of terrorism. From 

67
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Protecting Vulnerable Targets 
this perspective the measures are both primary and tertiary prevention 
measures. This is also where some of the inherent contradictions in the 
situational strategy exist: many of the measures cause inconvenience to 
everyone even though the purpose of the measures is to get just a very 
few malicious actors to refrain from performing destructive activities. It 
can thus be difficult to gain the acceptance of those without malicious 
intent, e.g. of pilots who have to pass through numerous checks of both 
their bodies and hand luggage every day, which they perceive as being 
both offensive and pointless. After all, the pilots possess the ultimate 
weapon: the flight controls.
The advantage of the situational prevention strategy is first and fore-
most that the measures can have immediate and measurable effects on 
specific crime problems. In the area of terrorism, the aforementioned 
introduction of stricter access controls and hand luggage checks were 
clearly one of the main reasons for the heavy reduction in the number 
of aeroplane hijackings in the 1970s and 1980s (Clarke & Newman 2006: 
46). Another advantage of such control measures is that they can also 
have a positive effect by reducing types of crime other than those the 
measures originally targeted, e.g. anti-hijacking measures can also help 
prevent the smuggling of illegal goods, or in other places than where the 
actual measures are implemented. This is called “diffusion of benefits”, 
which may be seen as the opposite of displacement (see below).
Situational prevention measures also have some limitations and side 
effects. It is by no means certain that situational prevention measures will 
always reduce the number of terrorist attacks. Some of the (relatively 
few) measures to prevent terrorism that have been properly evaluated 
have been shown to have either a positive effect (with some displace-
ment to other targets), no effect, or a negative effect (Lum, Kennedy & 
Sherley 2006; de Graaf 2011: 5). Since situational prevention measures are 
designed to prevent specific terroristic actions against specific targets, 
and not affect the terrorists’ general motivations, these measures will not 
necessarily cause them to refrain from other types of acts of terrorism 
against other targets. This displacement effect is one of the great debates 
on situational prevention. Critics claims that if “target hardening” makes 
it more difficult to impact some types of target, the terrorists will instead 
target their attacks at less protected “soft” targets. In other words, one 
ends up with a displacement of the terrorist attacks. If it becomes too dif-
ficult to smuggle bombs onto aeroplanes, terrorists will choose to strike 
at other targets instead, e.g. trains, where it is practically impossible to 

68 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
check passengers and luggage in the same way as one can in airports 
(Cauley & Im 1988; Enders, Sandler & Cauley 1990; Enders & Sandler 
1993). It has also been shown that even though the introduction of metal 
detectors in airports more than halved the number of aeroplane hijack-
ings from 1972 to 1973, there was a significant increase in the number 
of hostage taking actions in the following years, in particular against 
embassies. And when the embassies’ security was reinforced, the number 
of assassinations increased (Enders & Sandler 1993; 2004).
The generally observed trend within international terrorism, i.e. that 
terrorists appear to be increasingly directing their actions towards the 
mass murder of unprotected civilians, may partly be attributed to the fact 
that the most attractive symbolic targets have become steadily harder to 
strike due to reinforced security measures, so-called target hardening. 
Nonetheless, few people deny that in many cases situational prevention 
measures directed at vulnerable targets are both necessary and effective. 
No one would claim that one should eliminate all security measures for 
aeroplanes because they may cause terrorists to attack trains instead. A 
certain level of perceived security is necessary in order to ensure most 
people will dare to fly. Nonetheless, it is a paradox that many of these 
measures are primarily symbolic and aimed at affording the general 
public a sense of security without actually having any genuine overall 
security effect.
Advocates of the situational prevention strategy assert that the 
displacement effect of situational prevention measures with regard to 
various types of crime has proven to be far smaller than what the critics 
estimated. Even though some displacement takes place, experience from 
situational prevention in relation to other crime shows that measures 
that are effective against one specific type of crime do not result in a 
corresponding increase in crime against other targets, meaning that 
overall a reduction takes place. Sometimes situational measures against 
one type of crime appear to actually help reduce other crime in an area. 
They also assert that the reduction in the number of aeroplane hijack-
ings due to checking hand luggage has not resulted in the expected rise 
in bombs being placed in checked in luggage (Clarke & Newman 2006: 
47), though they are treading on thin ice here. Other researchers (Enders 
& Sandler 1993; 2004) have, as mentioned, also pointed out substantial 
displacement from aeroplane hijacking to other types of hostage taking 
actions.

69
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Protecting Vulnerable Targets 
Another effect of situational prevention measures is that they often 
help to create a control society in which “Big Brother” is always watching 
and controlling us. The control measures result in economic, temporal, 
psychological, social and political strains. Some are unproblematic, oth-
ers are just irritating, like having to remove your shoes and belts in airport 
security. However, some situational measures may also be destructive for 
the local community as a whole, such as the Israeli “Security Wall” in the 
West Bank. This is credited with having reduced the number of suicide 
bombers in Israel (Clarke & Newman 2006: 39), but the wall also cuts off 
many Palestinians from their farming areas, schools and workplaces.
This illustrates a more general ethical dilemma with some situational 
prevention measures: sometimes those who have to carry the burdens of 
the measures are neither those who benefit from increased security nor 
those who have any intention of carrying out malicious actions (Duff &  
Marshall 2000; Kleinig 2000). After 9–11, “Muslim-looking” people 
have frequently been subjected to far more scrutinizing security checks 
at airports than the average passengers because of raised suspiciousness 
towards Muslims as a category.
Based on Clarke & Newman (2006), the primary approach for devel-
oping situational prevention strategies may be described as follows:
Identify vulnerable targets
▸▸
Prioritise the targets by need for protection
▸▸
Analyse the targets’ specific weaknesses
▸▸
○	 Think like a terrorist!
○	 Identify possible weapons and methods terrorists could use to 
strike targets
○	 Find ways of limiting terrorists’ access to the targets
Implement adequate protection measures
▸▸
Identify how terrorists can circumvent the protection measures and 
▸▸
find new counter-measures
One fundamental limitation of the situational prevention strategy is that 
there is an infinite number of possible terrorist targets and no limits with 
respect to how many security measures one could envisage introduc-
ing or the amount of financial means that could be expended to secure 
against all possible terrorist attacks. And anyway, it will not be sufficient 
to secure against all eventualities as long as there are terrorists with the 
motivation and capacity to carry out actions against a country or targets 

70 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
representing that country. Situational prevention is to a large extent a 
way of treating symptoms. Here other prevention strategies can help to 
reduce the risk of terrorist attacks in more fundamental ways by doing 
something about the root causes of recurrent problems.
Notes
Ronald Clarke’s situational prevention model contains five elements: 
1	
increasing the effort required, increasing the risk of discovery, reducing the 
rewards, reducing provocations, removing excuses. The first two elements 
are incorporated into my study in the sub-strategy “protect vulnerable 
targets” and “reducing the rewards”, while the last three are incorporated 
into two other sub-strategies: “building normative barriers” and “reducing 
recruitment”.
Plutonium-based nuclear bombs are generally considered to be too complex 
2	
to develop for non-state actors.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
71
7
Reducing the Harmful 
Consequences of 
Terrorist Attacks
Abstract: If a terrorist attack cannot be avoided, the next 
preventive mechanism is to reduce the harmful consequence 
through interventions which are planned, prepared and 
trained before an attack takes place. The goal is to save 
lives, alleviate suffering, reduce fear, restore social functions 
and infrastructure, and maintain confidence in institutions 
and authorities. Many actors play important roles in such 
an effort, with the police, medical emergency units, fire 
brigades in lead roles but a number of other public and 
private agencies and actors are also involved. Coordination 
of these agencies and personnel is often a main challenge in 
major crisis, typically due to capacity problems, insufficient 
communication, lack of training, irrelevant emergency plans 
or failure to implement such plans. 
Keywords: consequences; crisis management; harm 
reduction; preparation; protecting victims; restore 
confidence; training
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

72 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
If an act of terrorism has not been successfully stopped by some of the 
preceding strategies, the next step in the prevention chain is to reduce 
the negative consequences and adverse effects as much as possible. The 
preventive aspect of this lies in the fact that effective crisis response 
requires advance planning, coordination and training before any terror 
incident takes place. The objectives of this sub-strategy are to save lives, 
alleviate suffering, reduce fear, restore social functions and infrastruc-
ture, and maintain confidence in institutions and authorities. In other 
words, the preventive mechanism lies in reducing the harmful effects and 
consequences of acts of terrorism through preparations made in advance 
of any incident.
Many actors play important roles in the field of what is called crisis 
management, and at different levels of organisation. At the strategic or 
political level there is in most countries one particular ministry with 
an over-arching responsibility for coordinating, leading and planning 
responses to various types of crisis, a role often held by the Ministry of 
Interior, Ministry of Justice, Department of Homeland Security, or a 
similar department, or in some countries by the Cabinet Office or the 
Prime Minister’s Office. There will typically also be a high-level inter-
ministry crisis management committee which will coordinate between 
relevant ministries in the event of major terrorist attacks, disasters or 
other crises. At the operational levels, there is also a need to coordinate 
the various specialist agencies like the police, fire service, health agen-
cies, military forces and other relevant actors. In some countries, the 
police bear overall responsibility for coordination at the operational 
level, whereas in other countries, the fire service plays this role. Although 
the police, fire service and health agencies are the main players at the 
operational level, a number of other actors may also have various opera-
tive tasks. Competent hostage negotiators can help to resolve hostage 
situations without loss of life. A number of other government agencies, 
relevant ministries, political leaders, private companies and voluntary 
organisations can also play important supporting roles, depending on 
the nature of the incident. One of the main challenges after an act of 
terrorism will be to coordinate the many actors who are going to con-
tribute to the effort to reduce the harmful consequences of the attack. 
Experience and commission reports from a number of large-scale ter-
rorist attacks in several countries show that the same faults appear time 
and time again: There was inadequate communication and coordination 
vertically between different levels of organisation as well as horizontally 

73
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Reducing the Harmful Consequences of Terrorist Attacks 
between different agencies. Crisis management systems are overloaded. 
There was a lack of imagination about the possibility that the impossible 
could actually happen.1
The target groups for this strategy and its means are those who are 
affected, directly or indirectly, by acts of terrorism. These are the direct 
victims of the violence and their families, a frightened civilian popula-
tion, the activities impacted (e.g. public transportation systems), and 
the authorities or others who might be the political targets of the acts of 
terrorism. Those who might be hit hardest by the indirect consequences 
of any future acts of large-scale terrorism committed by Islamist extrem-
ists in European countries are the Muslim minorities, who risk being 
subjected to great suspicion and perhaps also acts of vengeance. All over 
Europe, these population groups still suffer from the effects of the 9–11 
and 7–7 attacks in the USA and London. Avoiding polarisation between 
groups in society in the aftermath of an act of terrorism is therefore very 
important. Ultimately this strategy aims to reduce the harmful effects for 
society as a whole.
The measures are complex and varied, and exist on different strategic 
and operative levels. The development of plans, organisation structures 
and routines for managing acts of terrorism, crises and other catastrophes 
is one important element. Competent manpower and equipment must 
also be in place to put these plans into action should the need arise.2 This 
is especially true of contributors such as the police, fire service, health 
personnel and hostage negotiators, but also other groups of personnel 
tasked with maintaining important social functions. Regular exercises 
that enable the actors to train together on coordinating the many tasks 
and functions at different levels is also an important measure.
In crisis situations, getting information out to and communicating 
with the general public and, not least, the next of kin is crucial in avoid-
ing unnecessary fear and restoring confidence and trust in the authori-
ties. Inadequate crisis management and communications could create a 
secondary crisis which primarily involves a lack of confidence that the 
authorities are capable of taking care of their citizens (’t Hart & Boin 
2001; Boin, ’t Hart, Stern and Sundelius 2005).
In the aftermath of an act of terrorism the police will also come under 
great pressure to ensure that their investigation quickly explains what has 
happened and who was responsible, and that the criminal justice system 
will be able to make the perpetrators answer for their crimes. Such a legal 
process could help to heal some of the mental wounds faster.3

74 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
At a more physical level, measures that can reduce adverse effects can 
include making infrastructure more robust. This could involve simple 
measures such as installing splinter-proof glass into new developments 
or gluing anti-splinter film on the windows of existing buildings that may 
be targeted by car bombs to avoid flying glass, which is one of the main 
immediate causes of death and injuries in terrorist bombing attacks. 
There are a number of more or less extensive and expensive measures 
that can help to reduce injuries to people or damage to infrastructure 
in the event of a terrorist attack, such as keeping parked vehicles at a 
distance from exposed buildings (Fussey 2011: 166–167) or constructing 
train carriages in ways which may reduce harm to passengers in case of 
explosions (Meyer 2012; Meyer & Ekblom 2012).
The advantages of putting resources into crisis management and harm 
reduction are that it can help to reduce the suffering of the victims and 
restore a degree of confidence and trust even if all other prevention 
barriers fail and one does not manage to stop an act of terrorism from 
being carried out. Many of the measures, resources and skills deployed 
to manage terrorist incidents can also be used to manage other types of 
crises and disasters, or used to mange more routine events in a normal 
situation.
There are also some disadvantages of focusing on harm reduction. 
Reducing the consequences and adverse effects is a reactive strategy 
employed when everything else has gone wrong. Preparing and main-
taining preparedness to manage such terrorist incidents is also very 
costly in terms of both personnel and other resources. Some measures 
and investments will never be put to use. If no terrorist attack ever hap-
pens, this may be considered a waste of resources. However, if sufficient 
resources are not allocated to managing such incidents, the political, 
social and human costs of poor crisis management will be even greater.
Notes
See e.g. the 
1	
9/11 Commission Report http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/911/
report/911Report.pdf [Accessed 06.03.2013] and the Norwegian Rapport 
fra 22. juli-kommisjonen. NOU Norges offentlige utredninger 2012: 14. 
http://22julikommisjonen.no/Rapport [Accessed 06.03.2013]. Most of the 
failures and shortcomings which led to a disastrous outcome of the terrorist 
attacks in Oslo and Utøya on  22  July  2011, had also been identified and 
reported by the 9/11 Commission.

75
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Reducing the Harmful Consequences of Terrorist Attacks 
Incompatible communication equipment was one of the factors which 
2	
caused problems and delays in the police operation to stop the massacre at 
Utøya on July 22, 2011. The Norwegian Police force and emergency services 
were in the process of replacing their old analogue radio systems with 
modern TETRA-based digital radios. The police districts near the capital 
which were rushing to Utøya had all implemented the new system whereas 
the local police district with operational responsibility for Utøya had the 
old analogue system. These two radio systems cannot communicate, and 
the various police units had to use mobile telephones to coordinate their 
operations. This caused problems in allocating personnel and other resources 
as well as in identifying “real” police officers from possible terrorists dressed 
up as police (which was the trick used by the mass-murderer Anders Behring 
Breivik).
The fact that the Swedish police and criminal justice system have never been 
3	
able to provide a final and satisfactory solution to the question of who was 
behind the murder of Prime Minister Olaf Palme has remained an open 
wound in Swedish society.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
76 
8
Reducing the Rewards 
from Acts of Terrorism
Abstract: In order to achieve their aims, terrorists are 
dependent on others reacting to the terrorist violence in 
a manner that affords the terror greater effect than the 
physical harm the actual violent act causes in itself. The 
preventive mechanism therefore consists of not giving 
the terrorists the responses they seek to achieve, making 
it less attractive for them or other potential terrorists to 
repeat a form of action that has not provided the desired 
return. This may mean not to overreact with brutality and 
repressive force, not to give in to their demands, or not to 
give the terrorists the kind of media attention they crave 
for. The main actors here are political leaders, business 
leaders and the news media.
Keywords: demands; media; overreaction; publicity; 
reduce rewards; response 
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

77
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Reducing the Rewards from Acts of Terrorism 
Terrorists usually have very limited means of force. They are unable to 
achieve their aims through violence alone. Therefore, in order to achieve 
their aims they are dependent on others reacting to the terrorist vio-
lence in a manner that affords the terror greater effect than the physical 
harm the actual violent act causes in itself. Terrorists try to provoke the 
authorities into acting in a manner in which they weaken themselves. 
Thus, we have to ask both what the terrorists want to get their enemy 
(authorities and others) to do and what makes these target groups act 
in a manner that makes the terrorist violence effective in the eyes of the 
perpetrators.
Terrorist groups have throughout history had very different politi-
cal goals and made use of different types of actions. Nonetheless, most 
terrorist groups make use of some common, basic terroristic strategies, 
which they combine in different ways.
Communication – gaining attention and communicating a message
▸▸
Creating a climate of fear, overreaction or paralysis
▸▸
Extortion/coercion – getting the authorities or others to give in to 
▸▸
specific demands1
When terrorists make use of these different strategies they are in fact 
trying to achieve specific responses from a variety of target groups. The 
counter strategy therefore is to ensure the authorities and other actors 
avoid responding as the terrorists want them to, or minimising these 
responses if it is impossible to avoid them completely. The preventive 
mechanism consists of making it less attractive for (other potential) 
terrorists to repeat a form of action that has not provided the desired 
return. This relates, of course, to the previous section on reducing harm-
ful consequences. The actors in this counter strategy will vary depending 
on what the terrorists are trying to achieve and from whom. Political 
authorities, news media and hostage negotiators may play central roles. 
The target groups are both those who have already adopted terroristic 
means and those considering doing so. In other words, this involves 
both tertiary and secondary prevention.
The vast majority of terrorists are trying to gain attention and media 
coverage through the use of spectacular violence. By doing so they are 
trying to communicate a political message to different target groups: 
enemies, (potential) supporters and a possibly neutral general public. 
They also want to multiply the fear-producing terror effect of the vio-
lence through extensive media coverage. By tailoring incidents to ensure 

78 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
they fit the journalists’ news criteria, they can to some extent manipulate 
the news media.
Journalists and the news media therefore have a particular respon-
sibility to not allow themselves to be directed by the terrorists’ media 
strategy. Obviously the news media cannot abstain from covering major 
incidents extensively. However such incidents can be covered in different 
ways. Some angles are more likely to provide the terrorists with the sort 
of coverage they are interested in, while other angles are less likely to 
do this. There are many examples of terrorists managing to gain a great 
degree of editorial control over the coverage of terror incidents, not least 
in hostage and hijacking situations (see Bjørgo & Heradstveit 1993, ch. 2; 
Schmid & de Graaf 1982). Among more recent examples is how hostage 
takers in Iraq in 2004–2005 succeeded in getting television companies 
the world over to show their frightening videos in which they beheaded 
their hostages.2 After awhile editors realised they were allowing them-
selves to be (mis)used to increase the pressure on the authorities, among 
other things, and tightened their practices.3 With no more television 
showings, these types of beheadings then also ended. Obviously, journal-
ists and news editors would naturally not allow themselves to be steered 
by the authorities’ instructions on how to cover a terror incident. But 
it is also an expression of poor journalistic judgement if editors allow 
themselves to be steered by the terrorists’ dramaturgy and attempts to 
direct the news. Instead of giving terrorists unnecessarily large amounts 
of publicity for their political cause or what they are trying to achieve, 
journalists can, for example, focus on the cynical ways terrorists inflict 
suffering on innocent victims and their families, or take a critical jour-
nalistic look at the terror organisation.
Another primary strategy of the terrorists is to create a climate of fear 
and provoke overreactions by the authorities in the form of excessive 
repression or the use of military force against civilians, or alternatively, 
become paralysed. Latin American and European far left terrorists had 
a theory that the state would, by overreacting, show its true, repressive 
face, which in turn would cause the people to rise up against it and carry 
out the revolution (Røde Armé Fraktion 1973). This has never happened. 
However, there are plenty examples of acts of terrorism provoking the 
authorities into overreacting so brutally they reduce their own legitimacy. 
The counter move by the authorities is to strictly adhere to the rule of law 
in dealing with criminal acts of terrorism and not allowing themselves to 
be tempted into excessive use of force, surveillance or witch hunts against 

79
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Reducing the Rewards from Acts of Terrorism 
minorities and oppositions. The reaction of the authorities’ to a terror-
ist threat must be proportional to the threat and rooted in the criminal 
justice system. An alternative desired strategic outcome in the eyes of the 
terrorists is to make the authorities appear paralysed and unable to protect 
their citizens, which in turn may undermine the legitimacy of the state. If 
the authorities can manage to be vigorous without being panicked into an 
overreaction, this will deprive the terrorists of this reward.
Extortion or coercion is also a classic terrorist strategy in which 
terrorists try to force authorities or others to give in to demands by 
threatening to injure some primary victims, e.g. kidnapped hostages. 
Extortion usually takes the form of an ultimatum: if not … , then … 
Usually the terrorists threaten with the killing of one or more hostages 
if the enemy or the authorities do not meet specific demands or condi-
tions. This presents the authorities and others with a difficult dilemma: 
Not complying with the demands may result in hostages being killed and 
the authorities being blamed for not saving them. While complying with 
the demands may resolve an untenable situation in the short-term, it will 
in the longer term invite new extortions because the authorities have 
demonstrated that they are weak and willing to give in to pressure. This 
also undermines the authorities’ legitimacy and credibility. However, 
while almost all state authorities officially deny that they will negotiate 
with terrorists and meet their demands, history shows that most gov-
ernments and private actors will in practice negotiate in some form or 
other because totally rejecting negotiations has even greater costs. The 
question is what one can negotiate with terrorists about without under-
mining the fundamental values of the state and society, and without 
giving the extortionists such great rewards from taking hostages that 
they invite new extortion situations. Recent practice and research relat-
ing to hostage situations and negotiations show that it usually is possible 
to save lives and reduce harm by negotiating with hostage takers. This 
can be done without it necessarily being at the expense of fundamental 
social values, or at least at an acceptable cost (Dolnik & Fitzgerald 2007; 
Zartman 2006; Faure & Zartman 2010). However, this requires specially 
qualified hostage negotiators with both theoretical and practical training 
in negotiation techniques.
The advantage of reducing the terrorists’ rewards from their actions is 
that it can make such acts less profitable and attractive, and thus reduce 
the risk of similar acts in the future. At the same time such a counter 
strategy can also help to maintain the authorities’ legitimacy.

80 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
However, this counter strategy also has some limitations and weak-
nesses. Even though the news media have to show responsibility in their 
coverage of terror situations, it is also important that journalists maintain 
their critical perspective towards the government. The “patriotic jour-
nalism” that dominated the American news media in the years following 
11 September 2001, in which almost all the journalists gave their full 
support to the government, damaged both the media’s credibility and 
the quality of politics in the USA. For a long time the news media did 
not function as a necessary critical corrective to government policy. This 
resulted in reckless political measures causing great harm to the USA’s 
standing in the world community, in the fight against terrorism, and to 
the many innocent people who were affected by the USA’s excessive use 
of military force.
Not all terrorists are interested in negotiating: some primarily take 
hostages to humiliate the authorities, not to have some demands met 
(Romarheim 2010: 164–165). Attempts to reduce the terrorists’ rewards 
will as a rule involve the authorities trying to make the best out of a very 
difficult situation. Solutions to such dilemmas seldom result in a fully 
satisfactory outcome. If the authorities do not give in to demands it may 
sometimes cost the hostages their lives. Striking a balance between the 
costs and benefits of different ways of acting may require some difficult 
decisions, with both human and political dilemmas. However, as a rule it 
is possible to avoid acting as the terrorists want.
Notes
These and several other terrorist strategies are discussed in more detail in 
1	
Bjørgo & Heradstveit (1993).
Most Western TV editors stopped broadcasting the videos right before the 
2	
victims’ throats were cut. But this hardly made them less frightening for 
viewers.
Some cynics might add that by that time, the news media had squeezed out 
3	
everything of news value of the beheading videos, so there was little ‘sacrifice’ 
to stop showing them.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
81
9
Incapacitation – Eliminating 
the Capacity of (Potential) 
Terrorists to Cause Harm
Abstract: The preventive mechanism in incapacitation is to 
reduce or eliminate the capacity of terrorist actors to carry 
out terrorist attacks and cause harm. The main means in 
a criminal justice framework is arresting and incarcerating 
(potential) violent perpetrators, to take away their access to 
weapons and funding, and in extreme cases to “take them 
out” by lethal force. In a military framework, killing (or 
apprehending) terrorists and destroying terrorist training 
facilities and their equipment are the main measures. Some 
countries have made extensive use of targeted killings by 
drones, sometimes in the form of extra-legal executions. It 
is often more effective to neutralise the hubs in a terrorist 
network than trying to take out the entire network.
Keywords: detention; drones; extra-legal executions; 
funding; incapacitation; neutralisation; prison; weapons  
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

82 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
Incapacitation’s mechanism is to reduce or eliminate the ability of mali-
cious actors to commit criminal acts through measures such as confine-
ment or physical “neutralisation”, or by reducing their access to tools or 
targets. In the USA incapacitation has become the most important argu-
ment for both the extensive use of long-term prison sentences and the 
death penalty. People who are kept locked up or killed are in an effective 
manner prevented from committing criminal acts in society (Zimring 
& Hawkins 1997). This tangible prevention strategy has also been exten-
sively used to put terrorists out of action – and in some contexts undeni-
ably with some success. This strategy has been especially effective against 
hierarchical organisations in which the group has been paralysed when 
the leadership has been arrested or killed, or where one has succeeded in 
putting key nodes in a network out of action.
Possible measures in an incapacitation strategy may range from arrest-
ing and incarcerating (potential) violent perpetrators, to taking away 
their access to weapons or funding, to the more radical measures of 
killing those considered a threat.
Stopping an ongoing terrorist massacre by shooting or arresting the 
perpetrator(s) is an obvious example of crime prevention by incapacita-
tion. This happened when the Norwegian Police Delta Force eventually 
arrested Anders Behring Breivik at Utøya island on 22 July 2011. He 
surrendered without resistance. Unfortunately, by then he had had more 
than an hour at his disposal to kill 68 young people until the police 
arrived to stop him. Better logistics, communication and coordination 
would have saved time – and lives.
One recurring counter-terrorism strategy is that of “decapitation” – 
cutting of the head of a terrorist organisation by arresting or killing the 
top leader. The operation by US Navy Seals to assassinate Osama Bin 
Laden on 2 May 2011 is a prime example of this. USA’s and Israel’s “tar-
geted killings” that use drones and missiles against Taliban, al-Qaida and 
Hamas leaders and fighters are other examples of the same strategy.
However, depriving terrorists of their capacity to carry out acts of 
terrorism, e.g. their access to explosives, weapons and training, is also a 
form of incapacitation in the wider sense. The destruction of al-Qaida’s 
training camps in Afghanistan and causing its leadership to flee helped 
to significantly incapacitate al-Qaida’s ability to train, plan and carry out 
major acts of terrorism. Depriving terrorists of the tools of their trade, 
e.g. by seizing weapons, explosives or money intended to finance acts of 
terrorism, is a measure of incapacitation as well. This can also be seen 

83
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Incapacitation 
in the context of situational prevention in that such measures make it 
harder to carry out actions (see below).
The most important actors in this strategy are the military, the police 
and the prison authorities. However, other authorities and control bod-
ies can also play important roles in reducing the capacity of terrorists by 
regulating access to the means required for carrying out terrorist attacks, 
such as explosives, chemical or radiological substances, or financial 
resources. The target group for the measures is primarily those who are 
directly involved in carrying out terrorism, i.e. this is a form of tertiary 
prevention. However, incapacitation is also used in ways that border on 
secondary prevention, in that people who are suspected of conspiring 
to plan and make preparations for acts of terrorism can be imprisoned 
(Myhrer 2011: 89; Zedner 2007). In some countries, not least the USA, UK 
and former British colonies, “administrative detention” (i.e. incarceration 
without trial) of potential terrorists is used extensively against people 
who are suspected that they might do something terrorist-related.
The advantage of the incapacitation strategy is that it is an effective and 
tangible way of putting key activists and groups out of action. This par-
ticularly applies to groups with limited numbers of members in which 
new recruitment is limited or in which a lot of the activities depend on 
a few key leaders, as in some hierarchical organisations. There is little 
doubt that American efforts to “take out” the leadership of Al-Qaida 
have had a devastating effect on the organisation’s ability to prepare and 
coordinate major terrorist attacks. In his study of terrorist networks, 
Marc Sageman argues that incapacitation should be use selectively 
against terrorist networks:
Unlike a hierarchical network that can be eliminated through decapitation 
of its leadership, a small-world network1 resists fragmentation because of its 
dense interconnectivity. A significant fraction of nodes can be randomly 
removed without much impact on its integrity […]. Where a small-world 
network is vulnerable to targeted attack is at its hubs. If enough hubs are 
destroyed, the network breaks down into isolated, noncommunicating 
islands of nodes. […] Hubs in a social network are vulnerable because most 
communications go through them. By tracing messages through good 
police work, law enforcement authorities should be able to identify and 
arrest the human hubs. (2004: 140–141)
Another advantage of the incapacitation approach is that state capacities 
for doing this will often exist in the form of established military forces, 
police organisations and criminal justice systems.

84 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
However, there are significant costs, limitations and disadvantages from 
using incapacitation as a primary strategy. One of the main problems is 
the great uncertainty associated with predicting people’s future criminal 
or terroristic behaviour. Imprisoning (or killing) someone to prevent 
them from committing an act of terrorism that they perhaps would 
never actually commit is problematic (Tilley 2009: 27). It is also highly 
doubtful that incarcerating or killing individual activists in itself has a 
particularly limiting effect on groups that have a high level of recruitment 
and a broad social base. Innocent people will also often be impacted by 
such measures, either in the form of mass arrests or the use of military 
force, such as in the USA’s and Israel’s targeting killings of Taliban and 
Hamas activists that often harm children and other innocent people.
The Obama administration’s increased used of drones, also called 
UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) or RPV (Remote Piloted Vehicle), to 
kill suspected terrorists has been described by the UN and legal experts 
as extra-judicial killings and a breach of international law because these 
attacks take place outside armed conflict zones regulated by the laws of 
war.2 Many such attacks have been carried out against targets in Pakistan 
and Yemen, killing considerable numbers of al-Qaida operatives and 
leaders (but also hundreds of innocent bystanders).3 Until recently, this 
technology of armed drones has been limited to a few countries, mainly 
Israel and the USA, but this is rapidly changing. There is every reason to 
expect that terrorist organisations and perhaps even single actor terror-
ists in the near future will get access to and make use of simple drones to 
carry out attacks against (and even within) the USA, e.g. against political 
leaders or military personnel. Given the fact that the US government has 
undermined international law against extra-judicial killings and attacks 
outside armed conflict zones, tit-for-tat retaliation attacks with drones 
against US targets is likely to be popular beyond the narrow circles of 
terrorist movements.
Heavy-handed repression may reinforce recruitment and the motiva-
tion to use extreme violence, and strengthen the movement’s social 
and political base (de Graaf 2011: 6). The violent repression that some 
governments have employed to crush such movements also had as a 
consequence that the state itself make use of terrorist methods. The state 
would thus undermine its own moral and political legitimacy in rela-
tion to both its own population and the international community, which 
is often one of the terrorists’ primary objectives. At the same time, too 
heavy use of force can undermine more long-term prevention strategies, 

85
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Incapacitation 
e.g. to reduce recruitment by reducing the sources of frustration and 
political conflict that provide the growth conditions for terroristic move-
ments. Incapacitation should therefore be considered a sub-strategy that 
must be applied selectively in combination with other, more long-term 
strategies to achieve a lasting reduction in terrorism.
Notes
According to Sageman (2004: 140), a “small-world network” is similar to 
1	
that of traffic on the internet, in which gigantic hubs like Google, Yahoo 
and CNN receive far more hits than most other web sites. In his study, he 
found that the two Arab clusters in the global Salafi jihadi network had this 
character.
See op-ed by Mary Ellen O’Connell, International Law Expert, on US Drone 
2	
Policy, in New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/07/opinion/
the-questions-brennan-cant-dodge.html?_r=0 [Accessed 12.02.13]. For an 
overview on laws of war, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laws_of_war 
[Accessed 25.02.2013].
For a discussion on the impact on drones against terrorism, see Daniel L. 
3	
Byman  “Do Targeted Killings Work”, http://www.brookings.edu/research/
opinions/2009/07/14-targeted-killings-byman [Accessed 12.02.2013]; and 
Henriksen & Ringsmose (2013).

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
86 
10
Disengagement from Terrorism
Abstract: It is not true that “once a terrorist, always a 
terrorist”. Most terrorist groups and individuals end their 
involvement sooner or later, voluntarily or involuntarily. 
The preventive mechanism involves bringing about an end 
to individual terrorist careers and collective campaigns 
sooner rather than later. This requires a combination of 
push and pull factors, making continued involvement 
in terrorism less attractive and providing realistic and 
attractive exit options. Measures could involve amnesties 
or lighter sentencing/prison conditions, peace processes, 
political reforms or programs to facilitate disengagement 
and reintegration into mainstream society. Bringing an 
end to terrorist campaigns should be the ultimate goal of 
counter-terrorism. However, if amnesty to former terrorists 
is part of the process to end terrorist campaigns, it may 
compromise the rule of law and cause further pain to the 
victims of terrorists. 
Keywords: amnesty; deradicalisation; disengagement; 
exit; push and pull; rehabilitation; reintegration 
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

87
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Disengagement from Terrorism
This brings us to the last prevention strategy, which involves getting 
individuals and groups involved in terrorism to give up their participa-
tion in such activities – often referred to as disengagement, desistance or 
exit processes. The preventive mechanism involves bringing about an end 
to individual terrorist careers and collective terror campaigns, such that 
the individual or group is no longer involved in terroristic activities. The 
desired outcome of such a process is that terroristic violence ceases or is 
reduced. Meanwhile, knowledge of how these processes occur is neces-
sary in order to be able to develop result-oriented prevention measures 
based on this mechanism.
The prevailing belief has been that “once a terrorist, always a terrorist”, 
and that the only way to get them to cease their terror activities is through 
physical incapacitation: imprisonment or death. Recent research shows 
that terrorist careers and campaigns can be ended in a number of ways 
and for a number of reasons (Cronin 2008; Jones & Libicki 2008; Bjørgo 
& Horgan 2009). Some of course come to end because the people are 
killed or imprisoned for a long time, but many give up terrorism because 
they choose to do so – more or less voluntarily. The goal must be to get 
more to quit earlier rather than later, before they have time to inflict suf-
fering on others and before they themselves have blood on their hands. 
Interrupting a radicalisation process early on in a terrorist career is better 
than waiting until the person or group concerned has managed to do a 
great deal of harm. It is useful to differentiate between an individual end 
to a terrorist career and a collective end to a terror campaign or group. 
This is because the measures that can be employed to achieve this can be 
quite different. Again, the notion of macro, meso and micro level factors 
and processes may guide our understanding of how and why terrorists 
disengage, collectively or individually.
The most effective way of preventing terroristic violence in the long-
term is to get entire terrorist groups to lay down their arms. This has 
happened in a number of different ways, caused by factors and processes 
at different levels. On striking example of how developments at the 
macro level precipitated the demise of a terrorist organisation relates to 
the left-wing “Red Army Faction” in Germany. The dissolution of the 
Soviet Union, the ideological bankruptcy of the communist model as 
well as the collapse of the DDR and its subsequent reunification with 
the Federal Republic of Germany were background factors when the 
remaining RAF activists at large announced in April 1998 that “the urban 
guerrilla in the shape of the RAF is now history”.1 After the German 

88 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
reunification in 1990, it was confirmed that RAF members had been 
given shelter and new identities in the DDR and that the security and 
intelligence organization Stasi had provided RAF with training, logisti-
cal and financial support (Sørensen 2006).
Several factors at national as well as group levels2 led to “The Good 
Friday Agreement” in Northern Ireland in which the IRA and the 
Protestant paramilitary groups laid down their arms and eventually 
decommissioned them in a verifiable fashion. In Egypt, the two largest 
Islamist terror organisations, “The Islamic Group” and “Jihad”, ended their 
terror campaigns after the leaders of the two organisations realised their 
violent struggle was the wrong path. These leaders have provided com-
prehensive theological justifications for this to persuade their followers  
(a process at meso level, see below).
Some groups give up terrorism by admitting defeat (e.g. the Red Army 
Faction in Germany and the Islamic Group in Egypt), because their 
leaders are arrested (Aum Shinrikyo in Japan and Shining Path in Peru) 
or because they lose popular support (Red Brigades in Italy during the 
years after the killing of Prime Minister Aldo Moro). Others end their 
armed struggle through negotiations and peace agreements (IRA, Fatah/
PLO). In some cases groups that have previously used terroristic methods 
have later gained power (FLN in Algeria, Fatah, ANC in South Africa) 
(cf. Cronin 2008; Hoffman 2006; Crenshaw 1991). A study of how long 
terror groups remain active (LaFree 2011) shows that almost 75 per cent 
are no longer active one year after their first attack, while only 6 per cent 
of groups are active for more than 10 years. Another study that looked at 
how terror groups give up terrorism (Jones & Libicki 2008) showed that 47 
per cent of the terror groups in the study gave up using terroristic means 
because they were defeated by police, intelligence or military forces. More 
surprisingly, no less than 43 per cent gave up terrorism because they 
became participants in a political process. Typically, giving up terrorist 
methods involves a gradual process rather than a sudden halt. Ten per 
cent of the groups gave up terrorism because their campaign ended in a 
form of victory (mainly anti-colonialist movements). Meanwhile, other 
studies (including Cronin 2008) show that many groups also disintegrate 
through internal splits or disappear due to a lack of popular support, 
disillusionment among their members or weak leadership.
The two major Egyptian terror organisations Gama’a al-Islamiya 
(The Islamic Group) and Jihad provide an interesting example of how 
terror organisations can break with terrorism due to their leaders and 

89
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Disengagement from Terrorism
ideologists becoming disillusioned and changing their ideology. Most of 
their leaders (and tens of thousands of members) were imprisoned for 
a long time (many of them since the 1980s or earlier). After a while the 
leadership realised that their violent struggle had done more harm than 
good to their cause. From the end of the 1990s onwards the leaderships 
began to gradually revise their understanding of what the Qur’an and 
theological tradition says about Jihad, and have in recent years strongly 
denounced al-Qaida’s ideology and terroristic practices. Some of these 
individuals were among the key ideologues and leaders in al-Qaida’s 
early phase (see Rashwan 2009, especially pp. 128–129). Such ideological 
criticism from their own has shaken al-Qaida and forced them to defend 
their ideological point of view (Wright 2008). Since 1997 (and up to the 
time of writing) no acts of terrorism have been carried out by these two 
organisations in Egypt and thousands of imprisoned former extremists 
have now been released from prison (Rashwan 2009; Blaydes & Rubin 
2008; Wright 2008).
In addition to this collective way of disengaging from terrorism, many 
individuals involved in terrorism also disengage on their own. Members 
of terror groups leave in different ways and for different reasons, though 
disillusionment usually plays a key role in the process. Different types of 
activists (cf. the three types described on page 43–44) tend to become 
disillusioned for different reasons. Those who to begin with were moti-
vated by political idealism and altruism are more disposed to losing their 
illusions because they realise there is a contradiction between the means 
and the ends, or that the violent actions go too far and harm innocent 
people. These ideological activists also often realise that their struggle is 
not improving the situation of those on whose behalf they claim to be 
fighting, and that it is often these who are most harmed by the violent 
acts. Fellow travellers who primarily joined the militant group out of 
loyalty to friends or a desire to belong to a group will often become 
disillusioned because the comrades, group and leaders do not live up 
to their high expectations – in other words, mainly due to factors and 
processes at the meso and micro levels. They become disappointed if 
paranoia about possible infiltrators poisons relationships in the group, 
or if the leaders try to manipulate them into joining in actions they do 
not want to be part of. Such people are often disposed to defecting to 
another strong group and forming bonds with alternative friends. Many 
people also leave a group because they have found a girlfriend/boyfriend 
or have had a child, meaning their priorities in life change. They long for 

90 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
a normal life and end up burnt out and exhausted from the pressure and 
stress of underground activism. The socially frustrated and marginalised 
have limited social resources and weak ties with normal society. They are 
often interested in excitement and action, and can easily become bored 
with the endless waiting and preparations for an action that may be far 
into the future. If they leave the extremist group, they can easily slide 
into other criminal circles. Others quit after being arrested. For some 
this means they are no longer subject to the group’s bad influence, mean-
ing their world view unravels and they reorient themselves (Jamieson 
1990; Horgan 2003; Bjørgo 2009; 2011).
The mechanism involved both when groups and individuals disengage 
from terrorism can be understood as being the result of a combination of 
push and pull forces. “Push” forces are the negative social incidents and 
circumstances that make it uncomfortable and unappealing to remain in 
a specific social environment. “Pull” refers to positive factors attracting 
the person to a more rewarding alternative (see Bjørgo 2009: 36–49). A 
policy aimed at encouraging groups and individuals to quit terrorism 
and political violence has the best chance of succeeding if one can rein-
force both the pull and the push forces such that they interact and work 
in the same direction – the well-known carrot and stick method.
One important conceptual distinction that should also influence pol-
icy development is the difference between the terms deradicalisation and 
disengagement. Deradicalisation should be seen as mainly as a change in 
values and ideas away from embracing radical and/or violent ideologies 
and policies. Disengagement is a change in behaviour by discontinuing 
or breaking off participation in violent groups or engagement in politi-
cal violence. Values and ideas may or may not change when individuals 
disengage (Bjørgo & Horgan 2009: 3–5). These are to some extent sepa-
rate or loosely linked processes, and one does not necessarily depend 
on or lead to the other. Some people no longer believe in the political 
cause, but continue to participate in terroristic activities due to a lack of 
alternatives. Others cease their involvement in militant activities even 
if they still have extreme attitudes – they are “disengaged without being 
deradicalised” (Bjørgo 1997: 245; Horgan 2009: 27–28). This raises the 
question of what should be the most important goal of a policy aimed at 
getting terrorists and other political extremists to quit: that they change 
their behaviour or that they change their mindset? Many deradicalisa-
tion programmes have very unclearly defined goals and it is thus difficult 
to evaluate the programmes’ effectiveness.

91
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Disengagement from Terrorism
The target group for the exit strategy of getting individual and groups 
to give up terrorism and violent extremism is of course those who 
are involved in this type of activism. The aim is to avoid a continua-
tion or repeat of such violent activities. Thus, this is a form of tertiary 
prevention.
The actors are primarily the authorities, especially the criminal justice 
system (prosecutors, courts and prison authorities), though the police, 
social authorities, religious leaders, voluntary organisations and families 
can also help guide former extremists back into society (Gjelsvik & 
Bjørgo 2012). Political authorities must make the difficult evaluations 
and decisions on whether it is desirable to allow ex-terrorists to make 
such a return to society and what measures are needed to make this pos-
sible, e.g. by establishing rehabilitation or amnesty programmes. When 
it comes to getting entire groups to lay down their arms, peace negotia-
tors and various political actors can play key roles in facilitating these 
processes.
The measures vary based on whether we are talking about a collective 
or individual process of disengagement, and whether they are aimed 
at people who are in prison or not. Some measures depend to a great 
degree on a voluntary choice to break with violent extremism, while 
other measures involve a large degree of coercion, and very often there is 
a combination or something in-between. Negotiations can persuade ter-
rorist groups with a substantial proportion of their members still at large 
to lay down their arms. As a rule this only happens when achieving their 
aims through violence appears hopeless and when their life situations 
are otherwise intolerable. In these circumstances an offer to participate 
in more normal political processes and return to ordinary society may 
gain support (Faure & Zartman 2010).
In some countries in which hundreds of participants in terrorist 
movements are imprisoned, the authorities offer full or partial amnes-
ties, most often to those who agree to participate in various type of reso-
cialisation or deradicalisation programmes to ensure that they are no 
longer a danger to society. These programmes can be found in a number 
of countries including Colombia, Italy, Algeria, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, 
Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. Programmes involving amnesties 
usually do not cover those who have committed serious crimes, but 
in some cases even such offenders are offered opportunities to reduce 
their sentences. Some of these amnesty programmes primarily focus on 
changing mindsets, while others require active collaboration with the 

92 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
prosecuting authorities, e.g. providing intelligence or testifying against 
other participants in the terror movement (Taarnby 2005a; 2005b; 
Boucek 2009; della Porta 2009; Neumann 2010). The more sophisticated 
prison-based rehabilitation programmes – the Saudi Arabian programme 
is the best known – combine theological dialogue, therapy, social and 
cultural activities, involving the family, financial incentives, and not least 
help arranging a marriage to tie the former militant activist into family 
obligations (Boucek 2009). Other rehabilitation programmes primarily 
focus on providing ex-combatants with the education and vocational 
training they need to get by in normal society, as is the case in Colombia 
(Ribetti 2009).
Another type of programme targets defectors from militant extremist 
groups – primarily people who are not in prison and who themselves 
choose to break with a group. The purpose is to offer a way out for 
individuals who otherwise would be trapped in a violent activist social 
environment, and thus prevent them from continuing their destructive 
activities there. Examples of the latter include the Exit programmes for 
participants in neo-Nazi and racist groups, which started in Norway in 
1997 and later spread to Sweden, Finland, Germany and the Netherlands 
(Bjørgo, van Donselaar & Grunenberg 2009). Another example is the 
rehabilitation programme for defectors from the FARC guerrillas in 
Colombia (Ribetti 2009). Such defectors will often have reason to fear 
reprisals, both from former comrades and from former enemies, or pos-
sibly prosecution by the authorities if they have committed criminal acts. 
The measures partly involve practical help with dealing with the circum-
stances surrounding the break with the group and possibly security and 
legal problems. It also involves finding a new footing in life. This means, 
among other things, (re-)establishing social networks and contact with 
public agencies, and building up an understanding of reality that more 
closely resembles that of “normal” society.
The advantage of trying to get terrorist entire groups to give up terror-
ism collectively is of course that this, more than anything else, can help 
to bring terrorist campaigns to an end. This may sometimes be the only 
opportunity to put an end to or reduce the violence and suffering. It may 
be a long and gradual process with many setbacks, e.g. factions breaking 
ranks and continuing terrorism to undermine compromise and peace 
solutions (Hamas and the Real IRA are prime examples of such “spoil-
ers”). The fact that individuals are quitting can in itself help to reduce 
the size and capacity of terrorist groups, especially if many people quit 

93
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Disengagement from Terrorism
without the ranks being replenished with new recruits. However, just 
as important is the fact that some of these former participants can help 
reduce recruitment by telling the stark truth about these movements and 
breaking down the romanticised image that makes these movements 
attractive to some young people. If key members defect and actively work 
against the movement they belonged to, this can also help create internal 
splits in the group. In recent years, there have been a number of cases in 
the UK and elsewhere in which former radical Islamists have decided 
to actively and openly work against the movement to which they once 
belonged. And they are doing so with great credibility and effectiveness. 
We are seeing something similar in Indonesia where one of the leaders 
of Jemaa Islamiyah, the organisation behind the Bali bombing in 2002, 
has been a frontman in the work of rehabilitating imprisoned members 
of the organisation and guiding them back to normal society. When this 
person, Nasir bin Abas, was arrested he was already disillusioned with 
the organisation because the Bali bombing affected so many innocent 
people. He relates that one of the reasons he turned so quickly and 
started to cooperate with the authorities was that he was surprised that 
the police treated him so humanely and in an “Islamic way” (Abuza 
2009: 198). It is actually a recurring finding that treating imprisoned 
jihadists humanely provides better results in the form of cooperation 
than what one achieves through torture, denying people their rights and 
other grim consequences of the Guantanamo model (see also Boucek 
2009). Another important advantage of getting terrorists to defect and 
break with a movement is that they can provide important and more 
reliable intelligence information and perhaps also important testimony 
in legal processes cases against leading members (della Porta 2009).
A strategy of facilitating collective or individual disengagement from 
terrorism has many limitations. One of the problems has been that some 
of the amnesty programmes have been misused to get out of prison 
quickly and then return to terroristic activities or other criminality 
(Horgan & Braddock 2010). Another problem is that terrorists with 
“blood on their hands” walking around free may be difficult to accept for 
the terrorists’ victims. The fact that recently active terrorist operatives 
and leaders, who may be responsible for the deaths and suffering of close 
relatives, can avoid punishment in connection with peace agreements, 
as happened recently in Northern Ireland, can undermine both the rule 
of law and people’s sense of justice (Alonso 2009: 90–91). At the same 
time it is almost inconceivable that the leaders of the IRA and similar 

94 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
groups would have concluded peace agreements that could have resulted 
in them and their foot soldiers ending up in prison for a long time. If 
the only alternatives to continuing the violent struggle are death or 
imprisonment, many would rather continue the struggle even if there is 
no longer hope of victory. The outcome of this is more suffering. So, in 
such situations it may be worth the price to compromise on some legal 
principles to achieve an end to terrorist violence.
Notes
RAF-Auflösungserklärung
1	
. http://www.rafinfo.de/archiv/raf/raf-20–4-98.php 
[Accessed 28.01.2013]. At the time of the announcement, it was five years 
since the RAF had launched a major attack, in March 1993.
These factors include a redefinition of Irish traditional nationalism, growing 
2	
political isolation of the IRA and Shin Fein, and a realisation among the 
leadership that they lacked the strength to achieve the end goal (Alonso 
2009: 98). The IRA also realised that their organisation was infiltrated at 
all levels by British intelligence. The determination of the British and Irish 
governments to push together for a political settlement was crucial. See also 
English (2009: 132).

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
95
11
Some Conclusions
Abstract: One of the major challenges of preventing 
terrorism can be to find an appropriate balance between 
short-term and long-term prevention strategies, and 
between repressive and constructive measures. This study 
has argued for developing a broad, comprehensive strategy 
that employs multiple preventive mechanisms and their 
pertinent measures rather than focusing on a narrower 
range of repressive mechanisms and measures alone.  
A wide range of measures activating multiple preventive 
mechanisms will construct more barriers that can catch 
potential terrorists and acts. This means that every 
measure alone does not need to be as heavy for the total 
effect to produce adequate protection. This broad and 
holistic approach may serve to lighten the pressure from 
the more repressive prevention measures and reduce the 
negative side effects.
Keywords: barriers; comprehensive strategy; holistic; 
long-term; short-term 
Bjørgo, Tore. Strategies for Preventing Terrorism. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.  
doi: 10.1057/9781137355089.

96 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
One of the main aims of this study has been to develop a comprehen-
sive, theory-based model for preventing terrorism and other crime. 
The theory of preventive mechanisms has proven to be a good basis for 
systematic thinking on strategies for reducing terrorism, and a model 
which is also easy to understand for experts and non-experts alike. The 
nine different preventive mechanisms described in the study explain how 
measures can help to reduce the occurrence of acts of terrorism or the 
consequences of such actions. Based on the nine mechanisms we have 
specified some relevant measures and who is responsible for implement-
ing them, who the target groups are, and the strengths and advantages of 
the various measures, as well as the limitations and the unintended side 
effects of these measures. Obviously, many more measures could have 
been included in the discussion.
One of the major challenges of preventing terrorism can be to find 
an appropriate balance between short-term and long-term prevention 
strategies, and between the repressive and the constructive measures. 
The more repressive and controlling strategies are necessary to curb 
immediate, acute terrorist threats. When violent actors have both the 
intention and capacity to carry out acts of terrorism against concrete 
targets, they must be prevented from carrying out this in one way or 
another. They can be deterred, which is a form of demotivation. Planned 
actions can be disrupted, especially by surveillance and arrests, or by 
reinforcing security measures. They can also be denied the ability to 
carry out acts through incapacitation, typically by being locked up. 
Different situational prevention measures can make it too demanding, 
too risky or not rewarding enough to carry out specific acts of terrorism 
against specific vulnerable targets. In other words these work by influ-
encing target specific capacities and motivations.
But these strategies do not necessarily reduce the terrorist threat in the 
long-term. In some cases repression and control can reinforce the anger and 
frustrations that provide fertile ground for the growth of terrorism and thus 
undermine the more long-term prevention strategies. The USA’s “War on 
Terror” has provided many examples of this. Control measures that particu-
larly impact Muslim minorities might easily reduce the broad majority of 
law-abiding Muslims’ trust in the authorities. This may in turn undermine 
their normative barriers to the use of terroristic violence as well as the 
motivation to cooperate with the police by providing important informa-
tion about suspicious people or worrying tendencies in their social environ-
ments. This reduces the opportunities for disrupting acts of terrorism.

97
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Some Conclusions 
The long-term strategies aim to reduce recruitment, violent radicalisa-
tion and terrorism through building normative barriers and reducing 
the root causes for the emergence and recruitment to terrorism, and get-
ting terrorists to disengage – individually or as a group. These strategies 
can, if they succeed, remove the fundamental motivations for employing 
violence to achieve political goals. These strategies primarily work by 
reducing terrorism in the long-term, and sometimes the time horizon 
can be very long! One cannot wait three, ten or twenty years if bombs are 
exploding around us. In these circumstances it is necessary to employ 
other strategies to halt or reduce the terrorist threat here and now.1
One important reason for developing a broad, comprehensive strat-
egy that employs multiple preventive mechanisms and their pertinent 
measures instead of focusing on a narrower range of mechanisms and 
measures is that it makes it possible to reduce the pressure from each 
individual measure. If the focus is narrowly on deterrence, disrup-
tion, incapacitation and protecting vulnerable targets (as in the Bush 
administration’s first five years after 9–11), the measures have to be 
heavy and repressive in order to achieve sufficient effect. However, this 
heavy-handed approach will also produce many negative side effects. 
On the other hand, if one relies on a broader strategy that employs 
multiple preventive mechanisms, this will construct more barriers that 
can catch potential terrorists and acts. This means that every strategic 
component and measure alone does not need to be as heavy for the total 
effect to produce adequate protection. This broad and holistic approach 
may serve to lighten the pressure from the more repressive prevention 
measures and reduce the negative side effects.
In order to develop an overall comprehensive and balanced policy for 
preventing terrorism, the various sub-strategies must work together and 
complement each other. We must realise that the long-term, constructive 
strategies are not in competition with the more repressive, controlling 
strategies, but actually depend on these short-term strategies for being 
able to curb the immediate bloodletting so that long-term strategies 
have time to work. However, this requires the short-term strategies to 
be carried out with such a gentle touch that they do not reinforce the 
tendencies the long-term strategies are aimed at limiting. Therefore, the 
different prevention actors must have an understanding of and respect 
for what the other actors are trying to achieve. They need to work 
together instead of undermining each other’s efforts. In other words, 
we need tools that supplement and complement each other. But, as the 

98 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Strategies for Preventing Terrorism
saying goes, if the only tool in your toolbox is a hammer, everything 
looks like a nail.
This study has developed a general model for crime prevention which 
here is applied to preventing one specific form of crime, terrorism. One 
exciting challenge will now be to demonstrate that this model can also 
be applied to most other forms of crime. In a related project, the same 
generic model is used to develop and tailor strategies for a number of 
completely different types of crime: e.g. organised crime (with a focus 
on biker gangs), domestic violence, residential burglaries, violent 
youth gangs, drunk driving, sexual abuse of children on the internet, 
corruption in public services, and piracy off the coast of Somalia. The 
preventive mechanisms described and analysed in relation to terrorism 
in the present study are just as relevant for these other forms for crime, 
though the measures that must be used to activate these mechanisms 
are quite different. The target groups within each of the different forms 
of crime and the sub-strategies are also quite different, and a large part 
of the various measures must be implemented by completely different 
actors. This is precisely why it may be worthwhile to look at whether a 
model developed to prevent terrorism can also be used to develop better 
prevention strategies for such different crime problems as domestic vio-
lence and drink driving. After all, in most Western countries these are 
forms of crime that in the long run cause far more death and suffering 
than terrorism has ever done.
Moreover, the main point made in the present study is that terrorist 
violence is a form of crime and should be treated as such, applying the 
full repertoire of crime prevention mechanisms and measures.
Note
At the same time nor should we underestimate the fact that if a group decides 
1	
to introduce a ceasefire and perhaps enter into a peace process this can have 
immediate effects. Or if a key terror leader defects. Or if a suicide bomber 
changes his or her mind and chooses not to blow himself or herself up.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
99
Bibliography
Abuza, Zachary (2009). “The rehabilitation of Jemaah 
Islamiyah detainees in Southeast Asia: A preliminary 
assessment”. In: Bjørgo & Horgan (2009).
Alonso, Rogelio (2009). “Leaving terrorism behind in 
Northern Ireland and the Basque Country: reassessing 
anti terrorist policies and the ‘peace processes’”. In: 
Bjørgo & Horgan (2009).
Alonso, Rogelio et al. (2008). Radicalisation Processes 
Leading to Acts of Terrorism: A Concise Report prepared 
by the European Commission’s Expert Group on Violent 
Radicalisation. Brussels: Submitted to the European 
Commission on 15 May. 
Andenes, Johs (1994). Straffen som problem. Oslo: Exil 
forlag.
Arnesen, S.A., T. Bjørgo, and M.B. Mærli (2004). Hva 
gjør Norge utsatt for terrorisme: Trusselscenarier og norsk 
sårbarhetsforvaltning. NUPI-notat 673/2004.
Aven, Terje (2008). Risk Analysis. Assessing Uncertainties 
beyond Probabilities. Chichester: Wiley.
Bauman, Zygmund (1989). Modernity and the Holocaust. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
[Behring Breivik, Anders] (aka “Andrew Berwick”) (2011). 
2083: A European Declaration of Independence (Electronic 
compendium, available on the internet).
Benard, Cheryl (2005, ed.). A Future for the Young: Options 
for Helping Middle Eastern Youth Escape the Trap of 
Radicalization. Washington DC: Rand Working Paper 
WR-354.

100 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography
Bjørgo, Tore (1997). Racist and Right-Wing Violence in Scandinavia: 
Patterns, Perpetrators and Responses, Oslo: Tano-Aschehoug.
Bjørgo, T. (2005, ed.). Root Causes of Terrorism: Myths, Reality and the 
Way Forward. London: Routledge.
Bjørgo, T. (2005b). “Reducing recruitment and promoting 
disengagement from extremist groups: The case of racist sub-
cultures”. In: Benard (2005).
Bjørgo, T. (2009). “Processes of disengagement from violent groups of 
the extreme right”. In: Bjørgo & Horgan (2009).
Bjørgo, T. (2011). “Dreams and disillusionment: Engagement in and 
disengagement from militant extremist groups”. Crime, Law and Social 
Change 55(4):  277–285.
Bjørgo, T. (2011b, ed.). Forebygging av terrorisme og annen kriminalitet. 
Oslo: PHS Forskning.
Bjørgo, T. (2011c). Strategier for forebygging av terrorisme. In: Bjørgo 
(2011).
Bjørgo, T. and Daniel Heradstveit (1993). Politisk terrorisme. Oslo: Tano.
Bjørgo, T. and John Horgan (2009). Leaving Terrorism Behind: Individual 
and Collective Disengagement. London: Routledge.
Bjørgo, Tore and Yngve Carlsson (1999). Vold, rasisme og ungdomsgjenge: 
Forebygging og bekjempelse. Oslo: Tano-Aschehoug.
Bjørgo, Tore, Jaap van Donselaar and Sara Grunenberg (2009). “Exit from 
right-wing extremist groups: Lessons from disengagement programmes 
in Norway, Sweden and Germany”. In: Bjørgo & Horgan (2009).
Blaydes, Lisa and Lawrence Rubin (2008). “Ideological reorientation 
and counterterrrorism: Confronting militant Islam in Egypt”. 
Terrorism and Political Violence 20: 461–479.
Boin, Arjen (2008, ed.). Crisis Management (Volume III). Los Angeles: 
Sage.
Boin, A., P. ‘t Hart, E. Stern and B. Sundelius (2005). The Politics of Crisis 
Management: Public Leadership Under Pressure. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Boucek, Christopher (2009). “Extremist reeducation and rehabilitation 
in Saudi Arabia”. In: Bjørgo & Horgan (2009).
Brown, Stephen E., Finn-Aage Esbensen and Gilbert Geis (1998). 
Criminology: Explaining Crime and Its Context. Cincinnati: Anderson.
Cauley, J. and  E. Im (1988). “Intervention policy analysis of skyjackings 
and other terrorist incidents”. The American Economic Review 78(2): 
27–31.

101
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography 
Christie, Nils (1972). Fangevoktere i konsentrasjonsleire. En sosiologisk 
undersøkelse av norske fangevoktere i  “serberleirene” i Nord-Norge i 
1942–1945. PAX: Oslo.
Clarke, Ronald V. (1980). “Situational crime prevention: Theory and 
practice”. British Journal of Criminology 20(2): 136–47.
Clarke, Ronald V. (1997). Situational Crime Prevention: Successful Case 
studies. 2nd ed. Monsey, NY: Criminal Justice Press.
Clarke, Ronald V. (2005). Seven Misconceptions of Situational Crime 
Prevention. In: Tilley (2005).
Clarke, Ronald V. and John Eck (2003). Become a Problem-Solving Crime 
Analyst. London: Jill Dando Institute of Criminal Science.
Clarke, Ronald V. and Graeme R. Newman (2006). Outsmarting the 
Terrorists. Westport, London: Praeger Security International.
Coolsaet, Rik (2008, ed.). Jihadi Terrorism and the Radicalisation 
Challenge in Europe. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Coolsaet, Rik and Tanguy Struye de Swielande (2007). Belgium and 
Counterterrorism Policy in the Jihadi Era (1986–2007). Brussels: Egmont 
Paper 15.
Crenshaw, Martha (1991). “How Terrorism Declines”. Terrorism and 
Political Violence  3(1) (Spring): 69–87.
Cronin, A. K. (2006). “How al-Qaida ends: The decline and demise of 
terrorist groups”. International Security  31(1) (Summer): 7–48.
Cronin, A.K. (2008). Ending Terrorism: Lessons for Defeating Al-Qaeda. 
International Institute for Strategic Studies, Adelphi Paper #394. 
London: Routledge.
Cronin, A.K. (2009). “How terrorist campaigns end”. In: Bjørgo & 
Horgan (2009).
Della Porta (2009). “Leaving underground organisations: A sociological 
analysis of the Italian case”. In: Bjørgo & Horgan (2009).
Dolnik, Adam and Keith M. Fitzgerald (2007). Negotiating Hostage Crises 
with the New Terrorists. Westport, CT: Praeger Security Intl.
Duff, R.A. and S.E. Marshall (2000). “Benefits, burdens and 
responsibilities: Some ethical dimensions of Situational crime 
prevention”. In: von Hirsch, Garland & Wakefield (2000).
Dugan, L.,  G. LaFree and A.R. Piquero (2005). “Testing a rational 
choice model of airline hijackings”. Criminology 43: 1031–1066.
Eck, J.E. (2005). “Evaluation for lesson learning”. In: Tilley (2005).
Egge, Marit and H.I. Gundhus (2012). “Social crime prevention in 
Norway”. In: Hebberecht & Baillergeau  (2012).

102 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography
Ekblom, Paul (1994). “Proximal circumstances: A mechanism-based 
classification of crime prevention”. In: Ronald V. Clarke (ed.). Crime 
Prevention Studies, Volume 2. Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Ekblom, Paul (2011). Crime Prevention, Security and Community Safety 
Using the 5Is Framework. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Elster, J. (1989). Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Elster, J. (1998). “A plea for mechanisms”. In: P. Helström & R. Sweberg 
(eds). Social Mechanisms: An Analytical Approach to Social Theory. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Enders, W. and T. Sandler (1993). “The effectiveness of antiterrorism 
policies: A vector-autoregression-intervention analysis”. The American 
Political Science Review 87(4), 829–844.
Enders, Walter and Todd Sandler (2004). “What do we know about 
the substitution effect in transnational terrorism?” In: Andrew 
Silke (ed.). Research on Terrorism: Trends, Achievements and Failures. 
London: Frank Cass.
Enders, W., T. Sandler and  J. Cauley (1990). “UN conventions, 
terrorism, and retaliation in the fight against terrorism: An 
econometric evaluation”. Terrorism and Political Violence  2(1): 83.
English, Richard (2009). Terrorism: How to Respond. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Erstad, Ola (1997). Det kriminalitetsforebyggende siktemål: En meta-
evaluering av nasjonale og internasjonale tiltak og strategier i det 
kriminalitetsforebyggende arbeidet. Oslo: PHS Forskning.
Faure, Guy Olivier and William I. Zartman (2010, eds). Negotiating 
with Terrorists: Strategy, Tactics and Politics. London and New York: 
Routledge.
Felson, Marcus (1998). Crime and Everyday Life. London: Sage.
Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, 
Peterson.
Freilich, Joshua D. and Newman, Graeme R. (2009, eds). Reducing 
Terrorism through Situational Prevention. Crime Prevention Studies, 
Volume 25. Monsey/Cullompton: Criminal Justice Press/Willan 
Publishing.
Fussey, Peter (2011). “Deterring terrorism? Target-hardening, 
surveillance and the prevention of terrorism”. In: Silke (2011).
Ganor, Boaz (2005). The Counter-Terrorism Puzzle: A Guide for Decision 
Makers. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

103
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography 
Gendreau, Paul, Claire Goggin and  Francis T. Cullen (1999). “The 
Effects of Prison Sentences on Recidivism”. User Report: 1999–3. 
Department of the Solicitor General Canada. http://www.
prisonpolicy.org/scans/gendreau.pdf [Accessed 05.02.2013]
George, Alexander and Richard Smoke (1974). Deterrence in American 
Foreign Policy: Theory and Practice. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Gjelsvik, Ingvild Magnæs and Tore Bjørgo (2012). “Ex-pirates in 
Somalia: Processes of engagement, disengagement and reintegration”. 
Journal of Scandinavian Studies in Criminology and Crime Prevention 
13(2).
Gottfredson, M. and  T. Hirschi (1986) “The true value of Lambda 
would appear to be zero: An essay on career criminals, criminal 
careers, selective incapacitation, cohort studies, and related topics”. 
Criminology 24(2).
Graaf, Beatrice de (2011). Evaluating Counterterrorism Performance: A 
Comparative Study. London and New York: Routledge.
Grossman, Dave (1996). On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to 
Kill in War and Society. New York: A Back Bay Book.
Guelke, Adrian (2006). Terrorism and Global Disorder: Political Violence in 
the Contemporary World. London: I.B. Tauris.
’t Hart, P. and A. Boin (2001) “Between crisis and normalcy: The long 
shadow of post-crisis politics”. In: U. Rosenthal, A. Boin and L. 
Comfort (eds.). Managing Crises: Threats, Dilemmas, Opportunities. 
Springfield: Charles C Thomas, pp. 28–46.
Hebberecht, P. and E. Baillergeau (eds, 2012). Social Crime Prevention in 
Europe. Brussels: Brussels University Press.
Hegghammer, Thomas (2012). Trender og utviklingstrekk i 
internasjonal terrorisme etter 11. September 2011. Oslo: 22. 
juli-kommisjonen, Notat 2/12. http://22julikommisjonen.no/
Bakgrunnsnotater/Materiale-fra-kommisjonens-moeter [Accessed 
28.02.13].
Henriksen, Anders and Jens Ringsmose (2013). Dronerne er her! Hvad 
er de strategiske, retlige og etiske konsekvenser? DIIS Report 2013:03. 
http://www.diis.dk/graphics/Publications/Reports2013/RP2013–03-
Dronerne-er-her_web.pdf [Accessed 25.02.13].
Hirsch, Andrew von, David Garland and Alison Wakefield (2000). 
Ethical and Social Perspectives on Situational Crime Prevention. Oxford/
Portland: Hart Publishing.

104 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography
Hobsbawn, Eric (2007). Globalisation, Democracy and Terrorism. London: 
Little, Brown.
HM Government (2009). Pursue, Prevent, Protect, Prepare: The United 
Kingdom’s Strategy for Countering International Terrorism (Presented to 
Parliament by the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State for the 
Home Department, March 2009, chapter 9).
HM Government (2011). Contest: The United Kingdom’s Strategy for 
Countering Terrorism. Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of 
State for the Home Department by Command of Her Majesty, July 
2011. http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/publications/counter-terrorism/
counter-terrorism-strategy/strategy-contest?view=Binary [Accessed 
06.03.2013].
Hoffman, Bruce (2006). Inside Terrorism, 2nd edition. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Homel. R. (2005). “Developmental crime prevention”. In: Tilley (2005).
Horgan, John (2003). “Leaving Terrorism Behind”. In A. Silke (ed.). 
Terrorists, Victims and Society: Psychological Perspectives on Terrorism 
and Its Consequences. London: John Wiley.
Horgan, John (2005). The Psychology of Terrorism. London: Routledge.
Horgan, John (2009). “Individual disengagement: A psychological 
analysis”. In: Bjørgo & Horgan (2009).
Horgan, John and Kurt Braddock (2010). “Rehabilitating the terrorists? 
Challenges in assessing the effectiveness of deradicalization 
programs”. Terrorism and Political Violence 22: 267–291.
Husabø, Erling Johannes (2003).  “Pre-aktiv strafferett”. Tidsskrift for 
Strafferett, 1, side 96-107.
Innes, Martin and Nicola Weston (2010). Rethinking the Policing of 
Anti-social Behaviour. Cardiff: Report from Universities Police Science 
Institute, Cardiff University.
Jamieson, Alison (1990). “Entry, Discipline and Exit in the Italian Red 
Brigades”. Terrorism and Political Violence 2(1): 1–20
Jones, S.G. and  M.C. Libicki (2008). How Terrorist Groups End. Lessons 
for Countering al Qa’ida. Washington D.C.: Rand Corporation. http://
www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/RB9351/ [Accessed 28.02.13].
Kjos-Fonn, B. and A. Romarheim  (2004).  “Fra Radio Free Europe 
til al-Hurra: Amerikansk public diplomacy fra suksess til krise”. 
Internasjonal Politikk, 3.
Kleinig, John (2000). “The burdens of situational prevention: An ethical 
commentary”. In: von Hirsch, Garland & Wakefield (2000).

105
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography 
Kundnani, Arun (2009). Spooked! How Not to Prevent Violent Extremism. 
London: Institute of Race Relations.
LaFree, G. (2011). “Countering myths about terrorism: some lessons 
learned from the global terrorism database”. In: Forst, B., Greene, J. 
and Lynch, J. (eds). Criminologists on Terrorism and Homeland Security. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Laub, J.H. and R.J. Sampson (2001). “Understanding desistance from 
crime”. Crime and Justice 28:  1–69.
Laub, J.H. and  Robert J. Sampson, (2003). Shared Beginnings, Divergent 
Lives: Delinquent Boys to Age 70. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Lia, Brynjar (2005). Globalisation and the Future of Terrorism. London: 
Routledge.
Lie, Elisabeth Myhre (2011). På forhånd: Kriminalitetsforebyggende 
politiarbeid. Oslo: Gyldendal Akademisk.
Lum, Cyntia, Leslie W. Kennedy and  Alison J. Sherley (2006). The 
Effectiveness of Counter-Terrorism Strategies: A Campbell Systematic Review. 
http://campbellcollaboration.org/lib/download/53/ [Accessed 28.02.13]
Maruna, Shadd (2001). Making Good: How Ex-Convicts Reform and 
Rebuild Their Lives. Washington DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Meyer, Sunniva (2012). “Reducing harm from explosive attacks against 
railways”. Security Journal  25: 309–325.
Meyer, Sunniva and Paul Ekblom (2012). “Specifying the explosion-
resistant railway carriage – a  ‘bench’ test of the security function 
framework”. Journal of Transportation Security 5(1): 69–85.
Milgram, Stanley (1974). Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View. 
New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
Miller, Gregory D. (2013). “Terrorist decision making and the 
deterrence problem”. Studies in Conflict & Terrorism 36(2): 132–151.
Minken, Anders (1998). Alvorlig moro: Idé og virksomhet ved 
motorsporttiltaket 2X4. Oslo: Oslo kommune: Rusmiddeletaten.
Moffitt, T.E. (1993). “Adolescence-limited and life-course persistent 
antisocial behaviour: A developmental taxonomy”. Psychological 
Review 100(4): 674–701.
Myhrer, T-G. (2011). “Mulige forebyggende virkninger av straffen – generelt 
og overfor terrorhandlinger spesielt, del II”. In: T. Bjørgo (red.). 
Forebygging av terrorisme og annen kriminalitet. Oslo: PHS Forskning. 
Mærli, Morten Bremer (2004). Crude nukes on the loose? Preventing 
nuclear terrorism by means of optimum nuclear husbandry, 

106 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography
transparency, and non-intrusive fissile material verification. Dr.Philos 
dissertation, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University 
of Oslo, Norway.
Nesser, P.(2008).  “Chronology of Jihadi terrorism in Europe 
2000–2006”. Studies in Conflict and Terrorism 31(10).
Nesser, P. (2010). “Joining jihadi terrorist cells in Europe: Exploring 
motivational aspects of recruitment and radicalisation”. In: Ranstorp 
(2010), pp. 88–114.
Neumann, Peter (2010). “Prisons and terrorism: Radicalisation and 
de-radicalisation in 15 Countries”. A policy report published by the 
International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation and Political 
Violence (ICSR). London: ICSR.
Newman, Joshua R. and  Ronald V. Clarke (2008). Policing Terrorism: An 
Executive’s Guide. Washington D.C.: US Department of Justice/Office 
of Community Oriented Studies.
Norwegian Ministry of Justice and the Police (2011). Collective Security 
– A Shared Responsibility: Action Plan to Prevent Radicalization and 
Violent Extremism. English version. http://www.regjeringen.no/
upload/JD/Vedlegg/Handlingsplaner/Radikalisering_engelsk.pdf 
[Accessed 28.02.13].
NOU (2006). Når sikkerheten er viktigst: Beskyttelse av landets kritiske 
infrastruktur og kritiske samfunnsfunksjoner: Innstilling fra utvalg 
oppnevnt ved kongelig resolusjon 29. oktober 2004: Avgitt til 
Justis-og politidepartementet 5. April 2006. Oslo: Departementenes 
servicesenter: Informasjonsforvaltning. NOU 2006: 6. http://
www.regjeringen.no/Rpub/NOU/20062006/006/PDFS/
NOU200620060006000DDDPDFS.pdf [Accessed 28.02.13].
O’Connel, Ed and Cheryl Benard (2005). “The myth of martyrdom: 
Young people and the insurgency in Iraq”. In: Benard (2005).
Olsen, Tom (2011). Nynazisiske miljøer: En studie om tilslutnings- og 
exitprosessene. Masteroppgave i sosialt arbeid, Institutt for sosialfag, 
Universitetet i Stavanger.
Parker, Tom (2007). “Fighting an Antaean enemy: How democratic 
states unintentionally sustain the terrorist movements they oppose”. 
Terrorism and Political Violence 19(2) (June): 155–179.
Pedahzur, Ami (2006, ed.). Root Causes of Suicide Terrorism: The 
Globalization of Martyrdom. London: Routledge.
PET/CTA (2011). Truslen fra soloterrorisme og  “lone wolf”-terrorisme. 
Copenhagen: Politiets efterretningstjeneste (PET) & Center for 

107
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography 
Terroranalyse (CTA). http://www.pet.dk/upload/truslen_fra_
soloterrorisme_og_lone_wolf-terrorisme.pdf [Accessed 22.02.2012].
Prunckun, Henry and  Phil Mohr (1997). “Military deterrence of 
international terrorism: An evaluation of Operation El Dorado 
Canyon”. Studies in Conflict and Terrorism 20(3) (July–September):    
267–280.
Pyrooz, D.C. and S.H Decker (2011). “Motives and methods for leaving 
the gang: Understanding the process of gang desistance”. Journal of 
Criminal Justice  39(5) (September-October): 417–425.
Rampton, P.L. and J. Stauber (2006). The Best War Ever: Lies, Damned 
Lies, and the Mess in Iraq. New York: P. Tarcher/Penguin.
Ranstorp, M. (2010). Understanding Violent Radicalisation: Terrorist and 
Jihadist Movements in Europe. London: Routledge
Rashwan, Diaa (2009). “The renunciation of violence by Egyptian jihadi 
organisations”. In: Bjørgo & Horgan (2009).
Rekart, Michael L. (2005). “Sex-work harm reduction”. The Lancet  
366(9503): 2123–2134.
Romarheim, A. (2010). “Demand for hostages: Modelling hostage-
takings”. In: L. del Valle & J. Sadka (eds.). Teoria de Juegos y Derecho 
Contemporaneo. Mexico City: Instituto Tecnologico Autonomo de 
Mexico, pp. 157–185.
Ribetti, Marcella (2009). “Disengagement and beyond: Demobilisation 
in Colombia”. In: Bjørgo & Horgan (2009).
Richardson, Louise (2006). What Terrorists Want: Understanding the 
Terrorist Threat. London: John Murray.
Riches, David (1986, ed.). The Anthropology of Violence. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
Røde Armé Fraktion (1973). Væbnet kamp i Vest-Europa: Baader-Meinhof-
gruppens politiske manifest. København: Tidene skifter (Danish edition 
of German original).
Sageman, Mark (2004). Understanding Terror Networks. Philadelphia: 
Pennsylvania University Press.
Sampson, Robert J. and John H. Laub (1995). Crime in the Making: 
Pathways and Turning Points through Life. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.
Sarnecki, Jerzy (2003). Introduktion till kriminologi. Lund: 
Studentlitteratur.
Schmid, Alex P. (2001). “Towards joint political strategies for 
de-legitimising the use of terrorism”. In: Alex P. Schmid (ed.). 

108 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography
Countering Terrorism through International Cooperation. Milan:  ISPAC, 
pp. 266–273.
Schmid, Alex P. (2005). “Prevention of terrorism: towards a multi-
pronged approach”. In: Bjørgo (2005).
Schmid, Alex (2011). The Routledge Handbook of Terrorism Research. 
London: Routledge.
Schmid, Alex P. and Janny de Graaf (1982). Violence as Communication: 
Insurgent Terrorism and the Western News Media. London and Beverly 
Hills: Sage.
Schnayderman, Ronen (2004). Through No Fault of Their Own: Punitive 
House Demolitions during the al-Aqsa Intifada. Jerusalem: B’Tselem – 
The Israeli Information Center for Human Rights in the Occupied 
Territories. Information Sheet, November 2004. http://www.btselem.
org/download/200411_punitive_house_demolitions_eng.pdf 
[Accessed 29.01.2013).
Seligman, M.E.P., E.F. Walker and D.L. Rosenhan (2001). Abnormal 
Psychology. New York: Norton.
Silke, Andrew (2003). “Retaliating against terrorism”. In: A. Silke (ed.). 
Terrorists, Victims and Society: Psychological Perspectives on Terrorism 
and Its Consequences. Chichester: Wiley.
Silke, Andrew (2005). “Fire of Iolaus: The role of state counter-measures 
in causing terrorism and what needs to be done”. In: Bjørgo (2005).
Silke, Andrew (ed., 2011). The psychology of counter-terrorism. Abingdon, 
Oxon: Routledge.
Skarðhamar, Torbjørn (2004). Noen få veier tungt i kriminalitetsbildet. 
Samfunnsspeilet nr. 3, 2004. http://www.ssb.no/sosiale-forhold-og-
kriminalitet/artikler-og-publikasjoner/noen-faa-veier-tungt-i-
kriminalitetsbildet [Accessed 22.03.2013]
Sletteland, Anja (2008). The geopolitics of “Hearts and Minds”: 
American public diplomacy in the war on terrorism. Master’s 
Thesis in Human Geography, Department of Sociology and Human 
Geography, University of Oslo.
Sutherland, E. (1939). Principles of Criminology. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Sørensen, Anne (2006). Stasi og den vesttyske terrorisme. Aarhus: Aarhus 
universitetsforlag.
Tilley, N. (2005, ed.). Handbook of Crime Prevention and Community 
Safety. Cullompton/Portland: Willan Publishing.
Tilley, N. (2009). Crime Prevention. Cullompton/Portland: Willan 
Publishing.

109
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Bibliography 
Taarnby, Michael (2005a). “Yemen’s committee for Dialogue: Can 
jihadists return to society?” Terrorism Monitor 3(14) (July).
Taarnby, Michael (2005b). “Yemen’s committee for dialogue: The 
relativity of a counter terrorism success. In: Benard (2005).
Utenriksdepartementet (2006). Foreign Policy Strategy for Combating 
International Terrorism. Oslo: Ministry of Foreign Affairs. http://
www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/ud/documents/Reports-programmes-
of-action-and-plans/Reports/2006/Foreign-policy-strategy-for-
combating-international-terrorism.html?id=420458 [Accessed 
28.02.13].
Weemink, Anton W. (2012). “Situational crime prevention of terrorism. 
Remarks from the field of counterterrorism in the Netherlands on 
Newman and Clarke’s Policing Terrorism”. Trends in Organised Crime 
15: 164–179.
Wikström, Per-Olof H., Andromachi Tseloni and Demitris Karlis (2011). 
“Do people comply with the law because they fear being caught?” 
European Journal of Criminology 8(5): 401–420.
Wiktorowicz Q. (2005). Radical Islam Rising: Muslim Extremism in the 
West. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Willems, Helmut (1995). “Development, patterns and causes of 
violence against foreigners in Germany: social and biographical 
characteristics of perpetrators and the process of escalation”. In: Tore 
Bjørgo (ed.). Terror from the Extreme Right. London: Frank Cass.
Winsnes, Torgeir (2005). Vigrid – en drøfting av ungdommers binding 
til det høyre ekstreme miljøet og bekymringssamtalen som strategi 
i det forebyggende arbeidet. Fordypningsoppgave, videreutdanning 
i Kriminalitetsforebyggende politiarbeid 2004/2005. Oslo: 
Politihøgskolen.
Wright, Lawrence (2008). “The rebellion within: An al Qaeda 
mastermind questions terrorism”. The New Yorker, June.
Zartman I.W. (2006, ed.). Negotiating with Terrorists. New York: 
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
Zedner, Lucia (2007). “Preventive justice or pre-punishment? The case 
of control orders”. In: Colm O’Cinneide, Jane Holder and Christopher 
Campbell-Holt (eds). Current Legal Problems 2007. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Zimring, Franklin and  Gordon Hawkins (1997). Incapacitation: Penal 
Confinement and the Restraint of Crime. New York and Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
110 
Index
7 July 2005 (UK). See London 
bombings
11 September 2001 (USA), 3, 
54, 59, 61, 69, 73, 80, 97
22 July 2011 attacks (Norway), 
37, 60, 63, 74, 75
9/11 Commission Report, 60, 
74
actors, 24, 25, 33
aeroplanes, 67, 68
Afghanistan, 41, 54, 82
African National Congress 
(ANC), 88
aggression, 43, 44, 50
airport authorities, 18
Algeria, 88, 91
al-Qaida, 45, 54, 63, 82, 83,  
84, 89
altruism, 89
amnesty, 91, 93
Anders Behring Breivik, 35, 37, 
60, 63, 75, 82
anger, 5, 43, 44, 96
anti-colonialist movements, 88
anti-money laundering, 21, 26
arrests, 5, 22, 56, 57, 58, 82, 83, 
84, 96
Aum Shinrikyo, 88
awareness campaigns, 33
bad governance, 39, 40
Bali bombing, 93
banks, 20
barriers, 4, 7, 11–14, 19, 23, 34, 
36, 54, 61, 74, 97
Black September, 58
blood on their hands, 87, 93
boyfriend, 44, 89, See also 
girlfriend
British intelligence, 94
brutality, 32, 33, 35
bugging, 17, 57
bullying, 15
burden of control, 18
Bush administration, 3, 27, 40, 
47, 97
capacity, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 18, 21, 
22, 25, 27, 33, 46, 51,  
60, 65, 66, 69, 81, 82, 83, 
92, 96
career perspective, 22
caricatures, 35, 45, See also 
Mohammed cartoons
carrot and stick. See push and 
pull processes
cartoons. See Mohammed 
cartoons
CCTV, 17, 66
charismatic leaders, 40, 41
children, 13, 15, 23, 33, 35, 37, 
44, 84, 98
civil liberties, 22, 41
civilian targets, 27
cliques of friends, 40, See also 
groups of friends
cognitive opening, 35

111
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Index
collective punishment. See punishment
Colombia, 91, 92
compassion, 12, 14, 32, 35, See also 
empathy
comprehensive strategy, 97
confidence in the authorities, 73
conflict resolution, 43, 46
constructive measures, 96
CONTEST strategy, ix, 46
context, 7, 8
control bodies, 16, 66, 83
control measures, 61, 66, 67, 69
conventions, 28
coordination, 72, 82
correctional services, 23
corrupt authorities. See corruption
corrupt government. See corruption
corruption, 39, 98
costs and benefits, 65, 80
counter-narratives, 27
counter-productive, 4, 52
counter-terrorism, ix, x, 3, 9, 26, 28, 45, 
51, 52, 82
counter-terrorist policies. See counter-
terrorism
courts, 16, 91
covert, 17, 37
searches, 17
crime policies, 26
crime types, x, 4, 12, 14, 20, 98
criminal justice crime prevention 
model, 9
criminal justice system, 13, 16, 20, 25, 
51, 52, 54, 73, 75, 79, 91
criminalisation, 13
criminalise. See criminalisation
crisis management, 5, 72–74
customs and excise authorities, 20
Danish. See Denmark
Danish Security and Intelligence 
Service (PET), 62, 63
death, 32, 35, 60, 74, 87, 94, 98
penalty, 21, 46, 50, 82
decapitation, 82, 83
defection, 33, 89, 93, 98
democracy, 34, 43
demonstrators, 42
Denmark, 41, 62
deradicalisation, 22, 90, 91
desistance, 12, 22, 29, 87
detention, 8, 21, 22, 29, 51, 83
deterrence, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 15–17, 24, 25, 
26, 27, 28, 49–54, 66, 96, 97
dialogue, 27, 44, 45, 58, 59, 92, See also 
preventive dialogue
diffusion of benefits, 67, 68
diplomatic intervention, 58
discontent, 41
discovery, 16–18, 56, 59, 70
discrimination, 35, 40, 41, 42, 44
disengagement, 22–24, 27, 29, 34, 63, 
86–94, 97
disillusionment, 88, 89, 93
displacement effect, 19, 67, 68
disruption, vii, 5, 8, 11, 12, 17, 21, 24, 26, 
27, 28, 54, 55–63, 96–97
diversion, 12, 23, 28
drones, 82, 84, 85
drugs, 20
early intervention, 27, 43, 58, 62
economic underdevelopment, 39
education, 23, 92
Egypt, 45, 88, 89
emergency services, 19, 75
empathy, 14, 32, 33, 34, 35, See also 
compassion
empowerment conversation, 15, 17, See 
also preventive dialogue
environmentalist activists, 42
equal opportunities, 43
ETA, 47
Europe, 25, 40, 42, 47, 51, 56, 57, 59, 61, 
73
evaluation, 9
evidence, 57
ex-combatants, 92
excuses, 10, 29
Exit (programmes), 92, See also 
rehabilitation
exit process, 22, 23, 41, 87, 91

112 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Index
explosives, 47, 62, 65, 82, 83
extortion, 77, 79
extra-judicial killings, 84
extremist groups, 5, 15, 23, 24, 26, 29, 
62, 92
Facebook, 34
failed attacks, 56, 60
false positives, 61, 63
family, 92, See also parents
far left terrorists, 78
FARC, 92
Fatah, 88
fear, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 15, 19, 22, 50, 72, 73, 
77–78, 92
fellow travellers, 44, 89
financial transactions, 66
fines, 16, 28
fire service, 72, 73
FLN, 88
Force 17, 57
foreign invasion, 32
freedom of expression, 43
friendship, 36, 44, 89
frustration, ix, x, 39, 41, 42, 43, 48, 
 85, 96
Gaddafi, 52
Gama’a al-Islamiya. See Islamic  
Group
gangs, x, 10, 12, 14, 15, 23, 24, 26, 43, 
46, 98
general deterrence. See deterrence
general model for crime prevention, 
9, 11, 98
Germany, 28, 37, 87, 88, 92
DDR, 87
Federal Republic of Germany,  
87
girlfriend, 44, 89, See also boyfriend
globalisation, 41
Good Friday Agreement, 88
government buildings, 65
group loyalty, 36
groups of friends, 43, See also cliques 
of friends
Hamas, 82, 84, 92
hand luggage, 26, 59, 65, 67, 68
harm reduction, ix, 5, 19–20, 29, 71–74
harmful consequences, 11, 19, 27, 71, 
72, 77
health agencies, 72
highly enriched uranium, 65
hijackings, 54, 59, 65, 67, 68, 78
Hizballah, 52
holistic preventive approach, 4, 97
hostages, 78, 79, 80
negotiators, 72, 73, 77, 79
hubs, 82, 83, 85
human rights, 51, 54
ideological activists, 44, 89
ideologists, 89
illegitimacy, 32
imams, 66, See also religious leaders
imprisonment. See prison
incapacitation, 21–22, 81–85, 96
incompetence, 56, 60
increase the risk, 18, 65, 66
individual prevention, 9
Indonesia, 91, 93
infiltrators, 57, 62, 89
informal sanction, 16
injustice, 32, 41, 42
insurance, 19
intelligence services, 40, 56, 62
intended effect, 5
intention, 6, 10, 11, 51, 69, 96
internalised norms, 16
international conventions, 32
international law, 51, 84
international treaties, 54
internet, 36, 39, 63, 85, 98
invasions, 35, 39, 41
investigation, 17, 56, 73
Iran, 52
Iraq, 41, 78
Ireland, 94
Irish Republican Army, IRA, 88,  
93, 94
Islamic Group, 88
Islamic theologians. See religious leaders

113
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Index
Islamist movements, 59
Israel, 51–53, 53, 54, 69, 82, 84
Italy, 28, 88, 91
Japan, 88
Jemaa Islamiyah, 93
Jihad, 45, 63, 66, 88
Jihadi attacks, 60
Jihadi groups, 59
jihadists, 47, 93
job training, 23
journalists, 56, 58, 62, 78, 80, See also 
media
jurisdiction, 54
Jyllandsposten, 42, 47
kidnappings, 41
kill or capture, 25
lack of democracy, 41, 42
lack of imagination, 73
leaderless resistance, 63, See also solo 
terrorists
legislation, 13
legitimacy, 32, 34, 40, 46, 54, 59, 78, 
79, 84
legitimate use of force, 32
Libya, 52
life partner, 23
Lockerbie bombing, 53
London, 37, 60, 66, 73
bombings, 56, 59, 73
lone wolfs, 63, See solo-terrorists
long-term strategies, 3, 4, 46, 61, 82, 84, 
85, 87, 96–98
macro level, 15, 39–42, 46, 87
Madrid train bombings, 56, 59, 60
Malaysia, 91
manipulation by leaders, 78, 89
marginalisation, 10, 15, 44, 90
marginalised youths. See 
marginalisation
marriage, 92
martyr, 45, 53
mass murder, 33, 66, 68
massacres, 6, 35, 75, 82
means and ends, 89
measures, 15, 20, 24, 26, 33, 43
defined, 5
mechanism, defined, 5
media, 5, 10, 13, 16, 24, 25, 34, 36, 37, 51, 
56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 77, 78, 80
medical treatment, 19
mental process, 6
meso level, 15, 39–42, 87, 88, 89
metal detectors, 68
micro level, 15, 39–42, 87, 89
Milgram experiment, 14, 29, 36, 37
militant ideology, 36
militant movements, 32, 40
military, vii, 3, 25, 26, 27, 32, 33, 35, 37, 
39, 40, 47, 50–52, 53, 54, 72, 78, 80, 
83–84, 88
force, 3, 25, 52
minorities, 40, 43, 46, 59, 73, 79, 96
minority populations. See minorities
models of crime prevention, 9–11
modernisation, 39, 41
Mohammed cartoons, 40, 41, 42, 43, 47
money, vii, 21, 26, 82
monitoring, 17, 56, 61
moral order, 14, 35
moral systems, 13, 33
moral values, 32
Mossad, 58
motivations, 6, 18, 20, 21, 27, 39, 41, 43, 
46, 50, 65, 67, 69, 84, 96, 97
multiple preventive mechanisms, 97
municipalities, 21
muslim leaders. See religious leaders
Muslim world, 42
Muslims, 41, 45, 48, 61, 66, 69, 96
Nazism, 37, 58, 63, 92
negotiations, 24, 79, 88
Netherlands, 28, 92
neutralisation, 12, 17, 21, 82
newspaper editors, 43
No Fly List, 61, 63
nodes, 83
non-combatants, 27

114 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Index
norm setting, 31
normative barriers, 7, 10, 11, 12–14, 17, 
25, 29, 31–37, 70, 96, 97
norms, 13, 14, 27, 32, 34, 35, 36
North Korea, 52
Northern Ireland, 42, 88, 93
Norway, ix, x, 28, 37, 42, 45, 57, 58, 62, 63, 92
Norwegian Police Delta Force, 82
Norwegian Police Security Service 
(PST), 62, 63
Norwegian Police Surveillance Agency 
(POT), 62
nuclear bombs, 70
nuclear weapons, 65
occupation, 39
occupying force, 32
one man’s terrorist is another man’s 
freedom fighter, 32
opinion makers, 33
opportunities, viii, 10, 11, 18, 21, 23, 33, 
46, 60, 65, 91, 96
Osama Bin Laden, 82
overreactions, 54, 77, 78
Pakistan, 84
Palestinian, 54, 57
paranoia, 89
parents, 13, 33, See also family
parole officers, 23
peace agreements, 88, 93
peace movements, 40
peace negotiation, 91
peer group, 33, 36, See also groups of 
friends
People’s Movement Against 
Immigration (FMI), 62
personality traits, 35
Peru, 88
piracy, x, 98
place managers, 66
plots, 59–61, 63
police, ix, 6, 7, 15, 16–18, 18, 20–21, 23, 
24, 25, 32, 33, 35, 37, 42, 43, 52, 54, 
56–57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 66, 72–73, 75, 
82–83, 88, 91, 93, 96
political activists, 25
political agenda, 41
political crime prevention strategy, 
39–48
political injustice, 32
political leaders, 33, 72, 84
political processes, 24, 43, 91
politicians, See political leaders
popular support, 88
population groups, 15, 26, 33, 34, 43, 
61, 73
positive redistribution, 19
poverty, 40, 46
precipitants, 41–42
preconditions, 41–42
preparations, 17, 19, 56, 57, 58, 60, 72, 
83, 90
press freedoms, 43
preventing recruitment, 25, 39–48
prevention, 3
prevention actors, 3, 4, 5, 13, 15, 18, 20, 
22, 24, 97
prevention strategies, 5, 24–26, 27, 70, 
84, 96, 98
preventive dialogue, 15, 58, 62, See also 
dialogue
preventive mechanism, 5, 6–9, 33, 34, 
35, 39, 42, 50, 56, 72, 77, 87
primary prevention, 10, 26
principal actors, 16, 24, 56
prison, 6, 10, 14, 16, 17, 21, 23, 25, 37, 
46, 50, 51, 58, 62, 82, 83, 84, 87, 89, 
91–92, 93, 94
prison incapacitation, 5, 7, 8, 12, 17, 21, 
24, 25, 26–28, 44, 57, 82–85, 87, 
96, 97
proactive criminal law, 21
problem groups, 16, 17, 26, 34
prosocial networks, 23
protecting vulnerable targets, 11, 18, 27, 
64–70, 97
Protestant paramilitary groups, 88
Provisional IRA, 47
provocation, 10, 29, 70, 77
provocative incidents. See triggering 
causes

115
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Index
psychopaths, 35
pull factors, 23, 90
punishment, 6, 8, 9, 11–12, 15–17, 27, 37, 
50–54, 93
punitive house demolitions, 51, 53
push and pull processes, 23, 90
push factors, 23, 90
radicalisation, 3, 25, 33–36, 38–48, 58, 
62, 87, 97
rational actors, 51
Real IRA, 34, 92
recidivism, 14
recruitment, 5, 12, 28, 29, 33–36, 42, 70, 
83, 84, 93, 97
Red Army Faction (RAF), 78, 87,  
88, 94
Red Brigades, 88
reduce recruitment, 11, 14
rehabilitation, 12, 22, 23, 25, 28, 91–92
religious authorities, 13
religious leaders, 25, 33, 43, 88, 91
repression, 3, 40, 78, 84, 96
repressive measures, 3, 4, 5, 20, 34, 36, 
40, 78, 96, 97
reprisals, 50, 51, 53, 92
resocialisation programme, 91
responses, ix, 4, 50, 52, 72, 77
restorative justice, 23, 28
restraints, 33
retaliation, 52, 84, See also reprisal
retribution, 51
revenge, 54, 73
rewards, viii, 10, 11, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 25, 
27, 29, 70, 76–80, 96
risk, 10
increment of, 14
and protection factors, 46
risk management model of crime 
prevention, 11, 28
role model, 13
root causes of terrorism, viii, x, 3, 11, 
25, 27, 39–48, 70, 96, 97
routine checks by the police, 56
rule of law, 22, 34, 41, 42, 43, 54, 
 78, 93
sabotage, 24, 47, 57, 66
Sámi people, 42
sanction, 10, 15
Saudi Arabia, 45, 47, 91
Scandinavia, 42, 60
Scandinavian countries. See 
Scandinavia
schools, 10, 13, 15, 23, 25, 33, 34, 69
scruples, 14, 35
secondary prevention, vii, 10, 16, 18, 26, 
43, 52, 56, 73, 77, 83
security checks, 59, 69
security companies, 20, 25, 66
security guards, 16, 18, 59
security measures, 57, 58, 68, 69, 96
security services, 17, 56–63
self-control, 12, 16
self-defence, 32
self-help groups, 23
Shin Fein, 94
Shining Path, 88
short-term strategies, 3, 4, 61, 79,  
96, 97
side effects, 4–6, 14, 24, 25, 26, 53, 59, 
67, 97
Singapore, 45, 48, 57, 91
situational crime prevention, viii, 9, 18, 
25, 28, 29, 51–52, 70, 83, 96
model, 10
social capital, 44
social control, 23
social crime prevention 
model, 10
strategy, 38–48
social development, 43, 46
social mechanisms, 7, 23, 40, See 
mechanism
social media. See Facebook
social networks, 22, 25, 92
social workers, 43
socialisation, 13, 34
socially frustrated, 44, 90
socio-psychological mechanisms, 35
soft targets, 19
soldiers, 37, 52, 94
solo-terrorists, 36, 60, 63

116 
DOI: 10.1057/9781137355089
Index
Somalia, x, 98
South Africa, 88
Soviet Union, 87
specific deterrence. See deterrence
spoilers, 92
Stanford Prison Experiment, 36
Stasi, 88
state sponsors of terrorism, 52
state terrorism, 27, 32
stigmatisation, 59
strategic analyses, ix
strategy, defined, 5
subculture, 13
suffering, 14, 19, 32, 34, 35, 36, 43, 59, 
60, 72, 74, 78, 87, 92, 93, 98
suicide, 45, 53, 56, 69, 98
sunk costs, 41
surveillance, 17, 56–58, 66, 78, 96
suspicion, 56, 59, 73, 96
activities/behaviour, 56, 58, 60
sustaining factors, 41, 46
symbolic politics, 8
Syria, 52
Taliban, 82, 84
target groups, 4, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 
24, 26, 29, 34, 43, 52, 56, 66, 73, 77, 
83, 91, 96, 98
target hardening, 18, 67, 68
targeted killings, vii, 82, 85
teachers, 43, See also schools
technological developments, 39
terror organisations, 25, 26, 33, 88
terrorism, defined, 5
terrorist campaigns, 4, 92
tertiary prevention, vii, 10, 16, 17, 18, 
20, 26, 52, 56, 66, 77, 83, 91
thrill-seekers, 44, 90
torture, 36, 93
training camps, 82
triggering causes, 5, 8, 10, 39, 41, 42, 43
trust in the authorities, 96
unemployment, 15, 46
unintended effects, 5, 26, 96, See also 
side effects
United Kingdom, 22, 41, 62, 83, 93
United Nations, UN, 52, 84
US Navy Seals, 82
USA, 21, 25, 28, 37, 40, 41, 50, 51–52, 61, 
63, 73, 80, 82, 83, 84, 96
Utøya, 60, 74, 75, 82
victims, 12, 19, 20, 26, 29, 44, 73, 74, 78, 
79, 93
Vigrid, 62
violent force, 25, 32
violent ideologies, 90
vocational training, 92
voluntary organisations, 23, 25, 72, 91
vulnerability factor, 10
War on Terror, 3, 25, 40, 96
warnings, 58
weapons, 22, 52, 59, 65, 69, 82
winning hearts and minds, 25, 32
wire tapping, 57
wishful thinking, 7, 42
Yemen, 45, 84, 91

