
Wafaa Al-Rabayah
Independent Researcher, Jordan
Rawan Khasawneh
Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan
Rasha Abu-shamaa
Yarmouk University, Jordan
Izzat Alsmadi
Boise State University, USA
Strategic Uses of Social 
Media for Improved 
Customer Retention
A volume in the Advances 
in Marketing, Customer 
Relationship Management, 
and E-Services (AMCRMES) 
Book Series 

Published in the United States of America by
IGI Global
Business Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2017 by IGI Global.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored or distributed in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the 
names of the products or companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the 
trademark or registered trademark.
	
	
	
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material. The views expressed in 
this book are those of the authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
CIP Data Pending
ISBN: 978-1-5225-1686-6 
eISBN: 978-1-5225-1687-3
 
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Marketing, Customer 
Relationship Management, and E-Services (AMCRMES) (ISSN: 2327-5502; eISSN: 2327-5529)

Advances in 
Marketing, 
Customer 
Relationship 
Management, 
and E-Services 
(AMCRMES) 
Book Series
IGI Global is currently accepting 
manuscripts for publication within this 
series. To submit a proposal for a volume in 
this series, please contact our Acquisition 
Editors at Acquisitions@igi-global.com or 
visit: http://www.igi-global.com/publish/.
Coverage
The Advances in Marketing, Customer Relationship Management, and E-Services  (AMCRMES) Book 
Series (ISSN 2327-5502) is published by IGI Global, 701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033-1240, USA, 
www.igi-global.com. This series is composed of titles available for purchase individually; each title is edited to 
be contextually exclusive from any other title within the series. For pricing and ordering information please visit 
http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-marketing-customer-relationship-management/37150. Postmaster: 
Send all address changes to above address. Copyright © 2017 IGI Global. All rights, including translation in other 
languages reserved by the publisher. No part of this series may be reproduced or used in any form or by any means – 
graphics, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or information and retrieval systems 
– without written permission from the publisher, except for non commercial, educational use, including classroom 
teaching purposes. The views expressed in this series are those of the authors, but not necessarily of IGI Global.
Mission
ISSN:2327-5502 
 EISSN:2327-5529
Business processes, services, and communications are important factors in the 
management of good customer relationship, which is the foundation of any well 
organized business. Technology continues to play a vital role in the organization and 
automation of business processes for marketing, sales, and customer service. These 
features aid in the attraction of new clients and maintaining existing relationships.
The Advances in Marketing, Customer Relationship Management, and 
E-Services (AMCRMES) Book Series addresses success factors for customer 
relationship management, marketing, and electronic services and its performance 
outcomes. This collection of reference source covers aspects of consumer behavior 
and marketing business strategies aiming towards researchers, scholars, and prac-
titioners in the fields of marketing management.
•	B2B marketing
•	Mobile services
•	CRM strategies
•	CRM and customer trust
•	Text Mining and Marketing
•	Telemarketing
•	Web Mining and Marketing
•	Customer Retention
•	Data mining and marketing
•	Database marketing

Titles in this Series
For a list of additional titles in this series, please visit: www.igi-global.com
Analyzing Children’s Consumption Behavior Ethics, Methodologies, and Future Consid-
erations
Jony Haryanto (President University, Indonesia) and Luiz Moutinho (Dublin City Univer-
sity, Ireland) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2017 • 278pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522509936) • 
US $165.00 (our price)
Handbook of Research on Leveraging Consumer Psychology for Effective Customer 
Engagement
Norazah Mohd Suki (Universiti Malaysia Sabah, Malaysia) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2017 • 374pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522507468) • 
US $230.00 (our price)
Handbook of Research on Strategic Retailing of Private Label Products in a Recovering 
Economy
Mónica Gómez-Suárez (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain) and María Pilar Martínez-
Ruiz (University of Castilla-La Mancha, Spain) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2016 • 625pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522502203) • 
US $330.00 (our price)
Handbook of Research on Consumerism and Buying Behavior in Developing Nations
Ayantunji Gbadamosi (University of East London, UK) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2016 • 565pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522502821) • 
US $235.00 (our price)
Managing Public Relations and Brand Image through Social Media
Anurag Singh (Banaras Hindu University, India) and Punita Duhan (Meera Bai Institute of 
Technology, India) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2016 • 353pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522503323) • 
US $195.00 (our price)
Handbook of Research on Promotional Strategies and Consumer Influence in the Service 
Sector
Upendra Singh Panwar (Shri Govindram Seksaria Institute of Technology and Science, India) 
Raj Kumar (Banaras Hindu University, India) and Nilanjan Ray (Netaji Mahavidyalaya, India) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2016 • 492pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781522501435) • 
US $335.00 (our price)
701 E. Chocolate Ave., Hershey, PA 17033
Order online at www.igi-global.com or call 717-533-8845 x100
To place a standing order for titles released in this series, 
contact: cust@igi-global.com
Mon-Fri 8:00 am - 5:00 pm (est) or fax 24 hours a day 717-533-8661

Editorial Advisory Board
Ahmed Al Zyoud, Yarmouk University, Jordan
Yaser Jararwah, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan

Foreword;..............................................................................................................xv;
Preface;................................................................................................................xvii;
Chapter 1;
Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing;.............................................1;
Rawan T. Khasawneh;, Jordan University of Science and Technology, 
Jordan;
Chapter 2;
Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media, Customer Relationship, 
and Knowledge Management;................................................................................11;
Olayiwola W. Bello;, University of Ilorin, Nigeria;
Modupe Folarin;, City University London, UK;
Nasir Faruk;, University of Ilorin, Nigeria;
Chapter 3;
Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM): A Strategy for 
Customer Engagement;..........................................................................................45;
Ameen Al-Azzam;, Technical College in Tai’f, Saudi Arabia;
Rawan Khasawneh;, Jordan University of Science and Technology, 
Jordan;
Chapter 4;
Marketing on Tumblr:;...........................................................................................59;
Kristen Smirnov;, Whittier College, USA;
Chapter 5;
The Effect of Social Networks on Branding: A Factorial Analysis Approach;.....84;
Meriem Nouala;, Sidi Bel Abbes University, Algeria;
Marwa Imene Mekki;, Sidi Bel Abbes University, Algeria;
Abdelmadjid Ezzine;, Sidi Bel Abbes University, Algeria;
Table of Contents

Chapter 6;
Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool: Case of 
Jordan Medical Directory;...................................................................................108;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;
Chapter 7;
Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites;.................................124;
Kaan Varnali;, Istanbul Bilgi University, Turkey;
Vehbi Gorgulu;, Istanbul Bilgi University, Turkey;
Chapter 8;
The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks;..........154;
Arturo Haro-de-Rosario;, University of Almería, Spain;
Laura Saraite;, University of Almería, Spain;
Alejandro Sáez-Martin;, University of Almería, Spain;
María del Carmen Caba-Pérez;, University of Almería, Spain;
Chapter 9;
Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions and 
Current Customer Loyalty;..................................................................................173;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;
Chapter 10;
Opinion Mining: A Tool for Understanding Customers – Challenges and 
Approaches;.........................................................................................................193;
Rawan Khasawneh;, Jordan University of Science and Technology, 
Jordan;
Izzat Alsmadi;, Texas A&M University - San Antonio, USA;
Chapter 11;
Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer .
Retention;.............................................................................................................207;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;
Ahmad Al-Zyoud;, Yarmouk University, Jordan;
Chapter 12;
Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family 
to Grow Successful Family-Owned Businesses? The Usefulness of Social 
Media in Growing a Family-Owned Business;....................................................224;
Mambo Governor Mupepi;, Grand Valley State University, USA;
Patience Taruwinga;, Saint Joseph’s College, USA;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;

Chapter 13;
Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers: Cases and Tips;..............................246;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;
Compilation of References;...............................................................................264;
About the Contributors;....................................................................................302;
Index;...................................................................................................................307;

Foreword;..............................................................................................................xv;
Preface;................................................................................................................xvii;
Chapter 1;
Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing;.............................................1;
Rawan T. Khasawneh;, Jordan University of Science and Technology, 
Jordan;
During the fast growth of social media, the ways companies usually use in their 
marketing are changed; social networks became a great approach for companies to 
improve their communication with customers. The wide usage of social networking 
sites and tools by individuals makes companies want to think carefully on how 
they can benefit from such usage in rebuilding their relationship with customers 
and increasing their engagement level. Such companies found that social media 
marketing is the solution through which companies and their customers will become 
much closer. This chapter covers three main sections where traditional marketing 
and electronic marketing concepts are reviewed in the first section. Then a detailed 
exploration of social networks and their distinct features is presented in the second 
section. Finally a discussion of social network marketing tools and its related 
technologies is explored in the third section.;
Chapter 2;
Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media, Customer Relationship, 
and Knowledge Management;................................................................................11;
Olayiwola W. Bello;, University of Ilorin, Nigeria;
Modupe Folarin;, City University London, UK;
Nasir Faruk;, University of Ilorin, Nigeria;
Academic concepts such as customer relationship management (CRM) and knowledge 
management (KM) are well established concepts today. Integration between these 
two concepts has been established with the term customer knowledge management. 
Detailed Table of Contents

Social media (SM) is now fast growing and has an intrinsic nature hence reducing 
barriers of varying concepts. It has been integrated with CRM through the term social 
CRM (SCRM). From the above it appears that there is interdependency between 
the concepts. It is on this basis that this work proposes a process model integrating 
SM, SCRM and KM. Through data collected from expert interview and extensive 
literature review, this study explored the possibility of interdependency between 
these concepts to make a case for the process framework for business organisations. 
The framework, leaning on the CKM model was able to identify strategy, mindset 
and engagement management, including knowledge context as crucial additions to 
the existing model towards integrating the three concepts. ;
Chapter 3;
Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM): A Strategy for 
Customer Engagement;..........................................................................................45;
Ameen Al-Azzam;, Technical College in Tai’f, Saudi Arabia;
Rawan Khasawneh;, Jordan University of Science and Technology, 
Jordan;
The organizations reach to their objectives by adopting an effective customer 
management strategy. Today, organizations have become aware that to reach their 
objectives its must focus on customer relationships, engagement and retention, 
not only to increase their market share. The development of information and 
communication technology (ICT) and in particular social networks enables an 
important communication tool with customer. Improving customer relationship by 
using social network is called social customer relationship management (SCRM). 
SCRM focused on establishing new channels with customers for better understanding 
of customers needs and build a long-term relationship with them. This chapter 
explores social customer relationship management and its general concepts including 
social media and customer relationship management. Also, it reviews the context of 
SCRM that aims to enhance customer relationship and make customers much more 
engaged. Conclusions and proposed future work are stated at the end.
;
Chapter 4;
Marketing on Tumblr:;...........................................................................................59;
Kristen Smirnov;, Whittier College, USA;
Despite many demographic, behavioral, and technical features that should make it an 
appealing destination for social media marketers, the Tumblr platform has lagged in 
marketing adoption. This chapter discusses the site features that drive its potential, 
while also acknowledging the challenges that Tumblr presents. Contrasts are offered 
between the limited flexibility but easier adoption curve of other platforms such as 
Facebook and Twitter, with the phenomenon known as choice overload discussed 
as a possible explanation for non-Tumblr preferences. Three Tumblr case studies are 

presented in depth to illustrate best practices (Denny’s diner chain and the musician 
Taylor Swift) and to warn against certain common pitfalls (Nordstrom). The chapter 
concludes with potential future research directions to pursue on this growing but 
underutilized platform. ;
Chapter 5;
The Effect of Social Networks on Branding: A Factorial Analysis Approach;.....84;
Meriem Nouala;, Sidi Bel Abbes University, Algeria;
Marwa Imene Mekki;, Sidi Bel Abbes University, Algeria;
Abdelmadjid Ezzine;, Sidi Bel Abbes University, Algeria;
The Internet is currently the largest computer network in use. Because everyone can 
use it, and join the network. The main role is that the internet allows to exchange 
information freely. Corporate communication modes jostled following the advent 
of the internet and more specifically social networking. Many victims of online 
business communication crisis affecting sustainably their brand. A real challenge for 
today’s companies needs to understand the characteristics of these new media and 
to establish an effective communication strategy in order to maintain and improve 
its image among its customers. This research looks at whether social networks have 
an effect on the brand image. Several dimensions for assessing this concept will be 
identified through an empirical study.;
Chapter 6;
Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool: Case of 
Jordan Medical Directory;...................................................................................108;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is the process of managing a business’s 
interaction with current and future potential customers. This instrumental case 
study aims to study and explain the role of social media as Electronic Customer 
Relationship Management tool (ECRM) in health care and tourism context by 
using Jordan Medical Directory company as a case study, we identified how using 
social media in communicating and managing customer’s requirements as eCRM 
technique affects institution efficiency, the result proved the significant positive role 
of social media in managing customers relation starting from acquisition, passing 
by retention, and finally termination, data collected through personal and phone 
interviews in a time frame of one month.
;
Chapter 7;
Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites;.................................124;
Kaan Varnali;, Istanbul Bilgi University, Turkey;
Vehbi Gorgulu;, Istanbul Bilgi University, Turkey;

This research aims to contribute to the understanding of how brand impressions in 
social networking sites influence brand recall. Further, the relationship between the 
built-in metrics offered by social networking sites and brand recall are also examined 
to assess the validity of these metrics as measures of advertising effectiveness. Results 
indicate a positive relationship between brand recall and self-brand congruence, tie-
strength with, trust toward, and perceived popularity of the profile associated with 
the post, and clicking a link embedded in the post / ad in which the brand appears. 
On the other hand, there is not a significant difference between the levels of brand 
involvement, homophily with the profile associated with the post / ad, like-count, 
and four types of built-in user-interaction options including liking, sharing, posting 
a comment and tagging among the brands that were successfully retrieved from the 
memory and those were not. ;
Chapter 8;
The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks;..........154;
Arturo Haro-de-Rosario;, University of Almería, Spain;
Laura Saraite;, University of Almería, Spain;
Alejandro Sáez-Martin;, University of Almería, Spain;
María del Carmen Caba-Pérez;, University of Almería, Spain;
This chapter has two main aims. First, to investigate the Facebook practices used in 
the U.S. banking sector with the aim of enhancing customer engagement; second, 
to perform a comparative analysis of the use of Facebook in this respect, among 
different U.S. banks. In this comparative analysis, we apply the Federal Reserve 
charter classification (Nationally chartered member bank, State-chartered member 
bank and State-chartered nonmember bank). The findings of this study contribute 
significantly to our understanding of the influence of social media in enhancing 
customer engagement. Banks, and their community managers in particular, can 
make use of the conclusions drawn in this study to develop future strategies to foster 
citizen engagement via Facebook.;
Chapter 9;
Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions and 
Current Customer Loyalty;..................................................................................173;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;
Social networks are fundamentally changing the way we communicate, collaborate, 
consume, and create. They represent one of the most transformative impacts of 
information technology on business and daily life. This chapter will explain set of 
social network concepts and its influences in social interaction and decision making, 
and to determine whether individual’s decision to consume a product, service, or 
attend an event are influenced by their interaction on social network, by studying 

three characteristics: Contagion, Connection, and Virtual Word of mouth. The results 
of this research can be used by business to enhance their relation and opportunities 
with their current and potential customers. ;
Chapter 10;
Opinion Mining: A Tool for Understanding Customers – Challenges and 
Approaches;.........................................................................................................193;
Rawan Khasawneh;, Jordan University of Science and Technology, 
Jordan;
Izzat Alsmadi;, Texas A&M University - San Antonio, USA;
In recent years social media sites become very popular communication tools among 
Internet users where a significant amount of information is exchanged via computers, 
smart phones, etc. Internet now is not only a source of information for users to search 
for; regular users are now a major source of Internet information; where now regular 
people post daily life activities, share online pictures, and express their opinions 
about products, news, political debates, etc. Such noticed growing of opinion-rich 
resources along with user-generated content makes it worthwhile to use information 
technologies to collect, analyze, and understand human factors and behaviors. This 
chapter covers three main sections where the first section introduces the field of 
opinion mining in general along with a detailed exploration of its definitions and 
goals. Then a discussion of opinion mining related challenges is presented in the 
second section. The last section explores opinion mining available approaches along 
with possible future directions.
;
Chapter 11;
Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer .
Retention;.............................................................................................................207;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;
Ahmad Al-Zyoud;, Yarmouk University, Jordan;
Sentiment analysis is a process of determining the polarity (i.e. positive, negative or 
neutral) of a given text. The extremely increased amount of information available 
on the web, especially social media, create a challenge to be retrieved and analyzed 
on time, timely analyzed of unstructured data provide businesses a competitive 
advantage by better understanding their customers’ needs and preferences. This 
literature review will cover a number of studies about sentiment analysis and finds 
the connection between sentiment analysis of social network content and customers 
retention; we will focus on sentiment analysis and discuss concepts related to this 
field, most important relevant studies and its results, its methods of applications, 
where it can be applied and its business applications, finally, we will discuss how 
can sentiment analysis improve the customer retention based on retrieved data.
;

Chapter 12;
Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family 
to Grow Successful Family-Owned Businesses? The Usefulness of Social 
Media in Growing a Family-Owned Business;....................................................224;
Mambo Governor Mupepi;, Grand Valley State University, USA;
Patience Taruwinga;, Saint Joseph’s College, USA;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;
The objective of the study was to collect data from family owned enterprises to assess 
and evaluate the effectiveness of social media as a strategy to grow the useful business 
and to determine the subscription of family owned entities to social networking. 
The methodology included data collected from a total of 68 family owned firms 30 
in the USA and 38 in Africa SADC countries. Monkey survey tools were deployed 
to collect data. Results show that those companies that subscribed to social media 
were more successful than those that did not. Certain social networks were much 
more useful than others and that it was not always important to have a website but 
useful to have a social network. The debut of the popular Facebook was received 
with mixed views by many organizations but its subscription by many organizations 
demonstrate its usefulness as a tool to grow a business. The recommendations are 
that it is important for a family owned business to subscribe to a social network as 
a strategy to advance productivity.;
Chapter 13;
Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers: Cases and Tips;..............................246;
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah;, Independent Researcher, Jordan;
Customer retention is the process of keeping your current customers’ set satisfied 
and loyal to your product, successful customer retention is not only related to the 
applied product or services, but strongly related to how the organization provide 
the services and the reputation it creates within and across the marketplace. This 
chapter mentions four different cases of using social media to achieve customer 
retention. Cases will be named based on services provided by the firm, theme park, 
personal care business, food business, and suppling athlete tools. Also set of tips and 
guidelines about planning social strategy presented, finally suggested tools support 
different platforms were mentioned.
;
Compilation of References;...............................................................................264;
About the Contributors;....................................................................................302;
Index;...................................................................................................................307;

Foreword
  xv
The world has change dramatically since the advent of the Internet, where informa-
tion and communication technology (ICT) and the Internet converged to make the 
world a small village and open doors for exchanging information. Still, information 
exchanged was a product of businesses and individuals who accessed such systems. 
In the last ten years, social media in all its forms like online social networks (OSNs), 
blogs, wikis, and many other applications changed our lives and influenced indi-
viduals on both the business level and personal level.
Social networks content blurred line between business and personal matters. It 
generated huge amount of information that can be utilized by both businesses and 
individuals (customers). The posts, reviews, images, and videos make online social 
networks and rich environment for marketing products and services and interacting 
with customers. OSNs generated data and information that can influence customer 
relationship management (CRM). OSNs can have a substantial influence on all 
stages of CRM: select, acquire, retain, extend.
The world is full of potential customers, where acquiring a new customer costs 
more than retain existing one. The new applications like data analytics and data 
mining enable businesses to target potential customers in an efficient and effective 
manner. Questions that need to be answered are all available on social media like 
who do we target? What is their value to us? What might be their customer life 
cycle? And where do we reach them?
Customer behavior on social media can reveal if businesses are targeting the 
right customer, and thus minimize the acquisition cost, and optimize the quality of 
interaction. Businesses using social media can reach their customers and overcome 
time and place restrictions. Social media is now in all houses, on all phones and 
open for all segments. It is enriching the retention process where firms understand 
their customers’ needs, maximize service quality, and also use the right channel 
for them. The richness and variety offered by social media and specially OSNs can 
open doors for diverse and rich marketing strategies. Retaining customers means 
being where they are, targeting their needs through their preferred channel and send 
the relevant offers and promotions.

xvi  
The last CRM process is customer extension, where social networks enable 
businesses to sense what their customers want and respond by offering the suitable 
cross-sell or up-sell strategy. Businesses are utilizing OSNs to be a major tool and 
source of information that can be easily transferred to knowledge that help in the 
decision making process. The richness and influence of such knowledge influence 
the CRM process and eventually will add value to both businesses and customers.
The use of OSNs adds value, but also adds some risks that are reported by previ-
ous research and cases. This book will explore issues related to strategies for using 
social media for marketing and how to utilize data mining and big data analytics 
to understand customer needs and put forward solutions on how to select, acquire, 
retain and extend customers. Knowledge will be the ultimate defining factor for 
such process, where OSNs are the source of such important resource. Terms like 
customer knowledge management (CKM) and social customer relationship manage-
ment (SCRM) are trending in new research and can be of much importance in the 
future. Finally, OSNs will an important source for branding strategies, marketing 
mix strategies, Crowdfunding and sourcing channel, and finally, a customerization 
direction.
The importance of this topic entails a careful review of this valuable work, and 
put forward to the library a diverse content that offers concepts, experiences, and 
cases on the topic. This book is an enjoyable reading that opens channels for readers 
from both businesses and individuals to be able to build more effective customer 
relationship strategies. The international diverse authorship also adds more value 
to the book and gives better insights to the topic from all perspectives.
Emad Abu-Shanab
Yarmouk University, Jordan
Emad A. Abu-Shanab earned his PhD in business administration, in the MIS area from Southern 
Illinois University – Carbondale, USA, his MBA from Wilfrid Laurier University in Canada, and his 
Bachelor in civil engineering from Yarmouk University (YU) in Jordan. He is an associate profes-
sor in MIS. His research interest in areas like E-government, technology acceptance, E-marketing, 
E-CRM, Digital divide, T project management, and E-learning. Published many articles in journals 
and conferences, and authored four books.

xvii 
Preface
Online Social Networks (OSNs) continue to evolve and take a significant role in 
current human societies. OSNs are the most popular and top ranked websites based 
on popularity and traffic. Additionally, they also clearly mark and identify the cur-
rent Internet where regular users are involved in Internet information uploading.
As public and private companies and business start to realize the richness and 
the value of users’ uploaded information, they continue evaluate tools that can un-
derstand their clients or customers and plan their future business decisions based 
on knowledge extracted from OSNs. Jobs and research areas in information science 
grow significantly in the last decade beyond the classical Natural Language process 
(NLP) or Information Retrieval (IR) tasks.
In this scope, this book integrated a collection of chapters with subjects and case 
studies related to how business can understand their customers based on informa-
tion from OSNs.
In this book, several chapters are introduced within the scope of our book subject.
In the first chapter, Rawan Khasawneh presented a chapter on how OSNs are 
used recently as business marketing tools. The chapter introduces concepts related 
to social media marketing. The amount of information users upload through OSNs 
and the nature of such dynamic interactions are two major factors to consider and 
utilize for marketing purposes.
In the second chapter (Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media, Cus-
tomer Relationship, and Knowledge Management) by Olayiwola W. Bello, Modupe 
Folarin and Nasir Faruk, authors discussed a framework; through data collected 
from expert interviews, on how to integrate social media concepts and knowledge in 
particular with Customer Relation Management (CRM). Their framework extended 
an already existing customer knowledge management (CKM) framework. Ideas were 
also used from the business framework for CRM and Social CRM. The framework 
also presented key themes to consider for a successful integration between social 
media and SRM.
In the same scope of the relations between social media and CRM, Chapter 3 
(Social Customer Relationship Management [SCRM]: A Strategy for Customer En-

xviii  
gagement) By Ameen Al-Azzam and Rawan Khasawneh is presented. The chapter 
elaborated on tools and methods used in Social media CRM (SCRM) in comparison 
with classical or traditional CRM.
In a focused study on one OSN (i.e. Tumblr), Kristen Smirnov presented the 
chapter: Marketing on Tumblr: Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird). Tumblr, 
recently own by Yahoo, is a microblog website that allows users to post short text 
or comments. Three Tumblr case studies are presented in depth to illustrate best 
practices (1: Denny’s diner chain and 2: the musician Taylor Swift) and 3: to warn 
against certain common pitfalls (Nordstrom). The chapter discusses also some of 
the strategies (e.g. paid advertisements, gradual customers’ interactions, etc.) that 
businesses use to be more involved with their customers in OSNs.
OSNs and interactions with users can also impact business names and brands. 
This is the subject of Chapter 5, “The Effect of Social Networks on Branding: 
A Factorial Analysis Approach,” by Meriem Nouala, Marwa Imene Mekki and 
Abdelmadjid Ezzine. Classically users tend to like to buy always from the brands 
that they used to buy from. They trust them or are loyal to them based on either 
previous self-business interactions or based on general public trust in such known 
brands. OSNs represent new channels for business to be more known or visible. 
Nonetheless, some companies may have a better success be more visible in OSNs 
in comparison with other businesses that have been very successful in classical 
methods. The words of mouth about positive and negative product aspects in OSNs 
can spread very quickly and can have serious impacts on businesses. For example, 
several case studies about customer’s negative interactions with airlines got very 
popular through OSNs and prompted a serious business response to those incidents.
Wafaa Al-Rabayah, introduced Chapter 6, “Social Media as Social Customer 
Relationship Management Tool: Case of Jordan Medical Directory.” The chapter 
focused on Social media CRM in one business or domain sector: Medical section 
in the country of Jordan and one company in particular: Jordan medical directory 
(JorMedic) which is involved in medical as well as health-related tourism. JorMedic 
as a click-mortar business type, heavily depends on web presence and OSNs. One 
of the interesting challenges introduced in the chapter is related to how we can ef-
fectively collect data from OSNs and also how we can, reasonably, make rational 
findings based on the collected data. This is considered one of the major challenges 
in the analysis of data from OSNs.
In the subject of OSNs impact on business brands, Chapter 7, “Determinants of 
Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites,” by Kaan Varnali and Vehbi Gorgulu is 
introduced. Businesses vary in their level of involvements in OSNs. For example, 
for some businesses, a Facebook or a Twitter page is considered as one of the main 
pages for the business website. On the other hand, some other business use those 
OSNs just for the cause of being present, as all others, in those social media websites 

  xix
without much activities in those pages. In other examples, some businesses allow 
users to post, respond and interact with the business website and all its activities, 
services, products. They also allocate a significant number of customer services to 
be involved in those pages and respond to users. In the brand recall, which is the 
focus of this chapter, results showed that users’ trust on the brand and its product 
and services is an ongoing and a continuous process. Businesses should be heavily 
involved with their customers to understand their feedback and act accordingly.
Arturo Haro-de-Rosario, Laura Saraite, Alejandro Saez-Martin and Maria del 
Carmen Caba-Pérez introduced in Chapter 8 (The impact of Social Media on Cus-
tomer Engagement with U.S. Banks) a case study related to US banks. Facebook was 
the OSN website which was used in this chapter evaluation to show how customer 
engagement can be enhanced. Several metrics related to: popularity, commitment 
and virality are used to measure customer involvement or engagement. Results 
showed that focusing only on one metrics (e.g. number of fans) can be misleading 
if considered in isolation from some other metrics.
In Chapter 9, “Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Deci-
sions and Current Customer Loyalty,” three characteristics: contagion, connection, 
and virtual word of mouth are used to evaluate customers loyalty and interactions 
with businesses. Studies showed that users, recently, depend heavily on the Internet 
in general and OSNs in particular in their decisions to buy a product, a service or 
attend an event. There is of a course a possibility that users can be possibly mislead 
by some sort of spam in OSNs where such public information may not be precise 
or accurate.
Rawan Khasawneh and Izzat Alsmadi introduced in Chapter 10 (Opinion Mining: 
A Tool for Understanding Customers – Challenges and Approaches) the subject of 
opinion mining and sentimental analysis. As we mentioned earlier, one of the most 
significant challenges in knowledge extraction from OSNs is what data to extract 
and how to use and utilize such data. This is why goal-oriented approaches are more 
important than data-driven approaches as the collection of a large amount of data 
without early or initial specific goals can be useless and time consuming. Authors 
showed some tools and techniques to conduct opinion mining and possible future 
trends.
In the same opinion mining or sentimental analysis scope, Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah 
and Ahmad AlZyoud introduced Chapter 11: (Sentiment Analysis of Social Media 
as Tool to Improve Customer Retention). With focus on customer retention, the 
paper focused on challenges of final extractions of customer opinions on the busi-
ness products or services (i.e. positive or negative). The amount of false positive 
and false negative cases can be very large in many cases specially as users typically 
use slang language, expressions, images, strange symbols, sarcasms, etc.

xx  
Mambo Governor Mupepi, Patience Taruwinga and Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah in-
troduced Chapter 12 (Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness 
of the Family to Grow Successful Family-Owned Businesses? The Usefulness of 
Social Media in Growing a Family-Owned Business). The chapter focuses on one 
type of businesses (family-owned businesses) and how to utilize OSNs in this type 
of businesses. What can be possibly unique in many family-oriented business is their 
small-scale in general and their dependence on a focused local sector of customers 
where loyalty is built largely based on words of mouths. The studies showed that in 
the current global and connected world and environments the terms family, small, 
local can be different as the Internet and OSNs make the whole world as a small 
connected, local town.
In the last chapter, 13, Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah presented “Using Social Strategy 
to Retain Customers: Cases and Tips.” Customer retention and loyalty are important 
goals for CRMs. Deep understanding, communication and interaction with custom-
ers are important tools and methods to assess and improve such loyalty. Perhaps 
nothing like OSNs can be useful and valuable to empower such factors between 
business and their users or customers.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch001
Chapter 1
1 
Social Media as a 
New Emerging Tool 
of Marketing
ABSTRACT
During the fast growth of social media, the ways companies usually use in their 
marketing are changed; social networks became a great approach for companies 
to improve their communication with customers. The wide usage of social network-
ing sites and tools by individuals makes companies want to think carefully on how 
they can benefit from such usage in rebuilding their relationship with customers 
and increasing their engagement level. Such companies found that social media 
marketing is the solution through which companies and their customers will become 
much closer. This chapter covers three main sections where traditional marketing 
and electronic marketing concepts are reviewed in the first section. Then a detailed 
exploration of social networks and their distinct features is presented in the second 
section. Finally a discussion of social network marketing tools and its related tech-
nologies is explored in the third section.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, social media has exceeded its existence as a platform that is easily 
accessible to anyone with an Internet connection, to become a favorite communication 
channel for a large number of people. Such shift changes the relationship between 
Rawan T. Khasawneh
Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan

Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing
2
companies and their customers which lead to a tremendous impact on the way 
companies conduct marketing. Companies, using social networks, can build closer 
and more profitable relationship with customers along with better understanding of 
their needs (Nezamabad, 2011). Social network marketing is very advantageous for 
companies; it can be represented as a great tool for finding talent, building brand 
awareness, finding new customers, and conducting market research (Bolotaeva & 
Cata, 2011; O’Brien, 2011).
There are wide ranges of social networking sites such as Facebook, Twitter, 
LinkedIn, MySpace and many others. Each site has its distinct features, but all of 
them share some common features. They are global, free and easy used (Suneetha 
& Kumar, 2012). Facebook, for example, is one of the fast growing social network 
sites; according to Das and Sahoo (2011), it has the first rank in the list of the ten 
most popular social networking sites in the world with M550 estimated monthly 
unique visitors compared with Twitter which has M95.8 and LinkedIn which has 
M50. Facebook was launched in 2004 with easily used interface and a wide range 
of features that are helpful for both individuals and companies (Khasawneh & 
AbuShanab, 2013); these features enable companies to create: a profile page to prove 
their existence on the Internet, group to make discussions: this feature is limited 
because it will be useful only for people who joining it, and a fan page where a 
large number of people share the same interests (Khasawneh & AbuShanab, 2013; 
Farooq & Jan, 2012).
Conducting marketing over the Internet and other electronic media has several 
advantages; Internet is fast, cheap, flexible, and comfortable with no time restrictions. 
It enables two-way relationship through easily used interface that helps customers 
make purchases wherever and whenever they want. The Internet is also considered 
as a friendly environment or platform of ordering, paying, and delivering products 
and services which guarantee that customers will be satisfied and loyal to their 
brands (Yazdanifard, et. al., 2011).
This chapter shed the light on the important role that social networks play in 
electronic marketing area by focusing on the ways through which companies can 
benefit from the services provided by social networks to gain real-time engagement 
with customers, to adopt new and creative way of interaction, and to get more insights 
on customers’ perceptions and opinions on their products and services.
TRADITIONAL AND ELECTRONIC MARKETING: 
DEFINITION AND GENERAL CONCEPTS
Marketing, in general, is a collective process where products/services can be exchanged 
between individuals based on what they want/need. This collective process is going 

Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing
3
around the following four main factors; which called in literature the marketing mix 
theory or the 4ps: product, price, place, and promotion.
Traditional marketing is one of the most recognizable marketing techniques 
that have several strategies; print, broadcast, telephone, and direct mail are the 
most traditional marketing strategies where print marketing is the oldest strategy 
that includes advertisements in magazines, newspapers, newsletters, and any other 
printed material. Broadcast marketing includes radio and television advertisements. 
Telephone marketing or telemarketing is based on delivering sales messages to the 
consumers over the phone. And finally direct mail, which sends printed materials 
such as catalogs and postcards through postal mail to attract consumers. Mainly 
traditional marketing tries to discover, find, and satisfy customers’ needs and wants 
using the traditional channels and strategies explained.
More and more people nowadays are choosing to get their advertisements, pro-
motions, and news online rather than through newspapers or magazines. So most 
businesses have added or fully replaced traditional marketing methods with new and 
innovative techniques mainly based on the Internet where companies can use social 
networks, create their webpages and blogs and become much closer with people/
consumers (Khattri & Sharma, 2013).
Electronic marketing can be defined as using electronic media, specifically 
the Internet, to conduct marketing activities that mainly focused on attracting new 
consumers, retaining current consumers, and developing brand identity (El-Gohary, 
2010). Online marketing, Internet marketing, and eMarketing are often considered 
synonymous for electronic marketing. Dehkordi and his partners mentioned in their 
research (2012) that Internet marketing is limited to Internet things only such as 
electronic mail and world wide web while electronic marketing includes Internet 
marketing tools in addition to mobile phone, intranet, extranet, and many other tools.
Compared to traditional marketing, electronic marketing helps in increasing 
marketing efficiency and effectiveness, omitting unnecessary transaction costs, 
adding more value to customers, freeing customers from time and place constraints, 
increasing services quality, adding extra value to products, providing a platform for 
businesses to understand their customers’ needs better, and last but not least creating 
strong relationship between companies and their customers (Dehkordi et. al., 2012). 
The Following lines describe four main tools of electronic marketing:
1. 	
Mobile Marketing: It is a huge marketing tool that creates significant op-
portunities for firms and marketers to communicate with their customers and 
increase their brands awareness. It helps marketers serve and reach customers 
anytime anywhere easily.
2. 	
E-mail Marketing: It is an attractive tool of electronic marketing that helps 
companies reach huge number of customers with almost zero cost. Good email 

Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing
4
marketing message helps in rising sales communication and conversations with 
customers, reducing sales cost, notifying customers about their new products 
and services, receiving feedback from customers easily, and pushing customers 
to purchase (Salehi, et. al., 2012).
3. 	
Web Marketing: Compared with other tools and platforms, Internet is a 
cheaper tool that has great capabilities in distributing information and promot-
ing services and products in the global market. Banner ads and pop up ads are 
two examples of web marketing tools.
4. 	
Social Media Marketing: It refers to promoting products and services over 
social media sites. It is explained in details in the third section of this chapter.
Electronic marketing is a win-win situation for both customers and companies; 
it can effectively reach the target customers, it helps in conducting direct marketing 
campaigns much faster and less expensive, its success is measurable (identifiable and 
repeatable), and finally it is a cost effective tool in the long run. Electronic market is 
less appropriate for products that customer needs to touch, smell, or physically try. It 
is highly dependent on technology, security, and privacy issues (Gangeshwer, 2013).
SOCIAL MEDIA: AN OVERVIEW
Social media is all about networking; it is about sharing and discussing information 
among people via Internet based tools and online platforms. It is where users can 
share their opinions, content, and views using highly accessible publishing tech-
niques. It consists of user-driven websites where they usually have a specific focus 
or feature; it transfers people from being passive content readers into active content 
publishers involved in decision-making process. Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube 
are some of the popular social media sites (Neti, 2011).
There is no agreed upon definition of social media; it can be understood as a 
platform that has several online resources used by people to create and publish cre-
ative content and real time feedback. Compared with traditional media, social media 
enables online interaction, discussion, collaboration, and digital content creation 
and sharing. Following is a simple exploration of some of the most popular and 
high profile social media (Chan-Olmsted, Cho, & Lee, 2013):
•	
Social Networking Sites: Where people can create their personal pages and 
profiles and then start communicating with online friends and sharing what-
ever they want (Ex. text, videos, pictures, etc.).

Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing
5
•	
Blog: It is an information sharing technology available online. It has the same 
function as online journal regarding tone, topic/issue, and ease of subscription 
and inserting links. Usually, it has a clear owner for maintenance purposes.
•	
Wiki: It is a collaborative website where users can create, modify, and dis-
seminate web based content easily.
•	
Forums: It can be called online message boards. It is developed with specific 
topics and interests where administrator is responsible for deleting inappro-
priate content and spam.
Social media can be classified into the following mentioned categories/outlets 
based on its applications and uses; sites for online publication of opinions and in-
formation (ex. blogs and wikis), content sharing sites (ex. YouTube), sites allowing 
real time discussions (ex. Facebook), tools for micro-blogging and publishing (ex. 
Twitter), tools for social networking (personal ‘livecast’ platform), virtual network-
ing platforms, and networked games sites (Erragcha & Romdhane, 2014).
There are five general characteristics that all social media sites and applications 
share; participation: social media encourages all people/users to engage with each 
other. It is represented as an enabler for action oriented interactivity. Conversation-
ality: social media is a two-way communication environment where the capacity 
and speed of conversations/dialogues are enhanced. Connectedness: social media 
helps interpersonal relationships to stay forever using available communication 
technologies. Community and commonality: social media is an effective mechanism 
for building communities consisting of people with different nature and goals but 
they have something in common regarding specific posts, videos, or any shared 
online content. Openness: it is highly related to allowing feedback and is mainly 
based on three types of behavior which are requesting/giving information, receiving 
information, and acting on information received (Chan-Olmsted, Cho, & Lee, 2013).
For businesses and companies, social media is considered as a low-cost platform 
for reaching large number of customers and increasing their engagement level. It 
mainly helps in cost reduction by decreasing staff time and supporting revenue 
generation by increasing the probability of reaching more prospected customers. 
It is a key enabler for knowledge and expertise sharing where customers can help 
customers directly; it can increase brand reach and awareness. It is a necessity that 
each company should have a social media strategic plan that has 3 C’s: a Compa-
nywide strategy for engagement which implies Conversation with customers that 
Causes user loyalty (Neti, 2011).

Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing
6
SOCIAL MEDIA MARKETING: DEFINITION 
AND TECHNOLOGIES
Social medial is a very good platform for marketers where new marketing initiatives 
can be effectively implemented; marketers can promote, share, and spread their 
products, services, and everything with a large number of people easily and widely. 
Everyday more and more people starts using social media for several purposes in 
their daily life activities such as personal use, business to consumers and business 
to business interactions (Chaturvedi & Gupta, 2014). Social media facilitates the 
communication and interaction between consumers and companies. It provides 
marketers with several tools that change the nature of selling relationship to become 
more social; it enables them to better target their potential consumers, customize 
their current consumers messages and opening interactive dialogues with them 
(Assaad & Gomez, 2011; Miller & lammas, 2010).
Social media marketing is going around how to use online communities, social 
networks, blog marketing, and many other things in marketing. It is all about using 
online platforms to engage more with customers and keep the relationship between 
companies and customers much closer. It is a strategic and methodological process 
where companies can build their online communities of their potential customers, 
readers, and supporters which help in establishing companies’ reputation and influ-
ence (Neti, 2011).
Chary in his research (2014) listed several important social media marketing 
tips that should be considered by all businesses; some of these tips are: businesses 
should make their post more relevant including helpful and useful solutions and 
information for customers, utilize available tools and features to get the maximum 
gain from it, try to visualize marketing posts by embedding pictures, graphics, and 
videos, try to connect with potential/current consumers not only for sales, and learn 
from social media analytics and try to utilize it to leverage the expected benefits.
Social media changes the way companies follow in managing their brands; it 
enables dynamic and real-time interaction not only between consumers and compa-
nies but also between consumers themselves. Consumers nowadays can easily share 
their brand experiences through social media; they are the brand stories generators 
(Gensler et al, 2013). Social media helps companies in managing their brand com-
munities and influencing their consumers’ behaviors by adopting the strategy of 
“co-creation”; there are several models developed to guide the process of co-creation 
with online consumers. DART model is an example; it consists of a dialogue which 
is highly focused on having meaningful conversations with consumers, which im-
plies the company’s consumers access should be provided to each other, risk-return 
relationship is explained as something tangible that should be offered to online 

Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing
7
consumers, and transparency which relates to having/creating an environment for 
sharing valuable information (Miller & Lammas, 2010).
Social media promotion is all about knowing how technology makes people 
connection easier through social networks, and any business can benefit and make 
a profit from such a technology; it is a great tool that helps businesses being aware 
more about every innovative technology released and used in the society (Chaturvedi 
& Gupta, 2014). Miller and lammas mentioned in their research (2010) that some 
studies show that 70% of consumers are visiting social websites seeking for infor-
mation and some other research concluded that 90% of word of mouth (WOM) 
still occurred face to face or by phone. Such conclusions indicated that companies 
should not overstate the outcome of social media marketing, and they should think 
very well on how to benefit from the knowledge-sharing nature of social networks 
in promoting their products and services.
There are several social media marketing tools available for businesses; Quill 
Engage (https://www.quillengage.com/) is a free tool that helps businesses knowing 
more about their sites traffic growth or decline. It connects with Google Analyt-
ics account and then generates a weekly report that summarizes your data. Post 
Planner (https://www.postplanner.com/) is another tool for social media marketing 
which helps businesses in managing and enhancing their presence on Facebook 
via a value-packed dashboard. Bundle Post for curated content tweets (http://www.
bundlepost.com/), GitHub (https://github.com/) for open source code collaboration, 
Tagboard (https://tagboard.com/) for hashtag management, and Circloscope (http://
circloscope.com/) for Google+ circle management are some examples of social 
media marketing tools and software that help businesses to grow.
Measuring the success of social media marketing highly depends on qualitative 
metrics more than quantitative metrics. These qualitative metrics include unique 
visitors, interaction rates, conversation size, conversation density, content freshness, 
author credibility, audience profiles and many others. While website traffic, hit rates, 
time spent online, and postings are considered as examples of quantitative metrics 
(Miller & Lammas, 2010). Successful social media marketing has several benefits 
for businesses; it helps in increasing traffic, decreasing overall marketing expenses, 
rising search engine ranking, and selling more products/services (Neti, 2011).
SUMMARY
It is too much important for any business to be really active with social media and 
to get involved utilizing such a great communication tool. Electronic marketing is 
a marketing channel that should be highly utilized by advertisers and marketers to 
find the best combination of marketing mix that matches their customer needs. It is 

Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing
8
not only a promotional tool but also informational tool that is too much beneficial 
for companies in developing and maintaining their competitive advantages, saving 
costs, and guaranteeing customers satisfaction.
Social media is now the trend where businesses can find the best opportunities to 
connect directly with their customers. Every business nowadays explores the social 
media marketing initiatives and rapidly adopts it as a new marketing strategy to stay 
in touch with customers. Social media marketing is an important marketing strategy 
that each company should have, adopt, and continuously improve. It will help a lot 
in increasing customer satisfaction, loyalty, and engagement level. Social media 
size, transparency, reach, branding and boost website traffic are the main reasons 
why businesses need to consider social media marketing services.
Social media marketing is an effective tool that businesses can utilize to identify 
their customers’ needs and interests. It is a great opportunity that all businesses should 
not ignore. It is too much important for businesses to supplement their traditional 
marketing techniques with innovative methods which will give a great opportunity 
for companies to interact with their consumers, delivering special promotions, and 
increase the online presence.
REFERENCES
Assaad, W., & Gomez, J. (2011). Social Network in marketing (Social Media Mar-
keting) Opportunities and Risks. International Journal of Managing Public Sector 
Information and Communication Technologies, 2(1), 13–22.
Bolotaeva, V. & Cata, T. (2011). Marketing Opportunities with Social Networks. 
Journal of Internet Social Networking and Virtual Communities.
Chan-Olmsted, S., Cho, M., & Lee, S. (2013). User Perceptions of Social Media: A 
Comparative Study of Perceived Characteristics and User Profiles by Social Media. 
Online Journal of Communication and Media Technologies, 3(4), 149–178.
Chary R. (2014). Social Media Marketing-The Paradigm Shift in International 
Marketing. IOSR Journal of Business and Management, 16(9), 11-13.
Chaturvedi, S. & Gupta, S. (2014). Social media promotions – Can we restrict it 
under laws?. International Journal of Research – GRANTHAALAYAH, 1(1), 43-50.
Das, B., & Sahoo, J. (2011). Social Networking Sites – A Critical Analysis of Its 
Impact on Personal and Social Life. International Journal of Business and Social 
Science, 2(14), 222–228.

Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing
9
Dehkordi, G., Rezvani, S., Rahman, M., Fouladivanda, F., Nahid, N., & Jouya, S. 
(2012). A Conceptual Study on E-marketing and Its Operation on Firm’s Promotion 
and Understanding Customer’s Response. International Journal of Business and 
Management, 7(19), 114–124.
El-Gohary, H. (2010). E-Marketing - A Literature Review From A Small Businesses 
Perspective. International Journal Of Business And Social Science, 1(1), 214–244.
Erragcha, N., & Romdhane, R. (2014). Social networks as marketing tools. Journal 
of Internet Banking and Commerce, 19(1), 1-12.
Farooq, F., & Jan, Z. (2012). The Impact of Social Networking to Influence Marketing 
through Product Reviews. International Journal of Information and Communication 
Technology Research, 2(8), 627–637.
Gangeshwer, D. (2013). E-Commerce or Internet Marketing: A Business Review 
from Indian Context. International Journal of u- and e- Service. Science and Tech-
nology, 6(6), 187–194.
Gensler, S., Völckner, F., Liu-Thompkins, Y., & Wiertz, C. (2013). Managing Brands 
in the Social Media Environment. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 27(4), 242–256. 
doi:10.1016/j.intmar.2013.09.004
Khasawneh, R., & AbuShanab, E. (2013). E-Government and Social Media Sites: 
The Role and Impact. World Journal of Computer Application and Technology, 
1(1), 10–17.
Khattri, V., & Sharma, N. (2013). Evaluation of the scope and influencers’ of social 
media marketing. Asian Journal of Management Research, 4(1), 92–104.
Miller, R., & Lammas, N. (2010). Social media and its implications for viral mar-
keting. Asia Pacific Public Relations Journal, 11, 1–9.
Neti, S. (2011). Social media and its role in marketing. International Journal of 
Enterprise Computing and Business Systems, 1(2), 1–15.
Nezamabad, M. (2011). The Impact and Benefits of Internet on Marketing Mix. 
Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences, 5(9), 1784–1789.
O’Brien, C. (2011). The emergence of the social media empowered consumer. Irish 
Marketing Review Journal, 21(1), 32-41.
Salehi, M., Mirzaei, H., Aghaei, M., & Abyari, M. (2012). Dissimilarity of E-
marketing VS traditional marketing. International Journal of Academic Research 
in Business and Social Sciences, 2(1), 510–515.

Social Media as a New Emerging Tool of Marketing
10
Suneetha, S., & Kumar, G. (2012). An in Depth Study on the New Age Technol-
ogy – Social Media Marketing & its Impact on Business.Ninth AIMS International 
Conference on Management, (pp. 975-997).
Yazdanifard, R., Venpin, M., Yusoff, W., & Islam, M. (2011). Internet Marketing: 
The New Era of Innovation in E-commerce.International Conference on Software 
and Computer Applications IPCSIT, (vol. 9, pp. 192-197).

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch002
Chapter 2
11 
ABSTRACT
Academic concepts such as customer relationship management (CRM) and knowledge 
management (KM) are well established concepts today. Integration between these 
two concepts has been established with the term customer knowledge management. 
Social media (SM) is now fast growing and has an intrinsic nature hence reducing 
barriers of varying concepts. It has been integrated with CRM through the term so-
cial CRM (SCRM). From the above it appears that there is interdependency between 
the concepts. It is on this basis that this work proposes a process model integrating 
SM, SCRM and KM. Through data collected from expert interview and extensive 
literature review, this study explored the possibility of interdependency between these 
concepts to make a case for the process framework for business organisations. The 
framework, leaning on the CKM model was able to identify strategy, mindset and 
engagement management, including knowledge context as crucial additions to the 
existing model towards integrating the three concepts.
Towards a Framework 
for Integrating Social 
Media, Customer 
Relationship, and 
Knowledge Management
Olayiwola W. Bello
University of Ilorin, Nigeria
Modupe Folarin
City University London, UK
Nasir Faruk
University of Ilorin, Nigeria

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
12
INTRODUCTION
Social media (SM) has come to stay as an integral part of our social lives as well as 
a significant element of the business world. Organizations, be it academic, govern-
ment and especially businesses are gradually incorporating it into their processes. 
This is more evidenced as these organizations dot their website as well as other 
information interfaces with links to their social media platforms. Achieving success 
in social media does not come by accident and this may involve re-engineering and 
redesigning organizational processes in order to benefit from its usage (Thames, 
2011). Likewise, the concept of customer relationship management (CRM) is evolving 
and the former traditional CRM processes are no longer sufficient (Peppers 2011; 
Mosadegh & Behboudi 2011). With traditional CRM having a focus on managing 
customers and having a holistic view of the customer (Alexander & Turner, 2001), 
new channels of communication especially through social media make these goals 
more difficult to achieve (Greenberg 2009a; Anon, 2013). The new dynamics ush-
ered in by the proliferation of the new media is that, as customers are now using 
social media platforms as a method of communication, this makes it important for 
organizations to also engage with customers on these platforms. Integration between 
the concepts of SM and CRM is inevitable as far as data and customers are involved 
(Lawson, 2011). It has also been identified that research is on-going to discover 
and address ways to manage customers who use social media (Buchanan 2010). 
Knowledge, a byproduct of organizational activities and on which organizations 
also thrive, becomes a natural party in this relationship, thereby necessitating the 
inclusion of knowledge management (KM) in the triad.
Knowledge management (KM) in general involves managing knowledge within 
the organization. Dealing with the creation, processing, storing, re-use and shar-
ing of knowledge is the goal of knowledge management (Fanfan, 2012). Just like 
SM having an impact on CRM, data from social media can also have an impact 
on KM (Hendriks, 2011; Kotadia, 2012; Suleman, 2011). Some of these activities, 
will include providing data that, aid making informed decisions for organizational 
strategy and product development, amongst others.
The data from SM can be used to manage relationships with customers and it 
can also be a great contribution to knowledge as data is created, stored, shared and 
distributed within the organization in accordance with the organizational strategy. 
Therefore, with SM generating the data and engaging the customers, CRM man-
ages the engagement through relationships and analyzing customer data while KM 
will store, share and distribute the information gathered. This shows an underlying 
connection through the flow of data with the customer at the center. This shows 
that all these concepts that exist in their own right can be integrated on the process 
level for the benefit of an organization.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
13
In order to deal with these concepts from an organization’s point of view, integration 
is appropriate and will enable an organization to easily complete workflows, tasks, 
processes, meet organizational strategic needs and goals such as giving customers 
the desired experience they need (All,2011). It will enable a holistic view of the 
activities of the organization where SM, CRM and KM are involved. Organizations 
will normally utilize these concepts individually and integration will possibly lead 
to re-engineering their processes in order to reap the benefits of these concepts 
combined together. This will be engaged at the process level as, processes are a 
means of removing the constraints of organizations appearing in the form of silos 
(All, 2011). This approach has the tendency to accelerate reinventing the organi-
zation when the scope of social media is extended from just marketing to product 
development and internal knowledge management processes.
This chapter proposes a process framework that integrates the three concepts: 
social media (SM), customer relationship management (CRM) and knowledge man-
agement (KM). Previous research has been carried out and works are still on-going 
to integrate SM and CRM, leading to the emergence of the term Social Customer 
Relationship Management (SCRM) (Greenberg 2009a; Kolsky, 2010; Buchanan 
2010). Similarly, with regards to the integration of CRM and KM, the term Customer 
Knowledge Management also emerged (Gerbert et al., 2003; Gibbert et al., 2002; 
Madhoushi et al., 2011; Zanjani et al. 2008). There is therefore, room to establish 
the possibility of integrating all three concepts. To show this, the CKM process 
framework proposed by Gerbert and others (Gerbert et al. 2003) will be modified. 
Another framework, ‘business framework for CRM and Social CRM’ developed 
by Buchanan (2010) will be explored to identify SCRM processes. These, in addi-
tion to the findings of the study, will be incorporated into the proposed integrated 
process framework.
BACKGROUND
Social Media
Social Media has become a platform for numerous voices clamoring to be heard, 
many of which have come together to create communities. The communities, also 
referred to as ‘peers’, are a group of people with common interests and these groups 
are fast becoming (or have become) the ‘trusted source of information’ for many. 
It is a two-way conversation that allows for customer engagement. It provides op-
portunities for gathering and sharing information about the customer from and to 
the customer. It does not come without its challenges, like reputational damage 
from unhappy customers or” competition’’, outdated information and ill-advised 

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
14
responses to customers (Agnihotri et al., 2012). The communities manifest on the 
very popular platform like facebook, twitter and the likes.
The social media space has become a common place for communication, 
networking, and content sharing. Many companies seek marketing and business 
opportunities via these platforms. However, the link between resources generated 
from these sites and business performance remains largely unexploited (Paniagu 
& Sapena, 2014). More and more firms have started strategically using the online 
user innovation communities (OUICs) for open innovation initiatives. Dong and 
Wu (2015), conceptualized two OUIC-enabled capabilities. These are, ideation 
capability related to collecting user-generated ideas about potential innovation from 
OUIC, and implementation capability related to selecting user-generated ideas for 
innovation development and introducing developed innovation via OUIC. The re-
search discovered that OUIC-enabled ideation capability actually does not influence 
firm value, whereas OUIC-enabled implementation capability increases firm value 
(Dong and Wu, 2015). Building on empirical research, Rydén et al. (2015) identi-
fied four mental models of business–customer interactions. The four models are 
“business-to-customers,” “business-from-customers,” “business-with-customers,” 
and “business-for-customers. The study provided a conceptual framework that en-
ables managers to introspectively investigate their own mental models and thereby 
revise their sense making and use of social media. Several recent studies (Wang et 
al., 2016; Jiang et al, 2016; Guesalaga, 2016) have also looked into the use of SM 
concept in business organizations.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
CRM has several definitions, but many agree that customer relationship management 
is a strategy that places the demand of customers in the center of organization’s 
operation so as to make a contribution to the profitability of the company and the 
satisfaction of customers (Bago, 2011). The most widely accepted definition can 
be attributed to Payne (2007), who called customer relationship management the 
rejuvenated form of relational marketing. With the support of technological develop-
ment, maintaining a connection to many consumers is easier than ever. It is important 
to note the three levels of Payne’s definition: the first is the CRM designation of 
the project leading to the technological solution. The second is the integration of 
customer-centric technological solutions. The third is when customer relationship 
management is an emphasized strategy (Payne, 2007 as cited in Bago, (2011)).
CRM involves managing all communication with a customer, including managing 
it through social media. With social media, the reasons for a customer communicat-
ing with an organization is more ‘personal and relational’ than transactional (Looy, 
2016). Hence emotional and behavioral knowledge about a customer is now easily 

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
15
made available unlike in traditional CRM which involved mostly transactional and 
customer personal data (Mosadegh & Behboudi 2011). With SM, the traditional 
relational database may not effectively manage the amount of data generated and 
organizations may need to use new and adequate tools to manage the organiza-
tional data (Kotadia 2012). This concept exists in organizations for reasons such 
as understanding customers to gain knowledge about them, identify their needs, 
generate profit, have a holistic view of the customer (Karakostas et al. 2005) and 
understand customer information. According to Alexander and Turner (2001), CRM 
involves delivering value and profits from knowledge of your customers’ behavior, 
interests, and predictions of their value to the organization which then empowers 
the organization to make informed decisions. Such decisions affect their strategy, 
goal-setting, customer engagement, choice of products or services and delivery 
channels. An aim for CRM is to manage communications with customers, manage 
business processes (Karakostas et al. 2005), manage customer information (Pep-
pard, 2000) and use algorithms along with CRM strategies to achieve set CRM 
aims (Mosadegh & Behboudi 2011). It uses technology, through CRM software, 
to facilitate the achievement of its goals. Technology aids the provision of required 
information to employees to enable them better serve the customer thus providing 
great customer experience. CRM has three systems which are analytical, operational 
and collaborative (Mosadegh & Behboudi 2011).
In another context, social customer relationship management (SCRM), is ex-
plained as the connection of social data (wherever it is) with existing customer 
records (customer database) which enables companies to provide new forms of 
customer insight and relevant context. It is a new strategy and system that integrates 
web 2.0 and the power of online communities with traditional CRM systems for 
encouraging the customers to play a part with the firm in making decisions that have 
an impact on a particular customer and creating meaningful conversations and high 
value relationships between firms and customers. (Durgam, 2011). This description 
gives a summary of SCRM and introduces concepts such as a new dimension of 
knowledge made available, co-creation, the need for a strategy and tools as well as 
the need to extend managing relationships from the traditional way, to customers 
using social media which will impact on organizational processes. It also implies that 
SCRM is an extension more than a replacement of CRM (Mosadegh & Behboudi, 
2011; Greenberg 2009b). It surpasses traditional CRM through functionalities like 
“ratings, social book marking, blogs, collaborative computing” (Mckay, 2009) etc. 
Though there is an evolution, it is important that the key paradigm functionalities/
basics of CRM should not be discarded (Quintarelli 2010), despite CRM shifting 
its focus from products and services to customer engagement.
Studies in the past envisaged the possibility of the evolution of CRM (Karakos-
tas, et al., 2005). Traditional CRM, though still valid to a great extent, has evolved. 

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
16
There is now a dynamic approach of viewing the customer which involves dealing 
with customer data through their profiles, characteristics and interests rather than 
the single holistic view (Mosadegh & Behboudi 2011). Organizational strategy 
which used to be to acquire, retain and develop customers through email lists etc. 
now needs to be done ‘socially’ i.e. engage with the customer to satisfy them while 
also trying to achieve organizational goals through channels which include social 
tools (Peppers, 2011). Social CRM fosters a never-ending relationship. It is feedback 
driven between brand and customer. This approach can be used to generate data 
that delivers “useful knowledge and content” to the customer and the organization 
(Looy, 2016.). The focus is now on integrating the information to better collabo-
rate and interact with the customer thereby making the customer a partner with the 
organization and also an extension of the teams within the organizations. The data 
generated is now bidirectional and no longer unidirectional (Looy, 2016).
Apart from technology – the evolution enabler – one reason for CRM evolution 
is the ability of an individual to be a part of the ‘social world’ where the customer 
lives and engages with others. In the social world, the customer’s dealings with the 
organization are now more towards being a partner, being heard and being recog-
nized (Bago, 2011.).
Knowledge Management (KM)
Lin et al. (2002) defined knowledge management in the context of CRM as the 
process of managing knowledge from creating business value that will focus on 
creating and delivering innovative products or services and managing relationships 
with existing key stakeholders in the context of CRM. Knowledge is built gradually 
over time and enables action when manipulated. The figure below describes the data 
hierarchy through to knowledge and the relationships between them. Many times 
the terms, data, information, knowledge and wisdom are used interchangeably and 
there is no distinction between them which is not adequate however, the different 
levels are what gives meaning and enables usage.
While information emanates from processed data, knowledge involves further 
processing of information to understand patterns between items of information. 
Finally, knowledge becomes wisdom where principles of knowledge transform it 
to wisdom
On the organizational level, Yaghoubi et al. (2011) explain that ’Nonaka defined 
KM as the process of capturing collective expertise and intelligence of organiza-
tions and using them to foster innovation’. This involves processes such as creating 
and collecting, sorting/organizing, sharing, usage and extraction (Lin, et al. 2002). 

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
17
Knowledge in organizations is the most valuable asset an organization has (Gibbert 
et al. 2002) and can comprise skills, experiences, etc. in both the tacit and explicit 
forms. It is important for organizations to find processes that allow them convert 
tacit to explicit knowledge and vice versa. This activity is explained by the SECI 
model which involves socialization (the social process), externalization (recording 
information), combination (analyzing, organizing in broader terms) and internal-
ization (understanding of explicit knowledge) (Nonaka & Takeuchi 1995). For the 
organization, knowledge originates from the organization or the customer.
An addition to the list of activities identified above was discussed by Sofianti 
et al. (2009), where knowledge co-creation with selected customers allows for an 
“interactive process”. Here, there is knowledge exchange between the organization 
and the customer to work together to create value and gain mutual benefits (Durgam 
2011; Sofianti et al. 2009). This is also reflected in Smith and McKeen, (2005)
Organizational knowledge gives employees and professionals access to data that 
already exists and has been compiled from several channels, with qualities such as 
being complete, reliable, searchable, structured, having metadata applied, updated 
and easily available thereby making the employees sharper, more efficient and more 
effective (Hendriks 2011).
Though it all sounds perfect, organizations are faced with issues such as:
Figure 1. Data to wisdom hierarchy
(Source: www.cognitivedesignsolutions.com)

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
18
•	
The probability that employees will not want to contribute to and build on 
existing knowledge and colleague knowledge,
•	
The difficulty of getting knowledge from the customer while having the same 
customers pay for the products created from their ideas, and
•	
Finally, identifying appropriate knowledge extraction mechanisms e.g. ex-
trinsic motivations (Gibbert et al. 2002).
Customer Knowledge Management (CKM)
Customer knowledge (CK) is key. CK as posited by (Gibbert et al. 2002; Sofianti 
et al. 2009; Bueren et al. 2005), comprises knowledge about customers (informa-
tion from understanding the needs of customers so as to meet them), knowledge for 
customers (information to customers informing them on how to meet their needs) 
and knowledge from customers (perceptions, experiences etc. of the customer 
while using products and services). Yaghoubi et al. (2011) identified knowledge 
from customers to be vital as it provides valuable information that aids product and 
service improvement.
Durgam (2011) explains that “CKM is described as an on-going process of gen-
erating, disseminating and using customer knowledge within an organization and 
between an organization and its customer” as described by Sofianti et. al. (2009). 
This was supported by Madhoushi et al. (2011) by showing that CKM indeed has an 
impact on organizations. CKM is about acquiring and using knowledge inherent in 
customers to achieve organizational goals such as retention, satisfaction, and loyalty 
for both the customer, employee and organizational evolution, innovation and growth 
(Lin et al. 2002; Gibbert et al. 2002; Durgam 2011). It involves partnering with the 
customer in the act of co-creation and making employees willing participants in 
the process (Gibbert et al. 2002). Online communities, internal and external to the 
organization can be created for knowledge sharing to enable collaboration and the 
focus is not on the tool but on the people contributing and involved in the activity.
FRAMEWORK FORMULATION
The Existing Framework
This work is focused on proposing a framework that integrates the social media 
(SM), customer relationship management (CRM) and knowledge management 
(KM) concepts. For this purpose, an already existing customer knowledge manage-
ment (CKM) framework developed by Gerbert et al. (2003) will be expanded with 

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
19
changes and additions being justified. Ideas will also be garnered from the business 
framework for CRM and Social CRM, developed by Buchanan (2010).
With marketing, sales and service as primary business functions for CRM, busi-
ness processes that cover these functions were identified. Business processes have 
interactions between the organization and the customer where information, products 
or services exchange occur and usually involves interaction between both parties. It 
can be triggered by either party (Bueren et al. 2005; Gerbert et al. 2003).
Figure 4 captures the CKM framework. Six CRM sub-processes; campaign 
management, lead management, offer management, contract management, complaint 
and service management business were identified. Each of these has different goals. 
Two CRM activities were also identified as interaction management and channel 
management (Bueren et al. 2005; Gerbert et al. 2003).
As discussed earlier, the aspects of CRM are operational, analytical and col-
laborative (Mosadegh & Behboudi 2011; Joenn 2012). Where all 6 processes impact 
the operational CRM aspects, analytical CRM aspects are related to the processes 
campaign management, lead management and offer management that manipulates 
data acquired to enable informed decisions. The collaborative CRM aspect is 
handled by interaction and channel management CRM activities (Bueren et al. 2005).
According to Bueren et al. (2005), “A CRM business process involves the process-
ing of customer knowledge to pursue the goals of CRM’’ and organizations need to 
Figure 2. A conceptual framework for CKM
(source: Smith & McKeen, 2005)

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
20
focus on the three types: knowledge for the customer, knowledge about the customer 
and knowledge of the customer. They explain that the CKM model offers a process 
perspective to illustrate which KM tools can be used to the CRM sub-processes 
to achieve effective CKM. They also introduced 4 knowledge aspects (content, 
competence, collaboration and composition) that support the 6 CRM processes. 
The knowledge aspect as presented by Bueren et al. (2005), is captured in Table 1.
A simple application of the CKM model in an organization is illustrated when 
an employee of an organization wishes to manage a complaint received from a 
customer. This will involve the utilization of the complaint management CRM busi-
ness process, including the service CRM business function: the employee analyses 
the complaint received to extract ‘knowledge from customer’ and attempts to resolve 
the issue based on their own competence (tacit knowledge). If not, the employee 
will query the content and composition aspects for ‘knowledge for the customer’ 
for recorded resolutions and best practices and attempt to resolve the issue. If this 
is not available, the employee may use the competence aspect to identify competent 
skilled colleagues and collaborate with them through the collaboration aspect to 
seek avenues to resolve the issue.
Figure 3. CKM Model
(source: (Gerbert et al. 2003)

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
21
There were no social issues when the CKM framework was developed therefore, 
though very comprehensive, the CKM framework does not cater for changes that 
have occurred since then, such as the new ‘social’ aspect of things. Bueren et al. 
(2005) also discuss that the framework does not illustrate the strategic and infor-
mation systems aspect, and explains that they are key to the process of CKM. In 
addition, the framework though it discusses aspects of knowledge, does not appear 
to cover actual processes such as the conversion of tacit to explicit knowledge, the 
sharing, dissemination and re-use etc. of processes around knowledge and as such 
undermines the processes that focus on knowledge management. As a result, there 
is a need to revisit the framework to include social aspects that are captured through 
social media and social CRM concepts.
A second framework, the ‘business framework for CRM and Social CRM’, de-
veloped by Buchanan (2010), looks at the different components of CRM and social 
CRM. This framework is said to be work in progress, it gives a comprehensive view 
of social CRM and CRM aspects that business need to look into.
Whereas the main framework used for this study is the CKM framework, ideas 
from the other frameworks will be used to identify missing gaps in addition to the 
Figure 4. Business framework for CRM and social CRM
Source: http://www.capgemini.com/technology-blog/2010/04/a_business_framework_and_opera/

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
22
results from the investigative methods to produce an integrated ‘process based’ 
framework that integrates social media, customer relationship management and 
knowledge management.
METHODOLOGY
Data Collection and Analysis
A combination of data generation techniques were chosen to improve the quality of 
the research by analyzing the data from different angles and buttressing the validity 
of the data and research results hence providing sufficient information to address 
and answer the research question (Oates, 2010). These techniques include extensive 
literature review and opinions of experts.
For the literature review, a thorough and critical review of the various concepts 
was done to identify similar themes, patterns and interdependencies between the 
concepts. A mix of documents from journals, conference papers, white papers, reports 
and online resources were used to gather information about these various concepts. 
Table 1. Knowledge aspects summary
Content 
Competence
Collaboration
Composition
Description 
•Media form of 
Knowledge (image, 
text etc) 
•exists independently 
of individuals 
•also involves 
version control
• Combination of 
implicit & explicit 
knowledge 
• Implicit knowledge 
is embedded within 
the individual and will 
usually not be available 
to others directly in 
this form but can be 
converted to explicit 
knowledge 
• Explicit knowledge is 
made available to others 
and can be stored 
•past experiences, 
environment 
perceptions, skills etc
•Creation and 
dissemination 
amongst a 
few number 
of individuals 
amongst 
themselves 
•Ontological 
knowledge view
•Creation and 
dissemination 
amongst larger 
number of people 
such as what 
has been stored 
in databases or 
systems and made 
available to a large 
number of people 
•ontological 
Knowledge view 
• deals with search 
and navigations
CRM aspect 
support 
systems 
•Content 
management systems 
•document 
management systems
•Expertise directories, 
skills management 
or e-learning tools
•Email, group 
information tools, 
instant messaging 
systems
•Knowledge 
mining systems, 
personalization, 
taxonomy 
management 
systems and 
knowledge maps

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
23
These documents include a mix of recent and dated documents and a comparison 
between all of them was done to extract the required information.
For the expert interview, a number of experts in the industry were identified 
and consulted via email and LinkedIn. While some responses were favorable and 
interviews were secured and held, attempts to contact others failed. Table 2 presents 
the expert interview request attempts.
In the final analysis, 7 (listed in the first 7) experts were interviewed. Their area 
of expertise and mode of contact as well as data gathering medium is also pre-
sented.
PRESENTATION OF RESULTS
The results are summarized below with the tables and compared through triangula-
tion. The key themes are discussed with main points highlighted in the tables.
Strategy
Majority of the interviewees were in agreement that it is important to have a 
strategy before embarking on a social media initiative. Furthermore, they implied 
that organizations will normally have a strategy and all other activities are to be in 
alignment with it.
Knowledge
The interviewees acknowledged that knowledge is valuable to the organization 
and it involves creating, gathering, storing, distributing and retrieving information. 
They also, acknowledged that with social media, knowledge is now also created and 
used by customers, and organizations will also have to source it from the customer. 
Organizations will need to share information with customers so that customers can 
see and know almost as much as the Organizations employees. Organizations have 
to harness and process the information as well as make it available to both internal 
employees and customers.
Data Gathering, Analysis, Transformation, and Usage
This is also a part of knowledge theme discussed above. The interviewees acknowl-
edged there is now a large amount of data generated from within and without the 
organization through various channels of which social media is one. This data needs 
to be collected, sorted, categorized, analyzed and transformed into usable forms 

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
24
Table 2. List of industry experts contacted
S/N
Expert Name
Approach
Connection 
Established?
Decline Reason (If 
Applicable)
Comm. 
Medium
Data Gathering 
Technique
Data Gathering 
Medium
Expertise
1
Paul Greenberg
Direct
Yes
N/A
LinkedIn
Interview, Document 
Analysis
Skype & eMail
SCRM thought leader amongst others
2
Michael Krigsman
Referral
Yes
N/A
eMail
Interview
Skype & eMail
SCRM thought leader amongst others
3
Denis Pombriant
Referral
Yes
N/A
eMail
Interview, Document 
Analysis
Skype & eMail
SCRM thought leader amongst others
4
Mark Tamis
Referral
Yes
N/A
eMail
Interview, Document 
Analysis
Skype & eMail
SCRM thought leader amongst others
5
Laurence 
Buchanan
Referral
Yes
N/A
eMail
Interview
Skype & eMail
SCRM thought leader amongst others
6
Silvana Buljan
Referral
Yes
N/A
eMail
Interview
Skype & eMail
SCRM thought leader amongst others
7
Prem Aparanji
Referral
Yes
N/A
eMail
Interview, Document 
Analysis
Skype & eMail
SCRM thought leader amongst others
8
Tom Davenport
Direct
No
Response not received
LinkedIn
N/A
N/A
KM thought leader amongst others
9
Lutz Kolbe
Direct
Yes
Moved on from CKM field
eMail
N/A
N/A
Originator of CKM Framework
10
Michael Fauscette
Referral
No
Response not received
eMail
N/A
N/A
SCRM thought leader amongst others
11
Walter Brenner
Direct
Yes
Time not 
available
eMail
N/A
N/A
Originator of CKM Framework
12
Henning Gebbert
Direct
No
eMail address incorrect
eMail
N/A
N/A
Originator of CKM Framework
13
Philip Calvert
Direct
No
Response not received
LinkedIn
N/A
N/A
SM & Financial Services thought leader
14
Claire Calmejane
Direct
Yes
Awaiting further response
LinkedIn
N/A
N/A
SM & Financial Services thought leader
15
Malte Geib
Direct
Yes
Awaiting further response
LinkedIn
N/A
N/A
Originator of CKM Framework

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
25
Table 3. Results: Strategy
Identified 
Themes
Expert Interview
Interview 
Reference
Literature and 
Document Review
Lit. and Doc. 
Reference
Strategy
Strategy is important to give 
direction to organizations. 
Organizational actions 
are tied to its strategy 
and dealing with each 
of the concepts of study 
individually and together 
requires a strategic decision
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 2) 
(Respondent 3) 
(Respondent 4) 
(Respondent 5)
Organizations need 
to decide their wants, 
goals, required 
information, its source 
and decision types 
Organizational strategy 
should be tied to the 
organizations brand.
(Mckay 2009) 
(Alvarado 2012)
Social media strategy should 
allow for serendipity as 
social media is still new and 
being discovered
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 6)
Table 4. Result: Knowledge
  Identified 
Themes
Expert Interview
    Interview 
Reference
  Literature 
and Document 
Review
Lit. and 
Doc. 
Ref.
Knowledge
Knowledge Creation: There is now more 
knowledge about the customer through social 
media. It is a good source of innovative ideas 
and is generated by both the customer and the 
organization.
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 3) 
  (Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 6)
Knowledge is a 
source of value 
creation. 
Communities 
of employee 
collaboration 
contribute to 
the activities 
of knowledge 
sharing. 
Tools enable 
knowledge 
management.
(Fanfan 
2012) 
(Cramers, 
2012)
Knowledge Distribution: This now involves 
sharing with both internal (employees) and 
external customers. Channels of interaction of 
both customer and organization need to link to 
a central database of organizational artefacts 
such as compliance policies and procedures 
etc. A balance between what the organization 
distributes and what they know about 
themselves is required.
(Respondent 3) 
(Respondent 6) 
(Respondent 7) 
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 4) 
(Respondent 2)
Knowledge Retrieval: This is now required on 
a quicker basis as demand for responsiveness 
is near real-time, placing a higher demand on 
the organization to respond to the customer. 
This places higher expectation of the tools 
and also more emphasis on access to experts 
(competence) where knowledge may or may not 
be readily available. It also involves customers 
searching for knowledge and the organization 
responding by providing it.
(Respondent 6)
(Respondent 2)
(Respondent 3)
(Respondent 4)
Knowledge gathering, storing, usage and 
evaluation are discussed in the “Data gathering, 
analysis, transformation & usage management” 
section
N/A
Social media now provides “context” to 
knowledge generated giving knowledge a new 
aspect to the traditional knowledge aspects
(Respondent 6) 
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 5)

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
26
such as metrics, insights, intelligence, leads, best practices etc. It should be stored 
and easily retrievable with circulation around the organization. Tools are available 
to make this process seamless but human intervention is also required.
Value Creation and Co-Creation
The interviewees confirmed that value is created from acting on knowledge that 
has been obtained from within and outside the organization. Organization value is 
different from customer value.
Mindset (Cultural Change)
The interviewees brought to light the importance of the ‘mindset’ in organizations. 
With the impact of social media, if the mindset is not changed within the organi-
zation, applying the concepts is not likely to work. Although cultural change was 
highlighted during literature review, the term ‘Mindset’ change came about as the 
underlying issue to be tackled that will lead to the required cultural change.
Customer Engagement
The interviewees acknowledged that engaging with the customer is key. The process 
involves providing the means through various channels and also going to various 
channels where the customer is to engage with them. It also involves empathizing 
with the customer. It is a continuous process as the interaction is continuous.
Collaboration
The interviewees acknowledged that collaboration is important as it enables discus-
sions where knowledge is shared and gained. Insights and innovation is also obtained. 
It’s a process that can occur within the organization or outside the organization and 
is a form of engagement.
Customer Journey and Customer Experience
The customer experience is the path the customer takes to achieve the value they are 
interested in and can be mapped out as a customer journey. With social media a mix 
of channels or touch points is now available by which the customer can achieve the 
same goal. Mapping this path for organizations will have to take into consideration 
the various channels or touch points when creating journey maps of the customer.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
27
Table 5. Results: Data gathering, analysis, transformation and usage
Identified 
Themes
Expert Interview
    Interview 
Reference
Literature and 
Document Review
Lit. and Doc. 
Ref.
Data gathering, analysis, transformation & usage
It involves continuous exploring and gathering 
of data from both online and offline sources 
through various channels that are within or 
outside the organization and harnessing into a 
central repository within the organization. Social 
media is one of such channels
(Respondent 6) 
(Respondent 2) 
(Respondent 3) 
(Respondent 5) 
(Respondent 4) 
(Respondent 1)
Data transformation 
from data to 
information to 
knowledge and 
wisdom is required. 
Identification 
and separation of 
sensible data from 
non-sensible data 
is needed as data 
is unstructured and 
large. Organizations 
are producing tools 
that enable effective 
use of social media. 
Social media adds 
context to data. 
A central repository 
such as a database 
/ knowledge base 
/ graph databases 
/ enterprise data 
warehouse / 
CRM- specific 
data repository 
is needed. Data 
should be made 
available to 
customers outside 
the organization. 
Gathered data needs 
further processing 
to enable tangible 
decision making. 
Metrics is 
information 
that can inform 
measurement, usage 
and ROI.
(Durgam 2011) 
(Gerbert et al. 
2003) 
(Ostrow 2009) 
(Cramers, 2012) 
(All 2011) 
(Kotadia 2012) 
(Durgam 2011) 
(Ostrow 2009) 
(Cramers 2012)
Interpreting and transforming from data to 
information to knowledge to wisdom is essential 
to make sense of the large data gathered
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 2) 
(Respondent 3) 
(Respondent 4)
Metrics and analytics are a good
(Respondent 1)
description of how to do the above.
(Respondent 6)
Some of these are sentiments,
(Respondent 2)
business intelligence, influence, KPIs,
(Respondent 3)
Balance Scorecard, CRM calculators,
(Respondent 5)
trend lines etc. Decision on the
(Respondent 4)
metrics to use is dependent on the
business process or information the
organization is interested in
obtaining. It is applied knowledge
and applies context to data creating
thereby another aspect of
knowledge that was not previously
available.
Technological tools are available that
(Respondent 1)
produce analytics and metrics and
(Respondent 6)
enable sifting through data. However,
(Respondent 3)
Human interpretation is needed to
(Respondent 2)
provide other metrics and interpret
(Respondent 5)
and utilize for decision making for
(Respondent 4)
both the customer and the
Organization
This processed information
(Respondent 1)
/knowledge is stored and made
(Respondent 2)
available to the entire organization
(Respondent 3)
for usage through tools/technology
(Respondent 5)
such as repositories and workflows.
(Respondent 6)
Also making it available to customers
outside the organization in a timely
and efficient manner

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
28
DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS
The Proposed Framework
Based on the results presented above, key themes for the successful integration 
of social media (SM), customer relationship management (CRM) and knowledge 
management (KM) will include the following:
•	
Strategy.
•	
Value creation & Co-creation.
•	
Collaboration.
•	
Knowledge.
•	
Customer Engagement.
•	
Mindset / Cultural Change.
•	
Data gathering, analysis, transformation & usage.
•	
Customer Journey and customer experience.
The CKM framework used as a basis for the proposed framework for this study 
(Figure 3) caters for the following CRM sub-processes: campaign management, 
lead management, offer management, contract management, complaint and service 
Table 6. Results: Value creation and Co-creation
Identified 
Themes
Expert Interview
Interview 
Reference
Literature and 
Document Review
Lit. and 
Doc. Ref.
Value creation 
& Co- 
Creation
Value comes from acting on the 
knowledge that the organization 
has about the customer, from the 
customer and of the customer.
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 6) 
(Respondent 2) 
(Respondent 3) 
(Respondent 5) 
(Respondent 4)
They explain that 
the value compass 
is applicable to 
the organization 
using knowledge 
to create value for 
customers.
(Anon, 
2013) 
(Fanfan, 
2012)
Organizational value is different 
from customer value. Customer 
value is what the customer wants 
and not what the organization gives
(Respondent 2) 
(Respondent 7) 
(Respondent 3)
Value creation 
comes from 
knowledge. 
Organizations 
need to 
realize that 
customers can
(Anon, 
2012) 
(Alvarad, 
2012)
Co-creation between customer and 
organization is possible and this has 
been proved through success stories. 
It can be initiated either by the 
customer or by the organization and 
involves listening
(Respondent 6) 
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 7) 
(Respondent 3) 
(Respondent 4) 
(Respondent 5)
Determine what 
they consider as 
value themselves.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
29
Table 7. Result: Mindset
Identified 
Themes
Expert Interview
Interview 
Reference
Literature and 
Document Review
Lit. and 
Doc. Ref.
Mindset/ cultural 
change
Mindset enables effective 
functionality of all 
components and is today 
a very big challenge for 
organizations.
(Respondent 
6) 
(Respondent 
7)
The intelligent 
exploiter framework 
describes that 
mindset (though 
comprises a 
metaphor) is a 
strong enabler for 
organizational 
success.
(Holtham & 
Rich, 2012)
Organizations have to 
work on mindsets to cater 
for two aspects: Mindset/
Cultural change is needed. 
Control has now shifted 
from the organization to 
the customer and they need 
to have a customer service 
mindset. They need to move 
from functioning in silos to 
cross-functional processes. 
This may also require 
identifying ways to motivate 
customers to contribute to 
benefit the organization also 
· Mindsets of employees 
needs to be sculptured to 
think differently. They 
need to be encouraged to 
participate and contribute to 
the usage of these processes 
when introduced within the 
organizations.
(Respondent 
6) 
(Respondent 
2) 
(Respondent 
7) 
(Respondent 
4)
SCRM is 
interesting because 
of its “intrinsic 
nature inherently 
disrespectful of 
departments, 
business functions, 
inside-outside 
boundaries, separate 
processes.” The 
social customer is 
a different type of 
customer and dealing 
with them requires 
cultural change.
(Quintarelli, 
2010)
Organizations also need to 
manage the change process 
and reduce risk
(Respondent 
3) 
(Respondent 
5)
(Anon, 2013)
Behavior = Motivation 
+ Ability + Trigger 
Motivation has an impact 
on mindset. Motivating 
the employees will likely 
contribute to changing 
their mindsets. In addition, 
motivating customers to 
contribute in things like 
providing feedback, joining 
communities etc.
(Respondent 
6) 
(Respondent 
5)
Behavior = 
Motivation + Ability 
+ Trigger Ability 
+ Motivation and 
Opportunities + 
Integration.
(Alvarado, 
2012)

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
30
management CRM business processes and two CRM activities were interaction 
management and channel management. For KM aspects, the framework caters for 
four knowledge aspects: content, competence, collaboration and composition. It also 
has a unidirectional flow from the organization to the customer.
Table 8. Result: Customer engagement
Identified 
Themes
Expert Interview
Interview 
Reference
Literature 
and Document 
Review
Lit. and 
Doc. Ref.
Customer 
Engagement
This involves opening the line 
of communication, listening 
to as any channels as possible 
where the customer is, collecting 
responses and continuous 
interaction and dialogue with the 
customer to learn and understand 
the customer, their needs and 
experiences in order to give 
them better customer experience, 
value and empathize with 
them. Collaboration is a type of 
engagement.
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 6) 
(Respondent 2) 
(Respondent 3) 
(Respondent 4) 
(Respondent 5)
Organizations 
have recorded 
successes in 
collaboration. 
Engagement can 
be done through 
multi-channels
(Robson 
2012) 
(Peppers 
2011)
This is a two-way interaction 
between customer and 
organization and may lead to 
customer further engagement with 
organization and vice versa
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 2) 
(Respondent 3) 
(Respondent 5)
Table 9. Results: Collaboration
Identified 
Themes
Expert Interview
Interview 
Reference
Literature and 
Document Review
Lit. and Doc. 
Ref.
Collaboration
Collaboration can be 
achieved from Organization 
& Customer collaboration 
(bi-directional) or employee 
& employee collaboration 
(unidirectional). It leverages 
community and workflow 
can be added if required. 
It is a strong enabler of the 
knowledge flows.
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 7) 
(Respondent 5) 
(Respondent 6)
Communities 
of employee 
and external 
collaboration 
contribute to 
the activities of 
knowledge sharing. 
People when asked 
are willing to 
participate.
(Fanfan, 2012) 
There is power in 
communities. People love to 
be asked and collaboration is 
a good place for serendipity.
(Respondent 1) 
(Respondent 7)

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
31
The TO-BE Framework
The different items of the framework are discussed under the categories CRM Pro-
cesses, CRM Activities, Knowledge Aspects, KM Processes and Enabling factors
CRM Processes
•	
Campaign Management: The process of reaching out to individuals to mar-
ket a product or service and provides a means to receive feedback (Kumar & 
Reinartz 2012). It deals with managing all marketing activities (Bueren et al. 
2005). Social media provides another channel to facilitate this process.
•	
Lead Management: The process that creates and identifies prospective cus-
tomers that may be addressed for marketing or sales (Bueren et al. 2005; 
Gerbert et al. 2003). Social media tools aid the process. Communities on the 
web and ‘influencers’ can be explored to generate leads (Greenberg 2009a).
•	
Offer Management: The process of creating “individualized binding offers” 
(Bueren et al. 2005; Gerbert et al. 2003). With social, means of concluding 
these offers will have to be agreed within the process, especially with the 
various channels on social media.
Table 10. Customer Journey Maps
Identified 
Themes
Expert Interview
Interview 
Reference
Literature and 
Document Review
Lit. and Doc. 
Ref.
Customer 
Journey & 
experience
The journey the customer 
takes to add value to them 
is now very dynamic. 
Each customer journey 
the organization wants to 
map is now multi-channel 
or has many touch points. 
As such the organization 
has to cater for the 
possibility for these touch 
points and manage them 
adequately.
(Respondent 3) 
(Respondent 6) 
(Respondent 5)
Involves the 
process/flows that 
is taken by the 
customer from 
one point to the 
end following the 
reasons for the 
users.
 
-
Good customer 
experience is what 
is expected however, 
exceptional customer 
experience is what makes 
the difference and sets the 
organization apart from its 
competition.
(Respondent 2)
-

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
32
•	
Contract Management: The process that manages contracts for supplying 
products and services (Bueren et al. 2005; Gerbert et al. 2003).
•	
Complaint Management: The process that manages customer complaints 
(Bueren et al. 2005; Gerbert et al. 2003). Social media increases the number 
of channels customers use to complain and organizations may need to go and 
search for the complaints on these channels to manage and resolve them.
•	
Service Management: The process of managing the provision of services 
to customer and can shape the customer experience. If positive, it can easily 
lead to customer retention and profit for the organization. Social media pro-
vides an additional channel and has a high impact on this process.
CRM Activities
The activities in the CKM model have been greatly impacted by social media by 
giving them a social and deeper dimension:
•	
Channel Management: The activity as explained that addresses the “chal-
lenge of the configuration and synchronization of different communication 
channels”. It aims to “define organizational responsibilities for each channel, 
to avoid conflicts between channels and to ensure consistent knowledge flows 
across different channels” (Bueren et al. 2005; Gerbert et al. 2003).
•	
Engagement Management: (Formerly Interaction Management) involves 
opening the line of communication between the organization and the cus-
tomer, listening to the customer through as many channels as possible, col-
lecting responses and allowing for continuous interaction and dialogue to 
learn and understand the customer, their needs and experiences in order to 
give them better customer experience and value. The important aspect here is 
the continuous engagement between the organization and the customer which 
is bi-directional.
•	
Intelligence Interaction Management: The activity that involves continu-
ous exploring/observing, gathering, harnessing and interpretation of data 
from various channels and transforming it to information, knowledge or wis-
dom such that it is available for use to better serve the customer, inform deci-
sion making, education and learning etc. It involves a mix of both human and 
technology activities and produces outcomes such as metrics and analytics.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
33
Knowledge Aspects
On the knowledge management front, the four knowledge aspects content, competence, 
collaboration and composition presented in Table 1 are captured and described as 
follows. In addition to these, a new addition to the framework is proposed: Context.
•	
Context Knowledge Aspect: This relates to social media now providing 
context to data that has been generated such as reasons for the data, emo-
tions, behaviors, customer experiences, metrics, analytics, values, interests 
etc. allowing organizations to gain a deeper knowledge about the data. This 
was not possible previously hence the knowledge aspect ‘context’ is added to 
the framework.
KM Processes
KM involves creating, gathering, storing, distribution, retrieval and storing. This 
is not illustrated on the framework directly but has a backbone on the intelligence 
interaction management activity are achieved through use of the knowledge aspects 
captured on the framework.
Enabling Factors
These factors enable the successful usage of the CRM and Knowledge Management 
processes:
•	
Opportunity and Value Creation Management (formerly Opportunity 
Management): This is the act of identifying viable opportunities from either 
the customer or from employees in the organization such that both the orga-
nization and the customer gain value. Activities here can involve co-creation, 
evaluating the customer experience and customer journey.
•	
Strategy Management: Strategy is important to give direction to organiza-
tions. To define the scope, what is to be achieved, how and lots more. All 
other actions will be tied to the strategy and there can be many different 
strategies tied to an overall strategy depending on the approach an organiza-
tion chooses to take. This activity is essential in the success of adopting SM, 
CRM and or KM. For social media, allowing for serendipity is key as SM is 
still relatively new.
•	
Mindset Management: This involves managing mindsets. In this instance, 
it has to do with managing the cultural change that social media has brought 
upon the organization. The ‘mindset’ is the underlying issue.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
34
Arrows Directional Updates
The arrows pointing in a single direction representing the flow from the organization 
to the customer process is updated from unidirectional to bi-directional to capture 
the ‘inside-out’ and ‘outside-in’ flow of knowledge and relationship between the 
customer and the organization.
The framework now captures processes that reflect the findings of the study 
which integrates social media, customer relationship management and knowledge 
management. Based on the results from the study the framework above has been 
proposed to be an integrated framework of SM, CRM and KM on the process level 
and is demonstrated by the application described above.
FUTURE RESEARCH AND DIRECTIONS
This work has been a product of extensive literature review and analysis of qualitative 
data from industry experts in the different domains associated with the ideas of the 
authors. Further work can be carried out in the area of formalizing the framework, 
Figure 5. Proposed concept integration framework

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
35
in the form of an empirical study. Though the authors have already started working 
on this in relation to financial institutions, such could also be done with other sectors 
and in different geographical locations. From another perspective, a Delphi study, 
for its iterative nature, could also be employed to distill the variables.
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Understanding the Concepts
The literature review gave an understanding of concepts under study and to examine 
if there is a possibility of a link /overlap between them. A process based framework 
approach was adopted as processes show the cross functional integration in organiza-
tions (Gerbert et al. 2003). There were not many process based academic frameworks 
that integrated aspects of the concepts if not all. The process based CKM model 
developed by Gerbert et al. (2003) was one of the few and was used as a basis for the 
study. They based a number of their concepts on well-established concepts described 
by Nonaka and Takeuchi and Thomas Davenport who are knowledge management 
thought leaders. Another framework for SCRM developed by Buchanan (2010) was 
also investigated to inform the study though it is not process based.
Expert interviews conducted gave a good perspective to this work as majority of 
the experts had experience on the concepts under study. They were able to explain the 
concepts and gave their perspectives and thoughts on the interdependencies between 
the concepts. A thematic coding exercise was done on the interview transcripts to 
check for common themes. The results were in line with the literature review find-
ings. A few new themes were identified from the interviews and these were further 
investigated for deeper understanding in literature.
The Process Framework
Web 2.0 at the time of developing the CKM framework was not full blown and its 
impact on was not captured. In this study, social media is used to capture this evolu-
tion and impact of the web. During the study, the social dimension through identified 
themes was added to the framework. After which it showed that the traditional CRM 
processes discussed in the framework have not changed. This shows that SCRM, as 
discussed in the literature, is an extension of CRM and not its replacement. What 
makes these processes ‘social’ is that another channel of communication that has 
unique characteristics can be used to achieve the purpose of the process.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
36
Mindset and Cultural Change
The findings showed that the effective use of social media in organizational processes 
starts with changing the ‘mindset’ of the organization. It is a continual process, and 
has three dimensions and this change has to be managed adequately. The mindset 
of the employees of the organization has to change. Having the tools and processes 
in place without the people is a roadmap for failure. People are the link that makes 
it work (Alvarado 2012). A key aspect here is the tacit and explicit knowledge. Or-
ganizations need to apply the SECI model described by Nonaka & Takeuchi (1995) 
to the management of tacit and explicit knowledge. This dimension of knowledge 
then feeds into the ‘competence’ knowledge aspect on the proposed framework. 
Outputs of this process, enrich the other knowledge aspects content, context, com-
position and collaboration. As a result, the organization needs not only to empower 
the employees but to also find ways to make them participate intrinsically. With 
the customer now being in control of the ecosystem, organizations need to ensure 
the customer is in the center of their products and service offerings if they want 
to remain in business hence calling for a customer service mindset. However, this 
change must tie in with the overall strategy of the organization. This is captured on 
the framework through mindset management.
Strategy Development
The findings show that strategy management is key and this is confirmed by other 
studies. Organizations need to first decide what they want, the business and mea-
surement goals, type of information they are interested in collecting and decisions 
they would like to make based on the information gathered, etc. (Mckay, 2009). It 
needs the consultation of Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) and needs to make room 
for ‘serendipity’. As it gives direction, all other processes should be tied to it.
Organizations are reluctant to adopt SM but a look at the competition’s engage-
ment in SM will help in reaching a decision (Peppers, 2011) as others have recorded 
successes and failures (Mckay, 2009). The final strategy should be in line with the 
overall brand of the organization (Alvarado, 2012). This is captured on the frame-
work through strategy management.
Channel Integration
The findings also show that social media is a channel that enables customer engage-
ment and needs to be managed in relation to other channels used by the organization. 
One of such reasons is because the customer does not see different channels but has a 
holistic view of the organization. Now there are several touchpoints through the dif-

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
37
ferent channels used by customers to interact with the organization. The organization 
therefore needs to effectively manage these channels such that they are functional 
effectively and are available to the customer and employees whenever they are to 
be utilized. It also needs to provide channels that enable the employees to interact 
within the organization. This is captured on the framework as channel management.
Data Flows
These channels of communication generate ‘big data’ which is a mix of sensible, 
non-sensible data, tacit and explicit knowledge, etc. Data coming from all these 
channels need to be managed. Extract the relevant information such as customer 
needs, new ideas, customer complaints, teamwork discussions, trainings, best 
practices, compliance rules etc. without leaving out important things and in a short 
time, prioritize and act on them. It also harnesses information generated within the 
organization by other departments such as non-customer facing departments and 
derives intelligence and insight from data coming through all channels. It determines 
the actions required based on findings. For example, forwarding it on to relevant 
departments for further action or use, e.g. leads will go on to marketing and sales 
departments and complaints will go to customer service, innovative ideas to product 
development teams etc. This process involves harnessing all the data, making sense 
of the data, transforming it into usable forms, storing and distributing it to both the 
customer and the organization and discarding what is not important.
The key aspects here firstly, is to ensure continuous observation of on-going 
happenings within and outside the organization and secondly is the involvement of 
both technology/tools and humans to transform this data through the data hierarchy 
i.e. from data to information to knowledge to wisdom as explained earlier. Although 
tools and technology aid the process, humans are needed as they can spot, prioritize 
and make practical decisions. The output here is intelligence through metrics, leads, 
context etc. and these outputs provide inputs for the knowledge aspects (content, 
context, competence etc.) and the CRM processes (lead management, strategy man-
agement, value creation management etc.) captured on the proposed framework. This 
is the core knowledge management process level and is captured on the framework 
as intelligence interaction management.
Customer Engagement
The findings show that social media facilitates and requires organizational engage-
ment with the customer. It involves identifying a platform, listening or transmitting 
on the platform depending on the goal, building a repository of tried and tested 
common problems and solutions, responding to customers making enquiries, pro-

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
38
viding a solution, and giving an acknowledgement, value or simple thank you to the 
customer while ensuring the right person gets the right response. This is continuous 
bi-directional interaction. The output is generating sound and effective CK rather 
than customer transactional data.
There is also the aspect of risk management where employees engage using the 
channels. This can be done through internal trainings, incentives, guidelines etc 
(Baird & Paramis 2011b; Peppers 2011). Involves collaboration and there is power 
through communities. It is the “building of the relationship and knowledge of the 
customer by analyzing the bidirectional interactions (downwards and upwards) and 
horizontal, collaborative, community-oriented ones, where the essential components 
are the experiences and emotions of users and communities” (Anon, 2013)
On the framework, Interaction management activity was changed to Engagement 
Management. Interaction management originally meant identifying or creating 
“media-based communication channels” “with a goal to achieve optimal channel 
mix”. It is not very clear the purpose of this activity as it was somewhat similar to 
the channel management activity. However, taking the word interaction from the 
process name, it appears to mean the activity that involves managing the interaction 
points between the customer and the organization. With this as a basis, a deeper 
and meaningful term with social will be engagement hence the proposed activity. 
Engagement management replaced interaction management on the framework.
Value Creation and Co-Creation
Mapping the customer journey across various channels is a good way to identify 
what the customer considers as value. Organizations can also explore the partnership 
paradigm through communities and ask people to participate as they love to be asked 
(Mosadegh & Behboudi 2011). It is also important to note that while processes get 
information from the customer it is key to create processes that actually give to the 
customer what they value (Quintarelli 2010).
For the framework, specific opportunities could be discovered locally by sales 
and service staff as posited by Gerbert et al. (2003). However, the issue with this 
description is that it is limited to the sales and service staff and the opportunities are 
discovered locally. With social, finding opportunities go beyond the boundaries of 
the organization. Now in addition to seeking opportunities, organizations must extend 
their search to the customer such that opportunities identified can bring value to both 
the customer and the organization. Hence the term ‘Opportunity & Value Creation 
Management’ replaced ‘Opportunity Management’ on the proposed framework.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
39
Tools/Technology
Findings also show that all of this is possible with tools. Tools ranging from CRM 
systems, KM systems, analytical tools, database systems or repositories etc. are 
required to successfully integrate these concepts. Some of the possibilities include 
creating customer profiles that merge customer online data with customer trans-
actional data (Cramers, 2012), adding textured classifications to raw unstructured 
data (Mckay, 2009), getting real-time updates on the user’s desktop and instant 
replies (Ostrow, 2009) and lots more. For the framework, this is not illustrated in 
the diagram as tools and technologies are not processes.
Integrated Concepts Defined
It is apparent from the study that there are interdependencies between the concepts. 
Academic work had established linkages between social media and CRM and coined 
the term social CRM and also established a link between CRM and KM and coined 
up the term CKM. Though linkage between all these concepts was not found that 
draws a reader’s attention to the interdependencies directly, literature presented 
the possibility. This linkage was confirmed via the expert interviews as they were 
able to explain in their own terms the linkage between the concepts. This lack of 
academic linkage or interdependency is what makes this study novel and a contri-
bution to knowledge. Themes identified were assessed and put into the framework. 
The results were compared against the existing framework and modifications made. 
These were included into the framework as considered appropriate. The proposed 
process framework is the result of the study that further establishes the integration 
of the concepts within an organization.
From the findings of the study, a definition for the integrated concepts is pre-
sented below:
Integrated Social Media, Knowledge Management and Customer Relation-
ship Management can be explained as the integration of social into organizational 
processes. This is such that, an additional communication channel with multiple 
platforms is leveraged, to continually engage with the customer where contextual 
knowledge is harnessed and exchanged between the customer and the organiza-
tion. The effect is to enable the organization to provide better customer service that 
shapes the customers experience and creates value for both the customer and the 
organization. It also involves harnessing knowledge from both social and non-social 
media channels within and outside the organization to gain intelligence that leads 
to effective customer management and decision making.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
40
REFERENCES
Agnihotri, R., Kothandaraman, P., Kashyap, R., & Singh, R. (2012). Bringing ‘Social’ 
into Sales: The Impact of Salespeople’s Social Media Use on Service Behaviors and 
Value Creation. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32(2), 333–348. 
doi:10.2753/PSS0885-3134320304
Alexander, D., & Turner, C. (2001). C.R.M Pocketbook. Management Pocketbooks 
Ltd. Available at: www.pocketbook.co.uk
All, A. (2011). Lack of integration Holding Back Social CRM. ITBusinessEdge. 
Retrieved April 11, 2014, from http://www.itbusinessedge.com/cm/blogs/all/lack-
of-integration-holding-back-social- crm/?cs=48679
Alvarado, C. (2012). Social Media in the Financial Service Industry - Reap the 
Benefits of Building a Strong Brand. iUriel. Retrieved November 7, 2014, from 
http://www.iuriel.com/featured/online-brand-management-social-media-in-the-
financial-service-industry-reap-the-benefits- of-a-strong-brand
Anon. (2010). Social Media and Banking. Retrieved July 5, 2014, from http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=ZMiQKuGkaPQ&feature=related
Anon, . (2012). A more equal footing: How social media have transfromed customer 
relationships. Emerald Article, 28(6), 4–6.
Anon. (2013). What are some examples of business process reengineering where 
Social Media has enabled an organization to revamp itself? Received May 25, 
2014, from http://www.quora.com/What-are-some-examples-of-business-process-
reengineering-where-Social-Media-has-enabled-an-organization-to-revamp-itself
Bago, P., & Voros, P. (2011). Social Customer Relationship Management. Act Sci 
Soc, 33, 61-75. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2505401
Baird, C. H., & Paramis, G. (2011). From Social Media to Social CRM: Reinventing 
the cutomer relationship. IBM. Retrieved January 9, 2014, from http://public.dhe.
ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/en/gbe03416usen/GBE03416USEN.PDF
Bellinger, G., Castro, D., & Mills, A. (n.d.). Data, Information, Knowledge, & 
Wisdom. Systems Thinking. Retrieved December 14, 2014, from http://systems-
thinking.org/dikw/dikw.htm
Buchanan, L. (2010). Capping IT Off: A business framework and operating model 
for CRM & Social CRM. Capgemini.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
41
Bueren, A., Schierholz, R., Kolbe, L. M., & Brenner, W. (2005). Improving per-
formance of customer-processes with knowledge management. Emerald Group 
Publishing Limited, 11(5), 573–588.
Cramers, M. (2012). Data Driven Social Media: the shortest distance to a rational 
conversation, Elstree, UK: Salesforce Radian6. Retrieved December 30, 2012, from 
http://www.radian6.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/SFMC_FSIReport_FINAL.
pdf
Dong, J. Q., & Wu, W. (2015, June). Business value of social media technologies: 
Evidence from online user innovation communities. The Journal of Strategic Infor-
mation Systems, 24(2), 113–127. doi:10.1016/j.jsis.2015.04.003
Durgam, P. (2011). Transformation of Customer Knowledge management through 
Social CRM. Aalto School of Economics.
Fanfan, Y. (2012). Knowledge management: making a core competency in today’s 
business world. In 2012 3rd International Conference on System Science, Engi-
neering Design and Manufacturing Informatization. Retrieved January 14, 2014, 
from http://0-ieeexplore.ieee.org.wam.city.ac.uk/xpl/articleDetails.jsp?tp=&arnu
mber=6340781&contentType=Conference+Publications&searchWithin%3DSear
ch_Index_Terms%3A.QT.corporate+strategy.QT.%26searchField%3DSearch_All
Gerbert, H., Geib, M., Kolbe, L., & Brenneret, W. (2003). Knowledge-enabled 
customer relationship management: Integrating customer relationship management 
and knowledge management concepts[1]. Journal of Knowledge Management, 7(5), 
107–123. doi:10.1108/13673270310505421
Gibbert, M., Leibold, M., & Probst, G. (2002). Five styles of customer knowledge 
management, and how smart companies use them to create value. European Journal 
of Economics, Finance, and Administrative Services, 20(5), 459–469.
Greenberg, P. (2009a). CRM at the Speed of Light: Social CRM Strategies, Tools, 
and Techniques for Engaging Your Customers. McGraw-Hill.
Greenberg, P. (2009b). Social CRM Comes of Age. Retrieved February 11, 2014, 
from http://www.oracle.com/us/products/applications/crmondemand/036062.pdf
Guesalaga, R. (2016). (in press). The use of social media in sales: Individual and 
organizational antecedents, and the role of customer engagement in social media. 
Industrial Marketing Management.
Hendriks, B. (2011). Knowledge management in times of social media.mov. Re-
trieved January 7, 2015, from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qnfYzKiW50Q

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
42
Holtham, C., & Rich, M. (2012). Non‐formal management learning through elec-
tronic experiential fiction. Journal of Management Development, 31(3), 287–297. 
doi:10.1108/02621711211208916
Jiang, H., Luo, Y., & Kulemek, O. (2016, May). Leading in the digital age: A study 
of how social media are transforming the work of communication professionals. 
Telematics and Informatics, 33(2), 493–499. doi:10.1016/j.tele.2015.10.006
Joenn, A. (2012). Operational CRM. CRM Insights - The CRM Blog. Retrieved De-
cember 10, 2012, from http://info.collierpickard.co.uk/blog/bid/87997/operational-
crm?source=Blog_Email_[Operational%20CRM]
Karakostas, B., Kardaras, D., & Papathanassiou, E. (2005). The state of CRM 
adoption by financial services in the UK: An empirical investigation. Information 
& Management, 42(6), 853–863. doi:10.1016/j.im.2004.08.006
Katty. (2011). Lloyds Banking Group on Social Media Strategy, Team Structure, 
KPIs and ROI - YouTube. Retrieved July 7, 2012, from http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=zZDosreg5W0
Kolsky, E. (2010). A learning journey to a social CRM framework. Retrieved 
November 13, 2012 from http://www.mycustomer.com/topic/social-crm/learning-
journey-social-crm- framework/114484
Kotadia, H. (2012). Knowledge management critical in Social CRM. Blog on Big 
Data Analytics, Social CRM. Retrieved December 13, 2012, from http://hkotadia.
com/archives/2764
Kumar, V., & Reinartz, W. (Eds.). (2012). Customer Relationship Management: 
Concept, Startegy, and Tools (2nd ed.). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-20110-3
Lawson, L. (2011). Four Key Integration Steps for Better CRM. ITBusinessEdge. 
Retrieved April 11, 2014 from http://www.itbusinessedge.com/cm/blogs/lawson/
four-key-integration-steps-for-better-crm/?cs=45941
Lin, Y., Lyu, J., & Chan, C. (2002). Applications of Knowledge-Enabled CRM. In 
The Second International Conference on Electronic Business. Retrieved August 11, 
2014, from http://iceb.nccu.edu.tw/proceedings/2002/PDF/f212.pdf
Looy, A. V. (2016). Social Customer Relationship Management Springer Texts in 
Business and Economics. Springer International Publishing.
Madhoushi, M., Madhoushi, Z., & Saghari, F. (2011). Survey of Customer Knowl-
edge Management Impact on Customer Relationship Management (Iranian study). 
International Journal of Business and Social Science, 2(20), 215–226.

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
43
Mckay, L. (2009). Strategy and social media: everything’s gone social (Now). des-
tinationCRM.com. Retrieved February 11, 2014, from http://www.destinationcrm.
com/Articles/Editorial/Magazine-Features/Strategy-and-Social-Media-Everythings-
Social-%28Now%29-54723.aspx
Mosadegh, M. J., & Behboudi, M. (2011). Using social network paradigm for 
developing a conceptual framework in CRM. Australian Journal of Business and 
Management Research, 1(4), 63–71.
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company: How Japanese 
companies create the dynamics of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Oates, B. J. (2010). Researching Information Systems and Computing. Sage Pub-
lications Ltd.
Ostrow, A. (2009). HOW TO: Gather Feedback with Social Media. Retrieved 
November 7, 2013, from http://mashable.com/2009/09/28/social-media-feedback/
Paniagu, J. (2014). Business performance and social media: Love or hate? Business 
Horizons, 57(6), 719–728. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2014.07.005
Payne, A. (2007). CRM-kézikönyv: ügyfélkezelés felsőfokon. Budapest.
Peppard, J. (2000). Customer Relationship Management (CRM) in Financial 
Services. European Management Journal, 18(3), 312–327. doi:10.1016/S0263-
2373(00)00013-X
Peppers, D. (2011). The Social CRM eBook. Collier Pickard.
Quintarelli, E. (2010). An Integrated Social CRM Process. The Social Enterprise. Re-
trieved January 7, 2013 from http://www.socialenterprise.it/en/index.php/2010/05/16/
an-integrated-social-crm- process/
Robson, K. (2012). Developing a Social Media Strategy: analytics, interactivity 
and engagement. Retrieved December 26, 2013 Available at: http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=USelRQf3Za4
Rydén, P., Ringberg, T., & Wilke, R. (2015). How Managers’ Shared Mental Models 
of Business–Customer Interactions Create Different Sensemaking of Social Media. 
Journal of Interactive Marketing, 31, 1–16. doi:10.1016/j.intmar.2015.03.001
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2005). Customer Knowledge Management: Add-
ing Value for Our Customers. Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 16, 36. Available at http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol16/iss1/36

Towards a Framework for Integrating Social Media
44
Sofianti, T., Suryadi, K., Govindaraju, R., & Prihartono, B. (2009). Customer 
Knowledge Management in New Product Development. Asia Pacific Industrial 
Engineering & Management Systems Conference.
Suleman, A. (2011). Knowledge Management & Social Media – YouTube. Retrieved 
October 16, 2014 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kJ15irk6hbE
Thames, C. (2011). Business Process Reengineering & Enterprise Collaboraton A 
postion by Colby Thames Stryve Advisors. Academic Press.
Wang W. Y. C., Pauleen D. J., & Zhang, T. (2016). How social media applications 
affect B2B communication and improve business performance in SMEs. Industrial 
Marketing Management.
Yaghoubi, N.M., Khaksar S.M.S., Banihashemi, S.A., Jahanshahi, A.A. & Nawaser, 
K. (2011). The Impact of Knowledge Management on Customer Relationship Man-
agement. European Journal of Economics, Finance, and Administrative Services, 
(34), 76 – 86.
Zanjani, M. S., Rouzbehani, R., & Dabbagh, H. (2008). Proposing a conceptual 
model of customer knowledge management: a study of CKM tools in British dot-
coms. In Proceedings of World Academy of Science, Engineering, and Technology. 
Retrieved May 25, 2012 from http://www.waset.org/journals/waset/v38/v38-54.pdf

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch003
Chapter 3
45 
Social Customer 
Relationship 
Management (SCRM):
A Strategy for Customer 
Engagement
ABSTRACT
The organizations reach to their objectives by adopting an effective customer 
management strategy. Today, organizations have become aware that to reach their 
objectives its must focus on customer relationships, engagement and retention, not 
only to increase their market share. The development of information and commu-
nication technology (ICT) and in particular social networks enables an important 
communication tool with customer. Improving customer relationship by using social 
network is called social customer relationship management (SCRM). SCRM focused 
on establishing new channels with customers for better understanding of customers 
needs and build a long-term relationship with them. This chapter explores social 
customer relationship management and its general concepts including social media 
and customer relationship management. Also, it reviews the context of SCRM that 
aims to enhance customer relationship and make customers much more engaged. 
Conclusions and proposed future work are stated at the end.
Ameen Al-Azzam
Technical College in Tai’f, Saudi Arabia
Rawan Khasawneh
Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
46
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays social networks are considered as an important communication tool that 
should be utilized by organizations in improving their relationships with customers 
in order to make them more engaged and satisfied. Such usage of social networks in 
customer relationship management is called social customer relationship management 
(SCRM) which focuses on the strategies, processes and technologies organizations 
use to link social networks with CRM strategy.
Social media evolution leads to change in the way the organizations engage 
with their customers; it enables customers to connect, communicate, buy, filter 
out advertising, compare prices with competitors, and share negative or positive 
opinions with a global audience. Most organizations are moving toward integrated 
social media with their traditional CRM programs. Social CRM is considered as 
a good way for organizations to build a strong relationship with customers, and 
increase their satisfaction level.
This chapter illustrates the use and integration of social network in customer 
relationship management and how much this integration is important in organiza-
tional business strategy to enlarge customer engagement. An exploration of customer 
relationship management and social networks is presented in the chapter along 
with a focus on social customer relationship management and how it can be used 
to enhance their customer relationship management.
This chapter is divided into three sections where section one reviews customer 
relationship management (CRM) in general; its definitions, categories, dimensions, 
processes and other related concepts. Social media in general, its definitions, uses 
and categories, is described in the second section. The third section focuses on social 
customer relationship management (SCRM), its dimensions, approaches, and the 
differences between traditional CRM and Social CRM in addition to an exploration 
of the role of SCRM in increasing customers’ engagement level.
CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT 
(CRM): AN OVERVIEW
CRM term refers to building a customer-oriented culture where IT applications 
are utilized to enhance profitability and retain customers, so basically there are 
three main elements of any CRM strategy/initiative which are: people, process, 
and technology. CRM is a strategy where the customer is the king; it is all about a 
strategy where the main focus is the customer (Rababah, Mohd, & Ibrahim, 2011).
The literature shows that customer relationship management systems can be 
classified into three main categories: analytical, operational, and collaborative CRM 

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
47
(Khasawneh & Alazzam, 2014; Rababah, Mohd, & Ibrahim, 2011; Xiong et al., 2011; 
Khodakarami & Chan,2011; Oghojafor, Aduloju & Olowokudejo, 2011; Jirehbandei 
& Pour, 2011;Troggler, 2009; Rollins & Halinen, 2005; Gebert et al., 2003).
1. 	
Analytical CRM: It is a great tool for building and maintaining long-term 
relationships with customers; it analyzes customer data to generate informa-
tion about customer behavior, purchase patterns and market segmentation by 
incorporating various tools and techniques such as data mining. Analytical 
CRM is also called back office CRM system.
2. 	
Operational CRM: The main goal of operational CRM is to improve effi-
ciency and productivity by automating traditional CRM processes and opera-
tions. These operations include data collection, transactions processing, and 
workflow control. It is also called front office CRM system.
3. 	
Collaborative CRM: Another category of CRM which works at the opera-
tional level and focused on integrating and managing various communication 
channels that customers can use to interact with organizations. These channels 
include email, video and web conferencing applications, websites pages, and 
many others. It is a motivator for interactive learning relationship between the 
companies and their customers.
There are three levels of CRM processes: customer-facing level, functional level, 
and company-wide level. Customer- facing level includes a systematic process for 
managing all aspects of customer relationship starting from initiation, maintenance 
and ending with termination. The functional level consists of a set of processes that 
related to executing marketing functions such as sales force automation and market-
ing campaign management. Finally company-wide level or strategic level where 
information about customers, their behavior, and preferences has implications for 
the entire organization.
CRM systems have several benefits for companies; these benefits include decrease 
recruiting customers cost, build long-term relationships with customers, reduce sales 
cost and marketing campaign cost, increase customer profitability, and increase 
customer loyalty and retention. At the same time, CRM has several barriers such 
as lack of guidance along with no existence of long-term strategy, and customer 
database need to be maintained, and that requires huge investment, and employees 
are unwilling to be more customer-focused. Furthermore, lack of understanding of 
CRM, lack of management support, and low marketing orientation highly affect 
the best of utilization of CRM systems (Amoako, Arthur, Bandoh, & Katah, 2012).
Successful CRM program requires companies to effectively manage business 
process change, properly aligning business processes and IT operations and fully 

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
48
understand CRM not only as business strategy and business process but also as a 
business philosophy and technological tool (Rababah, Mohd, & Ibrahim, 2011).
SOCIAL MEDIA
Social media is a common term used these days; it includes video sharing sites, 
wikis, photo sharing sites, social network sites, microblogs, etc. It has become part 
of our daily activities.In light of the enormous development in social media, many 
companies use it to achieve the advantage for their brand, services and public rela-
tions.The term “social media” has been used in several contexts related to different 
technologies and what they can do. Social media can be defined as the technologies 
people use to communicate and interact with one another, typically online. Kupper 
et al. (2014) have defined social media as “group of Internet-based applications that 
build on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 2.0, and that allow 
the creation and exchange of user-generated content.”
Chua and Banerjee (2013) have classified social media according to services 
provided to organizations that are used to communicate with their customers: mi-
croblogging services (MBS) are social media services that allow users to publish, 
share and discuss in the form of short status updates, messages or commentaries, it 
also permit users to organize themselves in a follower-followee, Twitter is a good 
example. Social networking services (SNS) allow users to build their profiles, create 
connections with other users sharing the same interests. SNS also enable users to 
perform posting comments, receiving comments from others, joining groups and fan 
pages, creating events, using customized applications and playing games. Facebook 
and MySpace are examples of these services. Location-aware mobile services (LMSs) 
are social media services that allow users to check in online at real-world locations 
and receive context-sensitive information based on their locations. Foursquare and 
Google Latitude are two well-known LMSs. Corporate discussion forum services 
(CDS) allow users to discuss products and services provided by a specific organiza-
tion, Dell IdeaStorm, launched by Dell, is a prominent example of CDS. According 
to Ngai, Moon, Lam, Chin and Tao (2015), Social media have numerous applica-
tions: marketing, customer relationship management (CRM), knowledge sharing, 
collaborative activities, organizational communications, education and training.
Kietzmann et al. (2011) and He and Jiménez(2015) describe seven functional 
blocks of social media: identity- the extent to which users reveal themselves.; Con-
versations- the extent to which users communicate with each other; sharing- the 
extent to which users exchange, distribute and receive content; presence- the extent 
to which users know if others are available; relationships- - the extent to which 
users relate to each other; reputation- the extent to which users know the social 

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
49
standing of other and content and groups- the extent to which users are ordered or 
form communities.
For a business, users do not use social media only for publishing private informa-
tion; they also use it for looking up products or services or to share recommendations 
and experiences with friends or other users (Alt & Reinhold, 2012). Organizations 
also used social media to improve operations and enhance the business profile 
through improved communication; greater exposure through amplifying word-of-
mouth effects; getting closer to and building relationships with existing customers; 
attracting new customers; promoting a company’s products/services; improving 
brand awareness; increasing volume of traffic to web site; increasing levels of 
sales; improved collaboration and establishing online communities (Montalvo, 
2011; Stockdale, Ahmed & Scheepers, 2012; Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010; McCann & 
Barlow, 2015). In order to make better and effective use of social networks, it is not 
enough for businesses to simply have a presence on social media, for example, in the 
form of creating a Facebook page or a Twitter account. Furthermore, the business 
must have a strategy for its use and consider why they are using it as well as how it 
can support business objectives (Stockdale et al., 2012; McCann & Barlow, 2015). 
Fuduric and Mandelli (2014) have suggested five postulates to be considered when 
managers develop a strategy for social media: social media is always a function of 
the technology, culture, and government of a particular country or context; local 
events rarely remain local; global events are likely to be (re)interpreted locally; 
creative consumers’ actions and creations are also dependent on technology, culture, 
and government; and technology is historically dependent.
SOCIAL CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT 
(SCRM) AND CUSTOMER ENGAGEMENT
The term social customer relationship management (Social CRM) has emerged to 
describe measures that use social media technologies within the planning, imple-
mentation, and control of CRM activities (Ang, 2011; Woodcock, Green & Starkey, 
2011), the term SCRM consists of two fields: social media and CRM. According 
to Alqahtani and Saba (2013), Literature does not agree on a particular definition 
of what social CRM means. Table 1 presents several definitions of social CRM.
The integration of social media and CRM opens a wide range of potential ap-
plication areas. For examples, in analytical CRM, social media provides important 
knowledge from posting and discussion. Data obtained from social media provides 
a better understanding of individual customer’s behaviors and the targeted custom-
ers’ needs. For operational CRM, interaction with the customer via campaigns, 
offers, requests, complaints or suggestions from customers or other users can be 

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
50
done through social media tools to improve efficiency and productivity. In collab-
orative CRM, social media provides an additional channel to communicate with 
customers (Alt & Reinhold, 2012).
The applications of SCRM demonstrate two main task areas of social CRM: 
monitoring and mining in one hand and proactive and reactive interaction on the 
other (Alt & Reinhold, 2012). According to Reinhod and Alt (2013); Rappaport 
(2010) and Alt and Reinhold (2012) the integrated view of SCRM results in five 
tasks and functional areas in SCRM: Social Media platform, CRM system, Analytical 
functionalities, Interaction functionalities and management functionalities. Table 
2 summarized these tasks areas. Social CRM tools are used by the organization to 
collect data from social media which enables them for deeply monitoring and map-
ping of potential and existing customers (Wang & Owyan, 2010). Alt and Reinhold 
(2012) defined tools as applications that “encourage many-to-many participation 
among internal users, as well as customers, partners, affiliates, fans, constituents, 
donors, members and other external parties, to support sales, customer service 
and marketing processes”. Table 3 illustrates social CRM tools depending on the 
structure of the task areas within a social CRM.
Nadeem (2012) outlines five intelligence sources where social CRM tools can 
be used by organizations in marketing area: Posting Envelope – the meta data of 
social media postings provides information about authors, topics, sources, etc.; 
Posting Body – content of posting, it can be analyzed and segmented by keywords, 
opinions, topics, etc.; Profile Body – data in users’ profiles – emails, phone numbers, 
interests, groups, hobbies, etc.; Profile Envelope – meta data of profile – connec-
tions, activities, other profiles, etc.; Links – interconnections between profiles and 
postings can provide insights about role, influence, and relations.
Social CRM does not replace the traditional CRM; it can be seen as the growth 
of traditional CRM but with a slight change in marketing strategy (Dutot, 2013). 
Traditional CRM focuses on traditional ways of communication with customers such 
Table 1. Social customer relationship management definitions
SCRM Definition
Resource
“The process of managing customer-to-customer conversations to engage 
existing customers, prospects or other stakeholders with a brand and so 
enhance CRM.”
Dutot, 2013, p.56
“Is the business strategy of engaging customers through SM with goal of 
building trust and brand loyalty.”
Woodcock et al., 2011, p.52
“A philosophy and a business strategy, supported by a technology platform, 
business rules, processes, and social characteristics, designed to engage 
the customer in a collaborative conversation in order to provide mutually 
beneficial value in a trusted and transparent business environment.”
Greenberg, 2010, p. 413

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
51
Table 2. Tasks and functional areas of SCRM
Tasks and 
Functional Area
Description and Main Objectives
Social Media
Provision and integration of Social Media services, such as forums, wikis, and 
communities for information distribution and collaborative creation of information.
Analysis
Analytical techniques for analysis and mining, e.g. evaluation, filtering, search, 
aggregation, enrichment, transformation, or rule-based object generation.
Management
Management functionalities, such as moderation, process management, reputation 
management, data integration, evaluations or privacy management for resource and 
actor management and coordination.
CRM
CRM process and data integration and links to CRM functions, such as lead, contact, 
campaign or service management.
Interaction
Interaction techniques, such as content delivery, dialogue development, publication, 
dissemination, recommendation, alarm or notification for interaction management and 
coordination.
(source: Reinhod & Alt, 2012)
Table 3. Tools for social CRM
Tools
Functional Description
Examples of Systems
Business 
Intelligence
Storage and analysis of structured and unstructured Social 
Media data (e.g., interests of Facebook fans, product mentions 
in postings) in connection with existing information in a data 
warehouse.
SAS (2), 
MicroStrategy (2)
Community 
Management
Creation and management of communities or forums, as well 
as the provision of services to external interested parties.
Lithium Technologies 
(1;2;3;5), 
GetSatisfaction 
(1; 3; 5)
CRM
Integration and use of Social Media data within a CRM 
system (e.g., for team communication, master data 
completion, or process initiation).
Cosmic (2; 3; 5), 
Salesforce (2; 3; 4; 5)
Social Media 
Management
Management of profiles on several platforms, and 
simplifiedcommunication via posting schedulers or multi-
platform dispatchers.
Media Funnel (2; 3; 5), 
Cisco Social Miner 
(2; 3; 
4)
Social Media 
Monitoring
Analysis of Social Media content (e.g., opinions, sentiments), 
core topics or active users (e.g., influencers).
Overtone (2; 3), 
Sysomos (2; 3), Gigya 
(2; 
3; 5)
Social Network 
Analysis
Analysis of connections between postings and tracking of 
authors across several Social Media, with identification 
of core topics, relationships, and the impacts of individual 
contents on Discussions.
Kxen (2), Cyram (2), 
Sprout Social (2; 3; 4)
Social Search
Blog search by keywords or topics; navigation through Social 
Webofferings and identification of relevant content areas.
Social Search (2), 
Yahoo 
Pipes (2)
Legend related to task areas: 1 = Social Media; 2 = Analysis; 3 =Management; 4 = CRM; 5 = Interaction.
(Source: Alt & Reinhold, 2012)

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
52
as phone calls, emails, and conversation notes from conferences or live meetings, in 
addition to traditional ways social CRM communicates with customers via outlets 
such as Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and online forums or reviews platforms like 
Yelp. Table 4 illustrates a comparative between traditional CRM and social CRM.
Before the advent of the Internet and especially social networks, it was not easy 
to communicate with consumers as it is now, social CRM changed the way the 
company interact and communicat with customers. Social CRM creates two-way 
communication between customer and organization. It allows companies to interact 
and communicate through social media and improve the quality and quantity of 
Table 4. A comparison between traditional CRM and Social CRM
Traditional CRM Features/Functions
Social CRM Features/Functions
Tactical and operational: Customer strategy is part of 
Corporate Strategy.
Strategic: Customer strategy IS corporate strategy.
The relationship between the company and the 
customer was seen as enterprise managing customer 
- parent to child to a large extent.
The relationship between the company and the 
customer are seen as a collaborative effort. And yet, 
the company must still be an enterprise in all other 
aspects.
Focus on Company <> Customer Relationship.
Focus on all iterations of the relationships (among 
company, business partners, customers) and 
specifically focus on identifying, engaging and 
enabling the “influential” nodes
The company seeks to lead and shape customer 
opinions about products, services, and the company-
customer relationship.
The customer is seen as a partner from the beginning 
the development and improvement of products, 
services, and the company-customer relationship.
Business focuses on products and 
services that satisfy customers.
Business focus on environments & experiences that 
engages customer.
Customer facing features - sales, marketing & 
support.
Customer facing both features and the people who’re 
in charge of developing and delivering those features.
Marketing focused on processes that sent improved, 
targeted, highly specific corporate messages to 
customer.
Marketing focused on building relationship with 
customers - engaging customer in activity and 
discussion, observing and re-directing conversations 
and activities among customers.
Intellectual Property protected with all legal might 
available.
Intellectual property created and owned together 
with the customer, partner, supplier, problem solver.
Insights and effectiveness were optimally achieved 
by the single view of the customer (data) across 
all channels by those who needed to know. Based 
on”complete” customer record and data integration.
Insights are a considerably more dynamic issue and 
are based on 1) customer data 2) customer personal 
profiles on the web and the social characteristics 
associated with them 3)customer participation in the 
activity acquisition of those insights.
Resided in a customer-focused business ecosystem.
Resides in a customer ecosystem
Tools are associated with automating 
Functions.
Integrates social media tools into apps/services: 
blogs, wikis, podcasts, social networking tools, 
content sharing tools, user communities.
(Source: Mosadegh & Behboudi, 2011).

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
53
interactions with customers, suppliers and partners (Wongsansukcharoen, Trimet-
soontorn & Fongsuwan, 2013). According to Wongsansukcharoen et al., (2013) 
social CRM facilitates collaborative experience and dialogue that customer values, 
through social CRM companies provide answers to the discussions created and 
generated by customers on social media (Dutot, 2013). Social CRM is not just a set 
of technologies, but rather a social CRM strategies give organizations a chance to 
be closer to the customers through the social interactions (Patil, 2014), specifically, 
to improve customer engagement and build strong relationships with them (Nitu, 
Tileaga & Ionescu, 2014).
The definition of social CRM (Greenberg, 2010) implies that it designed to 
engage the customer in a collaborative conversation. Customer engagement can be 
defined as “a manifestation of the brand or firm that is more than a transaction or 
just purchase behavior and which goes beyond satisfaction, retention and loyalty” 
(Lipiainen, 2015; Choudhury & Harrigan, 2014). Garcia et al., (2014) defined 
customer engagement as “the intensity of individual participation and connection 
with the offers and activities of the organization initiated either by the customer or 
by the organization”.
Dessart, Veloutsou and Thomas (2015) explicate seven sub-dimensions of customer 
engagement classified under three-dimensional: affective engagement: enthusiasm, 
enjoyment; cognitive engagement: attention, absorption; and behavioral engage-
ment: sharing, learning and endorsing. Sashi (2012) proposed stages for customer 
engagement life cycle: connection- before establishing a relation between sellers 
and customers; they must first connect with each other. Such connection is done 
through offline (salespersons) and online (social media) ways. Interaction- after 
connection, customers interact with sellers. The emergence of the Web 2.0 enables 
customers to interact through texting, instant messaging, email, blogging, virtual 
worlds, and social networking. Satisfaction- only satisfied sellers and customers 
will stay connected and continue the movement toward engagement. Satisfaction is 
a necessary condition for customer engagement. But it is not enough for customer 
engagement. Retention- resulted from either overall satisfaction over time emerges 
from repurchase and long-term relationship; not from highly positive emotions, 
or highly positive emotions which do not mean that the customer has a long-term 
relationship with the seller. Commitment- consists of two dimensions: affective com-
mitment is emotional and results from the trust and mutual benefit in a relationship, 
and calculative commitment is more rational and results from a lack of choice or 
switching costs. Advocacy- happy customers share their happiness with others in 
the social network, but loyal customers have less tendency for sharing, only if the 
loyal customer in long-term relationships develops emotional constraints that can 
be an advocate for organization’s products or services. Engagement- reached when 

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
54
a happy or loyal customer shares their happy experience and loyal feelings with 
others via social networks and become brand advocates. Customer engagement 
requires affective commitment, calculative commitment and commitment between 
sellers and customers.
Organizations that have the intention to implement the social CRM should take 
into consideration three issues First, organizational ones, which include culture, 
structure, systems, staff and strategy. Second, technological issues, comprehending 
incomplete technologies; poor integration of social media with traditional channels, 
and having no systems that support all the channels where upon people interac-
tion. Finally, miscellaneous issues which comprise dropping prices of Social CRM 
systems; more empowered customers; the speed of development and information 
overload. (Woodcock et al., 2011).
Several benefits can be derived from the organizations from the implementation 
of social CRM, social CRM strategy increase customer engagement and loyalty 
which will drive brand performance. Also, establishing a link with customers as 
a primary method of contact, sales will increase, and the cost of sales, customer 
services and advertising will be reduced. Enactment of a proactive dialogue with 
consumers, which lead to improving the effectiveness of a business strategy through 
innovation and creativity, as research and development capabilities are amplified 
through social customers’ initiatives.
CONCLUSION
The main goal of CRM is to help organizations build a good relationship with, and 
engage their customers to maximize lifetime value. Social media evolution has 
changed the way organizations follow/adopt to make their customers get engaged.
Social media has several tools for communication, buying, filtering out advertising, 
prices comparison and global opinion sharing. Interactive relationships between 
organizations and customers make organizations moving toward integrating social 
media with their traditional CRM programs. Social CRM provides the organizations 
better way to build relationships with customers, and give the capabilities for the 
customers to interact with organizations in an effective way. Future work will focus 
on establishing a common ground that validates the concept of SCRM strategy and 
other concepts related to this domain such as: social media and customer relation-
ship management. Also, focus on antecedents of engagement such as satisfaction, 
loyalty and brand community that lead to customer engagement.

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
55
REFERENCES
Alqahtani, F. A., & Saba, T. (2013). The impact of Social Networks on Customer 
Relation Management (CRM) in Prospectus of Business Environment. Journal of 
American Science, 9(7), 480–486.
Alt, R., & Reinhold, O. (2012). Social Customer Relationship Management (Social 
CRM). Application and Technology.Business & Information Systems Engineering. 
doi:10.1007/s12599-012-0225-5
Alt, R., & Reinhold, O. (2012). Social Customer Relationship Management: State 
of the Art and Learnings from Current Projects. 25th Bled eConference.
Amoako, G., Arthur, E., Bandoh, C., & Katah, R. (2012). The impact of effective 
customer relationship anagement (CRM) on repurchase: A case study of (GOLDEN 
TULIP) hotel (ACCRA-GHANA). African Journal of Marketing Management, 
4(1), 17–29.
Ang, L. (2011). Community relationship management and social media. Journal of 
Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, 18(1), 31–38. doi:10.1057/
dbm.2011.3
Choudhury, M. M., & Harrigan, P. (2014). CRM to social CRM: The integration 
of new technologies into customer relationship management. Journal of Strategic 
Marketing, 22(2), 149–176. doi:10.1080/0965254X.2013.876069
Chua, A. Y.K., & Banerjee, S. (2013). Customer knowledge management via social 
media: the case of Starbucks. Journal of Knowledge Management, 17(2), 237 – 249. 
10.1108/13673271311315196
Dessart, L., Veloutsou, C., & Thomas, A. M. (2015). Consumer engagement in 
online brand communities: A social media perspective. Journal of Product and 
Brand Management, 24(1), 28–42. doi:10.1108/JPBM-06-2014-0635
Dutot, V. (2013). A New Strategy for Customer Engagement: How Do French Firms 
Use Social CRM?. International Business Research, 6(9), 54-67. doi:.10.5539/ibr.
v6n9p54
Fuduric, M., & Mandelli, A. (2014). Communicating social media policies: Evalua-
tion of current practices. Journal of Communication Management, 18(2), 158–175. 
doi:10.1108/JCOM-06-2012-0045
Garcia, A. O., Exposito, M. M., Verdugo, M. C., & Mejias, M. S. (2014). Consumer 
– brand engagement on Facebook: Liking and commenting behaviors. Journal of 
Research in Interactive Marketing, 8(3), 203–223. doi:10.1108/JRIM-12-2013-0081

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
56
Gebert, H., Geib, M., Kolbe, L., & Brenner, W. (2003). Knowledge-enabled cus-
tomer relationship management: Integrating customer relationship management 
and knowledge management concept. Journal of Knowledge Management, 7(5), 
107–123. doi:10.1108/13673270310505421
Greenberg, P. (2010). The impact of CRM 2.0 on customer insight. Journal of Busi-
ness and Industrial Marketing, 25(6), 410–419. doi:10.1108/08858621011066008
He, X., & Jiménez, R. P. (2015). Chinese social media strategies: Communication 
key features from a business perspective. El profesional de la información, 24(2), 
200-209.
Jirehbandei, S., & Pour, A. (2011). A new model for e-CRM in e-commerce using 
live-operator. World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, 56, 552–554.
Kaplan, A. M., &Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges 
and opportunities of Social Media. ESCP Europe, 53, 59-68.
Khasawneh, R., & Alazzam, A. (2014). Towards Customer Knowledge Management 
(CKM): Where Knoweldge and Customer Meet. A book chapter in. In M. Chilton 
& J. Bloodgood (Eds.), Knowledge Management for Competitive Advantage: Issues 
and Potential Solutions. IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4679-7.ch007
Khodakarami, F., & Chan, Y. (2011).Evaluating the success of customer relationship 
management (CRM) systems. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference 
on Information Management & Evaluation (pp. 253-262). Toronto, Canada: IEEE.
Kietzmann, J. H., Hermkens, K., McCarthy, I. P., & Silvestre, B. S. (2011). Social 
media? Get serious! Understanding the functional building blocks of social me-
dia. Kelley School of Business. Indiana University, 54, 241–251. doi:10.1016/j.
bushor.2011.01.005
Kupper, T., Jung, R., Lehmkuhl, T., & Wieneke, A. (2014).Features for Social CRM 
Technology - An Organizational Perspective. Twentieth Americas Conference on 
Information Systems.
Lipiäinen, H. S. M. (2015). CRM in the digital age: Implementation of CRM in 
three contemporary B2B firms. Journal of Systems and Information Technology, 
17(1), 2–19. doi:10.1108/JSIT-06-2014-0044
McCann, M., & Barlow, A. (2015). Use and measurement of social media for 
SMEs. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, 22(2), 273–287. 
doi:10.1108/JSBED-08-2012-0096

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
57
Montalvo, R. E.(2011). Social Media Management.International Journal of Man-
agement & Information Systems, 15(3), 91-96.
Mosadegh, M. J., & Behboudi, M. (2011). Using Social Network Paradigm for 
Developing A Conceptual Framework in CRM. Australian Journal of Business and 
Management Research, 1(4), 63–71.
Nadeem, M. (2012). Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM): How 
Connecting Social Analytics to Business Analytics Enhances Customer Care and 
Loyalty?. International Journal of Business and Social Science, 3(21), 88-102.
Ngai, E. W. T., Moon, K. L. K., Lam, S. S., Chin, E. S. K., & Tao, S. S. C. (2015). 
Social media models, technologies, and applications. Industrial Management & 
Data Systems, 115(5), 769–802. doi:10.1108/IMDS-03-2015-0075
Nitu, C. V., Tileaga, C., & Ionescu, A. (2014). Evolution of CRM in SCRM. Eco-
nomics, Management, and Financial Markets, 9(1), 303–310.
Oghojafor, B., Aduloju, S., & Olowokudejo, F. (2011). Information technology 
and customer relationship management (CRM) in some selected insurance firms in 
Nigeria. Journal of Economics and International Finance, 3(7), 452–461.
Patil, M. Y. (2014). Social Media and Customer Relationship Management. IOSR 
Journal of Business and Management, 27-32.
Rababah, K., Mohd, H., & Ibrahim, H. (2011). Customer Relationship Manage-
ment (CRM) Processes from Theory to Practice: The Pre-implementation Plan of 
CRM System. International Journal of e-Education, e-Business, e- Management 
Learning, 1(1), 22–27.
Rappaport, S. D. (2010). Cutting Edges: Listening-Led Marketing Science, Me-
dia Strategies, and Organizations. Journal of Advertising Research, 50(3), 1–14. 
doi:10.2501/S0021849910091464
Reinhold, O., & Alt, R. (2013). How Companies are Implementing Social Customer 
Relationship Management: Insights From Two Case Studies. 26th Bled eConference.
Rollins, M., & Halinen, A. (2005). Customer knowledge management competence: 
Towards a theoretical framework. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences. IEEE. doi:10.1109/HICSS.2005.180
Sashi, C. M. (2012). Customer engagement, buyer-seller relationships, and social 
media. Management Decision, 50(2), 253–272. doi:10.1108/00251741211203551

Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM)
58
Stockdale, R., Ahmed, A., & Scheepers, H. (2012). Identifying Business Value 
From The Use Of Social Media: An Sme Perspective.Pacific Asia Conference on 
Information Systems (PACIS).
Troggler, M. (2009). The functionality and usage of CRM systems. International 
Journal of Humanities and Social Science, 4(3), 164–172.
Wang, R., & Owyang, J. (2010). Social CRM: the new rules of relationship manage-
ment. Altimeter Group. Retrieved from: http://www.slideshare.net/jeremiah_owyang/
social-crm-the-new-rules-of-relationship-management
Wongsansukcharoen, J., Trimetsoontorn, J., & Fongsuwan, W. (2013). Social Cus-
tomer Relationship Management and Differentiation Strategy Affecting Banking 
Performance Effectiveness. Research Journal of Business and Management, 1-13.
Woodcock, N., Green, A., & Starkey, M. (2011). Social CRM as a business strategy. 
Journal Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, 18(1), 50–64. 
doi:10.1057/dbm.2011.7
Xiong, L., Yue, H., & Li, J. (2011). Creating competitive advantage through cus-
tomer knowledge management in customer relationship management. In Proceed-
ings ofInternational Conference on E-Business and E-Government (ICEE). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ICEBEG.2011.5881994

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch004
Chapter 4
59 
Marketing on Tumblr:
ABSTRACT
Despite many demographic, behavioral, and technical features that should make it an 
appealing destination for social media marketers, the Tumblr platform has lagged in 
marketing adoption. This chapter discusses the site features that drive its potential, 
while also acknowledging the challenges that Tumblr presents. Contrasts are offered 
between the limited flexibility but easier adoption curve of other platforms such as 
Facebook and Twitter, with the phenomenon known as choice overload discussed 
as a possible explanation for non-Tumblr preferences. Three Tumblr case studies 
are presented in depth to illustrate best practices (Denny’s diner chain and the 
musician Taylor Swift) and to warn against certain common pitfalls (Nordstrom). 
The chapter concludes with potential future research directions to pursue on this 
growing but underutilized platform.
INTRODUCTION
From a marketing perspective, Tumblr is the dark horse of the major social media 
platforms. Most corporate sites link to their Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. 
If they’re especially adventurous or dutiful, one might see Pinterest or LinkedIn. 
Although Tumblr’s user base is valuable, it is also notably and uniquely difficult to 
market to. Despite having many user statistics that should put it in the same discus-
sions as Pinterest and Instagram as a youthful social network on the rise, Tumblr is 
largely ignored in discussions of social media marketing.
Kristen Smirnov
Whittier College, USA

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
60
This chapter offers methods to improve customer engagement and the likelihood 
of successful marketing efforts on the Tumblr platform. First, an examination is 
made of Tumblr’s background, along with its user base and technical capabilities. 
Relevant academic theories about social media branding and consumer engagement 
are also introduced. A discussion of the marketing potential offered on the platform 
follows. Next, three case studies are presented with multiple supporting examples, 
with an analysis of two well-performing Tumblr accounts and one underperforming 
company. Lastly, conclusions and future research directions are offered.
It should be noted that Tumblr is rarely discussed in both the commercial and 
academic spheres. Accordingly, theories and references used in this chapter are 
largely about social media platforms in general, rather than findings specific to 
Tumblr. Accordingly, it is hoped that this chapter will make a significant contribu-
tion to the literature about the Tumblr platform.
As might be expected from this chapter’s title, Tumblr allows for more flexibil-
ity in one’s marketing presentation than many other platforms. Companies can be 
“weird” to stand out, to connect with an audience that distrusts typical marketing 
voices, or as a way to rebrand a staid image. Simply being weird, however, is not a 
coherent strategy. To understand how to best, promote consumer engagement and 
loyalty on a historically challenging platform, it’s important to first discuss those 
consumers and the platform itself.
BACKGROUND
In the introduction, Tumblr was referred to as one of the major social media plat-
forms. That label would surprise many people, who often leave it out of discus-
sions of the most important social media players. Tumblr was founded in 2007 by 
David Karp and Marco Arment. In 2013, Yahoo acquired Tumblr for $1.1 billion 
(Statista, 2015). Tumblr is known as a microblogging platform, and accordingly, 
each user is described as having his or her own blog. An early assessment of the 
site described it thusly:
It’s a happy medium between a tidbit posting service, such as Twitter, and a full-
fledged blogging tool, such as WordPress or Blogger. Tumblr is aimed at folks who 
feel they may not have enough content or time to write a full blog, yet still want to 
write and share links and media. (Lowensohn, 2007)
This platform style, off-the-cuff but media-rich, proved popular. Tumblr is one 
of the fastest-growing major platforms (along with Pinterest), with nearly 100% 
active user growth between 2014 – 2015 (Cohen, 2015). During 2014, it registered 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
61
nearly twice Instagram’s growth rate for active users (Luden, 2014). Higher growth 
rates are easier for smaller companies, of course. Tumblr’s information page (http://
www.tumblr.com/about) states that it hosts approximately 260 million blogs with 
122 billion posts, as of late 2015. Individual users may own multiple blogs, so the 
number of users would be somewhat smaller than that 260 million figure. While 
that is a large group of users, there are bigger platforms yet. Here stands one under-
standable reason for Tumblr’s historic lack of attention compared to the even larger 
platforms of Instagram, Twitter, or the true behemoth, Facebook.
However, Tumblr has two major appealing features beyond its growth rate that 
should earn it more attention from marketers: its technical flexibility and its userbase. 
Those same two appealing features also pose challenges to marketers. With Tum-
blr’s comparatively smaller userbase, the perceived negatives have outweighed the 
positives for many. For companies who wish to benefit from this growing platform 
in the future, however, a discussion of both elements is warranted. Before that, a 
context for all of these challenges is offered.
Paradoxically, we may say that we like flexibility but experience a paralyzing 
phenomenon known as choice overload when we actually encounter it. In theory, 
having more choice is preferable. We may feel a sense of freedom in high-choice 
environments, or that we are more assured of finding an optimal solution for some 
problem. However, larger number of options can instead lead to dissatisfaction with 
the decision we ultimately make, as we have now experienced a greater opportunity 
cost with our selection. It can even lead to a state of paralysis where we simply 
choose not to participate at all (Iyengar & Lepper, 2000).
Choice overload is not common knowledge. People perform more creatively 
under restricted choice even as they perceive greater choice to benefit them (Sellier 
& Dahl, 2011). Users with lower knowledge in a field will also prefer greater choice, 
with the perception that more options must be better (Hadar & Sood, 2014). With 
this in mind, Tumblr would seem appealing to a novice marketer who is uncertain 
of how to approach social media. On the surface, its enormous flexibility looks 
appealing. However, these same novice marketers would be poorly equipped to 
manage the challenges of such a technically sprawling platform. Conversely, well-
informed social media marketers may look at the range of possibilities provided by 
Tumblr and decide that some given amount of effort will return better results in a 
more constrained environment.
To further make this point, a contrast is offered with another platform. Instagram 
gives little flexibility to its users. They may upload a user icon, pick an account name, 
and write a short profile description, but everything else is decided for them. Every 
account has the same layout; every header banner displays a selection of previous 
posts; every post is of a photograph or video that must be uploaded from a mobile 
device. All photos used to be uploaded only in square formats. Although Instagram 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
62
recently allowed for photographs that are in portrait or landscape ratios, this ratio 
flexibility only shows up after opening individual posts or in the feed of current posts. 
Looking at anyone’s profile page displays an identical layout of squares. When a 
marketer launches an Instagram account, they are immediately aware of these firm 
boundaries. Their work, then, becomes a fairly straightforward task of optimizing 
performance within those limits.
Tumblr lies on the far opposite end of the flexibility spectrum. The only stan-
dardization comes from the “dashboard,” the default destination for seeing new 
posts, similar to the Facebook wall or Twitter timeline. Individual blogs, however, 
are wholly customizable. Unlike every other major social network, Tumblr gives 
full HTML code access to its users. Because of this, companies have nearly as much 
control over their blog’s appearance as they would with a self-hosted WordPress setup. 
(The only major operational differences in the two blogging platforms, in fact, are 
the lack of top-level categories on Tumblr and the functionalities offered by external 
WordPress plug-ins). With this HTML access, users can install major commercial 
analytics packages like Clicky or Google Analytics, add e-commerce capabilities, 
host external advertisements, or embed service chat windows or Google Maps on 
their sidebar. Users have enormous flexibility in appearance and functionality, can 
maintain branding consistency to unmatched levels, and yet still have immediate 
access to more than a hundred million existing Tumblr users.
As well, the type of content posted is far more varied than on other major social 
networks, and is again comparable to the WordPress blogging platform. Tumblr 
posts can consist of text (with or without embedded graphics for illustration), images 
(static or animated) in any size ratio, photo sets that display all images simultaneously 
rather than needing to first open a gallery, formatted chats & sourced quotations, 
and audio and video clips (either hosted by Tumblr or through an external site like 
Soundcloud or YouTube). Users can even replace the default username.tumblr.com 
address with a custom domain. This offers the chance to integrate a Tumblr blog 
with a company’s online presence, or even use it as the home page for a business. 
A Tumblr-hosted blog could be used like a typical homepage by attaching it to 
yourbusinessname.com, or could be more narrowly used to post product updates 
and stories to blog.yourbusinessname.com.
There is a surfeit of choice available to Tumblr users, and as discussed this choice 
can lead to confusion or paralysis. The strategic marketing questions posed by an 
Instagram account are kept within its strict boundaries: Do we upload videos, or 
only still photographs? What content do we have in our photographs? How often 
do we post? The questions posed by a Tumblr account are broader, and far more 
complex: Which blog theme should we use? Should we hire a designer to make a 
custom branded theme? What elements should it include? Should we add in links to 
all our other social accounts? Do we want to integrate this into our main website? 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
63
Should this be our main website? Should we make graphical posts or allow text-
only posts? If we do allow text-only, what about quotes? What do our readers want 
among all these options? Why are they following us? What do they hope to see?
Indeed, it’s much simpler to use other platforms. On Instagram, marketers can feel 
confident that someone is following them to see a regular feed of photographs—and 
the occasional video—in standard sizes, on a standard presentation. The barriers to 
entry are lower than Tumblr’s on every other major social network, as it’s faster and 
easier to gain a working knowledge of Pinterest’s technical capabilities or the user 
expectations on Twitter. The marketers who do try Tumblr, fascinated by the expanse 
of choice it offers, may become discouraged when their initially muddled efforts go 
unrewarded or simply unnoticed by consumers. With this in mind, Tumblr’s relative 
lack of popularity among marketers becomes easier to understand.
Making smart, tough decisions on the company end becomes key, rather than 
relying on constraints provided by the platform. “Anything” is not a smart approach 
for any company, and on Tumblr “anything” is quite possible. It is vital to self-limit 
an account to a certain posting approach, or a certain type of visual, or a certain 
voice, and maintain that consistency and honest, believable image. Otherwise, it 
becomes all too easy to look like a child with an overflowing toy chest.
Constructing a coherent strategy on Tumblr becomes even more difficult when 
the relative novelty of social media marketing, in any form and on any platform, is 
considered. Though even a majority of managers who do not currently place impor-
tance on social media believe it will be of future importance (Kiron et al. 2012), the 
precise structure of how that use will play out is unclear. The capabilities and norms 
of various platforms are constantly shifting and overlapping; for one example, the 
shift away from square-only Instagram pictures, as discussed above. There are even 
starker challenges that abruptly arise, such as when changes to Facebook’s algorithms 
limited companies’ abilities to reach their customers without paid placement (Kumar 
et al., 2016). However, on a more positive note, another “challenge” is the creative 
potential for new interaction strategies that would be impossible using traditional 
marketing approaches (Majchrzak 2009). This chapter deals largely with the latter.
Companies who wish to try something new and innovative may be enticed by 
Tumblr’s technical flexibility discussed above, despite the challenge it presents. 
Others may need further convincing that it’s worth the effort to enter those deep 
and strategically complex waters. For many, Tumblr’s user base would indeed be 
worth the effort. Tumblr has some of the most attractive demographics of any so-
cial media site. Its userbase is young, wealthy, and well-educated (Sloane, 2014; 
Statista, 2015). Users’ average time spent per visit (or “dashboard session” in the 
company’s own terminology) is a meaty 28 minutes (Fitzgerald, 2014). These two 
facts dovetail into one particularly intriguing fact for marketers: Tumblr users are 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
64
the most valuable e-retail click of any major platform, spending a dollar more on 
average than Facebook, the next most fruitful userbase (Sloane, 2014).
The young and educated userbase makes for a notably relaxed environment. 
Casual interactions are the norm, and quirky pop culture jokes and easy vulgarity 
can succeed here when they might fall flat or offend on Facebook. College students 
are commonly encountered, with both the passion and social awareness that entails. 
Tumblr is somewhat famous (or infamous) for having a liberal and socially aware 
outlook. Companies with socially responsible practices may find a natural, enthu-
siastic fit with Tumblr’s userbase. Conversely, less socially responsible companies 
attempting to capitalize on these attractive consumers have met with outright hostility 
and sabotage. At this point, the chapter moves to examples from specific accounts, 
both with major case studies and shorter discussions. Popular non-corporate Tum-
blrs are also discussed to identify some best practices that companies could adopt.
MARKETING CASE STUDIES ON TUMBLR
With such a flexible platform that has received relatively little formal marketing 
attention, it is difficult to give hard and fast rules for success. A method useful for 
finding appropriate strategies for the Tumblr consumer base is to critically examine 
success stories, as well as discuss where weaker accounts have made missteps. In 
this section, the chapter looks first at two popular accounts that make intelligent 
decisions for their brand and for the platform’s users: Denny’s and Taylor Swift. The 
accounts are examined with an eye toward brand strategy and consumer relationship 
management. Following this, another account—Nordstrom—is examined in depth 
to discuss its missteps, and how it and other marketers could correct these common 
Tumblr mistakes. Other accounts and advertising campaigns are also discussed as 
appropriate.
Before focusing on specific accounts, a few more key points about Tumblr’s 
consumer base are raised. So far, this chapter has discussed facts and figures about 
the consumer base. Tumblr is like most social networks in that certain cultural and 
behavioral trends dominate. Pinterest is famous for its craft-focused, feminine, and 
social behaviors; Snapchat for extreme youth, humor, and a lack of pretension. 
Tumblr, too, has dominant trends. As one might expect on such a flexible platform 
with visual posts, there are many creative users and creative companies. Disney 
Pixar (http://disneypixar.tumblr.com), for example, typically makes one graphic-
intensive post per day, which gets anywhere from several hundred to several thousand 
“likes” or “reblogs.” It’s also a politically aware and progressive site, where posts 
about environmentalism, feminism, or Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaign all 
find easy traction.

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
65
However, these same playful, progressive, and curious customers reject some 
traditional marketing efforts with a vehemence seldom seen on other platforms. Nike 
recently ran a paid campaign on Tumblr with a slogan that would not have looked 
out of place on Facebook or Instagram posts. It encouraged readers to “embrace 
their uncomfort zone” and push themselves to greater athletic performance, rather 
than stay with what is comfortable and easy. Tumblr users reacted negatively to the 
new presence on their dashboard. One notable reaction (see Figure 1) overlaid the 
advertisement onto photography of workers in one of Nike’s factories. This was an 
“uncomfort zone” for Nike, indeed. The ad campaign soon ended.
Jumpy, gory horror movie ads are criticized for sparking some users’ anxiety 
disorders without any option to hide the post. Cover Girl earned hostility for the 
wording of a promotional post that was perceived to favor lighter eyes over brown, 
with associated cries of racism. And Nike again made a misstep with a recent ani-
mated GIF post that suggested women should “earn” the right to a relaxing bath by 
first sweating over exercise. Poorer attempts at Tumblr marketing don’t always fail 
so dramatically, but they often share common themes: they are more traditional paid 
messages poorly suited for iconoclastic millennial and post-millennial consumers. 
They rely on stereotypes that progressive consumers reject, or they are offered by 
companies that those consumers would never embrace. There are trends to success 
on Tumblr as well, though.
Figure 1. Nike’s attempt to advertise to Tumblr users failed, as demonstrated by 
one post that overlaid their paid message on a picture taken at a Nike factory. As 
of October 2015, this post had more than 150,000 likes or reblogs

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
66
Denny’s
Denny’s (http://dennys.tumblr.com) is an account that truly lives up to this chapter’s 
title: it’s flat-out weird. Visiting the Denny’s Tumblr is akin to a hallucinogenic 
experience, filled with random text posts and surreal GIF animations. Someone 
familiar with Denny’s, a classic American diner known for its Grand Slam breakfast 
platters, might find this to be an unexpected decision for the brand. Yet, Tumblr is 
the showcase of Denny’s current social media strategy. They are perhaps the only 
corporation in America that links to Tumblr before Twitter, Instagram, or even 
Facebook from their homepage (http://www.dennys.com). Their Tumblr may also be 
visited by using a URL related to their homepage (http://blog.dennys.com), implying 
that it should be viewed as part of their overall corporate website.
Denny’s is in the middle of a rebranding and repositioning effort, part of which 
focuses on attracting more millennial customers. These efforts have been successful, 
resulting in their biggest sales jump in more than a decade and stock price growth 
that outpaces the general restaurant market by more than five hundred percent 
(Giammona, 2015). The cited article, however, demonstrates the blinders that many 
practitioners have toward Tumblr as a platform. When examining Denny’s modern 
social media presence, Bloomberg nodded to both Twitter and a collaboration with 
College Humor, a humor website that produces original videos. Despite Tumblr 
being the first social media link on the Denny’s homepage, it went unmentioned. 
At this point a direct comparison between the performance of Denny’s Twitter and 
Tumblr accounts is warranted.
The Denny’s Twitter (http://www.twitter.com/dennys) is also aimed squarely at 
a younger market that enjoys surrealistic humor. As seen in Figure 2, the humor is 
highly random. A specific call-out to college freshmen suggests the specific target 
audience for the social media account and demonstrates their commitment to reach-
ing millennials. By any measure, the Twitter account is successful. The displayed 
tweets were all liked and shared at least a thousand times, and even their less popular 
tweets receive a minimum of several hundred interactions from users. However, this 
does not compare to the consumer engagement on their Tumblr account.
Denny’s most popular Tumblr post for the same month was written in response 
to a structural change in how comments are displayed on the site’s dashboard. They 
made the following stream-of-consciousness complaint, echoing the sentiments of 
many site users:
what in the HECK Tumblr what is this streamlined NONSENSE with the dang com-
ments maybe we don’t want everything spick-and-span CLEAN for crying out loud 
give us some CHAOS give us a whole block of misaligned nonsensical reply conver-

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
67
sations just SHOVED into every which way in the bottom of a post just BURY US IN 
UGLY GREY LINES we yearn for bedlam, for pandemonium, for PURE BLOGGING 
MAYHEM got dang it the only thing we want streamlined is our menus you put the 
appetizers in the FRONT and the desserts in the BACK and the reblog comments 
ALL OVER THE FLIPPIN’ PLACE SHEESH or whatever it’s fine. (Denny’s, 2015c)
By the end of September, approximately 70,000 notes were left while liking or 
reblogging this near-incoherent but impassioned opinion. The next most popular 
posts—a graphical edit of a saxophone made of pancakes and series of puns about 
corn on the cob—had roughly 40,000 and 50,000 notes respectively by the end of 
the month (Denny’s, 2015a, 2015b). Tumblr posts have not been studied to the ex-
tent of Twitter posts, but they appear to have a notably longer shelf life than tweets. 
The “half-life” of a tweet (meaning the average point at which a tweet has received 
Figure 2. Three of the most popular tweets from Denny’s Twitter from the month 
of September, 2015

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
68
half the engagement it will ever get) has been found to be only 16 minutes (Rohlfs, 
2015). In contrast, Tumblr posts regularly circulate for days, weeks, months, or even 
years after their original publication. (This chapter’s author sees this happen on a 
regular basis, and in fact has made several posts which surface on occasion after 
months of inactivity to receive another few thousand notes.) In part, this longevity 
may be due to the blog structure for individual profiles, where it is easy to pull up 
posting archives by specific month or use the tagging system to browse old posts 
on any topic. It’s comparatively difficult to find older posts on platforms that rely 
on an infinitely scrolling profile page, such as Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram. If 
someone discovers Denny’s surrealistic Tumblr humor and wishes to see more, it 
is easy for them to browse the complete archives. Unlike on many other platforms, 
generating a rich cache of Tumblr content can pay long-term dividends.
This also points to another contributor to the higher engagement with Denny’s 
Tumblr. The site culture heavily supports reposting content that was original to 
another user. Even a popular user like The Frogman (http://thefrogman.me), who 
has a large enough follower base to justify branding himself with a custom domain 
and offers his own merchandise for sale, has a tag specific to his own original posts. 
Everything else posted by this popular user, who posts dozens or even hundreds of 
times per month, is being shared from someone else. Tumblr is a communal culture, 
where users collect entertaining, useful, or appealing bits from their dashboard feed 
like electronic magpies. More vitally for high-engagement companies like Denny’s, 
it is also a platform that supports the dispersal and expansion of previous conversa-
tions when this sharing occurs.
Compare this to Facebook. If a user sees a news story or video posted by another 
Facebook user and shares it to his/her own account, any new comments are unique to 
that sharing. A post by CNN’s official account may receive hundreds or thousands 
of comments, but those conversations do not persist away from CNN’s post on its 
own page. Similarly, when a pin is re-pinned on Pinterest, a new comment string 
begins on that new account. Re-tweeting a tweet will show any replies when the 
tweet is expanded, but they are hidden by default.
Tumblr’s software is different. If Tumblr user A leaves a comment on a post, and 
Tumblr user B reblogs it from them, then user A’s comment follows along as part 
of the post content. Another user could eventually reblog this expanded post and 
leave their own input added to the bottom of the current discussion, even if they do 
not follow user A and have never interacted with them. Asynchronous, public, and 
dispersed conversations are a core part of Tumblr culture and the site’s code. This 
allows Denny’s to not only engage with their customers, but for their engagement 
to be highly visible to other users. One need not visit the Denny’s Tumblr to see the 
conversations being held there, or to become aware that Denny’s is an approach-

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
69
able and entertaining Tumblr personality. Another popular September post began 
with Denny’s asking its followers one question: “truth or dare?” Users made their 
decision when they reblogged the post, and Denny’s then reblogged their answer 
with a new reply.
As the Tumblr platform is largely unstudied, these behaviors have seldom been 
described in formal theoretical language. Borgatti and Foster (2003) proposed an 
early framework for social media research that specified four key technical axes on 
which to examine a network’s structure. One of these areas was Contagion, or how 
content spreads through a network. The examples above demonstrate how Tumblr’s 
particular software coding promotes organic and unstructured content sharing and 
reuse. Posts may change markedly from their original forms, and with multiple 
branching versions. With a basic understanding of Tumblr’s unique technical fea-
tures, companies must be prepared to be nimble and reactive on it relative to their 
marketing plans on other networks.
Building on Borgatti and Foster’s work, Kane et al. (2014) described a dual-
directional effect of the technical features of each social network. In one direction, 
a platform selection effect induces social homogeneity. (For a simple clarifying 
example, visually oriented users will presumably be more drawn to Instagram 
than to Twitter.) In the other direction, however, individual variation occurs based 
on how users chose to utilize a platform’s capabilities. (To continue the example: 
among the visually oriented Instagram userbase, there will be those who prefer to 
post exclusively videos, those who post exclusively still photographs, and those 
who post a mixture of both.)
As discussed in the introduction, Tumblr has the greatest amount of technical 
flexibility of any major social media platform. Under the Kane et al. framework, 
there will be the greatest amount of user behavior variation, thanks to this relatively 
Figure 3. Denny’s engages their customers with a game of Truth or Dare

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
70
complicated range of post options. Recalling the earlier discussion of choice over-
load, this may all seem intimidating to marketers, and perhaps more trouble than it 
is worth. Recall another earlier point, however: under the Majchrzak (2009) view, 
this also allows for more creativity for innovative marketers who take the time to 
understand the software and the individuals who are drawn to this flexible outlet. 
Denny’s has demonstrated that it is possible to harness the flexibility of how content 
spreads on Tumblr, and flourish among the platform’s highly heterogeneous user 
behavior rather than becoming overwhelmed.
Denny’s also lives up to the other half of this chapter’s title: they’re honest. In 
this case, honesty equals a sense that the person behind the account uses Tumblr 
on a regular basis and is familiar with its cultural norms. Their posts often display 
a keen awareness of discussions that are being held on the site, such as the quoted 
example of their outrage over the change in comment structure. They act like a loyal 
user of the site, and that act is believable. Their surrealistic humor is also consistent 
in tone and appearance, giving the impression that this truly is who they are. Al-
though the odd tone may have been a hard sell in the account’s early days, by this 
point, Tumblr knows who the Denny’s account is and accepts it whole-heartedly. 
It’s weird, and it’s honest.
Denny’s clearly recognizes the importance of Tumblr to their social media strat-
egy, given the link’s prominence on their home page. They are an early, surrealistic 
pioneer in a largely untouched landscape. Tumblr offers them unique posting oppor-
tunities and levels of engagement that cannot be duplicated on any other platform, 
and they have used it to see more intense and sustained consumer reactions than 
they receive on the larger Twitter platform.
Taylor Swift
Marketing not aimed at selling traditional goods and services is well suited for 
Tumblr. Causes and charities may find willing audiences in the young, socially 
aware userbase. A variety of media styles provide a variety of potential ways to get 
users engaged and excited for specific events. Perhaps the type of non-company 
marketing that is best suited for Tumblr, however, is for individuals.
Both celebrities and politicians have made good use of Tumblr. In the time sur-
rounding Barack Obama’s 2012 re-election campaign, a Tumblr account (http://
barackobama.tumblr.com) was set up to alert users to campaign news, give them 
glimpses into the campaign process, and humanize the candidate. The author Neil 
Gaiman (http://neil-gaiman.tumblr.com) uses his account to share his work, related 
inspirations, and anything that he finds personally interesting, inspirational, or 
amusing. He also responds frequently to messages from individual users (known 
as “asks” on Tumblr, due to the default page URL for the messaging system). Fans 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
71
may get in touch directly with an author they love to ask for insight on his novels 
(Gaiman, 2015a) or on broader questions of e-publishing payments (Gaiman, 2015b).
Due to the general lack of nuance in relationship labels on social networks, a 
social flattening effect occurs. Depending on the vocabulary chosen by a platform, 
everyone followed becomes elevated to the status of “friend,” is a professionally 
distant “connection,” and so on. Everyone sharing the same social label becomes 
homogenized into also holding the same social status and perceived social distance 
(Gilbert and Karahalios 2009; Kane et al. 2014). Because of this, social media is 
well suited for humanizing brands. Such branding efforts for individuals can make 
them especially open. They are, after all, someone “friended” or “followed” like 
any other user.
The singer Taylor Swift is a particularly popular Tumblr celebrity, and an excellent 
demonstration of best practices for the platform. Ms. Swift—or “Taylor,” as seems 
more appropriate for her deliberately approachable brand image—has a strong pres-
ence on many social networks. Her Twitter (http://www.twitter.com/taylorswift13) 
has over sixty-five million followers; her Instagram (http://www.instagram.com/
taylorswift), over fifty-two million. Visiting her Instagram showcases a pop star at 
the top of her game, in the midst of a global tour paired with one of the most suc-
cessful pop albums in recent music history. Instagram posts in late 2015 are largely 
of scenes from the 1989 tour, whether on-stage or backstage, teasers for media ap-
pearances such as her cover of GQ magazine, or glimpses into Taylor’s personal life 
with photos of pets and interior design decisions. Her Instagram’s popularity befits 
her stardom, with posts typically earning a million likes and thousands of comments.
Tumblr allows for a more personal touch with her communication with fans. With 
the Denny’s example, there was a clear winner in consumer engagement between their 
Twitter and their Tumblr. Denny’s Tumblr had bigger numbers, more conversations, 
and a broader variety of engagement styles. Analyzing Taylor’s portfolio, however, 
does not reveal one clear star above all the others. Rather, Taylor’s Tumblr serves 
as a complement to the other parts of the social portfolio. In this, it is likely a closer 
example to what many companies would experience if they did properly develop 
their own Tumblr account: smaller raw numbers, but with greater engagement.
Borgatti and Foster’s (2003) Contagion analysis method is once again relevant. 
The flow of information on the platforms is the key difference between these accounts 
and how they can be used to market her individual brand. Personal communication 
on Instagram generally equates to leaving a comment on someone else’s post, wait-
ing to see if they reply on that post, and perhaps leaving another comment. Taylor’s 
Tumblr (http://taylorswift.tumblr.com) gets nowhere near the volume of engagement 
of her Instagram. Tumblr posts typically get engagement numbers in the thousands 
or tens of thousands, not over a million. However, the depth of that engagement dif-
fers. When a “like” shows up on Instagram, it is a quick user engagement that only 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
72
requires a finger tap. Comments stay on Taylor’s own photos, rather than following 
users to their own accounts. The much smaller engagement numbers on Taylor’s 
Tumblr do include people who simply liked a post, but they also include all users 
who like a post so much that they chose to reblog it, adding it to their own blog’s 
content in front of all their followers.
Tumblr is perfectly suited for generating electronic word-of-mouth among young 
consumers. One’s preferences become aggressively public, shared to every follower’s 
individual dashboard. In a site culture that thrives on the sharing of existing content, 
seeing one’s friends repeatedly reblog content from Taylor Swift’s Tumblr is a con-
stant reminder that she is popular in those social circles. On Instagram, following 
someone who is a Taylor Swift fan means that they might occasionally post pictures 
of themselves captioned with her songs’ lyrics, or that they will post pictures of 
themselves going to their local 1989 tour concert. On Tumblr, following someone 
who is a Taylor Swift fan means that they will share Taylor’s own personal content 
with you on a regular basis.
Her strategy also utilizes how reblogging a post shares not only its content, but 
also all captions added by the previous reblogging chain. Taylor will leave a reply 
to some fan, and this reply is then shared across thousands of other accounts and 
all the users who subsequently reblog from them. She has reblogged fans’ photos 
of themselves to leave encouraging comments, or even made herself into the gentle 
punch line for a joke. Her fans not only respond positively to this, but happily share 
her interactions with everyone who follows them. Although many sites are designed 
to make content go viral with shares and retweets, no other site is as well designed 
to make ongoing strings of interaction go viral, too.
Despite being a global superstar, Taylor’s personal brand image is that of a 
quirky, approachable twenty-something who is as likely to stay in with her cats and 
browse Tumblr as to headline an arena concert. She often posts gentle disparage-
ment of herself, appearing closer to her everyday fans in the process. Her single 
best Tumblr practice is to reblog posts originally made by her fans, cultivating a 
sense that she is practically a friend to any fans on the platform. One user directed 
a post to Taylor (using a notification system when an account name is used in a 
post) asking what she should name a pet pig, and Taylor reblogged the post to offer 
her a list of suggestions (Swift, 2015a). Another user posted that she had gotten 
the financial aid she needed to attend college and Taylor reblogged the post to add 
effusive encouragement:
FELICIA I AM SO PROUD OF YOU!!!!!!
This is why I love coming on here, reading an update on your life and getting tears 
in my eyes and feeling like sometimes hard work pays off and good things happen 
to good people.

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
73
This is so amazing, babe. (Swift, 2015b)
With respect to the current literature, her account reflects an interesting conflu-
ence between consumer-generated content and firm-generated content. Consumer-
generated content on social networks is better studied (Kumar et al., 2016). Among 
other effects, it has been found to indicate product quality (Tirunillai and Tellis, 
2014) and to more generally serve as positive word-of-mouth (Godes, 2011). Content 
generated by firms may be successfully used as part of an equity-building effort 
(Gensler et al., 2013). Corporate content posted on social media, if implemented 
well, can have a notably positive effect on consumers’ receptivity toward a particular 
brand (Kumar et al., 2016). Through the ability to reblog user-generated content 
and add her own content to these existing posts, Taylor Swift presents both of these 
content types in her own account.
Taylor Swift has perfectly capitalized on Tumblr’s unique software features to 
promote consumer engagement and fierce loyalty. Though she has more fans on 
Instagram and Twitter, Tumblr allows her to present herself as a friend to the users 
on Tumblr. She’s pushed engagement one step beyond Denny’s, where she not only 
posts her own content, but also regularly seeks out original content from other users 
to share with all her followers. Her image is gently quirky, if nothing to compare 
to Denny’s bizarre account, but Taylor Swift’s brand image on Tumblr is as honest 
as one could hope for. She is accessible, relatable, friendly, and open to the people 
buying her albums and concert tickets.
Users who once mocked Taylor’s breakup-centered lyrics now defend her, and 
a diner chain is cultivating a whole new generation of fans. In both cases these suc-
cessful marketing strategies were open and honest, avoided hard selling and blatant 
advertising, and recognized both the technical and offbeat cultural aspects of the site. 
Innovative startups and small companies have found traction on Tumblr, as well, 
when users became interested in the product itself without any further marketing 
effort. Liftware, a company that adapted camera stabilization technology to make 
utensils for people with Parkinson’s disease, had hundreds of thousands of reblogs 
about what users saw as a valuable, interesting, and compassionate new product. 
(Liftware has since been acquired by Google, and the demo model Tumblr was 
excited about is now in active production.) The Liftware post was straightforward, 
socially aware, and used the multimedia capabilities of the site to make its benefits 
apparent. It appeared honest as it appealed to the user base, as did Taylor Swift and, 
in its own surrealistic way, Denny’s.

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
74
Nordstrom
Not all companies on Tumblr have figured out how to utilize the site properly. The 
luxury retailer Nordstrom is a well-viewed company, with long-term trends placing 
it among the most beloved retail chains world-wide (Mannes, 2012). Nordstrom’s 
home page links to many of their social media accounts. The typical presences of 
Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, YouTube, and Instagram are all featured. So is their 
account on Wanelo (Want, Need, Love), a specialty social media platform centered 
on shopping activities. They do not, however, even link to their underperforming 
Tumblr account.
Nordstrom seems ideally suited to match up with Tumblr as a marketing platform. 
Tumblr users have a high household income, and Nordstrom is an upscale retailer. 
Tumblr provides for valuable e-retail clicks, and Nordstrom has a large online 
storefront. Tumblr rewards engagement and personal connections, and Nordstrom 
is famous for its personal touch and service levels. Tumblr applauds socially re-
sponsible companies, and Nordstrom has its own program for socially responsible 
actions (Nordstrom Cares). It receives popular word-of-mouth from Tumblr users 
themselves around Thanksgiving, as it’s pointed to as a company that doesn’t require 
its workers to come in on the holiday and should thus be rewarded with shopping 
dollars. Yet, its account flounders.
Examining Nordstrom’s account (http://nordstrom.tumblr.com) gives some indi-
cations as to why they have not succeeded on the platform. From a strategic side, its 
mission is unclear. In some posts they showcase their products in traditional glamour 
shots; in others, they show behind-the-scenes shots from fashion shows; in others, 
they have seemingly random imagery to entice people to shop at a sale or enjoy 
life in a big city. A sense of randomness works for the Denny’s Tumblr, as there is 
a consistent visual identity and surrealistic sense of humor as one scrolls down the 
page there. The jokes are random, but not the strategy. Nordstrom lacks this con-
sistency. Many posts appear divorced from those around them. Stylized, graphical 
ads similar to a Target commercial sit next to traditional runway shows. About the 
only connecting thread on the page is “these products are sold at Nordstrom,” and 
some posts don’t even include that.
Perhaps even more damningly, the graphics are not up to the standards of the 
site’s users. GIF files can currently be uploaded at a maximum of 2 megabytes on 
the Tumblr platform. For large-scale images like Nordstrom favors, that means that 
the animation cycles are short and choppy. Many of their GIFs attempt to play with 
this as a stop-motion effect, but the short loops make for a disorienting viewing ses-
sion. They also fail to show off movement in the clothes they are attempting to sell.
Some posts actually actively hinder efforts to examine the products. A recent post 
showcasing a dress from an Ann Demeulemeester runway show at Paris Fashion Week 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
75
used an animated GIF to do so (Nordstrom, 2015). The GIF is very large and lasts 
less than a second. In that time it flashes back and forth between a close-up of the 
front of the gown and a more distant view as the model walks away. It’s impossible 
to get a good look at any part of the dress in that time. Only 256 colors can be used 
in a GIF, which causes a stippled corrective effect known as “dithering” on images 
that cover a wide spectrum of hues and values (such as the Demeulemeester dress). 
In two weeks, the post received 9 likes and only three reblogs. It was not content 
that people responded to positively, and did not want to post to their own blog.
Nordstrom’s failings with their Tumblr account raise two different versions of 
the most common challenge with using the platform: with so much flexibility, it’s 
hard to know what to do. The first challenge has to do with the types of posts used. 
They have made two major decisions that help to narrow their focus here, so choice 
overload is less damaging on this point. One: all posts involve pictures, rather than 
being links, text, or public answers to customer questions. Two: all posts are original 
to them, rather than being reblogs. Both of these decisions are different than what 
is seen with the positive examples of Taylor Swift and Denny’s, who reblog other 
users’ content or answer questions they pose. This may suggest that the ultimate 
goal of a popular Tumblr is variety and direct user engagement.
However, a look at other Tumblr blogs suggests that it is perfectly possible to 
succeed with only original photo posts. Tumblr users are well primed to respond to 
beautiful images, including fashion photography. A fan-run fashion blog (Fashion 
Runways, http://fashion-runways.tumblr.com) is used for contrast. A post of close-
up images of accessories from a Dolce & Gabbana show, made just one day before 
Nordstrom’s Demeulemeester post, has nearly 5,000 notes in a similar time (Fashion 
Runways, 2015a). Dolce & Gabbana is sold at Nordstrom. The “Featured Brands” 
listed on Nordstrom’s online storefront include Givenchy, Chloé, Christian Louboutin, 
Fendi, Saint Laurent, and Valentino. The same Fashion Runways blog has a tagged 
category for posts about Valentino. All posts received at least a hundred notes. Many 
received several thousand. A few star performers passed one hundred thousand likes 
and reblogs from the fashion lovers of Tumblr (Fashion Runways, 2015b).
This contrast points to the core of Nordstrom’s choice overload issue. Look-
ing at their blog gives the impression of seeing many different companies’ visual 
strategies on Tumblr, and going for a grab bag version of those efforts. To use the 
comparison from earlier in the chapter, the Nordstrom account is an overflowing 
toy chest. Even though they’ve put limits on the types of content, the style of that 
content lacks unity. The creative, malleable Tumblr culture supports random humor, 
stop-motion animation, still photography, strong graphic design, and many other 
kinds of content. Using all of those at once, though, cultivates an image that is less 
“weird” than “confused.” A luxury retailer may not even wish to aim for a weird 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
76
image, but one gets the feeling looking at the Nordstrom account that they feel it’s 
(painfully) mandatory for Tumblr.
This chapter argues that “weird” is one way to succeed on Tumblr. However, 
one must also be honest. Nordstrom’s Tumblr does not align with its existing brand 
image, as does Taylor Swift’s Tumblr. Nor does its scattershot approach suggest one 
clear and honest (if unexpected) voice, like Denny’s. Instead, it gives the impres-
sion of seeing a parent trying and failing to use various slang terms favored by their 
teenage children. “Weird” can certainly be an avenue to success on this platform, 
but it is not necessary. Simple commitment to an open, honest brand presentation 
can be strong, as well.
Nordstrom did not use a variety of post types to engage their readers, such as 
answering customer service questions directly or reblogging posts of successful 
shopping trips. (Although, these approaches could certainly be tried.) While Taylor 
Swift and Denny’s suggest this type of interaction as a major contributor to suc-
cessful consumer engagement, Fashion Runways’ success counters the idea that it 
is absolutely necessary. Their reader engagement indicates that Nordstrom could 
see much better success with strong, confident presentations of their merchandise 
in ways customers would enjoy seeing. Aspirational high-end luxury, collections 
of tortoiseshell accessories, or dream rooms are all plausible photosets they could 
make while staying true to their brand and aligning well with more fashionable 
Tumblr users’ interests.
A competitor in the fashion market, Gap (http://gap.tumblr.com), paid to have a 
simple, static post occasionally appear on users’ dashboards. It contains two images: 
the elements of a man’s outfit, and then a man wearing that same outfit (Gap, 2015). 
Though few Internet users would say they actually like advertising, the Gap’s pro-
motional post has been liked or reblogged more than thirty-five thousand times by 
fans of the look. The post is clean, classic, all-American, and slightly urban: all the 
markers of the Gap’s brand. The photographs aren’t exciting, but they’re attractive. 
This ad isn’t weird in the slightest, but it’s entirely honest. (And, unlike Nike’s simple 
paid slogans with no accompanying content, users didn’t feel as if their dashboards 
had been seized by the Gap.) Nordstrom’s first step on Tumblr should be to achieve 
a similar level of honesty. Weirdness, if they still wish to pursue it, can come later.
A final comparison further addresses Nordstrom’s challenges with finding ap-
propriate, Tumblr-specific content. As discussed, Denny’s and Taylor Swift found 
success on Tumblr by regularly engaging with the users in innovative ways. For 
some marketers, these particular paths to success may be used as a template if they 
wish to truly commit to reaching the attractive Tumblr audience. However, many 
marketers may be unwilling to invest this effort into their Tumblr account when 
they have more confidence in other social media platforms, using more traditional 
marketing approaches. Denny’s and Taylor are good models for committed Tum-

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
77
blrs, but for novices, the equivalent of training wheels can help avoid Nordstorm’s 
creative missteps.
Content need not be original to the Tumblr platform. Even Taylor Swift’s account 
regularly cross-posts content from other sources. The same shot of her onstage at a 
concert is likely to appear on Twitter, Instagram, and Tumblr. Beginning this way, 
with inherently appealing posts that users would actually want to engage with, can 
serve as a gentle introduction to the site and slowly build a follower base with little 
additional effort over existing social media marketing strategies. It’s not innovative 
or highly engaging, but it’s a reasonable first step for learning to use a platform 
outside of one’s comfort zone (while avoiding the pitfalls of Nike’s un-comfort 
zone). Once a marketer sees which sort of posts gain traction on Tumblr, they can 
begin to strategically customize their approach there without feeling overwhelmed 
by the site’s flexibility.
An example: the Corcoran Group, a New York City-based luxury real estate 
company that also handles listings in the Hamptons and south Florida, has an estab-
lished Facebook page (http://www.facebook.com/thecorcorangroup). Approximately 
125,000 users have liked the page and see their updates on Corcoran’s listings, the 
real estate market, and New York City. Despite Facebook’s much larger userbase than 
Tumblr, Corcoran’s 10 A.M. Special Tumblr (http://thecorcorangroup10amspecial.
tumblr.com) sees generally higher engagement with users. On Facebook, Corcoran 
seeks out interesting articles to share, produces original content featuring a pair of 
French bulldogs, and links to current real estate listings. On Tumblr, they simply 
take existing real estate photos of one beautiful luxury house and upload them as a 
photoset with a short caption. The Facebook dog posts are the most popular (with 
several dozen to several hundred likes), but as original content, also the most time-
intensive. The Tumblr photosets, on the other hand, regularly get several dozen 
likes and often reach triple-digit engagement numbers with no expended effort but 
moving the photos off their real estate website and onto social media. Non-dog 
Facebook posts come nowhere near the Tumblr engagement numbers, and are often 
not shared at all.
DISUSSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
There is no replacement for experience, and relatively few marketers have experi-
ence with Tumblr. A slow and steady approach that does not rely on original content 
creation can serve as an initial entry to the site, as well as staying true to a company’s 
existing brand image. (In other words, staying honest.) Corcoran expends much less 
effort to run their Tumblr than Nordstrom’s surrealistic or animated efforts, but 
gets better engagement numbers. Fashion Runways, which simply reposts existing 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
78
fashion photography, also gets better engagement numbers than Nordstrom. These 
unpaid fashion fans have developed a more consistent and popular Tumblr presence 
than a major retailer.
Accordingly, the first step toward Tumblr success is to determine how to remain 
honest to one’s brand in a site that makes it easy to do anything. If marketers translate 
their existing content onto Tumblr, the likelihood of a confused (and confusing) 
account drops significantly. Later, once Tumblr becomes a regular update alongside 
more traditional platforms, the companies running those accounts may feel more 
confident about engaging with users, expanding their post types, or even generating 
content entirely original to Tumblr. The risks of choice overload are averted, while 
still receiving the benefits of choice.
Just as Tumblr is underutilized by marketers compared to many other social 
media platforms, it is understudied by academics. Earlier, it was mentioned that the 
lifespan of tweets has been identified as being quite short. Although general trends 
on Tumblr are indicative of much longer engagement periods per post, there is a 
lack of similar data-driven research on the platform. Practitioners and academics 
alike would benefit from an understanding of how Tumblr’s synthesis of blogging 
organizational structure with social media sharing capabilities affects post lifespan.
Tumblr’s tagging system has differences from other sites’ hashtags. On Twitter, 
Facebook, Tumblr, or Instagram, fans of the band One Direction all might check 
the tag “#1d” to see what others have posted about them. However, Tumblr’s tags 
can also be longer than on other sites, and include spaces and most punctuation. 
This allows for richer and more flexible communications for people interested in a 
topic, as they are able to use longer and more complex hashtags to talk with similarly 
interested users. The construction and use of these longer hashtags is essentially 
unstudied, as is their use in tagging content for others’ use versus when tags are 
used only to organize content on one’s own blog.
As noted, earlier comments are carried along in reblogs in perpetuity. This feature, 
unique to Tumblr, has the potential to generate several fundamentally different ver-
sions of a post that then get their own reblog chains with ever-growing conversations. 
Consider a hypothetical photoset posted by Fashion Runways, in which one popular 
reblog chain is given an aesthetics-driven focus with a top-level comment of “This 
was my favorite runway show of the season. Such innovative construction.” Another 
early commenter, however, reblogs the post with a discussion of how the company 
used African textile inspirations in their collection, but did not source materials from 
any African companies nor use any non-white models. Future discussions under 
this particular reblog chain would likely follow with a focus on social justice. From 
the perspective of the site owners, their original post with a straightforward fashion 
photoset is getting more engagement (likes and reblogs) no matter which version is 

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
79
seen. This poses obvious questions about the process of electronic word-of-mouth 
on the site, or even about broader questions of communication processes.
Lastly, more research is warranted on Tumblr users themselves. They pose many 
intriguing contradictions: young, but giving the most valuable retail clicks, Creative 
and progressive, yet often sharing others’ content instead of their own, able to run 
many different blogs (with no visible connection) under one account, offering the 
chance for multiple interests or even identities to flourish under a single login. 
Tumblr’s unique culture has served as a wall to many marketers. It’s also kept many 
academics off Tumblr, choosing instead to focus on the more mainstream platforms. 
The research possibilities for Tumblr, whether more theory or practice-driven, are 
therefore numerous.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter’s title, honesty was named as the first way to promote customer loyalty 
and engagement. It appears to be a nonnegotiable point, but there are many different 
ways to be “honest” on the platform. Like the Gap, one may simply showcase one’s 
products in beautiful ways without doing a hard sell on other brand attributes, with 
a strategy of reaching out to users who would enjoy sharing that appealing content. 
Like Taylor Swift, one may regularly interact with users and remove perceived bar-
riers to create a feeling of approachability and friendship. Or, like Denny’s, one may 
construct an entirely new and different brand image for the platform, but absolutely 
maintain a sense of clarity and consistency for that new voice.
Weirdness is optional, and not something that must be pursued if it’s a poor fit 
with a company like Nordstrom. Though weirdness is not mandatory, it’s still a pos-
sibility. Tumblr allows for companies to let their hair down, so to speak, and attempt 
new and creative marketing approaches that they would be hesitant to try elsewhere.
Brands that have found the most success on Tumblr have seldom done so via di-
rect marketing spending. Successful paid advertising, such as the Gap, has generally 
presented appealing imagery front and center to the viewer, rather than a branded 
message like Nike’s unfortunate un-comfort zone. The very top performers don’t 
operate via this route, but use organic growth based on engagement with users’ 
interests, selves, or both. They understand the platform’s culture and pursue a path 
of appealing content coupled with direct user interaction. They recognize the quirks 
and desires of this particular culture, respect that culture, and in the process gain 
loyal consumer advocates in wealthy, educated segments. They’ve stayed honest, 
and occasionally, they’ve gotten a little weird.

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
80
REFERENCES
Borgatti, S., & Foster, P. C. (2003). The Network Paradigm in Organizational 
Research: A Review and Typology. Journal of Management, 29(6), 991–1013. 
doi:10.1016/S0149-2063(03)00087-4
Cohen, D. (2015). Infographic: Explosive Active User Growth for Pinterest, Tumblr. 
Retrieved from http://www.adweek.com/socialtimes/infographic-gwi-pinterest-
tumblr/620098
Denny’s. (2015a). CORN ON THE. Retrieved from http://blog.dennys.com/
post/129381733083/corn-on-the
Denny’s. (2015b). STACKSOPHONE, BABY! Retrieved from http://blog.dennys.
com/post/128364753433/stacksophone-baby
Denny’s. (2015c). Untitled. Retrieved from http://blog.dennys.com/
post/128214110323/what-in-the-heck-tumblr-what-is-this-streamlined
Fashion Runways. (2015a). Dolce & Gabanna at Milan Fashion Week Spring 
RTW 2016 - Headwear. Retrieved from http://fashion-runways.tumblr.com/
post/130351439421/dolce-gabbana-at-milan-fashion-week-spring-rtw
Fashion Runways. (2015b). Valentino. Retrieved from http://fashion-runways.tumblr.
com/tagged/valentino
Fitzgerald, B. R. (2014). Yahoo: Tumblr to Make Over $100 Million in Revenue 
Next Year. Retrieved from http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2014/10/21/yahoo-tumblr-to-
make-over-100-million-in-revenue-next-year/
Gaiman, N. (2015a). July 5th, 2015 at 12:43 PM. Retrieved from http://neil-gaiman.
tumblr.com/post/123294903396/neil-gaiman-can-you-give-me-a-lengthy-answer-
about
Gaiman, N. (2015b). July 7th, 2015 at 8:40 PM. Retrieved from http://neil-gaiman.
tumblr.com/post/123509154296/what-are-your-thoughts-about-amazons-decision-to
Gap. (2015). New York photographer Brian Morr wears his Gap 1969 Japanese 
selvege denim for a day of exploring. Retrieved from http://gap.tumblr.com/
post/128736242093/new-york-photographer-brian-morr-wears-his-gap
Gensler, S., Völckner, F., Liu-Thompkins, Y., & Wiertz, C. (2013). Managing Brands 
in the Social Media Environment. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 27(4), 242–256. 
doi:10.1016/j.intmar.2013.09.004

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
81
Giammona, C. (2015). Denny’s Revival Provides Blueprint for McDonald’s Turn-
around. Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-06-03/
denny-s-revival-provides-blueprint-for-mcdonald-s-turnaround
Gilbert, E., & Karahalios, K. (2009). Predicting Tie Strength with Social Media.
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems.
Godes, D. (2011). Opinion Leadership and Social Contagion in New Product Dif-
fusion. Marketing Science, 30(2), 224–229. doi:10.1287/mksc.1100.0605
Hadar, L., & Sood, S. (2014). When Knowledge Is Demotivating: Subjective 
Knowledge and Choice Overload. Psychological Science, 25(9), 1739–1747. 
doi:10.1177/0956797614539165 PMID:25037963
Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (2000). When Choice is Demotivating: Can One 
Desire Too Much of a Good Thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
79(6), 995–1006. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.6.995 PMID:11138768
Kane, G. C., Alavi, M., Labianca, G., & Borgatti, S. P. (2014). What’s Different 
About Social Media Networks? A Framework and Research Agenda. Management 
Information Systems Quarterly, 38(1), 275–304.
Kiron, D., Palmer, D., Phillips, A. N., & Kruschwitz, N. (2012). Social Business: 
What Are Companies Really Doing? MIT Sloan Management Review.
Kumar, A., Bezawada, R., Rishika, R., Janakiraman, R., & Kannan, P. (2016). From 
Social to Sale: The Effects of Firm-Generated Content in Social Media on Customer 
Behavior. Journal of Marketing, 80(1), 7–25. doi:10.1509/jm.14.0249
Lowensohn, J. (2007). Tumblr: Microblogging done right. Retrieved from http://
www.cnet.com/news/tumblr-microblogging-done-right/
Luden, I. (2014). Tumblr Overtakes Instagram As Fastest-Growing Social Plat-
form, Snapchat Is The Fastest-Growing App. Retrieved from http://techcrunch.
com/2014/11/25/tumblr-overtakes-instagram-as-fastest-growing-social-platform-
snapchat-is-the-fastest-growing-app/
Majchrzak, A. (2009). Comment: Where Is the Theory in Wikis? Management 
Information Systems Quarterly, 33(1), 18–20.
Mannes, T. (2012). Nordstrom, Kohl’s among most beloved retail brands. Retrieved 
from http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/2012/may/16/poll-nordstrom-
kohls-among-most-beloved-retail-bra/

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
82
Nordstrom. (2015). Ann Demeulemeester at Paris Fashion Week. Retrieved from 
http://nordstrom.tumblr.com/post/130401742690/ann-demeulemeester-at-paris-
fashion-week-images
Rohlfs, A. (2015). The Half-Life of Social Media Posts: How to Improve Engagement 
on Twitter. Retrieved from http://www.pagemodo.com/blog/the-half-life-of-social-
media-posts-how-to-improve-engagement-on-twitter/
Sellier, A.-L., & Dahl, D. W. (2011). Focus!! Creative Success Is Enjoyed Through 
Restricted Choice. JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 48(6), 996–1007. 
doi:10.1509/jmr.10.0407
Sloane, G. (2014). Tumblr’s Top Draw as a Marketing Platform Is Its Wealthier User 
Base: Ringing up revenue for retailers. Retrieved from http://www.adweek.com/news/
technology/tumblr-s-top-draw-marketing-platform-its-wealthier-user-base-160103
Statista. (2015). Statistics and facts about Tumblr. Retrieved from http://www.
statista.com/topics/2463/tumblr/
Swift, T. (2015a). Untitled 1. Retrieved from http://taylorswift.tumblr.com/
post/125996514805/treacherousswiftie-taylorswift-im-getting-a
Swift, T. (2015b). Untitled 2. Retrieved from http://taylorswift.tumblr.com/
post/121252728745/seeyouinmywildestdreamsts-taylor-i-know-you
Tirunillai, S., & Tellis, G. J. (2012). Does Chatter Really Matter? Dynamics of User-
Generated Content and Stock Performance. Marketing Science, 31(2), 198–215. 
doi:10.1287/mksc.1110.0682
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Analytics: Software designed to track data for a site’s users, such as browsing 
time or geographical location, and present it as information useful to the site owner.
Blogging: A method for publishing online content that is dated and archived. 
This content is usually longer than typical posts on most social media platforms. 
Blogging is a process label, rather than its own platform like Facebook or Pinterest.
Choice Overload: The concept that rather that benefitting from high levels of 
choice, we become overwhelmed with so many options and instead become less 
satisfied or choose suboptimally.
Microblogging: A term for content presented in a blog-like manner, but that is 
typically shorter than posts made on traditional blogging platforms. There may be 
more of an emphasis on multimedia rather than on text.

Marketing on Tumblr Where It Helps to Be Honest (And Weird)
83
Notes: A collective term for user engagement measures on Tumblr. It refers to 
both “likes” (which do not share content to another user’s blog) and to “reblogs” 
(which do share content).
Photoset: A term used on Tumblr for a photo gallery in which all pictures are 
displayed simultaneously to the user in a sequential or mosaic-like arrangement.
Reblog: An original post on Tumblr may be reposted to other users’ blogs, where 
they may add additional comments and tags.
Sharing: Most social media networks have some capability for re-posting content 
from one user’s account to a second user’s. The name tends to be specific to each 
platform: reblogging on Tumblr, retweeting on Twitter, repinning on Pinterest, etc. 
Sharing is Facebook’s terminology and is also a general, generic descriptor for the 
process.
Tags: An organizational feature common to blogging platforms such as Tumblr 
and Wordpress. Clicking on a certain tag for a post will return all other posts made 
using that tag. They may be used to organize one’s own blog or to find content made 
by others on some topic.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch005
Chapter 5
84 
The Effect of Social 
Networks on Branding:
A Factorial Analysis Approach
ABSTRACT
The Internet is currently the largest computer network in use. Because everyone can 
use it, and join the network. The main role is that the internet allows to exchange 
information freely. Corporate communication modes jostled following the advent of 
the internet and more specifically social networking. Many victims of online busi-
ness communication crisis affecting sustainably their brand. A real challenge for 
today’s companies needs to understand the characteristics of these new media and 
to establish an effective communication strategy in order to maintain and improve 
its image among its customers. This research looks at whether social networks have 
an effect on the brand image. Several dimensions for assessing this concept will be 
identified through an empirical study.
Meriem Nouala
Sidi Bel Abbes University, Algeria
Marwa Imene Mekki
Sidi Bel Abbes University, Algeria
Abdelmadjid Ezzine
Sidi Bel Abbes University, Algeria

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
85
INTRODUCTION
Being close to customers is a major challenge for companies, even if it is intangible 
and difficult to assess, it is the result of having a large portfolio of loyal custom-
ers. More precisely, winning that loyalty requires proximity to the business and 
the brand at the same time, which is increasingly difficult to obtain in a globalized 
business world.
The main challenge for companies in the last years is to develop that emotional 
closeness as well as the virtual closeness, i.e. to move from a geographical proxim-
ity to a virtual proximity.
The evolution of Internet has enabled the creation of new communication tools 
and frameworks for companies and individuals. For example, today all companies 
have to deal with social networks, which allow them to manage their images and 
brands, increase their incomes and enrich their experience on the web market which 
offers completely new opportunities that are previously nonexistent and absent.
Creative employees present the kernel of success for the new businesses that have 
emerged after the advent of Web 2.0, by hiring: social media manager, community 
manager, web content manager, and search engine marketing specialist.
The companies developed their social media strategies by focusing on two key 
concerns. The first concern was the control of the brand presence and image in social 
media, and how to respond to the opportunities that social media presents to fans to 
impact on the brand. The second concern was how to strike an appropriate balance 
between strategies that deliver short-term revenue, and those that build longer term 
brand loyalty (Jeff, et al., 2014), also, the companies use social networks as a true 
marketing tool: it is considered as a mean of communication, sales promotion, and 
prospecting.
Today, the majority of consumers learn about products through social networks; 
the consumer feels closer to a company and a brand will often be true, but will also 
be its ambassador and presenter for other customers or potential companies and 
institutions (Adamy, 2013). The customer, in this case, will withstand the stresses of 
competitors and will defend the brand in case of an emergency or harmful rumors. 
There is therefore both a behavioral component and of course an emotional com-
ponent to the concept of brand loyalty. These attachment and proximity phenomena 
are observable for both consumer and business-to-business brands.
As an example, Apple implemented a client data base, where real “fans” are 
customers who have a thorough knowledge of Apple products and services; also, 
news and buyers are considered as strong supporters of the brand. And as initia-
tive, Steve Jobs also wished to inform the fans about the evolution of his brand, by 
launching, in June 2011, a new web site cupidtino.com a dating site dedicated to 
Apple fans. First, the customer must answer a questionnaire about Apple products 

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
86
they have before enrolling. The idea is to mark that attachment to Apple brand is 
guaranteed as the affinity between individuals.
The present chapter attempt to answer the following main question:
“Does the Social Networks have an effect on Brands Image?”
To answer this question, two assumptions were made:
•	
The presence of a brand on social networks influences the purchase decision.
•	
The brand image varies according to product groups.
To achieve this perspective, this chapter starts by reviewing the state of the art 
that defines the main features of social networks. Then, we discuss the branding and 
its characteristics. And finally, we propose our factorial analysis approach and show 
its effectiveness that measures the effect of social networks on the brand image. 
The results of these studies are presented and discussed, then, the future research 
directions are discussed in the conclusion section.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Social Networks
By the arrival of the Internet, virtual world and technologies emerged have com-
pletely changed our life style: Internet users spend more and more time behind a 
screen looking for information, follow general news, share passions, disseminating 
creations and communicate with family, friends or strangers in communities, and 
sharing the same interests (games, sports, technology, hobbies, studies, profession, 
etc.). These are the main activities that integrate digital technology, social interac-
tion, and content creation. And generally, they do these activities through social 
networks supported especially by the second version of the web (WEB 2.0).
What is Web 2.0?
Web 2.0 does not have a real definition yet. The first person who has used this new 
expression was Tim O’Reilly in 2005 (O’Reilly, 2005), making him its ‘founder’. 
O’Reilly declined to define formally what Web 2.0 is, and he was content to give 
examples of who was and what was not, at first, brainstorming with Medialive Inter-
national. Simply, Web 2.0 is intended as a new way of conceiving the Internet, which 
would not be realized by specialists but where everyone, in a spirit of cooperation, 
would participate in the establishment of an information.

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
87
Mainly, the term Web 2.0 serves to designate an evolution of the Web, a kind 
of a second generation which can leave some essential characteristics. Web 2.0 is 
initially characterized by technological developments. In version 2.0, the web be-
comes more dynamic. So the Web 2.0 applications support the creation of informal 
users’ networks, facilitating the flow of ideas and knowledge by allowing efficient 
generation, dissemination, sharing and editing/refining the content (Tsimonis & 
Dimitriadis, 2014) of information.
This means that contrast of the web at the beginning, which brought together 
static pages, Web 2.0 pages utilize programming languages that allow a developer/ 
a user to query databases or create events based on actions of users. More than that, 
the technological revolutions have advanced the characterization of the Web 2.0. 
These are intended to focus on the Internet and simplify the user experience on the 
web. This change allows the user to have a much more important role in the creation 
of content in the web pages.
Web 2.0 also corresponds to a change of use: users interact and participate in 
creating content on the Internet by a joint construction of information over the social 
web (Ben Farhat, 2014).
What is Social Media?
Dupin defined social media as “All online platforms creating a social interaction 
between different users around digital content (photos, text, and video) and to vary-
ing degrees of affinity. They are the center of attention, their audience is growing, 
and they have a craze louder from businesses or institutions that they represent a 
turning point in the dissemination of information and answer new mechanisms of 
marketing and communications” (Dupin, 2010).
Andreas Kaplan and Michael Haenlein, two professors from ESCP Europe de-
fined social media as: “A group of online applications that rely on the ideology and 
the technology of Web 2.0 and allows creating and sharing the generated content 
of users” (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010).
For Frédéric Cavazza, the French specialist in social media, he considered social 
media as “a set of services for developing conversations and social interactions 
on the internet or on the mobility situations” (Cavazza, 2009). So social media is 
a term commonly given to the Internet and mobile-based channels and tools that 
allow users to interact with each other and share opinions and content (Abaidi et 
al.,2013) As the name implies, social media involves the building of communities 
or networks and encouraging participation and engagement.

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
88
What is Social Network?
The term “social network” appeared for the first time in 1954, employed by John 
A. Barnes, the British anthropologist.
A social network is a group of individuals or social organizations linked by social 
interactions. In recent years, the Internet brings another dimension to the “social 
networking”, and defines it more as a community of individuals and organizations 
connected through new communication technologies according to their interests 
(music, cinema, etc.) or professional life.
Further, Boyd and Ellison (Boyd & Ellison, 2007) define social network sites 
as “web-based services that allow individuals to:
1. 	
Construct a public or semi-public profile within a bounded system,
2. 	
Articulate a list of other users with whom they share a connection, and
3. 	
View and traverse their list of connections and those made by others within 
the system”.
As part of a marketing approach, the term “social networks” generally refers 
to all websites that build up a network of friends or professional knowledge and 
providing their members with tools and interaction interfaces, presentation, and 
communication. The best known social networks are Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, 
Viadeo, and YouTube that can also be viewed partially as a social network to the 
extent that the service has developed tools of interaction between its members. 
Especially, the rating success of the main social networks has made marketing and 
advertising media more attractive
The online social network is characterized by a matchmaking website where 
members qualify and advise one or more facets of their personality in order to 
make contact with other people who have similar or complementary profiles. The 
social network also allows a user to edit multiple content types (private or public 
messages, comments, opinions, photos, videos, hyperlinks to websites, articles, and 
games) and exchange them with other members of the same or different network.
The advent of Web 2.0 makes social networks considered as essential communi-
cation tools for businesses at all levels of the famous purchase funnel: the promotion 
of new products in search of new customers through the customer loyalty or simply 
gain notoriety. Social networks have also become essential elements for human 
resources and recruitment strategies or for seeking new business partnerships.
On the media side, social networks are also fully integrated within the editorial 
strategies. Most of them, whether on TV, the press or radio, have developed their 
network through existing social networks or creating within their website a dedicated 
space for their hearing. Similarly, thanks to Web 2.0, media websites make avail-

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
89
able to their audience the tools to facilitate the publication and distribution of their 
content to the community of their readers (RSS feeds, Twitter son, like button, etc.).
Finally, social networks are now involved in all spheres of social life. The world 
of politics is strongly affected by this phenomenon. The use of social networks has 
punctuated the US presidential campaign in 2008 to recruit new voters or raise funds. 
Political life is happening as much in the virtual sphere (social networks, blogs, and 
microblogging platforms) than in the real economy.
Difference Between Social Media and Social Network
We use everyday terms of media and social networks, and we tend to believe that 
this is more or less the same. Indeed, social media includes social networks, blogs, 
forums and platforms questions, and answers. In other words, social networks are 
only part of social media.
The advent of the internet technology, particularly its implications for real-time 
interaction and marketplace crowding, has, however, made branding more complex 
and dynamic (Ibeh et al, 2005) . The term “e-branding” generally refers to a logical 
marketing or advertising campaign that seeks to position a brand in the consumer’s 
mind and mainly, it includes the cover-branding naming (the choice of name to 
promote), hosting, references, deployment or the actual branding on the network.
The naming: The charters naming and addressing are used by the IT departments 
of companies or organizations to codify and assigning email addresses to the em-
ployees and the other Internet users. Some providers are recessing and identifying 
corporate naming charters to be able to reconstruct an unknown email address from 
the name, first name, and the company.
The accommodation (accommodation of a site on a server): To allow Internet 
users were accessing a site easily, it should be posted on specific computers called 
“servers.” These servers will store documents for publication on the web and allow 
users to access it, and it is called a server because it hosts the website and its contents.
To visit the site, a particular computer, so-called “client”, establishes communi-
cation and ensure security with the server for which information will be exchanged 
between them. Flowing information from the server to client, and vice versa, this 
communication occupies a certain amount of bandwidth when more clients are 
connected to the server. A problem may arise in case of several computers access 
simultaneously to a server. In this case, if the bandwidth requirement is beyond the 
capabilities of the server, some visitors cannot get access to the site. That is why it 
is important to know the characteristics of the hosting offer (what are the limits) and 
choose depending on the objectives, in terms of visitors, the site, and its features.
Referencing: The term “referencing” when interacting with a website, has several 
definitions:

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
90
1. 	
It may be the registration of the website in search engines and directories (= 
index) which therefore will be the “reference” in their results pages.
2. 	
The referencing also corresponds to the set of actions and techniques to improve 
the position of the website in the search results (= positioning) and maximize 
visibility.
The referencing is a process to rise the visibility of a website on search engine 
(Andrieu, 2008), generate traffic to the website and influence the number of visi-
tors. They are classified as follows:
1. 	
The Natural Referencing: Also called organic referencing, includes all the 
techniques to optimize the positioning of a website in search engine results. All 
these methods are found under the acronym SEO (Search Engine Optimization). 
In SEO, we mention natural links (or organic) that are to say from the heart of 
links engine (provided by the relevancy algorithm) without the intervention 
of a commercial or monetary system.
2. 	
Paid Referencing or Paid Search: Also called SEO sponsored, organic or 
not, refers to all actions to position your website in Google top by buying 
sponsored links. These methods are found under the term SEA, Search Engine 
Advertising. This is all in place commercial advertisements on search engines 
with mainly commercial SEO Google Adwords.
3. 	
International Referencing or International SEO: In the case of a foreign 
website, if you want a proper position on the international market, you will 
work internationally the referencing of this site. So, how to implement an SEO 
strategy internationally and act on multilingual sites? The actions to implement 
will vary according to linguistic areas and local targets: so you do not reference 
a website in English for an Italian public for example. The simple transposition 
(mirror SEO) of a site from one language to another is not enough to hope to 
position themselves in this market.
4. 	
Local Referencing (Local SEO): If you have a website whose business de-
pends largely on local business, you cannot do without a local SEO strategy. A 
good ranking in Google Maps is a must especially through Google services and 
Google + Local Addresses. These free tools are very useful for SEO (display 
local results at the top of Google’s results pages) and for users who specifically 
will locate your business on a map and can obtain a link to the access plan.
In addition, the brand content means that a brand creates or edits the content. 
This can be informative, cultural, practical, fun, or entertaining. Branded content 
provides value (a service, information, entertainment): it is interesting in itself, 

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
91
irrespective of product purchase. It comes as a gift addressed to a person, which 
exceeds the commercial function and seeks involvement in a rewarding experience.
Traditional advertising essentially obeys a different logic: focused on one element 
of the product or brand, consisting of short messages to be repeated and memorized, 
it is primary to buyers. With digital, advertising tends to logic of content and dis-
tinctions fade (Jamet & Altman, 2013)
For Emmanuel Derieux and Agnes Granchet (Derieux & Granchet, 2013), social 
networks or online social networking are web-based platforms, meeting places and 
information of any kind exchanges between registrants (like a participant, contact, 
relationship, “friend”, “follower”) to the same group or claiming to belong to the 
same community. And for Kaplan and Haenlein (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010), social 
networking sites allow users to create profiles on the support, to post and share 
information, and communicate with other members of this network. Also defined 
by Nair (Nair, 2011) as “tools of the content, opinions, ideas and media-media that 
can be shared”.
BRANDING AND REPUTATION ON SOCIAL NETWORKS
Branding
Traditionally, a brand is thought to evoke, in the customer’s mind, a certain per-
sonality, presence and product or service performance (Doyle, 1998). Branding is 
endowing products and services with the power of the brand (Kotler & Keller, 2006). 
Branding is more than indispensable to survive, especially when the competition is 
tough. The presence of brand on social networks is radical to reflect the position-
ing of the brand, i.e. the image that a business it wants for the consumer to have.
Another aspect is using social networks to improve the reputation of a business 
can help to strengthen its global reputation. For a long time, companies are advertis-
ing their products, services or brands, but, only recently that they are interested in 
their image and brand. Branding is the personality cleared by a company with its 
various components. Branding is always comparative and analog. For example, if 
one mentions the name of Carrefour, one thinks immediately to its major competi-
tors’ markets: Auchan, Leclerc, or Euromarché. Also, branding is always reductive 
and simplistic. And, we retain only a few plots of the elements of a brand, like it is 
an expensive product, but solid; it is beautiful, but not so reliable, etc.
So, branding is how the public representation of a company is and how it has been 
created from the feedback that it receives. Hence, four classes exist to distinguish 
the different branding types:
The desired image: that corresponds to the company’s communication objective.

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
92
•	
The possible image: linked to the context in which the company operates.
•	
The projected image: that depends on the past and the current communication 
activities.
•	
The perceived image: internally and externally, for example in Algeria or 
abroad.
Also, there are other similar concepts in branding such as (Debourg, et al., 2004):
•	
The attachment to the brand.
•	
Sensitivity to the brand.
•	
Brand identity.
Role of Branding
The Need for a Strong Identity
It seems that the name brands gradually lose their power of attraction. Some even 
report that the marks are dying. They rely on the fact that people buy more and more 
“unbranded” products and explain notably by consumer awareness of the products 
are almost identical in quality plan, questioning the price gap. But do they exist at 
present unbranded products? If this is the case, how many people can they buy? The 
products are presented as fools brand are not! They may have no product brand, but 
they benefit from a service mark.
In short, they have a brand and without it, their sale is compromised. Take the 
example of “first prizes” that are found in supermarkets. Would you buy if they 
were not sold by a supermarket with a good image and reliability that guarantee 
them? That said, it is likely that you prefer to buy products with a strong identity. 
At present, the “consolidated” brands account about 93% for the market. Despite 
a higher price and characteristics similar to the brands one in terms of quality, and 
13 from 14 products sold are belonging to the same family that has a strong identity 
(Beckwith, 1997).
A brand allows customers to direct its choice towards a product. Any business 
can and should create a brand. Therefore, the money greatly facilitates this task, but 
it is mostly a problem of imagination. Moreover, it depends largely on the quality 
of the positioning.
The importance of branding is true in all areas: sales of products or services, 
business to business, e-commerce, etc. It is true, however, that its role is more or less 
important depending on whether such services or products. You can see the product 

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
93
and test it. However, the service represents a promise to do something, and the cus-
tomer is not always able to assess the result. In this case, nothing is more important 
than the brand. When it comes to e-commerce, it is easy to imagine how a strong 
identity plays an important role: it encourages coming to the site and reassures that 
must provide information to the customer that cannot touch the product. The need 
for a strong identity lies in two functions: generate interest and inspire confidence.
Generating Interest
In a world where the consumer has a multitude of options, where the offers are so 
numerous that it can never all be tested, branding can “stand out”. The company, in 
fact, allows to its potential customers a reason to buy what they know.
Moreover, being competent is not enough: we must also know, many people 
hear by chance speak well of a little-known company. But they might forget the 
name or ask why a respectable business is not known, people often making a very 
questionable relationship between merit and reputation. But on the Internet, the 
most visited shopping sites are those that have been opened by reputable companies 
in the “real” world or have created an online reputation, and, this requires a major 
promotional campaign.
Building a brand requires the meeting of two elements: visibility and credibility. 
In other words, it is necessary to develop the product and make it known. In addi-
tion to attracting prospects, the brand may encourage them to make the purchase.
Inspire Confidence
A brand is not a luxury but a guarantee that all companies should offer their poten-
tial customers, they are often afraid of being wrong. On the Internet as elsewhere, 
customers usually make the choice with the least amount of inconvenience rather 
than the one with the most advantages. Branding is the best way to reassure them. 
This guarantees that the site will keep its promises. In addition, Advertising plays 
a vital role in building a brand image. Customers choose indeed what is their most 
familiar. It is, therefore, necessary to be known in all possible ways. The company 
will also consider all means to reassure customers: transparency, availability, cus-
tomer service, etc. Of course, the company should keep all its promises.
In other words, we must inspire confidence to build a brand image and this, in 
turn, helps to inspire more confidence. Thus, the brand promotes and can even ac-
celerate a purchase decision. That is why we must choose the name with a particular 
attention.

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
94
Distinction Between Brand Image, Reputation, and Notoriety
•	
Brand Image: Lendrevie and Levy defined branding as: “A set of mental 
representations, subjective, stable, selective and simplistic in respect of a 
mark” (Lendrevie & Levy, 2013).
•	
Reputation: Reputation is «an intangible asset of a company and one of 
the essential components of the whole company.” (Adamy, 2014). It is the 
more appropriate external assessment of a brand than image (De Chernatony, 
1999):
◦◦
The use of the term brand reputation is usually referenced to what is 
said about a brand by consumers and opinion leaders. Thus, reputation 
has two aspects: the perception of someone or something by a “public” 
(that is to say a community of people seen as an individual) (Adamy, 
2013), and the result of the cognitive process leading to the formulation 
of an opinion. Further, the reputation can be seen; as a result, more than 
a cause. The result of actions by “someone or something” on the percep-
tion that individuals have of that person or thing. So, what is the way 
and how intensely the audience consider the signs and messages sent by 
someone or thing? This scale value idea is confirmed by the Latin ety-
mology of the term reputation “reputation,” meaning of “evaluation.”
◦◦
Profit for the interpretation of signs perceived by the individual (thus 
becomes an opinion, that is to say the result of the “evaluation” done, 
consciously or not elsewhere).
The individual thus receives signs that interpreter. These signs are sent voluntarily 
or not (you cannot communicate). The receiver of these signs then creates an image 
of what the receiver perceived, and the assessment was made by its scale of values.
Indeed, the brand is a name (a commercial and legal perspective mainly), term, 
sign, symbol, or other item used to identify a product or service and differentiate 
it from other competitors. This term applies when organizations, which have a 
“brand”. For example Renault, whose name is a brand, what is commonly called 
the “trademark” that allows to differentiate it from its competitors.
The brand becomes the receptacle of the projected reputation, that is to say, it 
helps differentiate and name the object to which we project a name, for which one 
has an opinion. More specifically, it is rare to hear that cars, in general, have a bad 
reputation, but rather that such a model or another producer (designated by a brand) 
was a good or bad reputation (Camille, 2009).
Generally, with the development of Internet, brand reputation depends more 
and more on its online reputation (e-reputation). This term is recent, synthesizes 
everything related to the reputation of the added “e” Internet (Adamy, 2013).

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
95
NOTORIETY
The notoriety measures the presence of mind, spontaneous or assisted, the brand name.
The only quote from the brand name is not enough to describe its notoriety. We 
need a brand name that can be associated with a product or a major area of brand 
activities.
Example
I know the Sony brand. I know the Sony manufactures electronic products.
The notoriety does not prejudge the degree of knowledge of the activities or the 
history of the brand and value judgments about the brand (Lendrevie & Levy, 2013).
The notoriety measures brand for the fact of being known by consumers. It was 
essentially evaluated by measuring unaided awareness, aided awareness, and of a 
top of mind. And, the gain awareness is a key objective of advertising.
In summary, we can define the different concepts as follows:
•	
Branding Image: The projected image.
•	
Reputation: The image perceived by the public.
•	
Notoriety: The result of projection and appropriation that the public is done.
EFFECT OF SOCIAL NETWORKS ON BRANTING IMAGES
The Study Objective
The main objective of this work is to study the key role between branding and social 
networks.
We achieve this objective by taking into consideration the following two as-
sumptions:
•	
“The presence of a brand on social networks influences the purchase deci-
sion”, and,
•	
“Branding varies by product category.”
•	
These issues make our work quantitative based on the factorial analysis.
Methodology
First, the used survey questionnaires were administered via social networks. Data 
collection was conducted through a questionnaire of 25 questions.

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
96
The sample was based on building social networks attendance statistics; this is 
the main reason we opted for convenience sampling method. And for this study, 
157 people were kind enough to answer this questionnaire.
The data was processed by the software Sphinx (Ganassali, 2014) in two phases. 
The first phase was devoted to the descriptive analysis or Frequency table where 
the second one is for the hypothesis testing by using the factorial analysis or Cross 
tabulation which means a percentage of calculation performed by crossing several 
variables.
RESULTS
Descriptive Analysis
The descriptive analysis provided by Sphinx showed the following.
•	
Sex proportion: 44% of respondents were women and 56% were men.
Questions 3: Do you use the social network? If yes: at which frequency? What is 
your favorite social network?
◦◦
The usability of the social network, frequency and favorite social net-
work: From the results sows in Figure 1, 100% of respondents are us-
ers of social networks, 80% use more than once a day. Unsurprisingly, 
Figure 1. The usability of social network

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
97
Facebook is the most used social network (94%), and YouTube comes 
in a second position (63%). The usability of the social network has been 
given by Figure 1.
Question 4: What the purpose of using these social networks?
◦◦
Concerning the purpose of using social networks, the results showed 
that 83% use the networks to communicate with their families, 68% 
share pictures and videos with their friends while 35% was looking up 
on the news of brands.
Question 5: In what media do you keep informed about brands news most of the time?
◦◦
Concerning the most used media that keep a customer updated, we find 
that 67% of customers use online media “social networks” to be updated 
about their favorite brands while 57% use the offline Medias.
Question 6 and 7: Do you visit the page of brands on social networks? And, do you 
evaluate brands on social networks? And Question 8: Why have you “liked” 
the brand on Facebook?
◦◦
The factorial results produced by Sphinx showed that 95% of users have 
already looked at a brand on social networks, and 93% of them have 
“liked” the brand on the social network, especially, “Facebook”. In ad-
dition, 53% of them adhere to the Brand’s Facebook pages to know the 
novelty of the brand.
Question 9: On which products or services belong the brands that you prefer?
◦◦
Concerning the different categories of goods and services that interest 
users, the statistical results show that the most users like pages of fash-
ion and wears, also, pages of health and beauty, jewelry and watches, 
sports and cars. Further, the statistic results show that the most users be-
lieve that the presence of a brand on social networks is very important.
Question 10: Do a brand that communicates through social networks is a good one?
◦◦
The statistic results show that the most of the users believe that a brand 
communicating through social networks is a modern brand, innovative, 
and more popular.
Question 11: Is a brand must maintain the dialogue with Internet users on social 
networks?
◦◦
The statistic results show that the social network users think that a brand 
must maintain the dialogue with Internet users on social networks where 
38.2% of users agree about that and 38.9% strongly agrees.
Question 12: Are the content distributed by the brands on social networks (news, 
promotions, etc.) influence your buying decisions?
◦◦
As shown by the statistic results from Figure 2, the most respondents 
believe that the content published by brands influence their buying deci-
sions, and only 10.8% of answers are strongly disagree about this claim.

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
98
Question 13: Are the comments and the feedbacks from users on fan pages influ-
ence the image you have about them?
◦◦
As shown by the statistic results given in Figure 3, about half of users 
find the comments and feedbacks about those pages influencing the im-
age that they have about it.
Question 14: Is the number of subscribers (or “fans”) for a brand on social networks 
reflects its notoriety?
Figure 2. The statistic results of question 12
Figure 3. The statistic results of question 13

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
99
◦◦
As shown by the statistic results from Figure 4, more than half of re-
spondents find that the number of subscribers on a page is proportional 
to the brand’s notoriety.
Question 15: Do you follow the news of the brands?
◦◦
As shown by the statistic results from Table 1, around 45% of users oc-
casionally consult the Fan pages to follow the news of brands.
Question 16: Do you want to be informed about promotions?
◦◦
As shown by the statistic results from Table 2, 42% of respondents are 
occasionally consult Fan pages to find out about promotions.
Question 17: Do you dialogue with the brand?
◦◦
As shown by the statistic results from Table 3, 61% of respondents never 
interact with the brand via the page on the social networks.
Figure 4. The statistic results of question 14
Table 1. The statistic results of question 15
News
#
%
Never
23
14.6
Occasionally
72
45.9
Frequently
43
27.4
Very often
19
12.1
Total 
157 
100 

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
100
Question 18: Do you share your opinion on a product or service within other users 
via social networks?
◦◦
As shown by the statistic results from Table 4.67% of users share their 
opinion about a product on social networks.
Question 20 and 21: Do you criticize the brand on the social network? And do you 
recommend a brand’s page to your friends? And Question 22: Have the com-
ments and feedbacks from users on a brand already influenced your purchas-
ing acts for a brand to which you were not yet a customer?
Table 2. The statistic results of question 16
Promotions
#
%
Never
29
18.5
Occasionally
66
42.0
Frequently
43
27.4
Very often
19
12.1
Total 
157 
100 
Table 3. The statistic results of question 17
Dialog 
#
%
Never
97
61.8
Occasionally
46
29.3
Frequently
9
5.7
Very often
5
3.2
Total 
157 
100 
Table 4. The statistic results of question 18
Dialog 
#
%
Never
50
31.8
Occasionally
75
47.8
Frequently
20
12.7
Very often
12
7.6
Total 
157 
100 

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
101
◦◦
The descriptive analysis results show that64% of respondents, they nev-
er criticized a brand via the brand’s page, and, 60% they have recom-
mended a brand’s page to their friends. And a little more than a half 
believe that the comments and feedbacks about a brand have influenced 
their act of purchase for a brand to which they were not yet customers.
Factorial Analysis or Bi-Variate Analysis: Confirmation 
and Validation of the Study’s Hypotheses
Testing Hypothesis 1: The Presence of a Brand on Social 
Networks Influences the Purchase Decision of Internet Users
We conducted an FCA (Factorial Correspondence Analysis) between the presence 
and influence of social network. And as it shown in Figure 5, the presence on the 
Figure 5. Factorial correspondence analysis (FCA) between the presences of the 
brand on social network and influence of social network

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
102
social network is represented in the table on the vertical column and the figure by 
the axe n 1. Further, the influence of social network is represented in the table on 
the horizontal column and the figure by axe n 2.
As a conclusion, since:
P = 0.6% < 5% for Khi2=33.58 and ddl=16	
Then: Authors accept the first hypothesis H1.
Results: There is an attraction between the modalities. Then, the presence of a brand 
on social networks influences the purchase decision of Internet users. This 
conclusion is illustrated by the blue and purple circles in the center of the axes.
Testing Hypothesis 2: Branding Varies 
According to the Product Categories
After conducting a FCA (Factorial Correspondence Analysis) between the catego-
ry and the brand image, we found that the category of a product on the social network 
is represented in the table on the vertical column and the figure by axe n 1. And, 
the Brand image in the social network is represented in the table by the horizontal 
column and in the figure by axe n 2.
Since:
P = 100% for Khi2=12.04 and ddl=36,	
Then: Authors reject hypothesis H2.
Results: Branding does not vary according to the product categories.
RESULTS DISCUSSION
From the descriptive analysis, we observe that all respondents use social networks 
is the most uses for communication, exchange, share and monitoring the informa-
tion. It is also noted that the presence of a brand in these networks is important to 
the user’s eyes and the content posted by its influences their purchasing decision.
From the analysis FCA, we observe that the presence of a brand influences 
purchasing decisions of users, if a brand publishes content, promotions, and news 

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
103
regularly; this has a direct effect on the purchase decision of internet users, it rep-
resents for them a trustworthy source of information. We also found that the brand 
image does not vary according to the product categories but according to the brands 
themselves. In addition, heir e-reputation produced a new conversational mode of 
communication when the consumer becomes conso-actor because he is simultane-
ously the transmitter and the receiver of the information.
Figure 6. Factorial correspondence analysis between the category and the brand 
image

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
104
FUTURE WORK
The aim of our future work will be to design a model, and using the modeling ap-
proach structural equation to measure the effect of social network on image branding.
The question that could be asked is: Do social networks are prominent in terms 
of customer relationship management or are they doomed to remain mere tools of 
neutral and lucid communication?
CONCLUSION
Social networks have transformed the way of communication between people as well 
as between people and businesses. We went from a one-way message from traditional 
media to a multidirectional dialogue, where everyone can express his feelings.
Based on these phenomena, the user or the customer gains in sources of infor-
mation, personalized help and can disseminate his creations, comments, emotions. 
And further, he can influence the future of products and services of companies.
From a business side, the company meanwhile, has direct access to its clients 
and prospects and can turn this advantage into considerable commercial and social 
gains. The brand can target customers, reach new segments of the population through 
social networking tools each by attracting different consumer profiles. The company 
must take advantage of this opportunity and get more adapted to these new media. 
It must include in its overall strategy of communication, strategies that involving 
efficiently social networks.
The possibilities offered by social media, who embarks on this new challenge, 
bring benefits to the enterprise in many ways: increasing the brand awareness, 
controlling a brand with one or more significant competitive advantages. Also, they 
can influence through their networks and the networks of the other users, or to live 
the marks become “sellers”.
However, one must take into account basic rules for listening, preserve communi-
ties and attract new clients: to be genuine, honest, and transparent, be open-minded 
and a little originality. Engage is a social being and not do social.
Social networks also seem to be a good way of communicating in a crisis or to 
prevent negative rumors since at the time these networks today are still neutral and 
playful tools, and the speed of propagation of information on these networks can 
reach astounding speeds. They arouse less suspicion among consumers as more 
traditional channels.

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
105
Further, social media is a constantly changing ecosystem services are created; 
others disappear, and most are transformed. These spaces are evolving rapidly adapt-
ing one hand the needs of users through the creation of new functions and partly 
because technological development enlarges the range of possibilities.
In addition, the results presented in this study were obtained by applying a fac-
torial analysis by using Sphinx, and well detailed and discussed. The result of this 
research shows that social networks affect the brand image, and the user/customer 
can be influenced positively or negatively by the content published by a brand. Also 
as future work, we intend to extend the presented study to support more brand and 
by applying more statistical analysis techniques.
REFERENCES
Aaker, D. (1991). Managing Brand Equity: Capitalising on the Value of a Brand 
Name. New York, NY: Free Press.
Abaidi, I., Maubisson, L., & Ranchoux, C. (2012, September). Perception de la page 
Facebook d’une marque: le cas de RugbysHop et d’Air France. Paper presented 
at the 11th journée de recherche sur le e-marketing, Université Paris 1 Panthéon, 
Sorbonne, Paris.
Adamy, G. (2013). Le web social et la e-réputation. Paris, France: Gualino Lextenso 
éditions.
Adamy, G. (2014). Développer sa marque avec les réseaux sociaux. Limoges, 
France: Vitrac éditions.
Andrieu, O. (2008). Réussir son référencement web. Paris, France: Eyrolles éditions.
Beckwith, H. (1997). Vendre l’invisible: un guide Pratique de Marketing Moderne. 
Québec, Canada: Ada édition.
Ben Farhat, O. (2014). Impact des réseaux sociaux sur l’image de l’entreprise: 
Cas Tunisie Telecom. (Unpublished Master Thesis). Virtual University of Tunisia, 
Tunis, Tunisia.
Boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social Network Sites: Definition, History, 
and Scholarship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 1(13), 210–230. 
doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00393.x

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
106
Camille, A. (2009). Definition of reputation. Retrieved January 10, 2009, from 
http://caddereputation.over-blog.com/article-32456974.html
Cavazza, F. (2009). Une définition des médias sociaux. Retrieved April 17, 2016, 
from www.mediassociaux.fr
De Chernatony, L. (1999). Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap Between 
Brand Identity and Brand Reputation. Journal of Marketing Management, 15(1-3), 
159–179. doi:10.1362/026725799784870432
Debourg, M. M., Clavelin, J., & Perrier, O. (2004). Pratique du marketing. Berti 
éditions.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1991). A motivational approach to self: Integration 
in personality. In Proceedings of Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (vol. 38, pp. 
237-288). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Derieux, E., & Granchet, A. (2013). Réseaux sociaux en ligne: Aspect juridiques 
et déontologiques. Editions Lamy.
Doyle, P. (1998). Marketing Management and Strategy (2nd ed.). Harlow, UK: 
Prentice-Hall.
Dupin, A. (2010). Communiquer sur les réseaux sociaux: les méthodes et les outils 
indispensables pour vos stratégies de communication sur les médias sociaux. Fyp 
Editions.
Ganassali, S. (2014). Enquêtes et analyse de données avec Sphinx. Paris, France: 
Edition Pearson.
Heude, R. P. (2003). Guide de la communication pour l’entreprise. Paris, France: 
édition Maxima.
Ibeh, K. I. N., Ying, L., & Dinnie, K. (2005). E-branding strategies of internet com-
panies: Some preliminary insights from the UK. Journal of Brand Management, 
5(12), 355–373. doi:10.1057/palgrave.bm.2540231
Jamet, T., & Altmann, O. (2013). Les nouveaux défis du Brand Content: au-delà 
du contenu de marque. Paris, France: Edition Pearson.
Jaques, P. A., & Viccari, R. M. (2006). Considering students’ emotions in computer-
mediated learning environments. In Z. Ma (Ed.), Web-based intelligent e-learning 
systems: Technologies and applications (pp. 122–138). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Publishing. doi:10.4018/978-1-59140-729-4.ch006

The Effect of Social Networks on Branding
107
Junho, S. (2005). Roadmap for e-commerce standardization in Korea. International 
Journal of IT Standards and Standardization Research, 3(2), 1–4. doi:10.4018/
jitsr.2005070101
Kaplan, A. M., & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges 
and opportunities of Social Media. Business Horizons, 1(53), 59–68. doi:10.1016/j.
bushor.2009.09.003
Kotler, P., & Keller, K. L. (2006). Marketing Management (12th ed.). Pearson Edition.
Lanktree, C., & Briere, J. (1991, January). Early data on the trauma symptom 
checklist for children (TSC-C). Paper presented at the Meeting of the American 
Professional Society on the Abuse of Children, San Diego, CA.
Lendrevie, J., & Levy, J. (2013). Mercator 2013 Théories et nouvelles pratiques du 
marketing. Paris, France: Edition Dunod.
Malhotra, N. (2011). Etudes marketing avec SPSS. Paris, France: Pearson Education.
McCarthy, J., Rowley, J., Jane, A. C., & Pioch, E. (2014). Managing brand pres-
ence through social media: The case of UK football clubs. Internet Research, 2(24), 
181–204. doi:10.1108/IntR-08-2012-0154
Nair, M. (2011). Strategic Business Transformation: The 7 Deadly Sins to Overcome. 
Wiley edition.
O’Reilly, T. (2005). What Is Web 2.0. Retrieved April 16, 2016, from http://www.
oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html
Sawyer, S., & Tapia, A. (2005). The sociotechnical nature of mobile computing 
work: Evidence from a study of policing in the United States. International Journal 
of Technology and Human Interaction, 1(3), 1–14. doi:10.4018/jthi.2005070101
Tsimonis, G., & Dimitriadis, S. (2014). Brand strategies in social media. Marketing 
Intelligence & Planning, 3(32), 328–344. doi:10.1108/MIP-04-2013-0056
VandenBos, G., Knapp, S., & Doe, J. (2001). The role of reference elements in the 
selection of resources by psychology undergraduates. Retrieved October 13, 2001, 
from http://jbr.org/articles.html
Wilfley, D. (1989). Interpersonal analyses of bulimia: Normal-weight and obese. 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Missouri, Columbia, MO.
Zhao, F. (2006). Maximize business profits through e-partnerships. Hershey, PA: 
IRM Press. doi:10.4018/978-1-59140-788-1

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch006
Chapter 6
108 
Social Media as Social 
Customer Relationship 
Management Tool:
Case of Jordan Medical Directory
ABSTRACT
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is the process of managing a business’s 
interaction with current and future potential customers. This instrumental case 
study aims to study and explain the role of social media as Electronic Customer 
Relationship Management tool (ECRM) in health care and tourism context by us-
ing Jordan Medical Directory company as a case study, we identified how using 
social media in communicating and managing customer’s requirements as eCRM 
technique affects institution efficiency, the result proved the significant positive role 
of social media in managing customers relation starting from acquisition, passing 
by retention, and finally termination, data collected through personal and phone 
interviews in a time frame of one month.
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah
Independent Researcher, Jordan

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
109
INTRODUCTION
Medical tourism is the concept applied on travelling people from their country to 
another country for medical treatment purposes, either due to cost problems or 
to achieving a better experience either through better doctors or medical centers 
that are not available in their own communities (Horowitz, Jeffrey, & Christopher, 
2007). Based on IMTJ Medical Travel Awards, Jordan present a wise and smart 
choice to rely on, due to their Private Hospitals Associations, highly qualified doc-
tors and highly efficient equipped medical centers, Jordan attracts up to 250,000 
international patients in 2012, with total revenues exceeding 1B US$, and won the 
Medical Destination of the year award in 2014, and was nominated to the position 
of International hospital of the year (IMTJ, 2014).
Medical tourism reflects a wide range of concepts and areas, where the main 
objective of the process is to gain medical care in all forms, either as routine checks, 
attending regular appointments, applying tests and simple surgeries, or more serious 
processes; patients still intended to gain more benefits of their travels by visiting 
tourism sites. Recently, this has created an evolutionary trend in Jordan, where an 
increasing number of licensed private businesses applied these services, where it 
creates huge benefits: economic wide, tourist wide, and social wide. To insure suc-
cess in this domain, decision makers and managers should distinguish their services 
among other competitors, hence customers “patients” are the leader power of this 
business; then creating sustainable, robust, and efficient relationships with custom-
ers create main dimensions in any strategy.
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) can be defined as the process of 
building a long sustainable relationship with current customers, encourage them 
to retain to business, and to attract new customers, by providing extra benefits and 
attention to customers and getting back extra revenue for the business (Injazz & 
Popovich, 2003). Information technology had provided a revolution in managing busi-
ness in general including managing customer’s relationships, to manage this process 
electronically (Winer, 2001), creativity utilization of eCRM will enable institutions 
to: collect and analyze customer pattern data, customer behavior interpretation, 
products/services delivery to customers, and development of service-level increase 
models (Winer, 2001; Bahrami, Ghorbani, & Arabzad, 2012; Godfrey, Seiders, & 
Voss, 2011), customers and suppliers satisfaction can be enhanced by the following 
marketing and supply management tools (Hüttinger, Schiele, & Veldman, 2012):
1. 	
Collecting extensive volumes, long-term commitments, and exclusivity 
agreements.
2. 	
Sharing internal information and broad communication.

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
110
3. 	
Display a readiness to change behavior in the purchasing organization.
4. 	
Respond quickly to requests from suppliers.
CRM focuses on applying a full service with a fruitful experience through three 
different levels, pre-process, in-process, and post-process. Where it is essential to 
encourage new potential customers through pre-process activities such as providing 
a higher expected value through lower price to the potential customers, in-process 
provides a flexible honest process, and added value to the introduced product/ser-
vice, while post-process activities include providing extra effort, to serve customers 
who have purchased. Retaining current customers require putting your attention on 
all three phases and focus particularly on the in-process and post-process phases,
eCRM, as one of information systems in organizations, combines IT, marketing, 
and services to be capable to fulfill informative and communicative needs of an 
organization (Bahrami, Ghorbani, & Arabzad, 2012), eCRM systems have mainly 
three components: an interface, a workflow management system, and OLAP tools, 
these systems allow cooperation and data sharing between the supply chain partners 
with the ability to accomplish business transactions, generate reports, and dynamically 
update information. The essential feature of this model “using Internet environment” 
is to provide both customer support and customer segmentation functions for the 
customer required value and the customer return value.
eCRM play an essential role in tourism too, (Sigala, 2011) have mentioned five 
styles of CRM and web 2.0 practices in eCRM within tourism context, like: Pro-
sumerism: where customers can create and share videos, reviews, etc., Team based 
co-learning: opportunity to create travel guides collaboratively, Mutual innovation: 
collaboration of firms and customers, Communities of creation: like Social network-
ing websites and blogs, and Joint intellectual property: Mash-up applications that 
combine resources from different partners for developing new business models and 
customer value.
Managing customers for maximum value, requires institutions to clearly under-
stand drivers of customers acquisition, retention, and growth over time. There are 
three key areas where institution can influence and may affect customer acquisition 
and retention decisions: value equity, brand equity, and relationship equity. Value 
equity is the customer’s objective valuation of the institutions offering based on 
his opinions of what is given up for what is received. Key drivers of value equity 
are: features and benefits of the product or service, overall quality, customer’s 
convenience factors, and all elements of pricing. Brand equity is the customer’s 
subjective opinion of the institutions offering. Key drivers of brand equity include 
marketing strategies which influence brand awareness and brand perceptions (like 
promotion, advertising, and social media) and corporate citizenship efforts. Rela-

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
111
tionship equity is the customer’s opinion of the customer-institution touch points. 
Key drivers of relationship equity are: customer loyalty programs, direct interaction 
between customers and the institution, customer communities, and the knowledge 
developed by the institution (Verhoef & Lemon, 2013). Customer selection is one 
of the eCRM techniques used efficiently in Targeting Customer Segments (TCS) 
which is known as a group of customers that shares similar preferences or activities 
for products and services. These groups are segmented based on their Recency-
Frequency-Monetary behavior, or other characteristics and needs. This technique 
of customer categorization insures that standards clustering for customer values and 
TCS are more objectively based on Recency-Frequency-Monetary attributes than 
being subjective (Chen, et.al., 2012).
Rising social technologies shifts the control to the hands of customers; and the 
brand slogan has moved from “customer push” to “customer pull”, apart customers 
have bargain power and possibility to affect brand image through social networks 
channels. Businesses’ strategies need to be modified to adapt to the new interac-
tion channels between customers and organization, where social channels need to 
be included into the existing CRM strategies. Next we will discuss previous CRM 
literatures and how IT plays a role in affecting CRM and converting it into eCRM, 
and other issues.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Researchers have questioned the effectiveness of several CRM strategies. eCRM 
practices show that organizations need to address three issues mainly to increase 
their current utilization levels of web 2.0: enhance the technological skills and 
competencies of their staff and/or outsource; integrate web 2.0 responsibilities into 
e-marketers’ job descriptions; use more suitable CRM metrics that can be used for 
customer segmentation, targeting and reward strategies; and use tools to identify 
and eliminate the cruel usage of web 2.0 in order to ensure the reliability of UGC 
(Sigala, 2011). Managers should be aware about differences between relation-
ship established with customers and product/service offered to customers. Where 
relationship value is different from product value: relationship value includes the 
extra possible benefits and concessions arising from the communication between 
customers and suppliers. Customer-perceived relationship value is defined as the 
customer’s view of the trade-off between the benefits and concessions of a business 
relationship with a given supplier. Functions of relationship can be characterized 
as direct: which implying direct, immediate effect on customer profitability and 
can be called “operation related” functions, and indirect: which implying indirect, 

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
112
delayed effect depend on changes to be made in the customer firm, this function 
can be called “change related” functions. Indirect functions represent: Innovation 
function, Information function, Access function, and Motivation function (Ritter 
& Achim, 2012).
A multichannel relational communication research to create and sent personalized 
messages were done by authors in (Godfrey, Seiders, & Voss, 2011); they exam-
ine three communicational effectiveness factors over three years: communication 
volume, communication channels mix, and the alignment of these channels with 
customer’s preferences. Their research revealed that customer’s react negatively when 
the communication level is exceeded, and that mix of multichannel communication 
can drive customer’s away rather than closer to a company.
Using social media as eCRM technology is another dimension of eCRM (Ros-
man & Stuhura, 2013; Malthouse, et.al., 2013; Jekimovics, Wickham, & Danzinger, 
2013; Ahuja & Yajulu, 2010). Social media affects core activities of CRM, which 
are: acquisition, retention, and termination, also it support different business areas 
such as: IT, people, performance evaluation, and marketing strategy; yet, using so-
cial media as CRM application has several pitfalls, like: big and unstructured data, 
privacy and data security issues, measuring ROI, and content managing (Malthouse, 
Haenlein, Skiera, Wege, & Zhang, 2013). Another research on using blogs as eCRM 
proved efficiency and success of this approach, where consumers are more likely 
to be engaged and exposed to a wide range of brand content with firms have in-
stant and active blogs, the exploratory research deduced the importance of content 
typologies: organizational, promotional, and relational; in building a relationship 
with customers, consumer’s engagement is positively dependent on the number and 
volume of organization’s posts (Ahuja & Yajulu, 2010).
A longitudinal content analysis of Australia’s largest firm’s Facebook pages 
revealed that transparency of contents and interaction volume with users help in 
creating and implementing effective eCRM, the same research recommended three 
strategies to improve results of applying social media as eCRM, which are: enabling 
trilogies, designing tailored e-CRM strategies for SNSs, and creating enthusiasm in 
user communities (Jekimovics, Wickham, & Danzinger, 2013).
Analyzing the dynamic effects of social influence and direct marketing of Dutch 
mobile telecommunication operators, shows that encouraging customers’ adoption 
of a new product requires extensive information gathering from different sources 
represented by different platforms of social media (Hans, Peter, & Bijmolt, 2014). 
A survey of 975 insurance customers over three years records shows that attachment 
styles are better in predicting customer’s preferences than established marketing 
variables do. Also these attachment styles affect loyalty intentions, cross-buying 
behavior, and control for antecedents. This research helps in creating guidelines to 

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
113
follow for segmenting customer’s, tailoring relationship marketing activities, and 
allocate resources effectively to match customer preferences (Mende, Bolton, & 
Bitner, 2013).
JORDAN MEDICAL DIRECTORY: BACKGROUND
Jordan Medical Directory (JorMedic) is a comprehensive visible and readable 
medical Jordanian reports guide, provides counselling, mental health, and physical 
therapist advices and arrangements, it is a click-and-mortar business type, where 
managers depends on both website and social networks presence, alongside with 
physical appointments and arrangements in both healthcare sectors and tourism ac-
tivities. Visible directory content represented by the institution portal (JMD, 2014) 
“main communication tool”, which is electronic medical and treatment location, 
launched at the beginning of 2011, followers of the site range from local Jordanian 
into national Arabian and foreign customers, by the end of 2011 up to 3.5 million 
visitors assigned to this visual directory 58% of them are not Jordanian. Readable 
directory content is periodic medical journal publisher once every three months 
under the name of (Al-Shafi guidance for medical treatment and tourism in Jordan), 
distributed for free locally in Jordan, on board the Jordanian airline, and Arabian 
country specially the Gulf countries.
JorMedic aims to deliver accurate, consistent, up-to-date, and fully medical 
information either to Jordanian or foreign customers through visible and readable 
directory, in an easy and flexible manner. Another perspective of JorMedic is to 
encourage medical tourism in Jordan by attracting patients from outside the kingdom 
for treatment by securing all means of comfort by JORMEDIC team such as: apart-
ments, transports, and appointments with doctors, hospitals, medical laboratories and 
more. JorMedic seeks to provide main health and tourism services either by readable 
or visible tools, such services include: providing diverse comprehensive medical 
information, with flexibility and ease of access to the largest portion of customers, 
enrich JorMedic with rigor medical articles and researches, and announcements 
about different healthcare areas.
RESEARCH METHOD
Data Gathering Technique
Data for this case study were collected from multiple sources, JorMedic websites 
first navigated and analyzed, archival records were requested from the CRM depart-

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
114
ments like: marketing strategy plans, customers’ descriptions files, and institution 
profile; records such as annual reports and emails were requested and analyzed too, 
social media pages also were studied and examined, to study JorMedic activities 
and energy in contacting and collaborating with their clients. Direct observation 
technique also applied to monitor real activities in the organization with current 
and potential customers. After studying the website, documentations, and collected 
data, a list of proposed questions were listed to be asked for CRM manager through 
an interview. Figure 1 presents data collections sources:
•	
Direct Observation: Applied in the normal field work environment “any 
work day in organization”, focusing on human actions, physical environ-
ments, or real-world events; and taking field notes about all situations. Using 
direct observation, researcher notes that most customers’ interaction applied 
online using web based tools and social media communications tools to ap-
point treatments and tourism dates and arrangements, for potential new cus-
tomers or current customers, some post-process services are applied both 
online and offline, where medical reports are sent via emails and traditional 
mail.
•	
Interviews: Open ended “non-structured” interviews were conducted, which 
offer richer and more extensive material than traditional surveys or close 
ended interview. Interview took place on the organizations offices, conducted 
with the CRM manager, list of questions include:
◦◦
What are the eCRM techniques followed by your organization?
◦◦
Why did you decide to focus on social networks pages as a main dimen-
sion of your CRM strategy?
◦◦
What is the role of Social Networks in enriching and improving the 
implemented CRM?
◦◦
What are the challenges or weaknesses that faced you when you decided 
to apply social media as a part of CRM strategy?
•	
Archival Records: Information stored in existing electronic and traditional 
channels such as computerized files and paper files, researchers retrieve in-
Figure 1. Used sources to collect data

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
115
formation about customers profiles and gain a rigor image about customers’ 
trends and needs based on the archival records. We can build a trend based on 
this data to be able to predict future potential customers’ set.
•	
Online Observations: Represented in browsing website and following social 
networks’ pages to continuously track activity of the organization and moni-
tor their communications with their customers.
•	
Documents: Represent up-to-date data and reports created by firms, any files 
or extra data that were not requested by the researchers, or created after the 
interview where conducted, and the CRM manager feels it could provide any 
benefits.
ANALYZING DATA
e-CRM Techniques
JorMedic provides convenient secure communication tools like: direct phone, Skype 
call, and e-mail contact. A high qualified teamwork to build personal relationship 
through sending personalized mails contains proper information and advices important 
for the customer, which contact customers directly either during or after providing 
the services. Simplicity in contact and providing services is essential purpose of 
JORMEDIC, where it encourages customers to select the firm as their preferred 
choice and improve efficiency of the employees at the same time. Customers can 
register their emails in the site to receive direct and update medical information 
that’s benefits them and response to their questions.
•	
Segmentation Technique: JorMedic mainly target foreign customers either 
Arabian or from other nationalities, then using segmented technique custom-
ers are segmented into either Our guest, Consultation, or extra care programs 
which involve: Infants, Elderly people, or Disabled customers.
•	
Our Guest Program: Improving process value of the customers by taking 
care of all three phases values “pre-visiting, in-visiting, and post-visiting” 
level, where JORMEDIC teams work on travel reservation “arrival and de-
parture”, staying, transparent, doctors and laboratories appointment, arrange 
tourism schedule, and following up patient status after travelling by testing 
results and any new recommendation that can be helpful in his/her case.
•	
Consultation Program: Clarifying vague conditions and minimizing any 
hesitation from patients or his/her partners by providing specialists doctor’s 
opinions from either inside or outside Jordan, if it’s a necessity, about some 
cases where patients can’t make definitive decision of complete treatment due 

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
116
to lack of trust of medical department, or weakness op capabilities. In this 
case patient existence is not necessary, where laboratories testing results can 
be received by JORMEDIC team through e-mail or fax and doctor consulta-
tion can be delivered to the patients as immediate as doctor give his opinion 
and recommendations.
•	
In-Our-Eyes “Extra-Care” Program: Special features program offered to 
specific segments of customers like: infants, elderly, and disabilities peoples, 
by providing qualified attendant to provide needed treatments, personal sup-
plies, and arranging entertaining activities inside or outside sanatorium.
JorMedic also manage customer’s relationship through the website, main features 
available in the site that support customers are:
•	
Comprehensive content that covers all context related to JORMEDIC vision 
and objectives
•	
Search property availability: where customer define research content to ar-
ticles, directories, connection contacts, groups, sections, or news feeds, and 
to choose mechanism of retrieving search result according to: newest, oldest, 
most visited, alphabetically, or based on category.
•	
Connected into social networkswww.facebook.com, and www.twitter.com 
where content of social pages is monitored, controlled, and updateable. All 
www.jormedic.com contents and advertisements are uploaded directly to 
Facebook page and Twitter page.
•	
JORMEDIC website providing diverse groups of pages describe: Jordan as 
country from different perspectives like location, weather, currency, tour-
ism locations and other criteria, pages about treatment in Jordan with lists of 
available hospitals, pharmacies, physicians, nurses, medical centers, and any 
other related healthcare services.
•	
“Dr. Sad” page is communication tools which discuss general issues in comic 
manner and provide advices for customers.
•	
Other than medical page: provides advices, recency, accuracy, and up-mind 
news from all over the world as tool to build stronger bonds with customers, 
and encourage them to re-visit the site.
JorMedic works on keeping a connection with its current customers and build 
relationships with them, as soon as the guest receives services asked for, a satisfying 
questionnaire is filled by him/her to be used by JorMedic team for measurement 
purposes, it helps to identify customer’s satisfaction, future expectations, avoids 
unnoticed problems, and respond effectively to opportunities. Most gusts keep 
in touch with JorMedic teams especially CRM manager, either by phone, e-mail, 

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
117
visiting personally, or gifts and souvenir which sent to JorMedic in occasions and 
holidays. This motions and bonds make customers more loyal to the firm and en-
courage them to come back or recommends by the JorMedic as services provider 
for future potential customers.
Affiliate Marketing
JorMedic deals with affiliate marketer like Arabic Center, Ebn Al-Haytham hos-
pital and others where a commission by 15% is received for each patient, Chinese 
Treatment Center also use another strategy with JorMedic where patients treated at 
the Chinese Treatment Center directly and JORMEDIC is responsible for tourism 
services only. Marketing strategy is used in combination with both discrimination 
strategy where JorMedic considered as one of the first companies in the medical 
tourism context firms, and tried to provide special and new services for its custom-
ers, and competitive strategy where tourist agents and offices providing similar 
activities and services.
Social media proved its powerful role in affecting client’s attitude and activities 
based on what and how they are treated using these applications. Using Facebook 
as a part of the marketing strategy is new strategy; which is followed by different 
types of companies and organizations to improve their relations with clients and 
create an up-to-date communication and instance response to any emergent situa-
tion. Other social media used to deliver any promotions or news in real time cases, 
and to create more personalized relationship.
Social CRM
Applying social network as a tool to manage customers’ relationship depends on 
many factors such as: management inside/outside relation and sponsorship, and 
having clear vision of how social networks will improve organization relations 
with customers, social CRM is defined as the process of managing customer-to-
customer conversations to engage existing customers and prospects with a brand 
and so enhance CRM. JorMedic apply sufficient and up-dated social strategy, where 
all required information are available online, contact details, support team available 
24/7. Consultation and frequent questions are answered through social networks’ 
platform either through public posts or using private messages. Providing reserving 
options requires more reliable communication through phone calls and exchange 
required papers and information through fax and emails. Creating a social CRM 
needs a step by step approach, include:

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
118
While JorMedic exist on multiple social platforms, which are: Facebook, Twit-
ter, YouTube, and Google+, but the social CRM focuses on Facebook and Twitter 
in particular. Facebook page created on January, 2011, and it provides updated 
clinical and cosmetic reports, where it provides related information about each oc-
casions, such as summer activities, fasting times, holidays behaviors, etc. new 
emergent clinical information and inventions also available on JorMedic page. Twit-
ter account has been created on June 2011, and it focuses more on rewetting doctors, 
clinical centers, medical labs, and followers. Twitting and rewetting provide update-
able medical information and reports, contents on Twitter and Facebook are very 
similar, which considered as weakness point in social CRM technique. JorMedic 
channel on Youtube contains television interviews with doctors and about medical 
facilities. JorMedic provide application available on Google play, to exchange in-
formation and updated notifications with user on real time. Medical parts are free 
to connect with social pages and webpage, where users can communicate with any 
parts connected to JorMedic through social media or webpage.
CHALLENGES OF APPLYING SOCIAL CRM
The top three challenges JorMedic face in implementing an effective social CRM:
Table 1. steps of creating social CRM
Step
JORMEDIC Case
Defining the objective of 
applying social CRM
Customer service and support, and encourage customer engagement. 
Provide full version of detailed information about important and relevant 
information, and apply open channel to interact and serve customers.
Preparing for and 
benchmarking internal social 
readiness
Involving and training employees from different departments for various 
social networks platforms. Taking into consideration required set of web 
browsing skills and social networks searching and communications.
Understanding the 
technological landscape
Be aware about available hardware and softeware JORMEDIC needs to 
achieve its goals, which hardware and software are available in house and 
which to purchase, keeping in mind JORMEDIC security guidelines.
Integrate social CRM with 
traditional CRM
Keep all channels active, use traditional CRM to aggregate and analyze 
customers’ data and automate workflows for business process optimization, 
empower this process by applying eCRM tools, social network platforms 
are activated with qualified team to manage and proceed activity efficiently 
and continuously.
Rate periodic results
Follow customers feedback by creating online short surveys, call back 
regular customers to take note about their experience, and any comments 
to improve any shorting in the process, activate automatic email to enhance 
personal one to one interaction with customers.

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
119
•	
How can we measure success of our adopted social CRM?
•	
How can we organize huge amount of online data? And how to find relevant 
accurate data?
•	
Diversity of social network platforms, and the continuously growing and im-
proving in their features, rises the challenges of keeping employees skilled 
and qualified, and create ambiguity about which to adopt and what to share in 
a way that did not redundant contents and create disinterest customers.
•	
Getting promising results need patience, and no one know the exact time to 
have successful reaction from customers.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Through navigation of JorMedic websites some features were not available that 
could significantly affect customers attention to the site, features like: FAQs that 
could help customers to get direct information about certain issue without needs 
to contact with JorMedic teams, and providing information immediately (24/7), 
neither call center number were available. Researcher also noticed that JorMedic 
site provides its content only in Arabic language, unavailability of English language 
content could cause the institution losing some potential customers who didn’t use 
Arabic language.
We also recommend JorMedic to focus on implementing factors that plays es-
sential role in social CRM success, including supporting social CRM plans with 
right technologies. JorMedic’s team should take into consideration that each step 
and activity of social CRM should be supported with at least one appropriate tech-
nology, either, email, phone calling, social media, or any other technology. Other 
factors are to develop customer-centric strategy, redesigning workflow systems, and 
to reengineer work process to gain best possible benefit of applying social CRM 
technologies. Social application could be implemented to announce regular and 
related information on customers’ wall and accounts.
Managers and decision makers should pay attention to social CRM tools, many 
tools can be found either for free or with a reasonable price, Jive Engage Platform 
is a social collaboration tool used to encourage and facilitate interaction between 
customers and organization’s members on social networks, it allows customers, 
employees, and partners to create viral communities to connect via social media, 
which will create new opportunities for internal collaboration, customer care, social 
marketing and sales. Another available tool is Nimble, which allow organizations 
to monitor and enhance their relationship with their customers and improve oppor-
tunities of retaining customers by integrating and unifying all points of contact and 

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
120
social communication, it gather data from various online sources, where it merges 
and unifies contacts, calendars and communications from Google, IMAP, Skype and 
social. Therefore, one platform created to use for read and response on communica-
tion with customers. Another key feature of Nimble is the ability to automatically 
crawling social networks to identify relevant connections and rank them in relevance. 
Important information can be shared among users; also Nimble’s API allows users 
to create their own social CRM widgets. SugarCRM is a CRM open source tool, 
organizations can improve online collaboration by integrating social networks feeds 
with their email marketing, document sharing and sales intelligence from the get-
go. Users can get up-to-date information on customers and prospective, and find 
feedback from different social networks, such as tweets from twitter. SugarCRM 
provides sets of social CRM applications to create additional functionality, such as 
Sugar Studio, Sugar Cloud Connectors and Module Builder.
CONCLUSION
JorMedic has adopted several procedures and techniques to enhance relationship 
with their customers, such as: applying loyalty programs, direct one to one interac-
tion with their customers, and enhance knowledge base to build interactive customer 
community, it achieved many benefits by applying these techniques, the most 
important benefits were: improved service quality, establishing personal relation-
ships, customer satisfaction, customer’s commitment, and enhance reputation of the 
institution. JORMEDIC used list of eCRM techniques, create ad-hoc CRM system 
presented in communication technologies like email and smart devices technolo-
gies, powered with analytics tools. Ad-hoc systems used to generate reports in real 
time to provide accurate information, in multiple report’s forms such as tables and 
charts, simple and easy to understand figures; and can be saved in another files’ 
types, achieved, and edited. Ad-hoc reports provide efficient, cost effective, cus-
tomized, and channel to share updated information. It also used social media like 
Facebook, Twitter, Google+, and WhatsApp to interact and communicate with cur-
rent and candidate clients, another trend was customizing and personalizing clients 
information, by creating client’s profile directory based on historical proceedings, 
finally JORMEDIC provide interactive communication section in “contact us” page, 
which allows clients to interact and ask about different types of consultation and 
view previous comments and questions from another clients.
eCRM ad-hoc tools, such as frequent up-to-date reports and dashboards, has a 
direct impact on the institution performance by implementing major characteris-
tics such as: reliability of the service as it promised to the customer, by provision 

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
121
the service correctly, accurately and timely at first time and every time the service 
provided. Make JorMedic’s customers feel comfortable and permanent safety when 
dealing with JorMedic employees, since employee’s have high level of communica-
tions skills and have the ability and knowledge to respond to customers’ inquiries 
and questions efficiently, in addition to creating confidence and security between 
JorMedic and commercials institutions. Tangible benefits for both JorMedic em-
ployees and customers through availability of new equipment to communicate, 
provide visual facilities to make process of communication more easy and effec-
tive, other modern appliances are assured to be used in the next step of JorMedic 
process through medical institutions or tourists centers. Empathize with customers 
through availability of qualified functional crew and giving customers individual 
attentions and cares based on their situations. Responsiveness is another dimension 
of improved service’s quality, where highly readiness employees from JorMedic 
are available to inform customers directly about time and details of services, and 
working on development of these services, these employees are fully prepared to 
response customers’ needs and demands.
Sustaining personal relationship either with current customers or other partner-
ship (medical and tourisms) affects positively on managerial business by increasing 
opportunities of customers retention based on their emotional and personal experi-
ences. Customer satisfaction is almost highly obtained since they achieve expected 
service and even better, reputation of the institution is highly improved through 
its partnership and customer’s descriptions and word of mouth advertising, these 
expressions and statements will build a brilliant mental image about JorMedic for 
potential future customers.
REFERENCES
Ahuja, V., & Yajulu, M. (2010). Corporate blogs as e-CRM tools–Building con-
sumer engagement through content management. Journal of Database Marketing 
& Customer Strategy Management, 17(2), 91–105. doi:10.1057/dbm.2010.8
Bahrami, M., Ghorbani, M., & Arabzad, M. S. (2012). Information technology (IT) 
as an improvement tool for customer relationship management (CRM). Procedia: 
Social and Behavioral Sciences, 41, 59–64. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.04.008
Chen, Y.-S., Cheng, C. H., Lai, C. J., Hsu, C. Y., & Syu, H. J. (2012). dentifying 
patients in target customer segments using a two-stage clustering-classification ap-
proach: A hospital-based assessment. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 42(2), 
213–221. doi:10.1016/j.compbiomed.2011.11.010 PMID:22177941

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
122
Godfrey, A., Seiders, K., & Voss, G. B. (2011). Enough is enough! The fine line 
in executing multichannel relational communication. Journal of Marketing, 75(4), 
94-109.
Hans, R., Peter, V. C., & Bijmolt, T. H. (2014). Dynamic effects of social influ-
ence and direct marketing on the adoption of high-technology products. Journal of 
Marketing, 78(2), 58–62.
Horowitz, M. D., Jeffrey, R. A., & Christopher, J. A. (2007). Medical tourism: 
Globalization of the healthcare marketplace. Medscape General Medicine, 9(4), 
33. PMID:18311383
Hüttinger, L., Schiele, H., & Veldman, J. (2012). The drivers of customer attractive-
ness, supplier satisfaction and preferred customer status: A literature review. Industrial 
Marketing Management, 41(8), 1194–1205. doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2012.10.004
IMTJ. (2014). Retrieved 2016, from the IMTJ Medical Travel Award Winners in 
2014: http://awards.imtj.com/results/2014-winners/
Injazz, C. J., & Popovich, K. (2003). Understanding customer relationship man-
agement (CRM) People, process and technology. Business Process Management 
Journal, 9(5), 672–688. doi:10.1108/14637150310496758
Jekimovics, L., Wickham, M., & Danzinger, F. (2013). Revolution or e-business as 
usual? Social Networking and e-CRM, 1, 153-162.
JMD. (2014, April). Jordan Medical Directory. Retrieved 10th, May 2016, from 
http://www.jormedic.com/
Malthouse, E. C., Haenlein, M., Skiera, B., Wege, E., & Zhang, M. (2013). Managing 
customer relationships in the social media era: Introducing the social CRM house. 
Journal of Interactive Marketing, 27(4), 270-280.
Mende, M., Bolton, R., & Bitner, M. J. (2013). Decoding customer-firm relation-
ships: How attachment styles help explain customers’ preferences for closeness, 
repurchase intentions, and changes in relationship breadth. JMR, Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 50(1), 125–142. doi:10.1509/jmr.10.0072
Ritter, T., & Achim, W. (2012). More is not always better: The impact of relationship 
functions on customer-perceived relationship value. Industrial Marketing Manage-
ment, 41(1), 136–144. doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2011.11.020
Rosman, R., & Stuhura, K. (2013). he implications of social media on customer 
relationship management and the hospitality industry. Journal of Management 
Policy and Practice, 14(3), 18.

Social Media as Social Customer Relationship Management Tool
123
Sigala, M. (2011). eCRM 2.0 applications and trends: The use and perceptions 
of Greek tourism firms of social networks and intelligence. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 27(2), 655–661. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.03.007
Verhoef, P. C., & Lemon, K. N. (2013). Successful customer value management: 
Key lessons and emerging trends. European Management Journal, 31(1), 1–15. 
doi:10.1016/j.emj.2012.08.001
Winer, R. S. (2001). A framework for customer relationship management. California 
Management Review, 43(4), 89–105. doi:10.2307/41166102

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch007
Chapter 7
124 
Determinants of 
Brand Recall in Social 
Networking Sites
ABSTRACT
This research aims to contribute to the understanding of how brand impressions 
in social networking sites influence brand recall. Further, the relationship between 
the built-in metrics offered by social networking sites and brand recall are also 
examined to assess the validity of these metrics as measures of advertising effective-
ness. Results indicate a positive relationship between brand recall and self-brand 
congruence, tie-strength with, trust toward, and perceived popularity of the profile 
associated with the post, and clicking a link embedded in the post / ad in which the 
brand appears. On the other hand, there is not a significant difference between the 
levels of brand involvement, homophily with the profile associated with the post / 
ad, like-count, and four types of built-in user-interaction options including liking, 
sharing, posting a comment and tagging among the brands that were successfully 
retrieved from the memory and those were not.
Kaan Varnali
Istanbul Bilgi University, Turkey
Vehbi Gorgulu
Istanbul Bilgi University, Turkey

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
125
INTRODUCTION
Today, consumers are more than passive buyers and audience members; they are 
also creators and distributors of media content (Vanden Bergh et al., 2011). Social 
network sites (SNS), which are sets of individuals, organizations and social enti-
ties connected by a set of social relationships such as friendship, co-working or 
information exchange (Garton, Haythornthwaite, & Wellman, 1997) also take part 
in the distribution of marketing information by allowing users to actively engage 
with branded-content delivered to them via sponsored stories, stories about friends, 
page publishing or ads coupled with social connotations. Since consumers typically 
judge information regarding the marketplace provided by other consumers to be 
more trustworthy and credible (Pornpitakpan, 2004), leveraging user-generated or 
-distributed content in social media is imperative for marketers (Liu-Thompkins, 
2012; Schivinski & Dabrowski, 2014). The value of these practices has been well 
documented in the context of word of mouth, or referral effects (Chu & Kim, 2011; 
Keller & Fay, 2012; Lee & Youn, 2009).
More recently the breadth of the domain of inquiry expanded to include more 
detailed issues such as the antecedents of consumer perceptions and responses 
toward advertisements on social networks (Soares & Pinho, 2014), motivations for 
consumer engagement with brand pages (Kabadayi & Price, 2014; Logan, 2014), 
the effects of likes and friends’ likes on Facebook brand pages in influencing brand 
related outcomes (Phua & Ahn, 2014; Tsai & Men, 2013), and development of 
a typology of Facebook fans (Wallace, 2014). However, despite the managerial 
relevance, the impact of delivering brand impressions [i.e., exposure to the brand 
elements in a manner that strengthens overall brand evaluation (Dillon et al., 2001)] 
in social media on the state of brand-related knowledge stored in the memory (i.e., 
brand awareness) has been largely missing in the relevant literature. The main reason 
for this conspicuous lack of researcher interest on this issue conceivably lies in the 
practical difficulties of employing a full-scope experimental research (preferably 
live on platforms such as Facebook) capturing the essential components of social 
media experience, which constitutes the dominant approach in assessing brand 
awareness in the literature. One of the most interesting researches on this area was 
conducted by Alves and Antunes (2015), who found out that consumers expect 
to personal advantages through proximity to the brands on the Internet and that 
the activity of following brands on social networks impacts on purchase decision 
processes of customers.
Thus it can be stated that as this new marketing medium unfolds, brands enthu-
siastically race to establish a presence in SNs (Malhotra et al., 2013; Rohm et al., 
2013), however with a very limited understanding of the true impact of their activities 
on brand-awareness. Today, the key metrics developed to measure effectiveness of 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
126
brand communications in SNS are based on simple interaction counts and talk-about 
(e.g., the number of mentions, likes, shares, comments, views, re-tweets), saying 
very little about the extent to which these incidences positively contribute to brand 
awareness (Lipsman et al., 2012; Phua & Ahn, 2014). Over-reliance on such metrics 
adds to the difficulty of grasping the full promise of social media marketing. As 
such, current practice and research lacks evidence to what extent brand impressions 
delivered via social media influences brand recall.
Facebook is a useful platform to conduct such practice, which is the dominant 
social networking site with more than 1 billion monthly active users. An important 
attempt to build a reliable method for calculating the engagement rate of the Face-
book brand pages was carried out by Vadivu and Neelamalar (2015), who aimed to 
identify the extent to which the moderators’ post influences the engagement rate of 
its audience in terms of its content, frequency and the number of fans present for 
a particular brand page. Through observing and probing Facebook users as they 
are being exposed to branded content while spending time in their own Facebook 
accounts, the present study aims to provide exploratory insights for the following 
questions:
•	
Can users retrieve the brand impressions delivered via SNs from their 
memory?
•	
What factors associated with delivering brand impressions in SNs facilitate 
the retrieval of brand name from memory?
•	
Does engaging with a branded content encountered in SNs enhance the re-
trieval of the associated brand name from memory?
•	
Can SNs-provided simple interaction counts be used as reliable indicators for 
the impact of brand impressions on brand awareness in SNS?
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Brand awareness denotes a state of brand-related knowledge stored in the memory 
of the consumer (Hoyer & Brown, 1990). Memory affects brand consideration and 
thus influences choice (Nedungadi, 1990). The expectation is that awareness will 
keep the brand in the consumer’s consideration set, thereby increasing the probability 
that the brand will subsequently be purchased (Hoyer & Brown, 1990). Especially 
in low involvement decisions, even a minimum level of brand awareness, such as 
the mere familiarity with the brand name, may be sufficient for product choice, 
even in the absence of a well-formed attitude (Bettman & Park, 1980; Keller, 1993; 
Park & Lessig, 1981).

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
127
The memorability of a brand name, therefore, is critical for the success of a brand 
impression (Jungsun & Ferle, 2008). A brand’s accessibility in memory is strongly 
associated with the strength of activation of the brand node, which is a function of 
the frequency, recency, and salience of brand instantiation and of brand evaluation 
(Barsalou, 1985; Kintsch & Young, 1984). In theory, a brand node is activated, or 
primed, by a direct reference to the brand name. Therefore, the true potential of an 
SNS brand impression depends on its ability to prime the brand and cue retrieval.
Recall, which refers to the ability to reproduce previously presented items, occurs 
when memory is searched and a word is independently retrieved (Jungsun & Ferle, 
2008; Lerman & Garbarino, 2002). Recall is often used as a measure for memora-
bility (Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984; Lerman & Garbarino, 2002; Lowrey, Shrum, & 
Dubitsky, 2003). As such, in the present study it is conceived as the indicator of the 
extent to which an SNS brand impression succeeds in enhancing the accessibility 
of the brand in memory.
Items that are attended are more likely to be stored in memory and recalled at a 
later time (Greenberg, 2012). Building upon the decades of research on the effect 
of task and context congruity on advertising effectiveness (e.g., Norris & Colman, 
1992; Novak et al., 2003), we focused our attention on two theoretical accounts in 
explaining the selective attention toward advertising messages in SNS. First, at the 
core of any message that aims to prime a brand lays the brand itself, and hence, as 
in all types of ads, brand-related characteristics (i.e., brand involvement, self-brand 
congruence) may account for the differences in brand recall in SNS.
Second account is related with the inherent nature of SNS use, in other words the 
effect of the context in which brand impression is delivered. The primary motiva-
tions of SNS use stem from social needs, such as self-expression, belongingness, 
seeking meaningful relationships, identity formation, impression management, 
and subjective norms (Acquisti & Gross, 2006; boyd, 2007; Christofides, Muise, 
& Desmarais, 2009; Donath & boyd, 2004; Zuckerberg, 2008). Therefore, as an 
inherent characteristic of SNS use, users should be highly aware of their surround-
ings and their actions in terms of how they relate to their social agenda. In a similar 
vein, a recent survey-based study demonstrated that social influence captured by 
group norms and social identity do indeed influence group intentions and perceived 
ad relevance in online social networks (Soares & Pinho, 2014). Accordingly, we 
conceive that social connotations of the post / ad (perceived characteristics and the 
identity of the profile associated with a post) may also influence observers’ atten-
tion and information processing motivations in SNS. Drawing upon the framework 
of social network theory, tie strength (Brown & Reingen, 1987), homophily (Gilly 
et al., 1998), trust (Nisbet, 2006) and popularity (Tong et al., 2008) are explored as 
focal dimensions that characterize the perceived social characteristics of the person 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
128
whose profile is associated with a post / ad in SNS, and consequently influence 
brand recall.
Additionally, following prior research on this domain (i.e., Phua & Ahn, 2014) 
the impact of two medium specific factors is also examined. SNS enable observers to 
interact with the messages (clicking the links within a post, liking or sharing a post, 
tagging, posting a comment underneath a post). Interaction is a type of conscious 
behavior, hence by definition requires a user to at least notice a particular content 
and engage in some level of cognitive processing to be able to take a deliberate 
action. A deeper processing of information enhances recall of the information 
(Muter, 1984). Therefore, interaction, although in most of the cases in SNS involve 
a minimal level of cognitive effort, may enhance the impact of a brand impression. 
Accordingly, the potential influence of users’ interaction with posts / ads in SNS on 
brand recall is assessed. Furthermore, “like count”, the coefficient representing the 
number of people who clicked the “like” button underneath a post, may serve as a 
behavioral cue regarding the popularity of the post (not the person who owns the 
post). As such, it may influence selective attention processes, thus is also considered 
as a potential predictor of brand recall.
In case of Facebook, brand impressions are delivered to Facebook users through 
four channels. First, marketers can acquire and engage “fans” through establishing 
Fan pages and deliver unpaid brand impressions by page publishing. Facebook us-
ers become “fans” by clicking the “like” button on these pages. Then, brand related 
content published in these pages appear on the Fan Page wall and may also appear in 
the News Feeds of the fans, which is a constantly updating list of stories from people 
and Pages that users follow on Facebook. Second, when a user actively engages with 
a brand, the story of this engagement becomes visible either on the user’s wall or 
in the Newsfeeds of the friends of that user as stories about friends. These unpaid 
impressions, therefore, may reach Fans and friends of Fans. Third, as a paid brand 
impression type, sponsored stories can be actively distributed more broadly to Fans 
and friends of Fans to appear not in the Newsfeed but in the right hand column of 
Facebook interface. Fourth, ads with social cues (i.e., the ad includes the name of 
a user’s friend) that come directly from advertisers can also be delivered to friends 
of fans (Lipsman et al., 2012).
A study by Nielsen revealed that Facebook ads, both paid and unpaid versions, 
were successful in increasing brand awareness on average by 4%, and purchase inten-
tion by 2% between exposed and control audiences after exposure (Nielsen, 2010). 
Further, a study by Mariani and Muhammed (2014) demonstrate, rather relying on 
descriptive data that people notice brand communication on Facebook and friends’ 
likes influence future purchasing intentions. Although these findings provide some 
evidence on the positive impact of Facebook ads on brand awareness, it provides no 
explanation on how this influence occurs. Drawing on advertising and sociology 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
129
literatures, the present study attempts to contribute to the understanding of how 
SNS brand impressions might be influencing brand recall. Further, the relationship 
between the metrics offered by SNS and brand recall will also be explored to assess 
the reliability of these metrics as measures of advertising effectiveness. Next, we 
discuss these accounts in detail and develop propositions.
DEVELOPMENT OF RESEARCH PROPOSITIONS
Brand Related Characteristics
Brand Involvement
The most pervasively used brand-related characteristic in the brand recall literature 
is the concept of involvement. The concept of involvement characterizes a state 
of motivation and of interest specific to an individual, which involves individual 
characteristics (e.g. needs, interests, goals), situational factors (e.g., purchase oc-
casion or perceived risk associated with the purchase decision), and characteristics 
of the stimulus (e.g. the type of media or the product class) (Andrews & Shimp, 
1990; Laurent & Kapferer, 1985; Zaichowsky, 1986). Although there exist many 
different conceptualizations of involvement in the relevant literature, they all relate 
to the feeling of self-relevancy.
This study adopts a perspective on involvement similar to that of Celsi and 
Olson (1988) and Broderick and Mueller (1999), conceptualizing involvement as a 
consumer’s subjective experience or feeling of personal relevance towards a brand. 
Advertising is apt to have more general relevance for those perceiving the brand as 
personally important. As such, those who are highly involved with a brand should 
be more selectively attentive and willing to process information included in a brand-
related post / ad (Cohen, 1983; Mitchell, 1979), which would consequently increase 
the likelihood of a successful brand prime.
Proposition 1: Brand involvement positively relates to brand recall in brand impres-
sions delivered via Facebook.
Self-Brand Congruity
The motivation to express one’s own self is among the primary forces that drive 
consumers to purchase goods or services (Sirgy, 1982). Self-congruity theory 
proposes that consumer decision making is determined, in part, by the congruence 
resulting from a psychological comparison involving the user image of a brand and 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
130
the consumer’s self-concept (Escalas & Bettman, 2003; Sirgy, 1986). User-image 
of a brand reflects the stereotype of the generalized users of that brand and is de-
termined by a host of factors such as advertising, price, and other marketing and 
psychological associations (Sirgy, 1982; Sirgy, 1985). Consumers perceive high 
self-congruity when the product-user image matches that of his or her self-image. 
Self-brand congruity affects consumer behavior through self-concept motives such 
as the need for self-consistency, self-esteem, and self-expression (Escalas & Bett-
man, 2005; Sirgy, 1982).
Facebook’s basic site structure is deliberately designed to gratify self-disclosure 
behavior (Zuckerberg, 2008), which is significantly driven by the need to convey self-
image to other people (Buss & Briggs, 1984). In line with this argument, deliberate 
and strategic self-disclosure has been recognized as one of the core SNs behaviors 
(Acquisti & Gross, 2006). People, specifically young people, ‘‘write themselves into 
being’’ through their actions in SNs (boyd, 2007, p. 129). From this perspective, 
strategically associating one’s profile with posts /ads involving self-congruent brands 
in SNs, may serve as a carefully calculated way to brand oneself and impress others 
(boyd & Ellison, 2008), as part of a larger social phenomenon of using social media 
instrumentally for self-conscious commodification (Marwick & boyd, 2011). Taylor 
et al. (2011) found that self-brand congruity is an important factor in facilitating 
greater attitudinal acceptance of advertisements designed to appear in the SNs con-
text. We posit that people would actively seek posts / ads involving self-congruent 
brands in SNs and spend more time and cognitive resources to evaluate such posts 
/ ads in order to identify content that by associating with their own profiles they 
can strategically benefit from the brand user-image to emit desired identity signals 
about themselves. Altogether these processes would underlie the positive relation-
ship between self-brand congruity and enhanced brand recall in SNS.
Proposition 2: Self-brand congruity positively relates to brand recall in brand 
impressions delivered via Facebook.
SOCIAL CONNOTATIONS
Tie-Strength
The strength of an interpersonal tie (i.e. strong, weak, or absent) is a linear combina-
tion of the amount of time, the emotional intensity, the intimacy, and the reciprocal 
services, which characterize each tie (Granovetter, 1973). Strong-ties, such as fam-
ily and close friends, constitute stronger and closer relationships that are within an 
individual’s personal network. Strength of a tie helps formation of trust and provides 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
131
social motivations to be cooperative (Hansen, 1999; Reagans & McEvily, 2003), 
hence strong-ties are more likely to be activated for the flow of referral behavior 
and influence interpersonal decision making within small groups and dyads (Brown 
& Reingen, 1987; Chu & Kim, 2011). Weak-ties on the other hand, consist of less 
personal social relationships that are composed of a wider set of acquaintances and 
colleagues, and facilitate dissemination of information across wider networks (Brown 
& Reingen, 1987; Pigg & Crank, 2004). As such, tie strength indicates ‘the potency 
of the bond between members of a network (Mittal, Huppertz, & Khare, 2008: 196), 
and even in an online context, influences behavior (De Bruyn & Lilien, 2008).
Facebook shows each user a customized News Feed in which stories related 
with stronger ties (determined by the frequency of past interaction) are prioritized 
and appear on top their feed. However, other criteria such as the number of likes a 
post receives, recency of a post, or the promoted status of a post also enable posts 
associated with weaker ties to be shown to a user, sometimes located at the very 
top of their feed. Since social motives (i.e., to keep track of activities of significant 
others and preserve the status as a close friend) precede utilitarian motives (i.e., 
searching for marketplace information) in driving Facebook use, we put forth that 
people would be more attentive toward posts associated with strong-ties. It has also 
been documented that information shared by a strong-tie in an online context is 
more likely to be noticed (De Bruyn & Lilien, 2008). Therefore, we conceive that 
brand impressions embedded in the posts associated with strong ties will be more 
effective in terms of priming brands in memory, when compared to those embedded 
in posts associated with weak ties.
Proposition 3: The strength of the social tie between the observer and the person 
associated with the brand impression positively relates to brand recall in brand 
impressions delivered via Facebook.
Homophily
Source similarity or homophily refers to the degree to which individuals are similar 
in terms of certain shared social characteristics (Rogers, 1983). Festinger’s (1954) 
theory of social comparison may provide a theoretical ground explaining how per-
ceived source similarity may influence effectiveness of brand impressions in SNs. 
This theory proposes that people tend to compare their attitudes and capabilities 
with those of others. According to Festinger (1954), the tendency to compare oneself 
with another person increases as that person is seen to be similar to oneself, because 
individuals assume that similar people have similar needs and preferences. Several 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
132
studies have found a positive relationship between homophily and persuasiveness 
and credibility of the information transmitted in the online contexts (Brown, Brod-
erick, & Lee, 2007; Prendergast, Ko, & Yuen, 2010). Following this logic, a post 
/ ad that is associated with a person whose personal characteristics are perceived 
as similar to the viewer should draw more attention and trigger a higher level of 
cognitive processing than a post / ad associated with a person who is perceived as 
dissimilar, hence result in higher brand recall performance.
Proposition 4: Homophily between the observer and the person associated with 
the brand impression positively relates to brand recall in brand impressions 
delivered via Facebook.
Trust
The literature in a variety of fields from philosophy to sociology and marketing is 
replete with studies on trust (Morgan & Hunt, 1994; Sullivan & Transue, 1999; War-
ren, 1999) and numerous definitions of trust have been offered (Corritore, Kracher, 
& Wiedenback, 2003). The unifying theme has always been the expectation that one 
can rely on the words or promises of another (Rotter, 1971). It is a mechanism for 
reducing complexity and for dealing with uncertainty (Luhmann, 1988). As such, 
trust is usually regarded as a catalyst in general consumer-marketer relationships, 
especially in online relationships (Lee, 2005), and influences message processing 
and attitudes toward advertising (Palka, Pousttchi, & Wiedemann, 2009; Sternthal, 
Dholakia, & Leavitt, 1978).
Trust in the context of SNs facilitates users’ reliance on the usefulness of infor-
mation attained from other registered SNs members to justify and evaluate personal 
decisions (Pigg & Crank, 2004; Ridings, Gefen, & Arinze, 2002). In situations where 
individuals do not yet have credible and meaningful information about the other 
party, initial trust formation occurs (McKnight, Cummings, & Chervany, 1998). 
Gradually through experience and familiarity knowledge-based and respect-based 
trust develops and it offers the highest form of commitment in relationships (Koehn, 
2003). SNs friendships often involve such parties with whom trust perceptions are at 
the initial stages of formation, and thus are goal-based or calculative-based that rely 
on assessments of benefits versus costs. Drawing on the literature on motivations of 
SNs use, benefits and costs associated with trusting the other party in the context of 
SNs should be largely perceived and assessed with respect to the social agenda of the 
user, driven by impression management needs. Therefore, we posit that, in order not 
to risk missing important pieces of information that may have social value (social 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
133
statuses of people, places, brands, ideas) and to minimize the risk of associating 
one’s profile with content that may inflict undesired effects on the delicate matter of 
impression management, a post / ad associated with a more trustworthy Facebook 
friend should be given priority in attentive and cognitive processes.
Proposition 5: Trust toward the person associated with the brand impression posi-
tively relates to brand recall in brand impressions delivered via Facebook.
Perceived Popularity
Both the source-attractiveness model of McCracken (1989) and the law of at-
traction of Byrne (1971) suggest that message effectiveness depends chiefly on 
the perceived attractiveness of the source. Receivers can better identify with and 
understand sources that are perceived as more attractive and therefore perceived 
source attractiveness increases the persuasiveness of the information transmitted. 
Extant research in interpersonal judgments suggests that there exists a positive and 
reciprocal relationship between perceived popularity and perceived attractiveness 
in terms of a variety desired characteristics, such as self-confidence, social appeal, 
and extraversion (Berry & Miller, 2001; Eagly et al., 1991). This reciprocal rela-
tionship also implies that perceived popularity may contribute to perceived source 
attractiveness.
In Facebook, the network size of an individual is revealed by a coefficient 
showing the number of friends. This coefficient may well serve to establish how 
well-liked an individual is, and also to provide clues about the profile owner’s social 
status, physical attractiveness, or credibility, consequently serve as an indicator of 
popularity (Tong et al., 2008). In line with this argument, Ellison, Steinfeld and 
Lampe (2007) found that “Friending” large numbers of people is one of the (if 
not the) main activities of Facebook. The fact that behavioral residues (i.e., posts 
left on the wall, ratings) generated by friends on Facebook are used by observers 
in impression formation processes has already been documented by Walther et al. 
(2008). Accordingly, it seems plausible an individual who appears to have lots of 
friends in Facebook is likely to be seen as a more attractive source, and hence his or 
her posts or ads associated with his or her profile would draw more attention from 
viewers and trigger a higher level of cognitive processing, consequently resulting 
in an increased brand recall performance.
Proposition 6: Perceived popularity of the person associated with the brand impression 
positively relates to brand recall in brand impressions delivered via Facebook.

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
134
METHODOLOGY
Procedure
The algorithm of Facebook uses several factors to determine top stories relevant for 
each user, including the number of comments, who posted the story, and what type 
of post it is. Accordingly, each user receives a different set of stories in their News 
Feed. Therefore, generating and using experimental stimuli (e.g., delivering users’ 
stories about fictitious brands via fictitious friends) and establishing a factorial de-
sign (which would have been the preferable experimental setting for the overarching 
research goals) were not attainable. In our pilot studies, which involved in-depth 
interviews and observations, we saw that users feel a sense of embeddedness within 
their social networks and experience medium-specific instant gratifications while 
using Facebook. Therefore, conducting the research live in Facebook was crucial 
for the realism and the applicability of our findings. We designed the following data 
collection method to reconcile our goals and limitations.
Subjects, in groups of 20 (the maximum number of people the computer lab 
could accommodate at a given time), were individually seated in front of personal 
computers in a computer lab. Once all the subjects were seated, they were asked 
to log in to their Facebook accounts. They were informed that a study will be con-
ducted about their Facebook use, and no personally identifiable information will 
be collected or recorded. They were specifically asked not to leave Facebook, and 
if they somehow are directed to other landing pages via clicking links in Facebook 
posts, they should return back to their Facebook News Feed. They were allowed 
to spend 5 minutes freely on Facebook unsupervised. At the back of the lab, three 
research assistants carefully observed the screens of the computers to ensure that 
subjects were doing what they were instructed. Following the 5 minute period (the 
duration of the experiment), the subjects were asked to shut-down their screens and 
to write down all of the brand names they could recall in 4 minutes for the brands 
they saw during the time they spent using Facebook. The research assistants asked 
participants to randomly select 3 of the brands from their list of recalled brands. 
Then, they were asked to turn-on their screens and scroll-up to find the posts related 
to these 3 brands they randomly selected from their lists. Subjects answered all the 
questionnaire items for each of these three specific posts / ads (i.e., brand-related 
characteristics, social connotations, like count, and interaction). Then, participants 
were asked to search for posts / ads in their News Feeds that: 1) involve brands that 
are not included in the recalled brands list, and 2) they remember paying attention 
to. Among the list of non-recalled brands the participants again randomly selected 
3 brands. Finally, they answered the same set of questions for each of the 3 specific 
posts / ads which involve a randomly selected non-recalled brand. Summated scores 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
135
were calculated for each of the questionnaire items for both brands that were recalled 
and brands that were not recalled. In order to avoid potential response biases, we 
tried to ensure that subjects did not know the purpose of the study prior to their 
participation.
Sample
The sample of the study consisted of 291 university students, recruited by banners 
posted on both public boards and on a variety of online media used by university 
students. Applicants were filtered based on their familiarity with SNs and Facebook 
in particular. Those who are active users of Facebook were included in the sample. 
The subjects were primarily urban youth, of which 149 were male (51.2%) and 142 
were female (48.8%). Their ages ranged from 18 to 26. Subjects’ number of friends 
on Facebook ranged from 52 to 2217, with an average of 540.
Measures and Measurement Validation
Following the procedure employed by Jungsun and Ferle (2008) and Lerman and 
Garbarino (2002), brand name recall was measured by providing the subjects with 
a four-minute time period in which to write down all of the brand names they 
could recall for the brands they saw during the time they spent using Facebook. 
Brand involvement (α = .92), self-brand congruity (α = .85), tie-strength (α = .91), 
homophily (α = .90), and trust (α = .91) were measured by using 5-point Likert 
scales adapted from the relevant literature. Scale items and their sources are shown 
in the Appendix. The number of Facebook Friends coefficient is used as a proxy 
for perceived popularity of the profile associated with a post / ad. The number of 
Likes coefficient provided the like-count of each post. Finally, five Yes/No questions 
were used for the interaction options provided in Facebook: clicking a link within 
the post, Liking, sharing, tagging, and writing a comment.
Additionally, a set of control variables were also recorded to capture individual 
Facebook behavior during the experiment to aid interpretation of the results: the 
number of posts seen, number of brands available for recall in posts reviewed, 
number of posts with multiple mentions of a brand name, number of brands that 
are mentioned in multiple posts.
A confirmatory factor analysis involving all multi-item constructs is conducted 
in order to assess the psychometric properties of the measures. The fit statistics 
indicated a good fit for the measurement model (chi-square = 1301.76; df = 620; 
IFI = 0.93; TLI = 0.92; CFI = 0.93; RMSEA = 0.062) (Hu & Bentler, 1999). 
All standardized factor loadings were significant (p < 0.001) and higher than .60 
(Anderson & Gerbing, 1988), average variance extracted estimates for all factors 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
136
were well above 0.50 and composite reliability figures for all factors were above 
0.75 (CRInolvement = 0.92, CRSelf-Brand Congruence = 0.90, CRTie-Strength = 0.76, CRHomophily = 
0.90; CRTrust =0 .83). These figures provide evidence for the convergent validity and 
internal consistency of measurement items (Hair et al., 2006). In addition, for all 
constructs the variance extracted values were higher than squared correlations with 
other factors, providing evidence for discriminant validity (Fornell & Larcker, 1981).
Data Analysis
Before attempting to assess the differences between the means of the theoretical 
predictors of brand recall in SNs between the brands that were successfully recalled 
and were failed to be recalled, the potential effects of several confounding factors are 
controlled for. First, the effect of recency and primacy of exposure was controlled 
by examining the vertical positions of the post in which the brand appeared within 
the News Feed for both recalled and non-recalled brands. Only 22 percent of the 
recalled brands were located in the top five posts and the last five posts reached by 
the user by scrolling down in the News Feed. Further analyses showed that the effect 
of vertical position in the News Feed on brand recall was not statistically significant. 
Second, we have regressed the number of posts seen, number of brands available for 
recall in posts reviewed, number of posts with multiple mentions of a brand name, 
number of brands that are mentioned in multiple posts on brand recall. None of the 
factors were significant. It was also interesting to see that in none of the cases there 
were more than 3 posts that mention the same brand.
Our research design limits the available options for subsequent data analysis to 
only paired-sample t-tests and Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests (associated drawbacks 
are discussed in the limitations section). A series of paired-sample t-tests were 
conducted to assess the differences between the mean values of the theoretical pre-
dictors of brand recall in SNS. Next, a series of Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Tests are 
Table 1. Reliability and validity
Constructs
Α
CR
AVE
1
2
3
4
5
1. Brand Involvement 
0.92
0.92
0.61
0.78
2. Self-Brand Congruity 
0.85
0.90
0.59
0.57
0.77
3. Tie-Strength 
0.91
0.76
0.82
0.16
.019
0.91
4. Homophily 
0.90
0.90
0.75
0.29
0.34
0.67
0.87
5. Trust 
0.91
0.83
0.77
0.22
0.19
0.69
0.59
0.88
Notes: The analysis was performed with maximum likelihood method. Diagonal elements in bold are the 
square root of AVE. Off-diagonal elements are correlations between the constructs. α, Cronbach’s Alpha, CR, 
composite reliability; AVE, average variance extracted.

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
137
conducted to assess the differences between the levels of “Like count”, “Number 
of friends / fans” as a proxy for popularity, and five interaction options offered by 
Facebook among recalled and non-recalled brands.
RESULTS
The number of brands recalled ranged between 1 and 12, with a median of 4 brands. 
The frequency of number of brands recalled is shown in Figure 1. 81.4 percent of the 
recalled brands have appeared within the News Feed, while 18.6 percent appeared 
in the side bar embedded within ads with social and sponsored stories. Among 
the recalled impressions occurred in the News Feed, 39.2 percent came from page 
publishing (i.e., the owner of the post was a Fan Page, not a personal account), and 
the rest (60.8%) were in the form of stories about friends.
The mean values, paired-samples correlations, and associated t-values are shown 
in Table 2. Although all the mean differences were in the expected direction, only 
Figure 1. Frequency of number of brands recalled

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
138
the levels of self-brand congruence (t = 2.67; p < 0.01), trust (t = 2.60; p < 0.01), 
and tie-strength (t = 2.18; p < 0.05) differed significantly between the recalled 
brands and non-recalled brands. In order to reduce the chances of obtaining false-
positive results (type I errors), a Bonferroni correction is performed, which revealed 
that with a more conservative error-rate only self-brand congruence and trust sig-
nificantly relates to brand recall.
As shown in Table 3, Wilcoxon Signed-rank tests revealed that, although with 
relatively small effect sizes, popularity (Z = -3.36, p < 0.05, r = 0.20) and clicking 
a link in the post / ad in which the brand appears (Z = -2.29, p < 0.05, r = 0.13) 
significantly effects brand recall. On the other hand, the effects of “Like count” (Z 
= -0.29, p = 0.78, r = 0.02), and the other four engagement options including Lik-
ing (Z = -0.84, p = 0.40, r = 0.05), Sharing (Z = -0.63, p = 0.53, r = 0.04), posting 
a comment (Z = -0.63, p = 0.53, r = 0.04), and tagging (Z = -0.82, p = 0.41, r = 
0.05) were insignificant. Overall, findings supported propositions 2, 3, 5 and 6, 
whereas propositions 1 and 4 were rejected.
Table 2. Comparison of group means
Construct
df
M Recall 
M No Recall 
Paired 
Correlation
t-value
Brand Involvement 
290
3.11
3.01
0.25
1.20
Self-Brand Congruence 
290
3.14
2.92
0.13
2.67 **
Tie-strength 
290
2.97
2.76
0.10
2.18 *
Homophily 
290
2.82
2.71
0.17
1.28
Trust 
290
2.88
2.66
0.21
2.60 **
* p < 0.05
** p < 0.01
Table 3. Results of the Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test
Construct
Z
R
Popularity 
-3.36 *
0.20
Clicking a Link 
-2.29 *
0.13
Like Count 
-0.29
0.02
Liking 
-0.84
0.05
Sharing 
-0.63
0.04
Posting a Comment 
-0.63
0.04
Tagging 
-0.82
0.05
* p < 0.05

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
139
LIMITATIONS
There are several limitations of the present study. In line with our exploratory inten-
tions, we collected data while respondents were live on their Facebook accounts, 
experiencing their regular Facebook screen. This approach not only reduced our 
ability to control the effects of many unrecognized factors [see a detailed discussion 
on the effects of unobserved heterogeneity (Becker et al., 2013)], but the practical 
impossibility of delivering experimental stimuli to predetermined groups of people 
(i.e., employing a factorial design) also constrained the scope of statistical analyses 
available and forced us to use a series of paired-sample t-tests and Wilcoxon Signed 
Ranks Tests (instead of more stringent statistical tests to examine effects such as 
ANOVA). Therefore, from a theoretical perspective, the exploratory nature of the 
analyses in the present study precludes us from offering causal explanations for the 
observed relationships. Acknowledging this major drawback of the present study, we 
believe the study is capable of contributing substantially to research in the domain 
of advertising on online social networks.
Another limitation relates to the issue of attention paid to the posts. We were un-
able to record how much attention, if any, was paid to the posts, specifically where 
the non-recalled brands appeared. Direct observation would have jeopardized the 
realism of the experiment and retrospective self-report questions would have been 
misleading. The sample characteristics (291 university students) also limit the 
generalizability of the findings to other demographic groups.
Lastly, it is important for marketing that a brand is recalled when the actual deci-
sion to buy is being made. The ability to retrieve a brand during the decision process 
depends on how strongly the brand is linked in memory with the need. Unfortunately, 
since each user receives a different set of stories in their News Feed, we were unable 
to use an experimental stimulus and hence had to measure recall independently of 
the need. Future research may adopt a scenario approach to overcome this weak-
ness, which will inevitably jeopardize the external validity of the empirical setting.
DISCUSSION AND AVENUES FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Results of the present research indicate a positive relationship between brand recall:
1. 	
Self-brand congruence,
2. 	
Tie-strength with,
3. 	
Trust toward, and
4. 	
Perceived popularity of the profile associated with the post, and
5. 	
Clicking a link embedded in the post / ad in which the brand appears.

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
140
On the other hand, we failed to find a significant difference between the levels 
of brand involvement, homophily with the profile associated with the post / ad, like-
count, and four types of built-in user-interaction options including liking, sharing, 
posting a comment and tagging among the brands that were successfully retrieved 
from the memory and those were not.
The findings of the present research, although exploratory in nature, provide 
interesting insights regarding the four overarching research questions. Regarding 
the first research question, the fact that each of our subjects successfully retrieved 
at least one brand impression freely from their memory, suggests brand impressions 
in Facebook have the potential to affect short-term memory. This finding when 
combined with the results of the survey-based study conducted by Mariani and Mu-
hammed (2014) in which 87% of every-day Facebook users reported noticing brand 
advertisement in Facebook, supports the practice of advertising in social media.
Regarding the second research question, our findings provide exploratory evi-
dence regarding how an array of literature-based theoretical predictors of brand 
awareness in social media relates to brand recall in a realistic setting. Self-brand 
congruence, tie-strength with, trust toward, and perceived popularity of the profile 
associated with the post, and clicking a link embedded in the post / ad in which 
the brand positively relate with brand recall. On the other hand, we failed to find 
a significant difference between the levels of brand involvement, homophily with 
the person associated with the post / ad, like-count, and four types of built-in user-
interaction options including liking, sharing, posting a comment and tagging among 
the brands that were successfully retrieved from the memory and those were not. 
Although the exploratory nature of our research design forbids us to make strong 
generalizations, these findings may have interesting theoretical and practical im-
plications for marketing in SNs.
The theoretical foundation of the hypothesized relationships between self-brand 
congruence, tie-strength, trust, and popularity and brand recall rests on the assump-
tion that SNS use is primarily driven by social needs such as self-expression and 
impression management (boyd, 2007; boyd & Ellison, 2007; Marwick & boyd, 2011). 
When people are highly involved with a task, their attention can be directed toward 
an item because it is relevant to the task at hand (Jessen & Rodway, 2010). Driven 
by their preoccupation with impression management, it may be plausible that SNs 
users orient themselves toward or process information from only those posts / ads 
that may in the future serve as desirable identity signals when associated with their 
profiles. Brands that are congruent with users’ desired self-images, may serve as 
excellent aids for identity construction; hence those posts that involve such brands 
may be selected for deeper processing. These findings resonate well with the find-
ings of the study conducted by Soares and Pinho (2014), in which they found that 
group norms and social identity significantly and positively influences perceived 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
141
advertising relevance in online social advertising. When coupled with results of 
the Soares and Pinho (2014), our findings indicate that brand communication in 
social media may aid the motivation to publicly announce social identity and group 
memberships.
Perceptions regarding trustworthiness and popularity of the person associated 
with a post/ad are also found to relate positively with brand recall. It seems that the 
task-at-hand, strategic impression management, not only influences how SNs users 
select the content they interact with, but may also affects to whom they tune-in to. 
It is plausible that in order not to miss important chunks of socially important and 
social identity-relevant information, people seek for and carefully evaluate the posts 
/ ads associated with popular and trustworthy sources.
Conversely, brand involvement was not associated with brand recall in SNs. In 
accordance with the logic presented above, a possible explanation for this outcome 
may be grounded on the fact that people do not search for brand-related informa-
tion on SNs, instead they are attentive toward socially-relevant cues and behavioral 
residues. SNs users are more concerned with the content associated with the people 
they are involved with, not the brands. They are more involved with the brands to 
the extent that the associations of the brand cater to their desired self-images. In 
drawing this explanation we also relied on the notes we took during the in-depth 
interviews. Many of the respondents either directly or indirectly stated that interact-
ing with brands on social media is actually a social act full of cultural meanings and 
values. They emphasized that interaction with branded content is actually a form 
of consumer-to-consumer interaction that occurs around sharing of brand-related 
values. This inference fits well with Kozinets’ (2014) definition of social brand en-
gagement as “a meaningful connection, creation and communication between one 
consumer and one or more other consumers, using brand or brand-related language, 
images and meanings” (p. 10). Cumulatively, this outlook suggests that targeting 
and segmentation of users in SNs should focus on social needs and gratifications, 
instead of utilitarian needs or interest-based characteristics. Further, the results 
suggest that the meaning of “being a Fan” in SNs may diverge from conventional 
settings, because perceptions related with image-related congruency of a brand 
seems to weigh heavier than other dimensions of brand involvement (i.e., personal 
interests, goals, product category) in the context of SNs in influencing cognitive 
processing of brand-related messages.
Regarding our third research question, among the four built-in interaction options 
provided by Facebook examined in the present study (liking, sharing, tagging, and 
posting a comment), none could cognitively engage our subjects enough to facilitate 
brand recall. Our results showed that only clicking a link placed within a post is 

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
142
associated with brand recall, which is probably due to the fact that clicking a link 
takes the user away from the Facebook News Feed and lands the user to a more 
brand-focused page. When the Facebook-specific interaction options are considered, 
the actions of liking, sharing and tagging can be enacted by a single mouse click, 
which often do not require elaborate cognitive processing. The comments underneath 
a post may sometimes be totally unrelated with the original content. People converse 
via posting comments underneath posts, and the topic of the conversation quickly 
shifts away from the post itself. Similarly, liking and tagging a particular content 
may serve as means to interact with the owner of the post, not the post itself. All 
these provide potential explanations as for why the relationship between these actions 
and brand recall was insignificant. Therefore, marketers should be cautious when 
relying on the ability of the number of the incidences of these actions associated 
with their content in assessing the true marketing impact of their activities in SNs.
Finally, “Like-count”, a frequently used success metric in the industry, does 
not seem to qualify as a reliable measure for brand awareness. Our failure to find a 
relationship between brand recall and Like-count raises an additional issue: What is 
the meaning of ‘like’ is in these environments? It can be speculated that the meaning 
of ‘like’ is broader than conventional understandings. It seems that the Like button 
serves many purposes. Thus, the meaning of a ‘like’ in SNs remains a mystery, 
which calls for future research.
The study of marketing communications in social media is still in an early stage. 
The present study provides insights regarding the impact of brand impressions in 
SNs on brand awareness and probably produces more questions than it elucidates 
concrete answers. There also exist many other relevant and important questions yet 
to be answered associated with brand impressions in SNs. For example, since our 
findings suggest that trust toward and tie-strength with the profile / page associated 
with the post are important predictors of brand recall, it a strategic imperative to shed 
light on the processes through which trust toward and tie-strength with a Fan Page 
are enhanced in SNs? Does media format (i.e., video, picture, text-based posts) affect 
brand recall in SNs? Is it possible to create new kinds of built-in interaction options 
that can improve the accessibility of brands in memory? Similar to the marketing 
effects of product and brand placements (Balasubramanian, Karrh, & Patwardhan, 
2006), can brand impressions in SNs exert an influence on implicit memory? How 
do the four different methods of delivering brand impressions on Facebook (i.e., 
sponsored stories, stories about friends, page publishing, and ads with social) differ 
in terms of their marketing impacts? Each of these issues is practically significant 
to advertisers, media planners and marketing theorists, yet remains untapped in the 
relevant literature and hence points toward an interesting direction for future research.

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
143
REFERENCES
Acquisti, A., & Gross, R. (2006, June). Imagined communities: Awareness, infor-
mation sharing, and privacy on the Facebook. In Privacy enhancing technologies 
(pp. 36–58). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/11957454_3
Alves, G., & Antunes, J. (2015). New paradigm in communication — The social 
networks between Brands and Consumers. In Information Systems and Technologies 
(CISTI), 2015 10th Iberian Conference.
Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural equation modeling in practice: 
A review and recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin, 103(3), 
411–423. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.103.3.411
Andrews, J. C., & Shimp, T. A. (1990). Effects of involvement, argument strength 
and source characteristics on central and peripheral processing in advertising. Psy-
chology and Marketing, 7(3), 195–214. doi:10.1002/mar.4220070305
Balasubramanian, S. K., Karrh, J. A., & Patwardhan, H. (2006). Audience Response 
to Product Placements: An Integrative Framework and Future Research Agenda. 
Journal of Advertising, 35(3), 115–141. doi:10.2753/JOA0091-3367350308
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and frequency of instantiation 
as determinants of graded structure. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learn-
ing, Memory, and Cognition, 11(4), 629–654. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.11.1-4.629 
PMID:2932520
Becker, J. M., Rai, A., Ringle, C. M., & Völckner, F. (2013). Discovering unobserved 
heterogeneity in structural equation models to avert validity threats. Management 
Information Systems Quarterly, 37(3), 665–694.
Berry, D. S., & Miller, K. M. (2001). When boy meets girl: Attractiveness and the 
five-factor model in opposite-sex interactions. Journal of Research in Personality, 
35(1), 62–77. doi:10.1006/jrpe.2000.2304
Bettman, J. R., & Park, C. W. (1980). Effects of prior knowledge and experience and 
phase of the choice process on consumer decision processes: A protocol analysis. 
The Journal of Consumer Research, 7(3), 234–248. doi:10.1086/208812
boyd, d., & Ellison, N. B. (2008). Social network sites: Definition, history, and 
scholarship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, 210-230.

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
144
boyd, d. (2007). Why youth heart social network sites: The role of networked publics 
in teenage social life. In D. Buckingham (Ed.), Youth, identity, and digital media: 
The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation series on digital media and 
learning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Broderick, A., & Mueller, R. D. (1999). A theoretical and empirical exigesis of the 
consumer involvement construct. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 7, 
97–108. doi:10.1080/10696679.1999.11501855
Brown, J., Broderick, A. J., & Lee, N. (2007). Word of mouth communication 
within online communities: Conceptualizing the online social network. Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, 21(3), 2–20. doi:10.1002/dir.20082
Brown, J. J., & Reingen, P. H. (1987). Social ties and word-of-mouth referral be-
havior. The Journal of Consumer Research, 14(3), 350–362. doi:10.1086/209118
Buss, A. H., & Briggs, S. R. (1984). Drama and the self in social interaction. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47(6), 1310–1324. doi:10.1037/0022-
3514.47.6.1310
Byrne, D. E. (1971). The attraction paradigm. New York: Academic Press.
Celsi, R. L., & Olson, J. C. (1988). The role of involvement in attention and 
comprehension processes. The Journal of Consumer Research, 15(2), 210–224. 
doi:10.1086/209158
Cho, C. H. (2003). Factors influencing clicking of banner ads on the www. Cy-
berpsychology & Behavior, 6(2), 201–215. doi:10.1089/109493103321640400 
PMID:12804033
Christofides, E., Muise, A., & Desmarais, S. (2009). Information disclosure and 
control on Facebook: Are they two sides of the same coin or two different pro-
cesses? Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 12(3), 341–345. doi:10.1089/cpb.2008.0226 
PMID:19250020
Chu, S., & Kim, Y. (2011). Determinants of consumer engagement in electronic 
word-of-mouth (eWOM) in social networking sites. International Journal of Ad-
vertising, 30(1), 47–75. doi:10.2501/IJA-30-1-047-075
Cohen, J. B. (1983). Involvement and you; 1000 great ideas. Proceedings: Associa-
tion for Consumer Research, 10, 325–328.
Corritore, C. L., Kracher, B., & Wiedenback, S. (2003). On-line trust: Concepts, 
evolving themes, a model. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58(6), 
737–778. doi:10.1016/S1071-5819(03)00041-7

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
145
De Bruyn, A., & Lilien, G. L. (2008). A multi-stage model of word-of-mouth in-
fluence through viral marketing. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 
25(3), 151–163. doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2008.03.004
Dillon, W. R., Madden, T. J., Kirmani, A., & Mukherjee, S. (2001). Understanding 
what is in a brand rating: A model for assessing brand and attribute effects and their 
relationship to brand equity. JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 38(4), 415–429. 
doi:10.1509/jmkr.38.4.415.18910
Donath, J., & Boyd, D. (2004). Public displays of connection. BT Technology Jour-
nal, 22(4), 71–82. doi:10.1023/B:BTTJ.0000047585.06264.cc
Eagly, A. H., Makhijani, M. G., Ashmore, R. D., & Longo, L. C. (1991). What is 
beautiful is good, but: A meta-analytic review of research on the physical attrac-
tiveness stereotype. Psychological Bulletin, 110(1), 109–128. doi:10.1037/0033-
2909.110.1.109
Ellison, N. B., Steinfeld, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of Facebook 
‘‘friends’’: Exploring the relationship between college students’ use of online social 
networks and social capital. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(4). 
doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00367.x
Escalas, J. E., & Bettman, J. R. (2003). You are what they eat: The influence of 
reference groups on consumer connections to brands. Journal of Consumer Psychol-
ogy, 13(3), 339–348. doi:10.1207/S15327663JCP1303_14
Escalas, J. E., & Bettman, J. R. (2005). Self-construal, reference groups and brand 
meaning. The Journal of Consumer Research, 32(3), 378–389. doi:10.1086/497549
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 
7(2), 117–140. doi:10.1177/001872675400700202
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with 
unobservable variables and measurement error. JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 
18(1), 39–50. doi:10.2307/3151312
Garton, L., Haythornthwaite, C., & Wellman, B. (1997). Studying online social 
networks. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 3(1).
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and recall. 
Psychological Review, 91(1), 1–67. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.91.1.1 PMID:6571421
Gilly, M. C., Graham, J. L., Wolfinbarger, M. F., & Yale, L. J. (1998). A dyadic 
study of interpersonal information search. Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, 26(2), 83–100. doi:10.1177/0092070398262001

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
146
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociol-
ogy, 78(6), 1360–1380. doi:10.1086/225469
Greenberg, A. S. (2012). The role of visual attention in Internet advertising. Journal 
of Advertising Research, 52(4), 400–404. doi:10.2501/JAR-52-4-400-404
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., Anderson, R. E., & Tatham, R. L. (2006). 
Multivariate data analysis (6th ed.). Pearson Prentice Hall.
Hansen, M. T. (1999). The search-transfer problem: The role of weak ties in sharing 
knowledge across organization subunits. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(1), 
82–111. doi:10.2307/2667032
Hoyer, W. D., & Brown, S. P. (1990). Effects of brand awareness on choice for 
a common, repeat purchase product. The Journal of Consumer Research, 17(2), 
141–148. doi:10.1086/208544
Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure 
analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Model-
ing, 6(1), 1–55. doi:10.1080/10705519909540118
Jessen, T. L., & Rodway, P. (2010). The effects of advertisement location and 
familiarity on selective attention. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 110(3), 941–960. 
doi:10.2466/pms.110.3.941-960 PMID:20681345
Jungsun, A., & La Ferle, C. (2008). Enhancing recall and recognition for brand 
names and body copy a mixed-language approach. Journal of Advertising, 37(3), 
107–117. doi:10.2753/JOA0091-3367370308
Kabadayi, S., & Price, K. (2014). Consumer–brand engagement on Facebook: Lik-
ing and commenting behaviors. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 8(3), 
203–223. doi:10.1108/JRIM-12-2013-0081
Keller, E., & Fay, B. (2012). Word-of-mouth advocacy: A new key to advertising 
effectiveness. Journal of Advertising Research, 52(4), 459–464. doi:10.2501/JAR-
52-4-459-464
Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring and managing consumer-based 
brand equity. Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 1–22. doi:10.2307/1252054
Kintsch, W., & Young, S. R. (1984). Selective recall of decision-relevant informa-
tion from texts. Memory & Cognition, 12(2), 112–117. doi:10.3758/BF03198424 
PMID:6727632

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
147
Koehn, D. (2003). The nature of and conditions for online trust. Journal of Business 
Ethics, 43(3), 3–19. doi:10.1023/A:1022950813386
Kozinets, R. V. (2014). Social media engagement: A new idea. GFK Marketing 
Intelligence Review, 6(2), 8–15. doi:10.2478/gfkmir-2014-0091
Laurent, G., & Kapferer, J. N. (1985). Measuring consumer involvement profiles. 
JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 22(1), 41–53. doi:10.2307/3151549
Lee, M., & Youn, S. (2009). Electronic word of mouth (eWOM): How eWOM plat-
forms influence consumer product judgment. International Journal of Advertising, 
28(3), 473–499. doi:10.2501/S0265048709200709
Lee, T. (2005). The impact of perceptions of interactivity on customer trust and 
transaction intentions in mobile commerce. Journal of Electronic Commerce Re-
search, 6(3), 165–181.
Lerman, D., & Garbarino, E. (2002). Recall and recognition of brand names: A 
comparison of word and non-word name types. Psychology and Marketing, 19(7/8), 
621–639. doi:10.1002/mar.10028
Lipsman, A., Mudd, G., Rich, M., & Bruich, S. (2012). The power of “like”: Brands 
reach (and influence) fans through social-media marketing. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 52(1), 40–52. doi:10.2501/JAR-52-1-040-052
Liu-Thompkins, Y. (2012). Seeding viral content: Lessons from the diffusion of 
online videos. Journal of Advertising Research, 52(4), 465–478. doi:10.2501/JAR-
52-4-465-478
Logan, K. (2014). Why Isn’t Everyone Doing It? A Comparison of Antecedents 
to Following Brands on Twitter and Facebook. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
14(2), 60–72. doi:10.1080/15252019.2014.935536
Lowrey, T. M., Shrum, L. J., & Dubitsky, T. M. (2003). The relation between brand-
name linguistic characteristics and brand-name memory. Journal of Advertising, 
32(3), 7–17. doi:10.1080/00913367.2003.10639137
Luhmann, N. (1988). Familiarity, confidence, trust: Problems and alternatives. In 
D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations (pp. 94–197). 
New York: Basil Blackwell.
Malhotra, A., Malhotra, C. K., & See, A. (2013). How to create brand engagement 
on Facebook. MIT Sloan Management Review, 54(2), 18–20.

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
148
Mariani, R., & Mohammed, D. (2014). “Like” A Global Endorsement. How Clicking 
“Like” Influences Facebook Users Brand Recall and Future Purchasing Intentions. 
Journal of Management Policy and Practice, 15(4), 51.
Marwick, A., & boyd, . (2011). I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, 
context collapse and the imagined audience. New Media & Society, 13(1), 96–113. 
doi:10.1177/1461444810365313
McCracken, G. (1989). Who is the celebrity endorser? Cultural foundation of 
the endorsement process. The Journal of Consumer Research, 16(3), 310–321. 
doi:10.1086/209217
McCroskey, J. C., Richmond, V. P., & Daly, J. A. (1975). The development of a 
measure of perceived homophily in interpersonal communication. Human Com-
munication Research, 1(4), 323–332. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.1975.tb00281.x
McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L. L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial trust forma-
tion in new organizational relationships. Academy of Management Review, 3(23), 
473–490.
Mitchell, A. A. (1979). Involvement: A potentially important mediator of consumer 
behavior. Proceedings: Association for Consumer Research, 6, 191–196.
Mittal, V., Huppertz, J. W., & Khare, A. (2008). Customer complaining: The role 
of tie strength and information control. Journal of Retailing, 84(2), 195–204. 
doi:10.1016/j.jretai.2008.01.006
Morgan, R. M., & Hunt, S. D. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of relationship 
marketing. Journal of Marketing, 58(3), 20–38. doi:10.2307/1252308
Muter, P. (1984). Recognition and recall of words with a single meaning. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10(2), 198–202. 
doi:10.1037/0278-7393.10.2.198
Nedungadi, P. (1990). Recall and consumer consideration sets: Influencing choice 
without altering brand evaluations. The Journal of Consumer Research, 17(3), 
263–276. doi:10.1086/208556
Nielsen. (2010). State of the media: The social media report. Nielsen, NM Incite.
Nisbet, E. C. (2006). The engagement model of opinion leadership: Testing valid-
ity within a European context. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 
18(1), 3–30. doi:10.1093/ijpor/edh100

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
149
Norris, C. E., & Colman, A. M. (1992). Context Effects on Recall and Recognition 
of Magazine Advertisements. Journal of Advertising, 21(September), 37–46. doi:
10.1080/00913367.1992.10673374
Novak, T. P., Hoffman, D. L., & Duhachek, A. (2003). The Influence of Goal-Directed 
and Experiential Activities on Online Flow Experiences. Journal of Consumer 
Psychology, 13(January), 3–16. doi:10.1207/S15327663JCP13-1&2_01
Palka, W., Pousttchi, K., & Wiedemann, D. G. (2009). Mobile word-of-mouth: A 
grounded theory of mobile viral marketing. Journal of Information Technology, 
24(2), 172–185. doi:10.1057/jit.2008.37
Park, C. W., & Lessig, V. P. (1981). Familiarity and its impact on decision biases and 
heuristics. The Journal of Consumer Research, 8(2), 223–230. doi:10.1086/208859
Phua, J., & Ahn, S. J. (2014). Explicating the ‘like’ on Facebook brand pages: The 
effect of intensity of Facebook use, number of overall ‘likes’, and number of friends 
‘‘likes’ on consumers’ brand outcomes. Journal of Marketing Communications, 1-16.
Pigg, K. E., & Crank, L. D. (2004). Building community social capital: The po-
tential and promise of information and communications technologies. Journal of 
Community Informatics, 1(1), 58–73.
Pornpitakpan, C. (2004). The persuasiveness of source credibility: A critical review 
of five decades of evidence. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(2), 243–281. 
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2004.tb02547.x
Prendergast, G., Ko, D., & Yuen, S. Y. V. (2010). Online word of mouth and con-
sumer purchase intentions. International Journal of Advertising, 29(5), 687–708. 
doi:10.2501/S0265048710201427
Reagans, R., & McEvily, B. (2003). Network structure and knowledge transfer: The 
effects of cohesion and range. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48(2), 240–267. 
doi:10.2307/3556658
Ridings, C. M., Gefen, D., & Arinze, B. (2002). Some antecedents and effects of 
trust in virtual communities. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 11(3&4), 
271–295. doi:10.1016/S0963-8687(02)00021-5
Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusion of innovations (3rd ed.). New York: Free Press.
Rohm, A., Kaltcheva, V. D., & Milne, G. R. (2013). A mixed-method approach to 
examining brand-consumer interactions driven by social media. Journal of Research 
in Interactive Marketing, 7(4), 295–311. doi:10.1108/JRIM-01-2013-0009

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
150
Rotter, J. B. (1971). Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust. The American 
Psychologist, 26(5), 443–452. doi:10.1037/h0031464
Schivinski, B., & Dabrowski, D. (2014). The effect of social media communication 
on consumer perceptions of brands. Journal of Marketing Communications, 1-26.
Sirgy, M. J. (1982). Self-concept in consumer behavior: A critical review. The 
Journal of Consumer Research, 9(3), 287–300. doi:10.1086/208924
Sirgy, M. J. (1985). Self-image/product-image congruity and consumer decision-
making. International Journal of Management, 2(4), 49–63.
Sirgy, M. J. (1986). Self-congruity: Toward a theory of personality and cybernetics. 
New York: Praeger.
Sirgy, M. J., Grewal, D., Mangleburg, T. F., Park, J., Chon, K., & Claiborne, C. B. 
et al. (1997). Assessing the predictive validity of two methods of measuring self-
image congruence. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 25(3), 229–241. 
doi:10.1177/0092070397253004
Soares, A. M., & Pinho, J. C. (2014). Advertising in online social networks: The 
role of perceived enjoyment and social influence. Journal of Research in Interactive 
Marketing, 8(3), 245–263. doi:10.1108/JRIM-01-2013-0004
Sternthal, B., Dholakia, R., & Leavitt, C. (1978). The persuasive effect of source 
credibility: Tests of cognitive response. The Journal of Consumer Research, 4(4), 
252–260. doi:10.1086/208704
Sullivan, J. L., & Transue, J. E. (1999). The psychological underpinnings of democ-
racy: A selective review of research on political tolerance, interpersonal trust, and 
social capital. Annual Review of Psychology, 50(1), 625–650. doi:10.1146/annurev.
psych.50.1.625 PMID:15012465
Taylor, D. G., Lewin, J. E., & Strutton, D. (2011). Friends, fans and followers: Do 
ads work on social networks? Journal of Advertising Research, 51(1), 285–296. 
doi:10.2501/JAR-51-1-258-275
Tong, S. T., Van Der Heide, B., Langwell, L., & Walther, J. B. (2008). Too much 
of a good thing? The relationship between number of friends and interpersonal 
impressions on Facebook. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(3), 
531–549. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2008.00409.x
Tsai, W. H. S., & Men, L. R. (2013). Motivations and antecedents of consumer 
engagement with brand pages on social networking sites. Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 13(2), 76–87. doi:10.1080/15252019.2013.826549

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
151
Vadivu, V. M., & Neelamalar, M. (2015). Digital brand management — A study on 
the factors affecting customers’ engagement in Facebook pages. In Smart Technologies 
and Management for Computing, Communication, Controls, Energy and Materials 
(ICSTM),2015 International Conference. doi:10.1109/ICSTM.2015.7225392
Vanden Bergh, B. G., Lee, M., Quilliam, E., & Hove, T. (2011). The multidimensional 
nature and brand impact of user-generated ad parodies in social media. International 
Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 103–131.
Wallace, E. (2014). Who Likes You and Why? A typology of Facebook Fans. Journal 
of Advertising Research, (March), 93–109.
Walther, J. B., Van Der Heide, B., Kim, S., Westerman, D., & Tong, S. T. (2008). 
The role of friends’ behavior on evaluations of individuals’ Facebook profiles: Are 
we known by the company we keep? Human Communication Research, 34, 28–49. 
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.2007.00312.x
Warren, M. E. (1999). Democracy and trust. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/
CBO9780511659959
Zaichowsky, J. L. (1986). Conceptualizing involvement. Journal of Advertising, 
15(2), 4–14. doi:10.1080/00913367.1986.10672999
Zuckerberg, M. (2008). Thoughts on the evolution of Facebook. Facebook Blog. 
Retrieved from http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=31033537130

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
152
APPENDIX
Final Items Used in Testing and Analyses
Brand Involvement: (Jungsun & La Ferle, 2008; Cho, 2003)
1. 	
The brand is important to me.
2. 	
I get involved with the brand.
3. 	
The brand is relevant to me.
4. 	
I am going to use / buy a product of the brand in the next six months.
5. 	
I am interested in the brand in general.
Trust: (Chu & Kim, 2011)
1. 	
I trust the owner of the profile / page associated with the post / ad.
2. 	
I have confidence in the owner of the profile / page associated with the post / 
ad.
3. 	
I can believe in the owner of the profile / page associated with the post / ad.
Self-Brand Congruence: (Sirgy et al., 1997)
1. 	
The brand is consistent with how I see myself.
2. 	
The brand caters to people like me.
3. 	
The brand reflects who I am.
4. 	
The typical customers of the brand are very much like me.
Homophily: (McCroskey et al., 1975)
The owner of the profile / page associated with the post / ad …
1. 	
Thinks like me.
2. 	
Behaves like me.
3. 	
Similar to me.
4. 	
Is like me.

Determinants of Brand Recall in Social Networking Sites
153
Tie-Strength: (Chu & Kim, 2011; Brown & Reingen, 1987)
1. 	
I frequently communicate with the owner of the profile / page associated with 
the post / ad.
2. 	
Overall, the owner of the profile / page associated with the post / ad is important 
for me.
3. 	
Overall, I feel close to the owner of the profile / page associated with the post 
/ ad.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch008
Chapter 8
154 
The Impact of Social 
Media on Customer 
Engagement with 
U.S. Banks
ABSTRACT
This chapter has two main aims. First, to investigate the Facebook practices used in 
the U.S. banking sector with the aim of enhancing customer engagement; second, 
to perform a comparative analysis of the use of Facebook in this respect, among 
different U.S. banks. In this comparative analysis, we apply the Federal Reserve 
charter classification (Nationally chartered member bank, State-chartered member 
bank and State-chartered nonmember bank). The findings of this study contribute 
significantly to our understanding of the influence of social media in enhancing 
customer engagement. Banks, and their community managers in particular, can 
make use of the conclusions drawn in this study to develop future strategies to foster 
citizen engagement via Facebook.
Arturo Haro-de-Rosario
University of Almería, Spain
Laura Saraite
University of Almería, Spain
Alejandro Sáez-Martin
University of Almería, Spain
María del Carmen Caba-Pérez
University of Almería, Spain

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
155
INTRODUCTION
Social media, based on Web 2.0 technologies, have elevated online communica-
tions to a new level (Constantinides & Fountain, 2008). According to Mitic and 
Kapoulas (2012), social media are becoming an integral part of consumers’ lives 
and can enhance the understanding of their needs and preferences, on the basis of 
shared information. Therefore, social media could help organisations build up brand 
awareness, visibility, reputation, knowledge sharing and customer acquisition and 
retention (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010; Bolotaeva & Cata, 2010).
The fast rate of Social Media adoption, and their rapidly growing popularity, 
encourages speculation on the potential goldmine that lies within the complex net-
work of user commentaries, testimonials and communities (Eccleston & Griseri, 
2008; Hardey, 2009). In this respect, Mitic and Kapoulas (2012) observed that social 
media have quickly escalated to become a global phenomenon where connectedness 
to Facebook or Twitter is everything and the ability to acquire “follows”, “likes” 
or “shares” means power. In consequence, inspired by the power of social media to 
engage users, organisations have begun to seek ways to learn to leverage these “likes”, 
“shares” and “comments” for profit making (Andriole, 2010; Culnan et al., 2010).
In a banking context, social media allow customers to engage, collaborate and 
interact, and present an opportunity for those banks which strategically adopt Web 
2.0 technologies into their organisation structure. Thus, social media provide a 
perfect platform for customer relationship management (Chikandiwa et al., 2013). 
Moreover, according to Bonsón and Flores (2011) and Gritten (2011), social media 
could enable banks to regain the customer trust that had been lost due to the recent 
economic crisis.
The most popular social media used by banks, for the purpose of communicat-
ing with their customers, are Facebook and Twitter (Chikandiwa et al., 2013; Goi, 
2014). Samuels (2013) observed that banks are now using social media like Face-
book far more intensively, as it affords them more space in which to post images, 
information and private messages. Similarly, Logvinov (2013) argued that banks are 
turning to social media to build and rebuild their customer relationships by inviting 
their customers to participate in the business, such as helping other customers and 
designing new products and services.
Taking the view that the appropriate use of social media can raise levels of 
customer feedback, loyalty and engagement (Beuker, 2009; Gallaugher & Ransbo-
tham, 2010), pioneers in social media are emerging in the banking sector (Mitic & 
Kapoulas, 2012). In the U.S., banks such as Citibank, Bank of America and ING 
Direct now have an active presence in social media, oriented toward creating rap-
port with customers and providing interactive online service support (Stone, 2009; 
Cohen, 2010). However, according to Klimis (2010), European banks appear to be 

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
156
more reserved, and there are fewer examples of their presence in the social media. 
Therefore, although social media implementation in banking is emerging (especially 
in the U.S.), the sector is still at an early stage of establishing a social media presence 
and using Web 2.0 technologies to enhance engagement with customers (Cocheo, 
2009; Hardey, 2009; Klimis, 2010).
The literature on the banking sector has abundant references to online and electronic 
services (e.g. e-banking), but has paid relatively little attention to the adoption and 
use of social media (Mitic & Kapoulas, 2012; Chikandiwa et al., 2013; Goi, 2014; 
Murray et al., 2014). Furthermore, most previous studies in this field have used 
interviews or questionnaires, although it has been argued that metrics measuring the 
effectiveness of social media engagement and its impact on customer relationships 
are still vague, and to date no hard evidence has been produced to prove the benefits 
of social media for the banking sector (Jaser, 2010; Vemuri, 2010). Therefore, there 
is a need to investigate, based on social media profiles, how certain banks adopt 
social media, why others resist the trend, and what could be learned from their 
practices and approaches.
Taking these considerations into account, this chapter has two main aims. First, 
to investigate the Facebook practices used in the U.S. banking sector with the aim 
of enhancing customer engagement; second, to perform a comparative analysis of 
the use of Facebook in this respect, among different U.S. banks. In this comparative 
analysis, we apply the Federal Reserve charter classification (Nationally chartered 
member bank, State-chartered member bank and State-chartered nonmember 
bank). The findings of this study contribute significantly to our understanding of 
the influence of social media in enhancing customer engagement. Banks, and their 
community managers in particular, can make use of the conclusions drawn in this 
study to develop future strategies to foster citizen engagement via Facebook. In ad-
dition, by exploring the differences among U.S. banks regarding their adoption of 
social media to increase customer engagement, we gain a better understanding of the 
possibilities of social media and their implementation in this sector of the economy. 
As a more general outcome, we hope that this research will spur reflection on the 
benefits offered by the adoption of social media in this sector and related industries.
Web 2.0 Technologies and Social Media in the Banking Sector
Due to increased competition, the greater homogeneity of financial products and 
services, globalisation and the recent economic crisis, financial institutions have had 
to increase the level of services provided in order to improve customer satisfaction, 
increase the degree of differentiation from the competition and, ultimately, involve 
the entire organisation in customer satisfaction (Liebana & Muñoz, 2013). This 
shift, known as Customer Relationship Management, has produced a transforma-

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
157
tion in financial institutions, both in their organisational model and in their business 
management model (Liebana et al., 2011). Thus, new technological solutions have 
been introduced into the banking sector via the internet, leading to the creation of 
‘electronic banking’ (Gerrard et al., 2006;. Suriya et al., 2012; Liebana & Muñoz, 
2013).
Electronic banking is defined as the combination of online banking activities (e-
banking) and relational marketing through the internet (Mukhtar, 2015). E-banking 
allows services to be offered at lower cost, by eliminating intermediaries, and makes 
them easily accessible (Ozdemir & Trott, 2009; Flavián et al., 2006). Moreover, the 
internet provides an alternative marketing channel, one that banks can use to attract 
and maintain new customers (Mukhtar, 2015).
Banks’ rising interest in retaining customers and strengthening their engagement 
has evolved in parallel with the growth of the internet (Wirtz et al., 2010). The 
social media, arising with the development of Web 2.0 tools, are considered the 
“next milestone” in the evolution and analysis of corporate information (Bonsón & 
Flores, 2011). The new possibilities of social interaction are considered a key aspect 
of achieving customer engagement and entering into close relations with stakehold-
ers (Sashi, 2012). Social media also facilitate the creation of value between the 
company and the customer (Harrison & Barthel, 2009). Therefore, this new phase 
of the internet, in which users of social media are no longer restricted to consulting 
online information, but can actively participate in its creation, has opened the way 
to the quick and easy communicating, collaborating and sharing of information 
online (Bonsón & Rathaki, 2013).
Mitic and Kapoulas (2012) identified four possible ways in which banks can 
engage with their customers via social media: by creating up-to-date, interactive 
content; by encouraging customers to interact with the bank through social media; 
by encouraging customers to actively contribute ideas to improve the banks’ offer 
of services and products, for mutual benefit; and by collaborating with the online 
community to raise awareness about social media programs. Chikandiwa et al. 
(2013) and Goi (2014), among others, have shown that Facebook and Twitter are 
the most commonly used forms of social media, while Samuels (2013) observed 
that Facebook offers the most space for the publication of images and information.
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Numerous theories have been proposed to explain how and why organisations 
implement their strategies and actions through social media. Thus, Wattal et al. 

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
158
(2010) referred to agency theory, noting that the social media have reshaped the 
relationship between stakeholders and organisations, offering the latter incentives 
to disclose information that enables their actions to be monitored. In accordance 
with the theory of rumour transmission, first proposed by Buckner (1965), it has 
been suggested that companies can improve their methods of promotion through 
the analysis of social media and organic word-of-mouth (Kazienko et al., 2011). 
In this line, too, and following stakeholder theory (Freeman, 1984), Bonsón and 
Ratkai (2013) examined how stakeholders’ moods in the social media can change 
in response to companies’ actions.
Referring to the theory of legitimacy, Bonsón and Ratkai (2013) suggested that 
society is a broader category than that of stakeholders because it contains entities 
that are not stakeholders in the company. Accordingly, a company must conduct its 
activities both through the social media and apart from them, in order to be considered 
socially acceptable. In other words, they must not only meet the expectations of, for 
example, present-day investors, but also those of future ones and of possible clients.
In any case, the impact and benefits of social media can only come after accep-
tance, adoption and continued usage. According to Kaplan and Haenlein (2010) and 
Clemons (2009), social media should be viewed as a tool for improving customer 
engagement, and therefore strategies should be determined to promote the adoption 
of social media. The literature in this field classifies models of social media adop-
tion into two main groups (Chikandiwa et al., 2013). On the one hand is the social 
organising model (SOM), based on the strategic framework of the organisation. 
According to Owyang (2010), companies may be organised for social development 
in any of five ways: centralised, distributed, coordinated, multiple hub and spoke, 
and holistic.
The second group consists of four models based on the level of maturity in terms 
of the adoption of social media: the social media strategy learning curve (SMSLC), 
the social media adoption curve (SMAC), the social engagement journey (SEJ) and 
the social media maturity model (SMMM). The SMSLC model describes the emer-
gence, tactics, integration and development of the process by which social media 
are adopted (Smiciklas, 2011). The SMAC model is composed of six successive 
steps: learning, observation, broadcast, participation, relationship and collaboration 
(MiXT Media, 2008). By means of the SEJ model, Carfi (2012) describes the five 
scenarios that an organisation must experience to become completely connected 
socially: traditional, experimental, operational, measurable and fully engaged. 
Finally, the SMMM model comprises the following phases: ad-hoc, experimental, 
functional and transformation (Luxembourg, 2011).
In addition to the above, the technology acceptance model (TAM) (Davis, 1989), 
which identifies the factors that lead people to accept or reject the use of technologi-

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
159
cal applications, has been used by authors such as Curtis et al. (2010) to demonstrate 
the effectiveness of social media in the clear, precise disclosure of information, and 
in obtaining real-time feedback from stakeholders.
All of the above-mentioned theories and models are important, but the dialogic 
communication theory proposed by Taylor and Kent (1998) has been the most widely 
used over the last decade to explain the importance of the use of social media as 
a strategic tool for promoting communication and dialogue (Waters et al., 2009; 
Bortree & Seltzer, 2009; Rybalko & Selzter, 2010; McAllister, 2012; Bonsón & 
Ratkai, 2013; Bonsón et al., 2014; Sáez-Martín et al., 2015). This theory highlights 
the use of Web 2.0 technologies via the social media as a key element in improving 
organisations’ interactivity and communication and in enhancing stakeholders’ sat-
isfaction and engagement. Thus, through increased transparency and participation, 
trust is reinforced between organisations and their stakeholders (Bonsón & Ratkai, 
2013; Bonsón et al., 2014).
In relation to previous studies of banks’ use of social media, an important paper 
was presented by Chikandiwa et al. (2013), who examined patterns of adoption of 
social media by banks in order to conduct marketing by this channel of communica-
tion. In this line, too, Mitic and Kapoulas (2012) investigated banks’ requirements 
for adopting social media, and concluded that social media are more appropriate 
for smaller or younger banks that wish to use innovative ways to increase their 
market share.
Goi (2014) examined the impact of social media on banks with respect to aspects 
such as conversation, exchange, publication and participation, all of which are also 
relevant to market share. With regard to the acquisition and retention of custom-
ers, Murray et al. (2014) suggested that social media are used primarily to improve 
customer participation in the affairs of the bank.
Despite the importance of these studies and the relative absence of research into 
the use of social media in the banking sector, the metrics used previously have been 
criticised as using only surveys and interviews to investigate the effectiveness of 
participation in social media and their impact on relations with customers (Jaser, 
2010; Vemuri, 2010). Therefore, there is a need for further research, to analyse 
bank profiles in the most popular forms of social media, such as Facebook. For this 
purpose, Bonsón and Ratkai (2013) provide a useful introduction. On the basis of 
dialogic communication theory, these authors propose a set of metrics with which 
to evaluate reactivity, dialogic communication and engagement through corporate 
profiles on Facebook (popularity, engagement and virality). These metrics provide 
a better understanding and measurement capability of social media, and thus can 
help improve the management of online communication between banks and their 
customers.

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
160
METHOD
Sample
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which is the U.S. government agency 
that protects customer deposits, has recorded the existence of 7,836 banking groups 
in the country. Most are State or local banks, while a few are nationwide banking 
giants, and play a major role in the economy.
According to the Federal Reserve, the U.S. banking system is composed of three 
types of banks: Nationally chartered member banks, which operate on the authority 
of Federal law and are members of the Federal Reserve; State-chartered member 
banks, which operate in accordance with the provisions of the banking laws of each 
State and are also members of the Federal Reserve; and State-chartered nonmember 
banks, which are private banks operating within a given State and which do not 
participate in the Federal Reserve System. In general, nonmember banks are less 
regulated than member banks, being subject only to the laws of the States in which 
they are chartered.
Our analysis is focused on the Facebook profiles of the largest U.S. banks. The 
study sample was obtained taking into consideration the Federal Reserve database, 
which compiles data on domestically chartered insured commercial banks that have 
consolidated assets of $300 million or more. We selected the 150 largest U.S. banks 
as the initial sample.
The approach used to determine the official Facebook page of the 150 banks 
was, first, to examine the official website of each bank. If no link was found to an 
official Facebook profile, “Facebook” was used as a search term on the bank’s own 
website. If this approach failed to obtain a Facebook profile, a search was conducted 
in Google, specifying “Facebook” with the title of the bank. By conducting this 
procedure, of the 150 banks analysed, 83 were found to have an official Facebook 
page (37 Nationally chartered member banks, 25 State-chartered member banks and 
21 State-chartered nonmember banks). Therefore, these 83 U.S. banks constituted 
the final study sample.
The study was conducted during the month of August 2015. The period of one 
month is considered an acceptable timeframe in which to analyse the information 
present in social media (Nah and Saxton, 2013). Altogether, 1,825 Facebook posts 
were analysed, together with 16,834 comments, 389,789 likes and 33,693 shares.
Analysis Procedure
The research for this chapter is structured in two phases. First, a descriptive analysis 
was conducted to determine the level of customer engagement through the Facebook 

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
161
profiles of U.S. banks. In the second phase, an analysis of differences of medians 
was performed to identify significant divergences between customer engagement 
in nationally chartered member banks, State-chartered member banks and State-
chartered nonmember banks.
In the descriptive analysis, we examined the popularity, commitment and virality 
of U.S. banks’ Facebook pages, following the metrics developed by Bonsón and 
Ratkai (2013) to measure the level of customers’ engagement. In the financial world, 
the popularity of Facebook has led the majority of banks to create their own profiles, 
containing lists of other users, enabling them to scan and search through their con-
nections (Boyd and Ellison, 2008). The effectiveness of a bank’s Facebook page 
can be measured as the number of “likes” it obtains. Commitment reflects a more 
interactive engagement with customers, and is measured by the number of “com-
ments”. The virality parameter reflects the effectiveness of viral posts on Facebook, 
and thus customers’ involvement in the active disclosure of posts. It is measured 
by the number of “shares”, i.e., how many times a wall post is shared with others.
As shown in Table 1, the numbers of posts, likes, fans, comments and shares 
were collected for each Facebook profile in order to calculate the proposed metrics. 
The data were compiled manually by three researchers working independently. An 
initial meeting was held to specify the strategy to be adopted for each metric. At 
the end of the process, the results were reviewed to resolve any differences and to 
overcome possible bias.
Table 1. Metrics used to measure customers’ engagement
Sign
Formula
Measures
Popularity
P1
Posts with likes/ total posts
Percentage of the total posts that have been liked
P2
Total likes/total posts
Average number of likes per post
P3
(P2/number of fans) * 1000
Popularity of messages among fans
Commitment
C1
Posts with comments/ total 
posts
Percentage of the total posts that have been 
commented on
C2
Total comments/ total 
posts
Average number of comments per post
C3
(C2/number of fans) * 
1000
Commitment of fans
Virality
V1
Posts with shares/ total 
posts
Percentage of the total posts that have been shared
V2
Total shares/ total posts
Average number of shares per post
V3
(V2/number of fans) * 
1000
Virality of messages among fans
Source: Bonsón and Ratkai (2013)

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
162
In the second part of our analysis, the Mann-Whitney U test was applied to de-
termine whether there are significant differences in customers’ engagement among 
the three groups of U.S. banks, following previous research on social media and 
online information disclosure (Pfeil et al., 2009; Roblyer et al., 2010; Syhu & Ka-
poor, 2010). This test is considered the nonparametric equivalent of the t-test, and 
it is well suited for the analysis of two independent groups when the sample is small, 
when the assumptions of normality and homoscedasticity cannot be made, and when 
the discriminant variable for the two groups is ordinal (Sheskin, 2011). The hypoth-
eses for this test are defined as follows:
•	
H1: There are differences between customer engagement in Nationally-
chartered member banks and State-chartered member banks.
•	
H2: There are differences between customer engagement in Nationally-
chartered member banks and State-chartered nonmember banks.
•	
H3: There are differences between customer engagement in State-chartered 
member banks and State-chartered nonmember banks.
In all three cases the null hypothesis is that there is no difference between the 
medians.
RESULTS
Tables 2 and 3 show the data obtained in the comparative analysis for customer 
engagement in the U.S. banking sector. It can be seen that the form of participation 
that is most commonly used by these banks’ customers is related to the popularity 
of the Facebook profiles analysed, measured by the “likes” received (see Table 2). 
The second commonly most used way of participating in Facebook is to “share” 
the publications of the bank, in what is known as virality. These data are consistent 
with the findings of other, similar studies (Wright, 2009; Bonsón & Ratkai, 2013), 
in which it is argued that these results can be explained by the fact that it is faster 
and easier to click “like” or “share” than to write a comment. Therefore, the least 
used form of interaction is that of commitment, which is measured by the comments 
made in response to the posts of each bank.
In general, however, bank customers present low levels of commitment, an out-
come that can be explained by reference to the models referring to the adoption of 
social media. According to these models, banks are in the early stages of social 
media adoption, and therefore it is difficult to perceive or quantify the positive 
outcomes associated with their use, because these can only be generated after the 
adoption, integration and prolonged use of social media by U.S. banks.

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
163
With respect to the level of engagement achieved by each type of bank, the de-
scriptive results reveal the existence of differences depending on the type of metric 
used (Table 2). Thus, the overall data indicate that U.S. customers are more engaged 
with State-chartered member banks than with the other types. Nevertheless, each 
measure should be analysed separately.
Table 2. Customers’ engagement in U.S. banks: Descriptive statistics
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min.
Max.
Nationally 
chartered member 
banks 
Popularity
P1
0.9420
0.1185
0.4615
1.0000
P2
239.9860
725.4367
3.0000
4261.4444
P3
3.2077
4.3867
0.0325
18.7140
Commitment
C1
0.4433
0.3239
0.0000
1.0000
C2
17.4956
44.0756
0.0000
199.0000
C3
0.1470
0.2285
0.0000
1.0273
Virality
V1
0.4682
0.3031
0.0000
1.0000
V2
15.6709
37.0223
0.0000
169.8889
V3
0.2149
0.2504
0.0000
0.9144
State-chartered 
member banks 
Popularity
P1
0.9617
0.0840
0.6250
1.0000
P2
200.4301
384.3458
2.8750
1680.8750
P3
9.6377
11.2069
0.2325
40.1146
Commitment
C1
0.3986
0.2972
0.0000
1.0000
C2
7.3869
13.5653
0.0000
53.0625
C3
0.3053
0.4336
0.0000
1.4705
Virality
V1
0.4861
0.3190
0.0000
1.0000
V2
18.4879
36.7003
0.0000
142.4583
V3
1.1488
2.4383
0.0000
11.1524
State-chartered 
nonmember banks 
Popularity
P1
0.9658
0.1090
0.5000
1.0000
P2
112.5027
318.1018
1.1875
1456.8571
P3
3.2655
3.1600
0.0408
9.8534
Commitment
C1
0.3992
0.3321
0.0000
1.0000
C2
5.1765
12.3240
0.0000
55.6000
C3
0.6415
2.5748
0.0000
11.8753
Virality
V1
0.3858
0.3241
0.0000
1.0000
V2
5.5938
12.7592
0.0000
57.7857
V3
0.2297
0.3306
0.0000
1.3029

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
164
Beginning with the levels of popularity (P) of each Facebook profile, it appears 
that customers favour the State-chartered banks, whether member or nonmember 
banks (P1=96%). However, in terms of the average number of “likes” per post (P2), 
the Nationally chartered member banks outperform the rest (P2=239). If popularity 
is measured by the number of fans, i.e. the number of “likes” per post and per fan 
(P3), we see that the State-chartered member banks are the most popular of those 
studied. However, the values obtained when this metric is used are very low, and 
so, following Bonsón and Ratkai (2013), they are shown multiplied by a thousand 
in the table.
The data for levels of customer commitment (C) (see Table 2) indicate that 44% 
of the posts of Nationally chartered member banks receive at least one comment 
(C1), with an average of 17 comments per post (C2). In this respect, the two types of 
State-chartered banks performed more weakly; on average, 39% of posts received at 
least one comment, and there were an average of 7 comments per post for member 
banks, and 5 for the nonmember banks. On considering the number of fans of the 
Facebook profiles of each bank (C3), we see that the State-chartered nonmember 
banks have a higher level of customer commitment (0.64) than the others.
Table 3. Comparative analysis of customers’ engagement in U.S. banks: Mann-
Whitney U test
Hypotheses
 
H1  
  Nationally banks
vs
State member banks






 
 
H2  
     Nationally banks
vs
State nonmember banks






 
 
H3  
  State member banks
vs
State nonmember banks






 
Z Statistic 
Z Statistic 
Z Statistic 
Popularity 
P1
-0.613
-1.030
-0.460
P2
-0.380
0.607
1.202
P3
-3.121***
-0.526
2.194**
Commitment 
C1
0.460
0.502
0.177
C2
0.301
0.817
0.695
C3
-1.794*
0.089
1.621
Virality 
V1
-0.287
1.174
1.269
V2
0.022
1.141
1.092
V3
-1.880*
0.283
1.820*
* Significant at the 0.10 level. ** Significant at the 0.05 level. *** Significant at the 0.01 level.

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
165
In the metrics that measure customer virality (V), the State-chartered member 
banks obtain the highest values. Thus, 48% of the posts made by these banks are 
shared at least once (V1), and each post is shared on average over 18 times (V2). 
With respect to fans (V3), too, the profiles of the State-chartered member banks 
are the most viral (see Table 2).
These results show that, whatever the form of participation (likes, shares or com-
ments), the level of engagement presented by customers on the Facebook pages of 
U.S. banks is relatively low. Therefore, the banks’ policy should be aimed at acquiring 
customer engagement via their social media. In this regard, banks should focus on 
their customers’ engagement in terms of the comments made, an approach that will 
allow banks to interact directly with customers and to determine their preferences 
or complaints regarding the services provided.
The results of the Mann-Whitney U test are summarised in Table 3. As can be 
seen, the tests performed between pairs of types of banks (Nationally chartered 
member banks, State-chartered member banks and State-chartered nonmember 
banks) only reveal significant differences in the metrics that focus on fans to measure 
popularity, commitment and virality (P3, C3 and V3). Thus, the State-chartered 
member banks differ from the others, while there were no significant differences 
in terms of customer engagement between the Nationally chartered member banks 
and the State-chartered nonmember banks. Therefore, although these tests indicate 
that the use of Facebook, both by customers and by banks, varies from one type of 
bank to another, the results obtained only partly corroborate the descriptive differ-
ences detected between the levels of engagement for the three types of U.S. banks.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The social media play an increasingly important role in the development of com-
munication strategies in the banking sector, and make a decisive contribution to 
strategies, to attract and retain customers. In addition, social media offer many 
possibilities for promoting dialogic communication and thus for building up brand 
awareness, enhancing the bank’s reputation and increasing customer engagement.
In the present study, we investigate the practices of U.S. banks in Facebook, 
from the perspective of the theory of dialogic communication, in order to measure 
the level of customer engagement. Descriptive data indicate, firstly, that popular-
ity is the most widely used form of customer engagement and, secondly, that this 
engagement is more strongly present in State-chartered member banks.
Some authors, such as Mitic and Kapoulas (2012), have suggested that banks 
should develop strategies to encourage customers to actively contribute to the social 
media by providing ideas to improve the supply of products and services. Neverthe-

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
166
less, our results show that the implementation of this type of strategy is still at a low 
level. Moreover, few customers actually participate in banks’ concerns by making 
comments in response to social media posts. Accordingly, banks are failing to take 
advantage of a unique opportunity to obtain the views of their customers. Therefore, 
in line with Mitic and Kapoulas (2012), we recommend that banks should undertake 
actions to encourage active participation and customer commitment, and to overcome 
the greater effort required for customers to write a comment.
Regarding the comparative analysis, the Mann-Whitney U test shows that cus-
tomer engagement for State-chartered member banks is only significantly different 
from that for the other types of banks in the metrics that include the number of fans. 
Although these results are consistent with the descriptive analysis, it is strange that 
no significant differences were found in levels of engagement between National 
banks and State-chartered nonmember banks, since, in general, these are banks with 
very different characteristics. All National banks belong to the Federal Reserve, 
and so they are more highly regulated than nonmember banks, private banks that 
constitute what has been termed ‘shadow banking’, and which are only subject to 
the laws of the State in which they conduct their activity. The United States, together 
with China, is one of the countries where this type of banking is most widespread. 
In 2014 alone, shadow banking operations to a value exceeding 71 billion dollars 
were recorded in the United States.
Therefore, the results obtained may be related to the size of the banks; both 
National banks and State-chartered nonmember banks are usually very large, while 
State-chartered member banks are generally smaller. This difference may account 
for the differences observed in customer engagement via Facebook. It should also 
be noted that State-chartered nonmember banks do not operate nationally because 
they would then be regulated by the Federal Reserve, while State-chartered member 
banks do not do so due to their small size.
In any case, these results help us to better understand the role played by the social 
media in increasing customer engagement. Consideration of these findings might 
help community managers to develop future strategies to encourage participation, 
and to attract and retain customers, through Facebook. However, it should be borne 
in mind that customer engagement through Facebook is not achieved simply by 
creating a Facebook profile; in addition, banks must define strategies to facilitate 
customer feedback (Bonsón & Flores, 2011). Moreover, the fact that a Facebook 
profile has a large number of fans does not automatically mean that the bank will 
have a highly engaged body of customers in this respect (Bonsón et al., 2014).
As areas for future research, it would be interesting to extend the study sample 
to other countries and to make comparisons between them. The present analysis is 
limited to measuring the level of customer engagement through interactions in the 
social media. It would be useful to extend the scope of analysis, by performing a 

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
167
content analysis of banks’ Facebook profiles. This could be done taking as a start-
ing point the previous research conducted in this field by authors such as Bortree 
and Seltzer (2009) and Rybalko and Seltzer (2010). Finally, in line with Stieglitz 
and Dang Xuan (2013), it would be interesting to analyse the mood of customers 
through social media, as this may influence their degree of engagement. The outcome 
of such an analysis could also be used to improve the online strategies and actions 
currently applied by banks.
REFERENCES
Andriole, S. J. (2010). Business impact of Web 2.0 technologies. Communications 
of the ACM, 53(12), 67–79. doi:10.1145/1859204.1859225
Beuker, I. (2009). How digital brands can succeed and thrive in the engaged era. 
Journal of Digital Asset Management, 5(6), 375–382. doi:10.1057/dam.2009.28
Bolotaeva, V. and Cata, T. (2010). Marketing opportunities with social networks. 
Journal of Internet Social Networking and Virtual Communities, 1-8.
Bonsón, E., & Flores, F. (2011). Social media and corporate dialogue: The re-
sponse of global financial institution. Online Information Review, 35(1), 34–49. 
doi:10.1108/14684521111113579
Bonsón, E., & Ratkai, M. (2013). A set of metrics to assess stakeholder engagement 
and social legitimacy on a corporate Facebook page. Online Information Review, 
37(5), 787–803. doi:10.1108/OIR-03-2012-0054
Bonsón, E., Royo, S., & Ratkai, M. (2014). Facebook Practices in Western Eu-
ropean Municipalities: An Empirical Analysis of Activity and Citizens’ Engage-
ment. Administration & Society. Available at: http://aas.sagepub.com/content/
early/2014/09/04/0095399714544945.abstract
Bortree, D., & Seltzer, T. (2009). Dialogic strategies and outcomes: An analysis of 
environmental advocacy groups’ Facebook profiles. Public Relations Review, 35(3), 
317–319. doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2009.05.002
Boyd, D., & Ellison, N. (2008). Social network sites: Definition, history and scholar-
ship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(11), 210–230.
Buckner, H. T. (1965). A theory of rumor transmission. Public Opinion Quarterly, 
29(1), 54–70. doi:10.1086/267297

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
168
Carfi, C. (2012). Ant’s Eye Vie. The Social Engagement Journey. Available at: http://
www.slideshare.net/antseyeview/social-engagement-journey-13578584/
Chikandiwa, S. T., Contogiannis, E., & Jembere, E. (2013). The adoption of social 
media marketing in South African banks. European Business Review, 25(4), 365–381. 
doi:10.1108/EBR-02-2013-0013
Clemons, E. K. (2009). The complex problem of monetizing virtual electronic social 
networks. Decision Support Systems, 48(1), 46–56. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2009.05.003
Cocheo, S. (2009). Banks wade into new media stream. ABA Banking Journal, 
101(5), 14–29.
Cohen, L.S. (2010). CT banks delve into social media marketing. Connecticut 
Banking, 12-15.
Constantinides, E., & Fountain, S. J. (2008). Web 2.0: Conceptual Foundations and 
Marketing Issues. Journal of Direct. Data and Digital Marketing Practice, 9(3), 
231–244. doi:10.1057/palgrave.dddmp.4350098
Culnan, M. J., McHugh, P. J., & Zubillaga, J. I. (2010). How large US companies 
can use twitter and other social media to gain business value. MIS Quarterly Execu-
tive, 9(4), 243–259.
Curtis, L., Edwards, C., Fraser, K. L., Gudelsky, S., Holmquist, J., Thornton, 
K., & Sweetser, K. D. (2010). Adoption of social media for public relations by 
nonprofit Organizations. Public Relations Review, 36(1), 90–92. doi:10.1016/j.
pubrev.2009.10.003
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User Ac-
ceptance of Information Technology. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 
13(3), 319–340. doi:10.2307/249008
Eccleston, D., & Griseri, L. (2008). How does Web 2.0 stretch traditional influencing 
patterns? International Journal of Market Research, 50(5), 591–616. doi:10.2501/
S1470785308200055
Flavián, C., Guinaliu, M., & Gurrea, R. (2006). The role played by perceived usabil-
ity, satisfaction and consumer trust on website loyalty. Information & Management, 
1(1), 1–14. doi:10.1016/j.im.2005.01.002
Freeman, R. E. (1984). Strategic management: a stakeholder approach. Boston: 
Pitman press.

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
169
Gallaugher, J., & Ransbotham, S. (2010). Social media and customer dialogue 
management at Starbucks. MIS Quarterly Executive, 9(4), 197–212.
Gerrard, P., Cunningham, J. B., & Devlin, J. F. (2006). Why consumers are not 
using Internet banking: A qualitative study. Journal of Services Marketing, 20(3), 
160–168. doi:10.1108/08876040610665616
Goi, C. L. (2014). The Impacts of Social Media on the Local Commercial Banks 
in Malaysia. Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce, 19(1).
Gritten, A. (2011). New insights into consumer confidence in financial services. Inter-
national Journal of Bank Marketing, 29(2), 90–106. doi:10.1108/02652321111107602
Hardey, M. (2009). The social context of online market research: An introduction 
to sociability of social media. International Journal of Market Research, 51(4), 
562–564. doi:10.2501/S1470785309200785
Harrison, T. M., & Barthel, B. (2009). Wielding new media in Web 2.0: Exploring 
the history of engagement with the collaborative construction of media products. 
New Media & Society, 11(1-2), 155–178. doi:10.1177/1461444808099580
Jaser, J. (2010). The case against social media in banking. New Jersey Banker, 26-33.
Kaplan, A. M., & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges 
and opportunities of social media. Business Horizons, 53(1), 59–68. doi:10.1016/j.
bushor.2009.09.003
Kazienko, P., Musial, K., & Kajdanowicz, T. (2011). Multidimensional Social Net-
work and Its Application to the Social Recommender System. IEEE Transactions 
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics. Part A, Systems and Humans, 41(4), 746–759. 
doi:10.1109/TSMCA.2011.2132707
Kent, M., & Taylor, M. (1998). Building dialogic relationships through World Wide 
Web. Public Relations Review, 24(3), 321–334. doi:10.1016/S0363-8111(99)80143-X
Klimis, C. (2010). Digital marketing: The gradual integration in retail banking. 
EFMA Journal, 4(226), 16–19.
Liébana, F., Martínez, M., & Rejón, F. (2011). The economic crisis in the European 
Union: The confidence in the Spanish financial sector. Workshop: Crisis, Lisbon, 
EU policies and member states, Granada.
Liébana, F. and Muñoz, F. (2013). Determinación de los perfiles de los usuarios de 
banca electrónica a partir de la satisfacción online: una aplicación empírica. Revista 
de Estudios Empresariales. Segunda época, 2, 84-113.

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
170
Logvinov, M. (2013). Banks Aren’t Social? Think Again. Bank Tech. Available 
at: http://www.banktech.com/business-intelligence/banks-arent-social-think-
again/240162041
Luxenmbourg, A. (2011). Social Media Maturity Model. M & I Partners. Available 
at: http://www.socialmediamodels.net/social-media-adoption-models-category/
social-mediamaturity model/
McAllister, S. M. (2012). How the world’s top universities provide dialogic forums 
for marginalized voices. Public Relations Review, 38(2), 319–327. doi:10.1016/j.
pubrev.2011.12.010
Mitic, M., & Kapoulas, A. (2012). Understanding the role of social me-
dia in bank marketing. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 30(7), 668–686. 
doi:10.1108/02634501211273797
MiXT Media. (2008). Social Media Adoption Curve. Available at: http://www.
socialmediamodellen.nl/socialmedia-organisatie-volwassenheidsmodellen/social-
media-adoption-curve-model/
Mukhtar, M. (2015). Perceptions of UK Based Customers toward Internet Banking 
in the United Kingdom. Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce, 20(1), 1–38.
Murray, L., Durkin, M., Worthington, S., & Clark, V. (2014). On the potential for 
Twitter to add value in retail bank relationships. Journal of Financial Services 
Marketing, 19(4), 277–290. doi:10.1057/fsm.2014.27
Nah, S., & Saxton, G. D. (2013). Modeling the adoption and use of social 
media by nonprofit organizations. New Media & Society, 15(2), 294–313. 
doi:10.1177/1461444812452411
Owyang, J. (2010). Social Businesses Forecast: 2011 The Year of Integration. 
Available at: http://www.slideshare.net/jeremiah_owyang/keynote-social-business-
forecast-2011-the-year-ofintegration
Ozdemir, S., & Trott, P. (2009). Exploring the adoption of a service innovation: A 
study of Internet banking adopters and non-adopters. Journal of Financial Services 
Marketing, 13(4), 284–299. doi:10.1057/fsm.2008.25
Pfeil, U., Arjan, R., & Zaphiris, P. (2009). Age differences in online social network-
ing–A study of user profiles and the social capital divide among teenagers and older 
users in MySpace. Computers in Human Behavior, 25(3), 643–654. doi:10.1016/j.
chb.2008.08.015

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
171
Roblyer, M., McDaniel, M., Webb, M., Herman, J., & Witty, J. V. (2010). Findings 
on Facebook in higher education: A comparison of college faculty and student uses 
and perceptions of social networking sites. The Internet and Higher Education, 
13(3), 134–140. doi:10.1016/j.iheduc.2010.03.002
Rybalko, S., & Seltzer, T. (2010). Dialogic communication in 140 characters or less: 
How Fortune 500 companies engage stakeholders using Twitter. Public Relations 
Review, 36(4), 336–341. doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.08.004
Sáez-Martín, A., Haro-de-Rosario, A., & Caba-Pérez, M. D. C. (2015). Using Twitter 
for Dialogic Communication: Local Government Strategies in the European Union. 
Local Government Studies, 41(3), 421–444. doi:10.1080/03003930.2014.991866
Samuels, T. (2013). Banking on More Social Media. Socialnomics. Available at: 
http://www.socialnomics.net/2013/08/20/banking-on-more-social-media
Sashi, C. M. (2012). Customer engagement, buyer-seller relationships, and social 
media. Management Decision, 50(2), 253–272. doi:10.1108/00251741211203551
Sheskin, D. (2011). Handbook of parametric and nonparametric statistical proce-
dure (5th ed.). Academic Press.
Smiciklas, M. (2011). Social media learning curve strategy and framework. Avail-
able at: http://www.socialmediaexplorer.com/social-media-marketing/social-media-
strategy-learning-curveand- framework/
Stieglitz, S., & Dang-Xuan, L. (2013). Emotions and Information Diffusion in Social 
Media - Sentiment of Microblogs and Sharing Behavior. Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 29(4), 217–247. doi:10.2753/MIS0742-1222290408
Stone, M. (2009). Staying customer-focused and trusted: Web 2.0 and Customer 
2.0 in financial services. Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, 
16(2), 101–131. doi:10.1057/dbm.2009.13
Suriya, M., Mahalakshmi, V., & Karthik, R. (2012). A study on customer perception 
towards internet banking. International Journal of Sales & Marketing Management 
Research and Development, 2(3), 15–34.
Syhu, H. S., & Kapoor, S. (2010). Corporate Social Responsibility Initiatives: An 
Analysis of Voluntary Corporate Disclosure. South Asian Journal of Management, 
17(2), 47–80.
Vemuri, A. (2010). Getting social: Bridging the gap between banking and social 
media. Global Finance, 24(5), 20–21.

The Impact of Social Media on Customer Engagement with U.S. Banks
172
Waters, R. D., Burnett, E., Lamm, A., & Lucas, J. (2009). Engaging stakeholders 
through social networking: How non-profit organisations are using Facebook. Public 
Relations Review, 35(2), 102–106. doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2009.01.006
Wattal, S., Schuff, D., Mandviwalla, M., & Williams, C. B. (2010). Web 2.0 and 
politics: The 2008 U.S. Presidential Election and E-Politics Research Agenda. 
Management Information Systems Quarterly, 34(4), 669–688.
Wirtz, B. W., Schilke, O., & Ullrich, S. (2010). Strategic development of business 
models: Implications of the Web 2.0 for creating value on the internet. Long Range 
Planning, 43(2-3), 272–290. doi:10.1016/j.lrp.2010.01.005
Wright, S. (2009). Political blogs, representation and the public sphere. Aslib Pro-
ceedings, 61(2), 155–169. doi:10.1108/00012530910946901

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch009
Chapter 9
173 
Social Networks Impact 
on Potential Customers’ 
Buying Decisions and 
Current Customer Loyalty
ABSTRACT
Social networks are fundamentally changing the way we communicate, collaborate, 
consume, and create. They represent one of the most transformative impacts of infor-
mation technology on business and daily life. This chapter will explain set of social 
network concepts and its influences in social interaction and decision making, and 
to determine whether individual’s decision to consume a product, service, or attend 
an event are influenced by their interaction on social network, by studying three 
characteristics: Contagion, Connection, and Virtual Word of mouth. The results of 
this research can be used by business to enhance their relation and opportunities 
with their current and potential customers.
INTRODUCTION
During the last decade, web has evolved to become one of the most popular means 
not only for searching and sharing information but also for developing online com-
munities, which results in transforming the Web technology environments from Web 
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah
Independent Researcher, Jordan

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
174
1.0 (read only) to web 2.0 (read and write), (Darwish, 2011). Web 2.0 can be defined 
as Internet applications that enable users to communicate and collaborate through 
creating and uploading new content, commenting on existing content and sharing 
content with other users, by using discussion boards, web blogs and social media 
websites (Betsch et. al., 2012; Pegoraro, 2010). Shifting people from being content 
readers to content generators and publishers distinguishes the web 2.0 as modern 
media from those classical media like newspapers, television and first generation 
Web (Alonso, et. al. 2013). According to Darwish (2011), Blogs, Really Simple 
Syndication (RSS), video sharing, podcasting, wiki, video conferencing and Social 
Networks are examples of the main web 2.0 personal activities tools.
Social Networks has become a pervasive phenomenon that is not limited to a 
specific age range or particular gender, and that plays a major role in every life ac-
tivity. The literature shows that Social Networks user’s decision process is affected 
by multiple attributes and factors, this chapter will study and measure the impact of 
Social Networks characteristics (Contagion, Connection, and Virtual Word of Mouth) 
on individual’s buying decisions, by analyzing available features and techniques 
used in Social Networks like contagion mechanism represented by “News Feeds”, 
“Like” button impact, and activities horizons. Therefore, a better view of customer’s 
perception will be available for organizations and decision makers about what really 
affect their customers’ hanging to their products, the last section will contain a set 
of advices to improve and strengthen the relation with customers.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Social networks technologies are vital in promoting collaboration and represent a 
flexible source of information and knowledge in the latest innovation, therefor it is 
crucial to efficiently use it in the modern social and business environment in order 
to create and consolidate the competitive advantages of modern-day businesses 
(Garrigos-Simon, et. al., 2012).
Social Networks
Social networks have become more reliable during the last decade and it has changed 
how people interact, navigate websites; make daily decisions, and daily lifestyle 
activities (Christakis & Fowler, 2011). It can be described as an Internet based 
real time communication tool which supports real world processes and activities 
by its users, and allow them to collaborate, communicate, share information and 
so on (Alonso, et. al. 2013). Social networks can take any shape including: offline 
social networking, online social connections, social bookmarking, and content 

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
175
sharing (Phulari et. al., 2010). There are several channels through which users can 
communicate utilizing the immediate discussion options, e-mail for longer term, 
synchronous elaboration of issues with document exchange and sharing, and other 
various forms of text messages, photos, comments, and streaming audio and video 
conferences (Betsch et. al., 2012; Sutcliffe & Alrayes, 2012). An online social 
networking service, accessed by both computers and smartphones to help people 
communicate more efficiently with their friends, family, coworkers, it provides op-
portunities to communicate and share information, unlike the conventional media, 
Social Networks area living system that changes constantly, it is “user-driven”; the 
collective communication activity of its millions of users’ lives, updated continu-
ously, it’s a large area of the wired and wireless social web that increasingly mirrors 
all of human life (Phulari et. al., 2010).
Businesses which do not involve in Social Networks marketing activities lose a 
lot of opportunities, since Social Networks provide a potential audience of 1 billion 
people, competitors already use Social Networks and gaining competitive advantage, 
it’s the most cost effective and easy to use communication way to share information 
about brands, products and services, new events, and finally this information gets 
passed on by a company’s followers to their followers creating a multiplier effect 
which increases audience, so for users if businesses are not available on Social 
Networks they may as well not exist at all (khan & khan, 2012).
Businesses prefer to be at the heart of a community, many companies have de-
veloped advertisement pages using Social Networks tools for this purpose, these 
pages present the opportunities for companies to get close to their consumers, in-
cluding observing and collecting information; hosting or sponsoring communities; 
and providing content to communities (Palmer & Koenig-Lewis, 2009). There have 
been many examples of companies who used Facebook to position themselves at 
the center of community, like Pizza Hut –middle east branch- with more than 26 
million likers, and Modanisa – an online shopping and retail page- has more than 
2 million likers in 2015. Businesses and key decision makers need to recognize 
that cultural change is needed to embrace social networking (khan & khan, 2012).
Social Networks as Decision Support Tool
Organizations apply direct marketing using low-cost internet access and communica-
tion tools like Social Networks to promote their brands and open up opportunities 
to deal with thousands or millions of customers (Palmer & Koenig-Lewis, 2009), 
and to develop more targeted and customized strategies (Khan & Khan, 2012). The 
Society for New Communication Research (SNCR) administered an online survey 
(2012), involved 356 participants either as decision makers or influenced the deci-
sion process from 25 countries, results proved that professional decision-making 

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
176
is becoming more social, LinkdIn, Facebook, and Twitter have emerged as leading 
professional networks, professional networks are emerging as decision-support tools, 
professionals trust online information almost as much as information gotten from 
in-person, reliance on web-based professional networks and online communities 
has increased significantly over the past 3 years, and social media use patterns are 
not pre-determined by age or organizational affiliation.
Answering the question “what are the top online steps you typically take to 
inform your decision making?” Three quarters of respondents said they conduct 
research via search engines, and close to three quarters visit a company website to 
inform decision-making, while 40% seeking peer referral, reading blogs, gather-
ing opinions through an online network, and looking the company up on a Social 
Networks. This indicates how traditional decision making process is supplemented 
by Social Networks. Researchers in the area of Social Networks like Christakis and 
Fowler (2011) presented several variables that affect customers’ decision making, 
like contagion, connection, and virtual word of mouth.
Social Networks Contagion
The concept of contagion has increasingly expanded from its original foundation 
in epidemic disease to describe a vast array of activities that spread across network 
users, notably social phenomena such as fads, political opinions, the adoption of 
new technologies, and financial decisions. For example, researches indicate that 
the decision of joining Facebook is more depending on the type of friends signed 
up more than the number of friends; as when the ties being stronger we trust more 
in informants (Centola & Macy, 2007; Schoenebeck, 2013; Ugander, et. al., 2012). 
This phenomenon in which texts, photos, and videos flow through the network, 
and how it does go from one participant to another and affect their decisions called 
Social Networks contagion (Centola & Macy, 2007; Christakis & Fowler, 2011), 
contagion theories are used to explain network members’ attitudes and behaviors 
and tend to involve decision-making on the part of the affected individuals.
Taking network structure into account provides important further insights into 
how contagion takes place. The underlying mechanisms are present at the level of 
whole populations, and also at a local level in the network, between an individual 
and his or her set of friends or colleagues. In many cases you care more about fit-
ting your own behavior with the behavior of your immediate neighbors (“neighbor” 
refers to any type of social or physical contact and is not limited to a residential 
neighbor) in the Social Networks, rather than with the population as a whole, when 
individuals have incentives to adopt the behavior of their neighbors in the network, 
we can get cascading effects, where a new behavior starts with a small set of initial 
adopters, and then spreads radially outward through the network (Centola & Macy, 

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
177
2007; Easley & Kleinberg, 2010). Social contagion models were based on physical 
analogies with biological contagion, in which the probability that an individual is 
affected by the contagion grows monotonically with the size of his or her “contact 
neighborhood”—the number of affected individuals with whom he or she is con-
nected to (Ugander, et. al., 2012).
Social contagion may occur in many conceptually distinct mechanisms, like: 
contagion may operate through spreading awareness and interest, or through social 
learning about the new product’s risks and benefits, also through social normative 
influence increasing the legitimacy of the new product, another mechanism is through 
concerns that not adopting may result in a competitive or status disadvantage, and 
finally through direct and indirect “network” or installed base effects (Iyengar, 
Bulte & Choi, 2011).
Aral and Walker (2010) studied the effect of “passive broadcasting” and “ac-
tive personalized referrals” as main contagion factors. Passive broadcasting refers 
to user’s activities (e.g. update status, change profile picture, like page) which are 
broadcasted as notifications to user’s friends’ walls, these notifications build aware-
ness among friends about new activities a user is engaging with and can encourage 
those friends to eventually adopt themselves. While active personal referrals allow 
users to select a list of their friends to invite them to adopt the product or service 
with attached personalized message to the invitation. Passive broadcasting drove 
246% increase in adoption of the activity where active personal referral increase 
only 98% in adoption of the activity. Aral’s study also revealed that broadcast forms 
were up to 10 times more effective than banner ads in converting users and around 
twice as effective as email advertising, another important feature is “Like” but-
tons it shows a powerful increase in referrals on Facebook, for users the idea is to 
be engaged as easy as possible while making an automatic broadcast. The “Like” 
button remains the core tool for encouraging fans to spread the word, after adding 
just the “Like” button, Levi’s had a 40% increase in referrals while Giantnerd.com 
had a 100% increase.
Social Networks Connection
Social networks impact the way people communicate and connect with each other, 
it gives users a place to share their opinions, experiences, and photographs through 
their connections, it helps people learn more about events, parties and other social 
functions. Ultimately, the purpose of a Social Networks areto facilitate social interac-
tion and connection (Karl & Peluchette, 2011; Manner, Blakley, Lawrence, O’Neill, 
& Raines, 2011). Users also benefit from using Social Networks relationships and 
interactions through resources such as emotional support, exposure to diverse ideas, 

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
178
and access to non-redundant information (Ellison, Steinfield & Lampe, 2011). 
However, it is important to acknowledge that there are difficulties like gender, 
racial, and socioeconomic lines that may stand against technology adoption and 
use, often referred to as the digital divide (Junco, 2011), in their research, Duggan 
and Brenner (2013) indicated that women are more likely than men to be on Social 
Networks sites; also those living in urban settings are also significantly more likely 
to use social networking than rural internet users.
Previous research indicates that the variables influencing the connection are vari-
ous in two main dimensions which are: bridging social capital with sub dimension 
(Outward looking, broader groups, and meeting new people), and bonding social 
capital with sub dimension (individual benefits, and collective action) (Jung, et. al., 
2013), since bridging social capital provides benefits such as increased informa-
tion and opportunities. Ellison and her partners (2007) have studied the different 
connection strategies of Facebook users, they identified specific Facebook enabled 
behaviors that contribute to users ability to access various perspectives, novel 
information, deepen relationships, and garner social support based on Facebook 
related factors like: time on site, numbers of Facebook friends, and “Cultivation of 
Social Resources” behavior, their 450 random samples has revealed that only social 
information-seeking behaviors contribute to perception of social capital, and report-
ing more actual friends on Facebook is predictive for social capital, they believe 
that explanation of their findings may be that the identity information in Facebook 
serves as a social lubricant, encouraging individuals to convert latent to weak ties 
and enabling them to broadcast requests for support or information.
In February 2013, Melissa conducted a research to study the phenomenon of 
moms and media 2013, the research results has indicated that moms in 2013 are: 
connected, mobile, multi-taskers, and decision makers. Mothers are more aware of 
the importance and benefits of new technology, and they use it to navigate through 
their busy day. In fact, retailers and marketers want to be “liked” by moms; where 
moms like, follow, and respond to brands and retailers who are authentic. Following 
are some of their results:
•	
Mothers give more than one third of their day to media, where 75% of moms 
connected using Wi-Fi networks in household.
•	
Mothers blend traditional and modern media habits.
•	
Mothers use Wi-Fi to the fullest, where 41% of moms indicate they have five 
or more devices connected to the Internet in their home.
•	
72% of mothers have social media accounts, 47% of mothers using it several 
times per day (in average 5 times).
•	
50% of mothers shops online.

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
179
•	
Mothers use various ways to access social network accounts: 86% use desk-
top or laptop, 72% use cell phones, and 37% use tablets.
•	
83% of mothers are using Social Networks to follow brands and connect with 
products.
Virtual Word of Mouth
Word of Mouth (WoM) has traditionally been defined as face-to-face information 
exchange about a product or service, where it involves a real time communication 
by the sender and the receiver, allowing for body language and facial expression 
observations (Kapp, 2011). WoM can be characterized by focus, valence, timing, 
solicitation and degree of management intervention, WoM research tends to focus 
more on customer-to-customer perspective, even though WoM is found in other 
contexts such as influence, and employee and recruitment markets (Buttle, 1998). 
WoM has been shown to influence a variety of conditions: awareness, expectations, 
perceptions, attitudes, behavioral intentions and behavior (Buttle, 1998).
Traditional WoM has evolved into a new form of communication named Virtual 
Word of Mouth (VWoM) (Cheung & Thadani, 2010). Just as the traditional WoM 
could affect consumer’s purchasing decisions (Voyer, 1999), it was shown that VWoM 
could also influence the consumer’s decisions (Tabbane, 2013; Chu & Kim, 2011). 
The big difference between WoM and VWoM is that in VWoM, recommendations are 
typically from unknown individuals, so social world community users have difficulty 
in using source similarity to determine the credibility of information (Lange-Faria & 
Elliot, 2012), VWoM refers to any positive or negative statement made by potential, 
actual, and former customers about a product or a company via the Internet (Cheung 
& Thadani, 2010; Hennig-Thurau, et. al., 2004). People read Virtual Word-of-Mouth 
(VWoM) to make purchasing decisions. Researches show that social factors affect 
the acceptance of VWoM (Fan & Miao, 2012), also expertise and involvement can 
help customers determine VWoM quality (Tabbane, 2013). Customers acknowledge 
that Social Networks user’s reviews help them to determine VWoM credibility and 
to make purchasing decisions, VWoM can be found in Social Networks communi-
ties and can affect consumer’s purchasing decisions, (Fan & Miao, 2012) VWoM 
gives users more information about choices they have, which may serve as valuable 
input in their decision process (East, Hammond & Lomax, 2008).
Social networking depends very much on the VWoM, which involves user’s com-
ments about products and services posted on the Internet, Social Networks community 
influence user’s decisions where they generally participate in these communities to 
find information, for social interaction, as well as, for personal enjoyment (Lange-
Faria & Elliot, 2012), Tucker (2011), and (Lange-Faria & Elliot, 2012) go on to say 
that VWoM may in fact be even more influential than WoM given its characteristics 

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
180
of global reach, the speed with which it travels, ease of use, and anonymity, absent 
of direct face-to-face pressure. Companies should recognize the need to engage in 
Social Networks. Social Networks offer companies numerous opportunities to listen 
to their consumers, to engage with them, and to even influence their conversations, 
by bringing like-minded consumers together and give them the opportunity to talk 
about brand-based topics, that’s why, companies should view Social Networks as an 
essential component of their marketing communication mix as VWoM marketing 
tool since it has the more potential impact than any other communication channel 
(Bruhn, Schoenmueller, & Scha¨fer, 2012; Godes & Mayzlin, 2004).
Focus-related utility is the utility Social Networks users receive when adding 
value to the community through their contributions; this includes providing previews 
and commentary on products and services of interest to other users. Four motives 
fall under the umbrella of focus-related utility are: concern for other consumers, 
helping the company, social benefits, and exerting power (Hennig-Thurau, et. al., 
2004). Research on VWoM communication is broad and fragmented; there are two 
main levels of analysis: Market-level analysis and individual-level analysis. In this 
chapter, authors focus on the individual-level analysis.
Many researchers have studied the influence of VWoM on individual behav-
iors and purchasing decisions, Tabbane (2013) study the impact of VWoM on the 
Tunisian consumer attitude towards the product, the results have confirmed that 
the VWoM has a significant influence on the attitude towards the product of the 
Tunisian consumer, and it can play an important role in the development of a posi-
tive or a negative attitude towards a product. Fan & Miao (2012) have used surveys 
and multiple regression analysis in their research “Effect of Electronic Word-Of-
Mouth on Consumer Purchase Intention: The Perspective of Gender Differences” to 
describe the relationship between customer expertise involvement, and connection 
to the acceptance and use of VWoM in making purchasing decisions, the study 
focuses on the cultural effects of gender on purchasing decisions in e-commerce 
virtual communities. Their results show that involvement has the most significant 
effect on perceived VWoM credibility; VWoM credibility has a significant effect on 
VWoM acceptance and intent to purchase, and also show the male customers have 
different e-commerce shopping behaviors than female customers. Previous research 
studied various factors that affect the VWoM, this chapter focus on cultural factors: 
gender, educational status, age, and geographical location.
DISCUSSION
This chapter has proposed and empirically tested a model of factors influencing the 
Social Networks impacts on buying decision, three hypotheses were proposed. The 

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
181
data show that the Social Networks impact on making buying decisions is directly 
and significantly affected by the information and media contagion, relationship con-
nection, and virtual word of mouth. All three supposed hypotheses were supported 
and all factors remained in the model, the following table shows the hypothesis:
The objective of this chapter concerned with proposing a model to study Social 
Networks impact on organization-customer relationship, where organizations and 
companies can use the results of the study to build their economic plans and strate-
gies to enhance their possibilities to gain satisfaction and loyalty of their customers. 
The results indicated that Social Networks media and information contagion has 
the highest influence on individuals buying decision making process, followed by 
virtual word of mouth, and lowest factors affecting the decision is the relationship 
connection.
Sample Descriptive Statistics
Authors used a statistical research to measure impact of contagion, connection, and 
virtual world of mouth on customers-organization relationship over the social me-
dia, they use a questionnaire to collect data from 563 respondents. A two forms of 
questionnaires were used, an online form was distributed using Facebook messaging 
feature and posted into groups walls; and papered questionnaire was distributed to 
Al-Yarmouk University students and employees. A questionnaire was distributed 
on a convenient sample of Social Networks users from various backgrounds, it was 
written in Arabic language to make it easy for respondents to understand the items, 
it contained a comprehensive sections covers all model’s factors. A 5-point Likert 
scale used for measuring the variables with:
1 = Strongly Agree; 2 = Agree; 3 = Neutral; 4 = Disagree; 5 = Strongly Disagree.	
Table 1. Research hypothesis
Hypothesis #
Hypothesis
Supported or Not?
H1 
In Social Networks community, contagion of videos, 
photos, and text positively affect individual’s buying 
decisions
Supported
H2 
In Social Networks community, connections negatively 
affect individual’s buying decisions
Supported
H3 
In Social Networks community, the virtual word of 
mouth positively affects individual’s buying decisions
Supported

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
182
Demographic characteristics of overall respondents show that female respondents 
percent where more than the male respondent percent (49.6%, 48,9% respectively), 
majority of the sample aged between 20-30 and that is consistent and convenient 
with questionnaire distribution among Al-Yarmouk University students at both 
bachelor and master level, overall sample either as students or employees bachelor 
education level was dominant with 67.9% while the remaining four levels (high 
school, diploma, master, and PHD) weighted 32.1% of the sample.
The empirical test shows that the highest item to affect the relationship between 
organization and its customer over the Social Networks was “I trust ads, commer-
cial pages, and comments which I see on Social Networks”, therefore organizations 
should focus more on their contents and ads. Results of the research indicate the 
importance of each variable in predicting Social Networks impacts on customers’ 
relationship with the organization.
An empirical test was conducted and resulted in high means regarding 5 major 
constructs and they are: social media impacts on buying decision (mean= 3.09), 
Social Networks impact on Individuals (mean= 2.76), Social Networks Contagion 
(mean= 2.6), Social Networks Connection (mean= 2.6) and finally, Virtual Word of 
Mouth (mean=2.8). The empirical test shows that the lowest item used was “‘News 
Feed’ helps you learn about the activities and news of your friends more easily” 
(Mean of Q9=1.91), and the highest item was “I trust ads, commercial pages, and 
comments which I see on Social Networks” (mean of Q5=3.31). Table 2 shows 
descriptive statistics related to the research variables including the means of the 
items and the summated means of the four variables.
Implications
Research Implications
Social networks can be an ideal alternative to telemarketing and marketing research 
due to inefficiency of such researches made through call centers, Social Networks 
features researches can provide immediate and direct answers to managerial ques-
tions and problems within the least time period. Researchers can focus on one 
dimension and study its impacts on both consumers and organizations deeply, also 
social network researches are not exclusive to marketing fields, and it can be held 
and benefits all types of works and at different levels like administrational level, 
strategic managers, and decision maker’s processes. Therefore, researchers from 
different backgrounds and with various interests can study social network features 
and its impacts on different ways and for different purposes. This chapter can be 
used as general framework to study each of the tested features solely, and concen-
trate on the impacts of each of these features on both individuals and organizations.

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
183
Table 2. Descriptive statistics related to instrument items
Q#
Item
N
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Std. Deviation
Total Variable Mean
Q1
Social networks affect my daily life style and purchasing decisions
524
1
5
2.99
1.215
Social Networks 
impact on Buying 
Decision= 3.09
Q2
I purchased a product after I saw it on Social Networks
526
1
5
3.24
1.193
Q3
I intent to buy a product based on what I see on Social Networks
520
1
5
3.03
1.176
Q4
I prefer to communicate with likeminded people
519
1
5
2.18
1.057
Social Networks 
impact on 
Individuals= 2.76 
Q5
I trust ads, commercial pages, and comments which I see on Social Networks
516
1
5
3.31 
1.088
Q6
I express myself more freely on Social Networks more than actual world
522
1
5
2.59
1.159
Q7
It is easier to decide to form a relationship on Social Networks than in real life.
515
1
5
2.96
1.275
Q8
My friends on Social Networks advise me about what I want to buy by telling me about the latest products and 
services they knew through Social Networks
519
1
5
2.85
1.082
Social Networks 
Contagion= 2.6 
Q9
‘News Feed’ helps you learn about the activities and news of your friends more easily.
522
1
5
1.91 
.877
Q10
Posting status and sharing pictures, videos and links provide you with topics to talk with distant friends.
520
1
5
2.02
.970
Q11
My decision of following commercial page is affected by the followers
524
1
5
2.79
1.140
Q12
Number of “Like” on commercial pages influences my purchase decision.
522
1
5
2.90
1.155
Q13
My friends’ comments about products influence my purchase decision.
523
1
5
2.87
1.095
Q14
My buying decision is affected by my friends’ opinion of pages’ contents
520
1
5
2.94
1.089
Q15
Social Networks are part of my everyday activity
518
1
5
2.51
1.178
Social Networks 
Connection= 2.6 
Q16
I feel out of touch when I haven’t logged onto Social Networks for a while
516
1
5
2.88
1.315
Q17
I feel I am part of the Social Networks community
517
1
5
2.47
1.149
Q18
Connecting and communicating on Social Networks are fun
513
1
5
2.12
.948
Q19
People met on Social Networks are not as trustworthy as people met in real life.
522
1
5
3.23
1.228
Q20
Posting comments, pictures or videos on your friends’ wall make you feel closer to your friends.
521
1
5
2.36
1.014
Q21
Social Networks area source of reference for my research on new ideas and products
517
1
5
2.53
1.099
Virtual Word of 
Mouth= 2.8 
Q22
I use Social Networks to get clarity on my information search about products and services.
520
1
5
2.41
1.107
Q23
I may cancel a buying decision for a specific product according to negative comments about it on social network.
524
1
5
2.94
1.129
Q24
I have followed a Social Networks link to another site to seek more information
520
1
5
2.92
1.148
Q25
My social community on Social Networks helps me in taking the right buying decisions.
525
1
5
3.02
1.136

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
184
Practical Implications
Social networks offer companies numerous opportunities to listen to their consum-
ers, to engage with them, and to understand their attitude and behaviors through 
advertisement pages and posted activities. Companies should recognize the need to 
engage in Social network and to carefully define a clear strategy for their engagement. 
Social networks create a platform that companies could use to bring like-minded 
consumers together and give them the opportunity to talk about company-based top-
ics. Therefore, companies should view Social networks as an essential component 
of their marketing communication mix, and integrate it in their marketing commu-
nications in order to increase company’s reputation. Social network communities’ 
users are relevant for marketers, through these communities, marketers are able to 
identify consumer tastes and likes, which is essential in helping to create market 
segmentation and targeting and positioning strategies.
The strategic implementation of Social network offers marketers an added advan-
tage in being relatively low in investment costs compared to traditional marketing 
communication tools. Companies are challenged to respond to these changes and 
to successfully integrate Social networks communications in their marketing mix 
in order to enhance their consumer-based loyalty and engagement.
This chapter describe and prove that companies can affect their consumers’ 
attitude through the company-related media contagion, consumer’s relationship 
connection with their friends, family, coworker or others, and virtual word of mouth 
ability to convince possible consumer of their products and services. Marketers can 
gain valuable information on Social network user’s profiles and from the news feed 
statements that users post on their walls and pages. This information can then be 
used for direct marketing purposes.
The benefits for companies of marketing on Social network are: lower com-
munication costs, personalized and directed advertising, immediate feedback from 
customers, virtual word of mouth referrals and positive influence on buyer behavior, 
while in contrast Social networks users may simply ignore Social networks market-
ing for many reasons, privacy violations and abuse of information by third parties 
and sellers’ domination of communities are possible; there is no proper measure of 
the return on investment in Social network marketing and organizations still have 
to invest time, effort, and personnel costs into Social network marketing.
Recommendation
It is obviously clear now that the importance of Social network as a marketing tool 
to affect and impact consumer’s buying decisions, authors can recommend a number 
of Social networks tools to be used to achieve marketing objectives, like:

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
185
•	
Social Networks profile: an organization profile with its vision and mission 
statement stated and clearly defined.
•	
Social Networks groups: with an attractive group name, group topic, and 
group image, companies can attract consumers to keep follow the companies’ 
activities in Social network.
•	
Fan pages: the organization can regularly post information on the fan page on 
upcoming events, articles, games, blogs, podcasts, videos and links.
•	
Sharing events: The organization can advertise its upcoming events on Social 
network.
•	
Social ads: Social ads can be placed on Social network according to the age, 
sex, location, workplaces and education level of the users.
•	
Social Networks messages can be tailored and sent to individual users.
These tools can serve as contagion phenomena among Social Networks users, 
strengthen connection relations, and create a virtual word of mouth power.
LIMITATIONS OF RESEARCH
Studying impacts of Social Networks on individual’s decision making process 
through their purchasing activities is challenging for multiple reasons; Social Net-
works are highly dynamic and updated environment, what we consider as fact and 
feature now, it might turn into obsolete characteristics in very near time; we can 
discuss this limitation in term of time where frame time of any Social Networks 
related research should be short and applying as quick process as possible. Another 
important point is the variety of features available for each single Social Networks, 
which create challenge of choose most related and reliable features to study. Another 
limitation lie in the scope of the sample, it is concentrated “but not exclusive” on 
students both at bachelor and master levels so it should be replicated with more 
comprehensive sample.
CONCLUSION
Social Networks has become a well-established area of research in information 
systems. In the near future, Social Networks will be a complementary part of orga-
nization structure. It will be used to improve the organization overall performance 
through enhancing the organization image, keep customers in touch, and getting 
immediate and updatable information particularly in decision making process. 
Social Networks in general and Social Networks specifically contribute in affect-

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
186
ing individual’s behaviors and purchasing decisions in multiple ways, that is why 
organizations need to study and focus more in this research area.
The rules of marketing and competitive nature have changed, the web becom-
ing a proven catalyst in making changes and amplifying the scale of integration, 
collaboration, and collectivism. The emergence of web 2.0 marketing techniques 
demands complementary approaches, brands and firms are exploring the scene that 
Social Networks create for marketers. These techniques are allowing much deeper 
drivers in social change to be released with a profound influence on planning of 
customer choice selection in the making of the decision. Previous researches have 
confirmed that Social Networks has strong implications on consumer selection of 
products or services, and this represents a unique paradigm of communication and 
decision making influences. By understanding the Social Networks contribution in 
affecting individual’s decision making process, marketers can learn how to respond 
and address the market in different, value adding manner.
REFERENCES
Alonso, S., Pérez, I. J., Cabrerizo, F. J., & Herrera-Viedma, E. (2013). A linguistic 
consensus model for Web 2.0 communities. Applied Soft Computing, 13(1), 149–157. 
doi:10.1016/j.asoc.2012.08.009
Aral, S., & Walker, D. (2010). Creating Social Contagion Through Viral Product 
Design: A Randomized Trial of Peer Influence in Networks. Management Science. 
Available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1564856
Betsch, C., Brewerb, N. T., Brocardc, P., Daviesd, P., Gaissmaiere, W., Haasea, N., 
& Strykm, M. et al. (2012). Opportunities and challenges of Web 2.0 for vaccina-
tion decisions. Vaccine, 30(25), 3727–3733. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.02.025 
PMID:22365840
Bruhn, M., Schoenmueller, V., & Scha¨fer, D. (2012). Are social media replacing 
traditional media in terms of brand equity creation? Management Research Review, 
35(9), 770–790. doi:10.1108/01409171211255948
Bulearca, M., & Bulearca, S. (2010). Twitter: A Viable Marketing Tool for SMEs? 
Global Business and Management Research: An International Journal, 2(4), 296–309.
Buttle, F. (1998). Word of mouth: Understanding and managing referral marketing. 
Journal of Strategic Marketing, 6(3), 241–254. doi:10.1080/096525498346658
Centola, D., & Macy, M. (2007). Complex Contagions and the Weakness of Long 
Ties. AJS, 113(3), 702–734.

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
187
Cheung, C., & Thadani, D. (2010). The Effectiveness of Electronic Word-of Mouth 
Communication: A Literature Analysis. 23rd Bled eConference eTrust: Implications 
for the Individual, Enterprises and Society.
Christakis, N., & Fowler, J. (2011). Connected: The Surprising Power of Our Social 
Networks and How They Shape Our Lives -- How Your Friends’ Friends’ Friends 
Affect Everything You Feel, Think, and Do (2nd ed.). Back Bay Books.
Chu, S., & Kim, Y. (2011). Determinants of consumer engagement in electronic 
word-of-mouth (eWOM) in social networking sites. International Journal of Ad-
vertising, 30(1), 47–75. doi:10.2501/IJA-30-1-047-075
Darwish, A., & Lakhtaria, K. I. (2011). The Impact of the New Web 2.0 Technolo-
gies in Communication, Development, and Revolutions of Societies. Journal of 
Advances in Information Technology, 2(4), 204–216. doi:10.4304/jait.2.4.204-216
Decesare, M. (2013). Moms and Media 2013: Media Multitaskers. Edison Research 
Center. Available online http://www.edisonresearch.com/moms-and-media-2013-
media-multitaskers/
Duggan, M., & Brenner, J. (2013). The Demographics of Social Media Users- 2012. 
Pew Research Center. Available at http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Social-
media-users.aspx
Easley, D., & Kleinberg, J. (2010). Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning 
about a Highly Connected World. Cambridge University Press.
East, R., Hammond, K., & Lomax, W. (2008). Measuring the impact of positive 
and negative word of mouth on brand purchase probability. Intern. J. of Research 
in Marketing, 25(3), 215–224. doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2008.04.001
Ellison, N., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The Benefits of Facebook ‘‘Friends:’’ 
Social Capital and College Students’ Use of Online Social Network Sites. Journal 
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(4), 1143–1168. doi:10.1111/j.1083-
6101.2007.00367.x
Ellison, N., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2011). Connection Strategies: Social Capital 
Implications of Facebook-enabled Communication Practices. New Media & Society, 
13(6), 873–892. doi:10.1177/1461444810385389
Fan, Y., & Miao, Y. (2012). Effect of Electronic Word-of-Mouth on Consumer 
Purchase Intention: The Perspective of Gender Differences. International Journal 
of Electronic Business Management, 10(3), 175–181.

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
188
Garrigos-Simon, F., Alcamı´, R., & Ribera, T. (2012). Social networks and Web 
3.0: Their impact on the management and marketing of organizations. Management 
Decision, 50(10), 1880–1890. doi:10.1108/00251741211279657
Godes, D., & Mayzlin, D. (2004). Using Online Conversations to Study Word-
of-Mouth Communication. Marketing Science, 23(4), 545–560. doi:10.1287/
mksc.1040.0071
Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. (2004). Electronic 
Word of Mouth Via Consumer-Opinion Platforms: What Motivates Consumers to 
Articulate Themselves on the Internet? Journal of Interactive Marketing, VOL., 
18(1), 38–52. doi:10.1002/dir.10073
Iyengar, R., Bulte, C., Choi, J., (2011). Distinguishing between Drivers of Social 
Contagion: Insights from Combining Social Network and Co-location Data. Aca-
demic Press.
Junco, R. (2011). The relationship between frequency of Facebook use, participation 
in Facebook activities, and student engagement. Computers & Education, 58(1), 
162–171. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2011.08.004
Jung, Y., Gray, R., Lampe, C., & Ellison, N. (2013). Favors from Facebook Friends: 
Unpacking Dimensions of Social Capital.Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. doi:10.1145/2470654.2470657
Kapp, K. (2011). Relationship Maintenance and Facebook. (Master Thesis). Gon-
zaga University.
Karl, K., & Peluchette, J. (2011). “Friending” Professors, Parents and Bosses: 
A Facebook Connection Conundrum. Journal of Education for Business, 86(4), 
214–222. doi:10.1080/08832323.2010.507638
Khan, A., Khan, R., (2012). Embracing new media in Fiji: the way forward for social 
network marketing and communication strategies. Academic Press.
Kim, Y. A., & Srivastava, J. (2007). Impact of social influence in e-com-
merce decision making. International Conference on Electronic Commerce. 
doi:10.1145/1282100.1282157
Lange-Faria, W., & Elliot, S. (2012). Understanding the Role of Social Media in 
Destination Marketing. Tourism: An International Multidisciplinary Journal of 
Tourism, 7(1), 193-211.

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
189
Manner, C., Blakley, S., Lawrence, S., O’Neill, E., & Raines, C. (2011). Understand-
ing the Predictors of Negative Personal Relationship Experiences on Facebook. 
International Journal of Humanities and Social Science, 1, 16-19.
March, J., & Simon, H. (1993). Organizations (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Palmer, A., & Koenig-Lewis, N. (2009). An experiential, social network-based 
approach to direct marketing. Direct Marketing. International Journal (Toronto, 
Ont.), 3(3), 162–176.
Pegoraro, A. (2010). Look Who’s Talking—Athletes on Twitter: A Case Study. 
International Journal of Sport Communication, 3, 501–514.
Phulari, S., Khamitkar, S., Deshmukh, N., Bhalchandra, B., Lokhande, S., & Shinde, 
A. (2010). Understanding Formulation of Social Capital in Online Social Network 
Sites (SNS). International Journal of Computer Science Issues, 7(1), 92-96.
Schoenebeck, G. (2013). Potential Networks, Contagious Communities, and Un-
derstanding Social Network Structure. International World Wide Web Conference 
Committee. doi:10.1145/2488388.2488486
Simon, H. (1976). Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes 
in Administrative Organization (3rd ed.). New York: Free Press.
Sutcliffe, A., & Alrayes, A. (2012). Investigating user experience in Second Life for 
collaborative learning. Int. J. Human-Computer Studies, 70, 508–525.
Tabbane, R. (2013), Impact of EWOM on the Tunisian Consumer’s Attitude Towards 
the Product. Advances in Business-Related Scientific Research Conference 2013.
Tucker, T. (2011). Online Word of Mouth: Characteristics of Yelp.com Reviews. 
The Elon Journal of Undergraduate Research in Communications, 2(1), 37–42.
Ugander, J., Backstrom, L., Marlow, C., & Kleinberg, J. (2012). Structural diversity 
in social contagion. PNAS, 109(16), 5962–5966.
Voyer, P. (1999). Word-of-Mouth Process Within A Service Purchase Decision 
Context. (Master Thesis). University of New Brunswick.

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
190
APPENDIX: USED SURVEY
Part One, Respondent Detail
Gender:⬜ Male ⬜ Female
Age: ⬜ 20-30 ⬜ 31-40 ⬜ 41-50 ⬜ more then 50
Educational level: 
⬜ Primary education ⬜ Secondary/High School ⬜ Bachelor/Diploma 
⬜ Master/PHD
Work place: ⬜ Public Sector ⬜ Private Sector ⬜ Student ⬜ Unemployment
Income: 
⬜ Less than 200 JD ⬜ 200-500 JD ⬜ 501-1000 JD ⬜ More than 1000 JD
Living Place: ⬜ City ⬜ Village
Do you have Facebook profile? ⬜ Yes ⬜ No
Are you married? ⬜ Yes ⬜ No
Do you have children? ⬜ Yes ⬜ No
When did you create your Facebook page? 
⬜ Less than month ⬜ 1-6 months ⬜7-12 months ⬜ 1-2 years ⬜2-4 years 
⬜ More than 4 years
How often do you visit your Facebook page? 
⬜ Once a week ⬜ Once a day ⬜ More than once a day
On average, approximately how many hours per day do you spend on Facebook: 
⬜ Less than 2 hours ⬜ 2-4 hours ⬜ 4-6 hours ⬜ More than 6 hours
About how many total Facebook friends do you have? 
⬜ Less than 50 ⬜ 51-100 friends ⬜ 101-200 friends ⬜ More than 200 friends
When do you browse your Facebook account more? ⬜ At work ⬜ At home
Part Two: Facebook Impacts on Individual 
Decision Making Process
To which extent do you agree with the following statements? (Table 3)

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
191
#
Question
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Normal
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
1 
Social networks affects my daily life 
style and purchasing decisions
2 
I purchased a product after I saw it on 
Facebook
3 
I intent to buy a product based on what I 
see on Facebook
4 
I prefer to communicate with 
likeminded people
5 
I trust ads, commercial pages, and 
comments which I see on Facebook
6 
I express myself more freely on 
Facebook more than actual world
7 
It is easier to decide to form a 
relationship on Facebook than in real 
life.
8 
My friends on Facebook advise me 
about what I want to buy by telling me 
about the latest products and services 
they knew through Facebook
9 
‘News Feed’ helps you learn about the 
activities and news of your friends more 
easily.
10 
Posting status and sharing pictures, 
videos and links provide you with topics 
to talk with distant friends.
11 
My decision of following commercial 
page is affected by the followers
12 
Number of “Like” on commercial pages 
influences my purchase decision.
13 
My friends’ comments about products 
influence my purchase decision.
14 
My buying decision is affected by my 
friends opinion of pages contents
15 
Facebook is part of my everyday 
activity
16 
I feel out of touch when I haven’t logged 
onto Facebook for a while
17 
I feel I am part of the Facebook 
community
18 
Connecting and communicating on 
Facebook is fun
Table 3. 
continued on following page

Social Networks Impact on Potential Customers’ Buying Decisions
192
#
Question
Strongly 
Agree
Agree
Normal
Disagree
Strongly 
Disagree
19 
People met on Facebook are not as 
trustworthy as people met in real life.
20 
Posting comments, pictures or videos on 
your friends’ wall make you feel closer 
to your friends.
21 
Facebook is a source of reference for my 
research on new ideas and products
22 
I use Facebook to get clarity on my 
information search about products and 
services.
23 
I may cancel a buying decision for a 
specific product according to negative 
comments about it on Facebook.
24 
I have followed a Facebook link to 
another site to seek more information
25 
My social community on Facebook 
helps me in taking the right buying 
decisions.
Any note:
Table 3. Continued

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch010
Chapter 10
193 
Opinion Mining:
A Tool for Understanding 
Customers – Challenges 
and Approaches
ABSTRACT
In recent years social media sites become very popular communication tools among 
Internet users where a significant amount of information is exchanged via comput-
ers, smart phones, etc. Internet now is not only a source of information for users 
to search for; regular users are now a major source of Internet information; where 
now regular people post daily life activities, share online pictures, and express 
their opinions about products, news, political debates, etc. Such noticed growing 
of opinion-rich resources along with user-generated content makes it worthwhile 
to use information technologies to collect, analyze, and understand human factors 
and behaviors. This chapter covers three main sections where the first section in-
troduces the field of opinion mining in general along with a detailed exploration of 
its definitions and goals. Then a discussion of opinion mining related challenges is 
presented in the second section. The last section explores opinion mining available 
approaches along with possible future directions.
Rawan Khasawneh
Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan
Izzat Alsmadi
Texas A&M University - San Antonio, USA

Opinion Mining
194
INTRODUCTION
There are several recent indicators that show the importance and the significance of 
web information. While classical web information can be broadly classified under 
“pure science” where the Internet was more like a large open library, the current 
face of the Internet is largely seen as a major “social science” source of informa-
tion. Online Social Networks (OSNs) are by large the current most popular websites 
through the Internet. The number of users in those OSNs is overwhelming. For 
example, Figure 1 shows that more than one-third of the world population are active 
OSN users. Statistics showed also that those numbers are continuously rising. Enti-
ties, individuals, young or adult are all trying to have their visible presence in those 
OSNs. Users post details and information related to their own daily life activities. 
In addition, they interact with activities posted by their peers or friends.
The classical “mining” term is used in two main categories: Data mining for 
structured data and text mining for unstructured data. While there are many com-
monalities between those mining categories, there are also some unique attributes. 
Based on techniques and algorithms used, opinion mining can fall within text min-
ing in general where the data in opinion mining is also unstructured. Nonetheless, 
Figure 1. Active OSN users
(http://devriesblog.com/)

Opinion Mining
195
the containers that opinions are extracted from are typically heterogeneous and 
dispersed in comparison with text mining sources. Text and data mining typical 
goals (e.g. clustering, classification, association, or prediction) are also relevant in 
opinion mining. However, opinion mining is concerned with a specific type of 
clustering related to opinions. For example, typically such classification can take 
one of two possible cases or classes (e.g. with or against, positive or negative, like 
or dislike, pro or against, democrat or republication, etc.). This is why opinion min-
ing is also called polarity or sentimental analysis. In some cases, a third neutral 
class is also suggested to have a balance classification model (i.e. positive, negative 
and neutral). Many research papers showed that if algorithms are not precise, the 
majority of opinions will fall in this middle neutral class. This can reduce the value 
of the final findings of the opinion mining process.
In several earlier published papers (e.g. Khasawneh et al 2015, Al-Kabi et al 
2014), researchers collected and evaluated different datasets collected from OSNs 
in Arabic language, they proposed automatic methods and developed tools to au-
tomate the process of collecting opinions, preprocessing data and finally make the 
final sentiment judgement on each post whether it typically represents a positive, 
negative or neutral opinion. Researchers described some of the challenges usually 
associated with such automatic based tools. While some of the challenges that face all 
languages can be similar, nonetheless, there are some challenges that can vary or be 
different from one language to another. For example, in the case of Arabic language, 
researchers noticed that in OSNs it is a trend for users to use slang languages that 
vary from one country to another and even in the same country. Users mix slang 
with standard languages. They also mix Arabic with English terms. Further, they 
heavily use icons, symbols, figures to express special opinions. All those issues 
can make the final automatic judgement of the sentiment harder or can lower the 
overall accuracy in such systems. In order to improve accuracy for sentiment detec-
tion systems in general researchers recommended two broad recommendations. The 
first one is that this is an evolutionary process that should be repeated and extended 
frequently to improve the quality of future predictions. The size and the scope of 
the evaluated dataset is also important where it is important to have large datasets 
that consider different domains. Researchers should also mix automatic detection 
with manual verification or annotation.
Authors also evaluated new trends in opinion mining such as the possible tam-
pering of public opinions (Alsmadi et al 2013). Spam typically refers to spreading a 
message to a large number of unsolicited users (i.e. not known to the sender before) 
with typically marketing or advertisement purposes. In this paper, authors introduced 
a new concept or usage of spam in social networks. This is the intentional tampering 
of public ratings or assessments that are estimated based on users and their opinions 

Opinion Mining
196
in OSNs. It is believed that this will continue to grow in future as measuring and 
finding the general public opinions and trends continue to be an important political, 
business or commercial factor.
OPINION MINING: DEFINITION AND GOALS
Sentiment analysis is considered as interdisciplinary field that crosses artificial 
intelligence, natural language processing (NLP) and text mining. It is a kind of text 
classification that classifies text based on the sentimental orientation of the opinions 
they contain. Sentiment analysis has several techniques and approaches that can be 
applied on different types of data reviews (ex. Movie reviews, music reviews, product 
features reviews), news articles, and web discourse (ex. social websites, news groups) 
(Singh, Paul, & Kumar, 2014). Jagtap and Dhotre added in their research (2014) 
that opinion mining has been studied in different domains such as travel destination 
review, social networking, e-learning and many others. In general machine learning 
approach and lexicon based approach are the two main approaches for determining 
polarity of a given text (Duwairi & Qarqaz, 2014).
Opinion mining, which is also called sentiment analysis, focuses on detecting 
and identifying positive and negative opinions which will help social science inves-
tigators understand the human factor and attributes in evaluating products, events, 
etc., opinion analysis falls under the scope of subjectivity analysis where detecting 
and extracting subjective information in text documents is the main goal where the 
writer sentiment about specific aspect or the whole document is determined (Pad-
maja & Sameen, 2013). Nasukawa and Jeonghee in their study (2003) illustrated the 
automatic extraction of sentiments associated with polarities for a specific subject 
in a whole document instead of classifying it into either positive or negative. They 
indicated that it is highly important to identify the semantic relationship between 
the sentiments and the subject. Their system is built based on syntactic parser where 
the manual development of sentiment lexicons is required.
Opinion mining can be referred to using NLP, linguistic computation and text 
mining techniques to extract others opinion in a given source (text). They distin-
guished between facts and opinions as two kinds of textual information; facts related 
to the objective statement about the nature of a product, and opinions refer to at-
titudes, appraisal and emotions extraction of a product, service, etc. (Singh, Paul, 
& Kumar, 2014). Padmaja and her colleague explained in their research (2013) that 
opinion is the subjective belief that presents the judgment of the majority of people 
formed about a particular thing based on emotion interpretation rather than facts or 
knowledge interpretation.

Opinion Mining
197
Opinion mining can be seen as a technique for determining a user/ a group of 
users response on a specific topic and categorize their opinion as positive, negative 
or neutral. It can be performed at three levels: phrase based level where the focus is 
on single phrase sentiment, sentence based level where the whole sentence sentiment 
is calculated, and finally document based level in which the aggregated sentiment 
of the whole document is taken into consideration (Kaushik, & Mishra, 2014).
It is highly noticed that most websites nowadays describe their items/products 
(ex. Cars, books, movies) in some details and ask people/clients to evaluate them as 
favorable/unfavorable, good/bad. Such collected reviews need automated categoriza-
tion by sentiment which is based on a property other than a topic to indicate whether 
they recommend or don’t recommend a particular item/product (Govindarajan, 2013; 
Singh & Husain, 2014). Sentiment can be defined as the writer’s opinion, attitude, 
or emotion expressed in a specific topic which mentioned as abstract concept in a 
specific document (Padmaja & Sameen, 2013). Effective automated categorization 
by sentiment has several applications and benefits; it makes the classification of 
online reviews of products or services much easier and quicker, and it helps busi-
nesses, governments, and non-profit organizations know their clients feedback for 
free and then analyze such feedback to know as example the percentage of happy/
satisfied clients (Govindarajan, 2013).
Opinion mining has several applications in several fields; it is so much helpful in 
marketing area, it helps in finding the general opinion about the currently trending 
topics, it enables them knowing their customers response towards a new product or 
service. It provides good information helps manufacturers in deciding the strategies 
they should follow in lunching new products or providing new service (Kaushik & 
Mishra, 2014).
Rahmath stated in her study (2014) eight major applications of opinion mining 
explained as following:
1. 	
Utilizing opinion mining techniques, people can easily know and evaluate 
other’s opinion about specific product or service they want to purchase.
2. 	
Manufacturers can improve the quality of their products and services utiliz-
ing opinion mining technique capabilities in opinions collection (critics and 
favorable opinions).
3. 	
It can be used in marketing research in order to analyze the recent trend of 
customers toward specific product or service.
4. 	
It can be used as a recommendation system based on people opinion classifica-
tion (positive and negative).
5. 	
It can automatically analyze the arrogant words used in emails, forums, social 
media, and newsgroups.

Opinion Mining
198
6. 	
It can work as opinion spam detection system to classify Internet content into 
spam content and not spam content.
7. 	
It helps policy makers in building citizen friendly policy based on citizens 
opinions toward existing policy, public services, and political issues.
8. 	
It can be effectively used in decision making process utilizing the analyzed 
people opinions.
Research in the area of opinion mining analysis is continuously evolving in terms 
of analysis depth and technique/approach sophistication; it is moving toward content, 
concept, and context based analysis of text. It has a wide range of scope includes, 
but not limited to, the following major areas: spam detection sentiment analysis, 
sentiment analysis on short sentences, generation of highly content lexicons, fully 
automatic analysis tool development, and word identification algorithms improvement.
OPINION MINING RELATED CHALLENGES
Opinion extraction is considered as one of the basic problems in the area of opinion 
mining; knowing the linguistic terms and then getting the idea from the content of 
the document to classify the text into positive/negative and subjective/objective terms 
identified by syntactic features is required, so text classification highly depends on 
opinion extraction (Padmaja & Sameen, 2013). There are four indexes that can be 
used to evaluate the performance of sentiment classification which are: accuracy (the 
portion of all true predicted instances against all the predicted instances), recall (the 
portion of true positive predicted instances against the all actual positive predicted 
instances), precision (the portion of true positive predicted instances against the all 
positive predicted instances), and F1 score (it considers both recall and precision 
to calculate their harmonic average).
Following are examples of used tools in opinion mining that could help in 
determining/extracting the polarity of user generated contents: Review Seer tool 
which use Naïve Bayes classifier approach, Web Fountain which extracting product 
features using the beginning definite base noun phrase heuristic approach, Red Opal 
which determines opinion orientations of products depending on their features, and 
Opinion Observer tool which helps in analyzing and comparing opinions on the web 
using generated contents (Angulakshmi & ManickaChezian, 2014).
Rahmath listed in her research (2014) six main challenges that might be faced 
by opinion mining; they will be explained in the following lines: detecting spam 
and fake reviews and eliminating them before processing, reducing the limitation 
of classification filtering, making opinion mining software available for everyone 

Opinion Mining
199
is relatively difficult since such software is highly expensive and nowadays it is 
limited to be used only by big organizations and governments, integrating opinion 
words with implicit data which represents the actual behavior of the words is dif-
ficult, domain dependence is considered as one of the biggest challenges (Varghese 
& Jayasree, 2013), and finally natural language processing overheads such as infer-
ence and ambiguity.
Named entity extraction is too much vital for effective opinion mining as men-
tioned by Varghese and Jayasree in their research (2013). They defined named entity 
as “definite noun phrases that refer to specific types of individuals such as organi-
zations, persons, dates, and so on” (page 313). Varghese and Jayasree mentioned 
other major challenges involved in opinion mining including information extraction 
which is too complex and difficult, since information comes in different shapes and 
sizes, sentiment determination which focuses on determining the polarity of a word, 
a sentence, or a document that is traditionally done based on sentiment lexicon, and 
co-reference resolution is a very important task that should be handled for effectively 
producing correct results in opinion mining, and relation extraction which relates 
to finding the syntactic relation between words in a sentence.
Developing opinion mining tools for social media in particular is faced by several 
challenges such as relevance, target identification, negation, contextual information, 
volatility over time, and opinion aggregation and summarization. Following lines 
describe some of these challenges (Maynard, Bontcheva, & Rout, 2012):
•	
Relevance: Building a crawler restricted to specific topics and correctly find-
ing related pages is not enough for having effective opinion mining especially 
that discussions and comments in the social media rapidly diverged into un-
related topics.
•	
Target Identification: There is no connection between the opinion men-
tioned in the comment/tweet and the search keywords where the polarity 
identification of the opinion is correctly determined but the topic is some-
thing totally different.
•	
Negation: Some sentiment classifiers can’t handle negation well.
Considering same word as positive in some situations and negative in others; is 
one of the main challenges in opinion mining. Also, expressing opinion toward the 
same thing in different ways makes the task of opinion mining much more chal-
lenging and complex (Vinodhini & Chandrasekaran, 2012; Sharma & Chitre, 2014). 
Vinodhini and Chandrasekaran mentioned in their research some of the problems 
that are predominating the area of opinion mining including handling negation, 
feature based classification, and sentiment classification.

Opinion Mining
200
In general opinion mining is a difficult task especially that sentiment determination 
is fully context sensitive and can’t be determined based only on specific keywords 
listed in lexicons (Pang & lee, 2008). Processing product reviews and comments 
written in different languages according to each language orientation, grouping 
synonym words where two comments for example are about the same feature of 
specific product but each one use different word, considering people different styles 
in writing, and dealing with comments written in free format using short words and 
abbreviations (for example. Writing cam instead of camera, f9 instead of fine, b4 
instead of before) are examples of the challenging tasks that might be faced during 
opinion mining analysis (Sharma & Chitre, 2014).
Researchers should develop opinion mining systems with broader and deeper 
knowledge bases where such knowledge should be more complete and combined 
with reasoning methods that are greatly inspired by human thoughts and emotions. 
This will help in overcoming the gap between structured and unstructured data and 
better understanding natural language opinions.
OPINION MINING APPROACHES
There are several major objectives to conducting opinion mining in general. Those 
include:
•	
Confirming existing semantic knowledge acquisition.
•	
The discovery of new affective or semantic knowledge.
•	
Making analogies.
•	
The discovery of human emotions or perceptions concerning a particular 
context.
Approaches to design and implement an opinion mining experiment are usually 
related to the experiment major objective or goal. Nonetheless, there are common 
generic tasks or activities which all or most opinion mining experiments will go 
through. Those include:
•	
Information Retrieval (IR): In order to collect a dataset of activities from 
an Online Social Network (OSN), tools should be used or code should be 
written to parse or extract those activities (e.g. posts) from the subject OSN. 
Most of OSN websites offer their own either free limited versions of tools or 
commercial tools with more capabilities and freedom to allow users to extract 
data from the OSN. Recently, such tools have more restrictions on what users 
can parse due to privacy issues or concerns. Users can also find some open 

Opinion Mining
201
source tools that can be used to conduct this extraction process. Ultimately, 
the output of such process is a structured dataset with several possible attri-
butes or dimensions. Some tools enable users to collect metadata information 
related to the collected data (e.g. data and time of the parsing process or the 
occurrence of the activity). There are some other tools that exist also to help 
collectors of data protect the privacy of the subjects. For example, such tools 
may change or encrypt certain attributes that can show the identities of the 
subjects.
•	
Dataset Preprocessing: There are several preprocessing activities that occur 
in opinion mining experiments. They may vary based on the specific experi-
ment goal. For example, activities may include text written in more than one 
language. It may be necessary to separate text in the dataset based on written 
language. In addition, it is typical that users in OSN may not write in standard 
language terms. They are often using slang language and terms. In fact, this 
is one of the most significant challenges that faces opinion mining accuracy 
where automatic tools can be incapable of correctly ciphering some of the 
terms that exist in those posts which will cause such terms to be ignored. This 
will eventually lower the overall process or system accuracy. As mentioned 
earlier, in many cases the extraction of a sentiment will not reveal a strong 
positive or negative sentiment (i.e. neutral sentiment). One of the main rea-
sons for this is the existence of many terms that can’t be translated or under-
stood by the mining engine or translator. Users in those social networks can 
typically repeat letters in words (e.g. to express their anger, stress on those 
words, etc.) this will cause also such words to be ignored or not retrieved cor-
rectly by the mining engine. Using figures and emotion icons are also popular 
in this regard. Many mining approaches extract those special images or icons 
and use certain dictionaries to retrieve or understand them correctly.
Based also on the goal of the mining process, stemming can be used in some 
cases. Stemming is the process of returning the roots of the subject terms or words. 
The stemming process can have conflicting impact (i.e. positively or negatively) 
on the accuracy of the overall process based on the process goals, dataset nature, 
language, etc.
Terms extractions, typically used in data mining clustering, classification or pre-
diction process can be also used in some opinion mining experiments. For example, 
dictionaries of positive and negative terms are assembled for a particular language 
or domain. Terms extraction is then used to check the kinds of terms that exist in 
the specific post and activity. Our final algorithm may depend on the number of 
occurrences of positive and negative terms in the post to come up with the final 
judgement on the post sentiment.

Opinion Mining
202
•	
Sentiment or Opinion Extraction: As the main objective of opinion min-
ing experiments, sentiment or opinion mining includes several sub-tasks. 
Typically extraction methods can be largely divided into: Rule-based or dic-
tionary based extraction methods. Rule-based extraction methods depend on 
using certain rules and lexicons related to the nature of the language, its syn-
tax and semantics. In addition, the rules should consider the context and the 
domain of the collected opinions. In dictionary based approaches, typically 
several dictionaries are developed part of the process including: Positive, 
negative and emotion or icon dictionaries. Terms in each evaluated post can 
then be compared for their existence in those dictionaries. A final polarity 
judgement is considered based on different possible formulas that include 
evaluating collectively all opinion terms.
In literature, lexicon based approaches (e.g. Ding et al 2008, Denecke 2008, Jin 
et al 2009, Gerani et al 2010, Taboada et al 2011, etc.), feature based opinion mining 
(Hu and Liu, 2004, Abulaish et al 2009, Peñalver-Martínez et al 2011, Zhai et al 
2011, Eirinaki et al 2012, etc.), or aspect-based opinion mining (e.g. Moghaddam, 
and Ester 2012, Florian et al 2013, Marrese-Taylor et al 2014, etc.), and Hierarchical 
classification (Wei and Gulla, 2010).
In Hierarchical methods or approaches, the classification system can include more 
than one level of opinions. For example, if our opinion mining system is interested to 
see the political direction of users, the first level can be: Has a political orientation 
or not, and in the second level, for users who answered “yes” what is the political 
orientation (e.g. democratic or republication) and in the third level, possibly who 
is their preferred candidate.
Aspect and feature approaches are somewhat similar and are based on aspects 
or features. This is considered a goal oriented approach where classifying a post 
based on terms or statements is not much useful for opinion evaluators. They are 
usually interested to extract certain opinions, features or aspects based in a particular 
context. In this approach the opinion is decomposed in an entity and its relevant 
aspects or features. An example of an aspect in a statement is: “The overall rating of 
the movie was really low” is “movie rating” and the entity is “movie”. This is more 
to say that this current evaluation does not cover all movie aspects “e.g. classifica-
tion, revenue, etc.), but only one specific aspect. In this specific example, the focus 
is to extract people opinions on “movie rating” as: Positive, negative or neutral. In 
order to conduct aspect or feature based opinion mining, one of two methods are 
usually employed: Supervised-learning and lexical based approaches. Supervised 
based approach is based on earlier or trained data. This is similar to the approach of 
using dictionaries or positive and negative terms described earlier by authors. The 

Opinion Mining
203
accuracy of opinion mining classification will largely depend on the volume and 
quality of the collected training data. In many research papers, users can develop 
their own training data or can use some of the publically available ones.
In lexical based methods, language lexicons are used to detect posts sentiments. 
This method can be more usable in cases where there are no available training datasets 
or their size or quality is limited. Those approaches can be more complex if they are 
covering a comprehensive list of language struts while they can be more accurate. 
Employing a hybrid approach to integrate both supervised and lexical methods is 
also proposed in some research papers to improve the overall classification accuracy.
SUMMARY
Opinion mining or sentimental analysis is a recent growing field of study. This field 
is expanded not only in computer science or information technology domains, but 
also in social science domains. Many researchers in the social science are inter-
ested to evaluate, based on a large amount of information collected from Online 
Social Networks (OSNs) how humans response to, interact with, or perceive certain 
activities, accidents, news subjects, products, technologies, etc. The fact that the 
collected data represent a large or significant number of human beings with typi-
cally different categories, can give an important dimension or value to this data or 
information. Without OSNs, acquiring such volume of data from a large number of 
audience can be really complex and time consuming. Humans are contributing to 
those OSNs by their will and frequently. However, there are several challenges on 
utilizing such data. One of the most serious challenges is the “privacy” dimension 
in insuring that users or collectors are not violating individuals’ privacy. Individuals 
should explicitly be willing to be part of those analysis and evaluations. Many OSNs 
are trying to balance and accommodate between utilization this large information 
content while at the same time, respect individuals’ privacies.
Not only OSNs can target data or utilize it, but hackers and many other market-
ing related entities may try legally or illegally to acquire information from OSNs. 
Some studies showed that some background and credit reporting agencies used tools 
and methods to access classified or private individual to individual conversations, 
pictures, videos, etc. in OSNs.
OSNs should try to distinguish data that can be collected for statistical measure-
ments from those that are used to target classified individual information. Tools 
should also exist to remove some attributes to hide individual identities when col-
lecting data from OSNs.

Opinion Mining
204
REFERENCES
Abulaish, M., Doja, M. N., & Ahmad, T. (2009). Feature and opinion mining for 
customer review summarization. In Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence 
(pp. 219–224). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-11164-8_35
Al-Kabi, M. N., Gigieh, A. H., Alsmadi, I., & Haidar, M. (2014). Opinion Mining 
and Analysis for Arabic Language. International Journal of Advanced Computer 
Science and Applications, 5(5), 181-195.
Alsmadi, I., et al. (2013). Video spam and public opinion in current Middle Eastern 
conflicts. International Journal of Social Network Mining, 1(3-4), 318-333.
Angulakshmi, G., & ManickaChezian, R. (2014). An Analysis on Opinion Mining: 
Techniques and Tools. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer 
and Communication Engineering, 3(7), 7483–7487.
Denecke, K. (2008, April). Using sentiwordnet for multilingual sentiment analysis. 
In Data Engineering Workshop, 2008. ICDEW 2008. IEEE 24th International Con-
ference on (pp. 507-512). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICDEW.2008.4498370
Ding, X., Liu, B., & Yu, P. S. (2008, February). A holistic lexicon-based approach 
to opinion mining. In Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Web 
Search and Data Mining (pp. 231-240). ACM. doi:10.1145/1341531.1341561
Duwairi, R., & Qarqaz, I. (2014). Arabic Sentiment Analysis using Supervised Clas-
sification. The 1st International Workshop on Social Networks Analysis, Management 
and Security (SNAMS - 2014). doi:10.1109/FiCloud.2014.100
Eirinaki, M., Pisal, S., & Singh, J. (2012). Feature-based opinion mining and rank-
ing. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 78(4), 1175–1184. doi:10.1016/j.
jcss.2011.10.007
Gerani, S., Carman, M., & Crestani, F. (2010). Proximity-based opinion retrieval.
Proceedings of the 33rd international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and 
development in information retrieval. ACM.
Govindarajan, M. (2013). Sentiment Analysis of Movie Reviews using Hybrid 
Method of Naive Bayes and Genetic Algorithm. International Journal of Advanced 
Computer Research, 3(4), 139–145.
Hu, M., & Liu, B. (2004). Mining and Summarizing Customer Reviews. In Proceed-
ings of the 10th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery 
and data mining.

Opinion Mining
205
Jagtap, B., & Dhotre, V. (2014). SVM and HMM Based Hybrid Approach of Senti-
ment Analysis for Teacher Feedback Assessment. International Journal of Emerging 
Trends & Technology in Computer Science, 3(3), 229–232.
Jin, W., Ho, H., & Srihari, R. (2009). A novel lexicalized HMM-based learning 
framework for web opinion mining.Proceedings of the 26th Annual International 
Conference on Machine Learning. doi:10.1145/1553374.1553435
Kaushik, C., & Mishra, A. (2014). A scalable, lexicon based technique for sentiment 
analysis. International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology, 
4(5), 35–43. doi:10.5121/ijfcst.2014.4504
Khasawneh, R. T., Wahsheh, H. A., Alsmadi, I. M., Al-Kabi, M. N. (2015). Arabic 
sentiment polarity identification using a hybrid approach. Information and Com-
munication Systems (ICICS), 2015 6th International Conference on. IEEE.
Marrese-Taylor, E., Velásquez, J. D., & Bravo-Marquez, F. (2014). A novel deter-
ministic approach for aspect-based opinion mining. Academic Press.
Maynard, D., Bontcheva, K., & Rout, D. (2012). Challenges in developing opinion 
mining tools for social media. In Proceedings of @NLP can u tag #usergenerated-
content?! Workshop at LREC 2012.
Moghaddam, S., & Ester, M. (2012). Aspect-based Opinion Mining from Online 
Reviews. New York: SIGIR.
Nasukawa, A. T., & Jeonghee, Y. (2003). Sentiment analysis: capturing favorability 
using natural language processing. In Proceedings of the KCA p-03, 2nd international 
conference on knowledge capture.
Padmaja, S., & Sameen, F. (2013). Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis –An 
Assessment of Peoples’ Belief: A Survey. International Journal of Ad hoc Sensor 
& Ubiquitous Computing, 4(1), 21–33. doi:10.5121/ijasuc.2013.4102
Pang, B., & Lee, L. (2008). Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations 
and Trends in Information Retrieval, 2(1-2), 1–135. doi:10.1561/1500000011
Peñalver-Martínez, I., Valencia-García, R., & García-Sánchez, F. (2011). Ontology-
guided approach to feature-based opinion mining. Natural Language Processing and 
Information Systems (pp. 193–200). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-
3-642-22327-3_20
Rahmath, H. (2014). Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis - Challenges and 
Applications. International Journal of Application or Innovation in Engineering 
& Management, 3(5), 401–403.

Opinion Mining
206
Rill, S., Scheidt, J. D., Schutz, O., Reinel, D., & Wogenstein, F. (2012). A generic 
approach to generate opinion lists of phrases for opinion mining applications. Pro-
ceedings of the First International Workshop on Issues of Sentiment Discovery and 
Opinion Mining. doi:10.1145/2346676.2346683
Sharma, N., & Chitre, V. (2014). Opinion Mining, Analysis and its Challenges. Inter-
national Journal of Innovations & Advancement in Computer Science, 3(1), 59–65.
Singh, P., & Husain, M. (2014). Methodological study of opinionmining and senti-
ment analysis techniques. International Journal on Soft Computing, 5(1), 11–21. 
doi:10.5121/ijsc.2014.5102
Singh, S., Paul, S., & Kumar, D. (2014). Sentiment Analysis Approaches on Dif-
ferent Data set Domain: Survey. International Journal of Database Theory and 
Application, 7(5), 39–50. doi:10.14257/ijdta.2014.7.5.04
Taboada, M., Brooke, J., Tofiloski, M., Voll, K., & Stede, M. (2011). Lexicon-
based methods for sentiment analysis. Computational Linguistics, 37(2), 267–307. 
doi:10.1162/COLI_a_00049
Varghese, R., & Jayasree, M. (2013). A survey on sentiment analysis and opinion 
mining. International Journal of Research in Engineering and Technology, 2(11), 
312–317. doi:10.15623/ijret.2013.0211048
Vinodhini, G., & Chandrasekaran, R. (2012). Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Min-
ing: A Survey. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science 
and Software Engineering, 2(6), 282–292.
Wei, W., & Gulla, J. (2010). Sentiment learning on product reviews via sentiment 
ontology tree. In Proceedings of Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL-2010).
Zhai, Z., Liu, B., Xu, H., & Jia, P. (2011). Clustering product features for opinion 
mining.Proceedings of the fourth ACM international conference on Web search and 
data mining. ACM. doi:10.1145/1935826.1935884

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch011
Chapter 11
207 
Sentiment Analysis 
of Social Media as 
Tool to Improve 
Customer Retention
ABSTRACT
Sentiment analysis is a process of determining the polarity (i.e. positive, negative or 
neutral) of a given text. The extremely increased amount of information available 
on the web, especially social media, create a challenge to be retrieved and analyzed 
on time, timely analyzed of unstructured data provide businesses a competitive 
advantage by better understanding their customers’ needs and preferences. This 
literature review will cover a number of studies about sentiment analysis and finds 
the connection between sentiment analysis of social network content and customers 
retention; we will focus on sentiment analysis and discuss concepts related to this 
field, most important relevant studies and its results, its methods of applications, 
where it can be applied and its business applications, finally, we will discuss how 
can sentiment analysis improve the customer retention based on retrieved data.
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah
Independent Researcher, Jordan
Ahmad Al-Zyoud
Yarmouk University, Jordan

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
208
INTRODUCTION
Social network sites are rapidly becoming a standard method of communication for 
millions of users, by sharing their updates, users enlarge their horizons and shar-
ing their believes and opinions, thus web has become a user-centered environment 
(Hays, Spiers, & Paterson, 2015). Businesses which do not involve in social media 
marketing activities lose a lot of opportunities, competitors already use social media 
and gaining competitive advantage, it’s the most cost effective and easy to use com-
munication way to share information about brands, products and services, and new 
events. This massive amount of information should be interpreted into measurable 
attitude dictionary (Khan & Khan, 2012).
Businesses prefer to be at the heart of a community; social media platforms 
present the opportunities for companies to get close to their consumers, including 
observing and collecting information; sponsoring communities; and providing content 
to communities (Kietzmann, Hermkens, McCarthy, & Silvestre, 2011).There have 
been many examples of companies who used Facebook to position themselves at the 
center of community, like Pizza Hut which claimed to have more than 26 million fans 
in 2015, Samsung with more than 42 million fans, and television network channels 
MBC with more than 13 million fans (Facebook, 2015). Common rapid growing of 
social networks creates dynamic streams of textual unstructured information created 
directly from customers’ reactions and opinions on social pages, businesses need 
to recognize the importance of social media content created by their followers and 
crowd to align their position in the most successful way, where timely analysis of 
online information can provide businesses with a competitive advantage, by getting 
better understanding of customers’ preferences, having early alarms on emerging 
issues, and monitor competitors’ activities (Kietzmann, Hermkens, McCarthy, & 
Silvestre, 2011; Culnan, McHugh, & Zubillaga, 2010). Research engines attempts 
to use different techniques to speed up and improve efficiency search results. Sen-
timent analysis is a new emergent process to facilitate measuring the attitudes of 
web visitors.
Sentiment analysis (opinion mining) is a sub-field of natural language process-
ing, which analyses social media, news, and research content on the web to extract 
meaningful data measurements from the subjective opinions and feelings surround-
ing an object (i.e. positive, negative or neutral) (Duwairi & Qarqaz, 2014). To make 
use of sentiment analysis results, companies must learn to prioritize the results 
depending on influence – digging down into an opinion to understand how it really 
affected other users and how did they respond to it. Sentiment analysis uses two 
main methodologies, the machine learning methodology and the semantic orienta-
tion, both methodologies are widely used but some new researchers suggests using 
a hybrid of both methodologies to get more accurate results. Sentiment analysis 

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
209
aims to determine the attitude of a writer with respect to some topic or the overall 
contextual polarity of a document. The attitude may be his/her judgment or evalua-
tion, emotional state, or the intended emotional communication (Abdulla, Ahmed, 
Shehab, Al-Ayyoub, Al-Kabi, & Al-rifai, 2013).
Sentiment analysis can be used by firms and organizations to measure their 
influence on the market, by following their customers’ interaction through social 
networks’ contents; therefore managers will have a better understanding of avail-
able/new products and services. Customer retention is an important scope in any 
marketing plan, keeping your current customer’s loyal and interested about your 
business is profitable more than attracting new customers, where a survey shows 
that “one in three respondents followed through with a friend’s recommendation 
received through a social media outlet like Facebook or Twitter” (Empathica, 2010)
BACKGROUND
Sentiment Analysis Techniques
As social media become more pervasive in our life, businesses should be more 
aware about this new power connected to customers, where it creates a new world 
of dominance and control in customers’ hand, searching for services or products is 
developed into new domains, online information created by users of social networks 
and through firms presence forms on the web, create new channel to exchange 
experiences and information “good and bad” about specific brands, organization, 
business…etc. analyst need to monitor and translate this information continuously, 
not just information on their own social networks’ platforms, but also to check and 
analyze textual information on their competitors’ social networks’ platforms. Analyz-
ing this amount of information with the diversity of forms, languages, and sources 
helps decision makers and e-marketers to create a competitive social network and 
transfer social network raw data into knowledge and actionable situation. A posi-
tive current customer experience revealed through social network’s platforms can 
encourage potential customers to become active brand advocates, increase brand 
loyalty and referrals and ultimately boost their revenues and profits (He, Zha, & 
Li, Social media competitive analysis and text mining: A case study in the pizza 
industry, 2013)
Sentiment analysis can be applied using different techniques to extract the 
knowledge from unstructured data of the web. Table 1 and Table 2 might look like 
what a typical sentiment analysis looks like.
Sentiment Analysis techniques can be classified into three main categories as 
follows.

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
210
Symbolic (Manual) Analysis
This technique depends on manually identifying a collection of words and their 
sentiment to form the opinion lexicon, opinion lexicon is a collection of words and 
phrases with information about their sentiment (Positive or Negative), a lexicon can 
either be created manually or acquired automatically (Ibrahim, Abdou, & Gheith, 
2015). Wiebe, Wilson, & Cardie in their study (2005) have employed an annota-
tion schema on a 100-thousand corpus of articles from the world news, the target 
of their study was to identify private states in context rather than judging words 
and phrases out of context. They defined a frame for each private state, a frame is 
a way to classify different words and phrases and assign specific specifications to 
them. Each frame shall contain the following information: source, target, properties, 
and attitude type. Their approach is supposed to give further insight into sentiment 
analysis than the usual classification of positive and negative classes. A private state 
as defined by the researchers is a state that is not open to objective observation or 
verification; it could represent opinions, beliefs, thoughts, feelings, emotions, goals, 
evaluations, and judgments.
Table 1. Example1 for sentiment analysis
Month 1
Month 2
Metrics
Likes 
2000
4000
Like Growth
Followers 
20887
30000
Followers Growth
Post 
200
300
Post Growth
Comments 
600
1500
Comment Growth
Comments-per-Posts 
3
5
CPP Growth
Table 2. Example2 for Sentiment Analysis
Platform
Objective
Metric
Goal
Alternative Metric
Facebook
Customer Engagement
Avg. # Comment/Post
10
Avg. number of Shares/Week
Twitter
General Awareness
Avg. New Followers/Post
5
Avg. number of RTs/Post
LinkedIn
Thought Leadership
# Best Answers
20
Number of InRecommendations
Youtube
Sales/Lead Generation
# Leads or Sales/View
1%
Likes/View
Google+
Customer Service
#Hangout/Week
3
NetPromoter Score

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
211
Machine Learning Techniques
Sentiment analysis can be handled as a classification problem where supervised 
learning classification algorithms can be used to classify documents, or sentences into 
two categories (Negative, positive). It’s also possible to use unsupervised learning 
techniques to classify sentiments, this is usually done with a three steps algorithm 
that extracts phrases with adjectives, estimate their orientation, and calculate the 
opinion orientation of the sentence (Ibrahim, Abdou, & Gheith, 2015).
Hybrid Techniques
The main concept in hybrid techniques is combining both the manual and the ma-
chine learning techniques to get information that are more valuable from sentiment 
analysis; most of these techniques combine the lexicon with the supervised learning 
process of classifying sentiments. (Dang, Zhang, & Chen, 2010).
Sentiment Analysis Tools
Eureka, a leading enterprise speech analytics for the call center, believes in “Listen 
to your customer. Improve your business”, where customer power become more 
intense and influential. In our open market place through social media customers 
Figure 1. Taxonomy of sentiment analysis techniques

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
212
can connect with each other cross the world and retrieve real time feedback about 
products and services of specific business. Thus, if businesses have the ability to 
reach to this feedback and analyze content in real time, it will help in better un-
derstanding customers, improve their services, and avoid any potential pitfalls and 
problems that might not be discovered in near time otherwise.
There are many tools we can use to manage and analyze content of social media, 
such tools like: Google analytics, Meltware, Facebook Insights, and more. Here we 
will discuss some available tools used in sentiment analysis.
•	
STATISTICA: Part of Dell software, this off-the-shelf analytic solutions 
provide a multi-topic summary of customer sentiments on a single dash-
board, with no need to learn special language where user should be familiar 
in using Microsoft office products and that will be enough. STATISTICA 
helps mangers and marketers to create ad hoc reports or obtaining details 
of any alarm in a an effective timely situation, provide numeric inputs for 
marketing campaigns, and media mix optimization, customer response mod-
els, and more. It provides solutions for many different industries across the 
globe it connected directly with databases and live feeds such as Facebook 
and twitter. STATISTIKA claimed that their products have received the high-
est rating in every published (independent) comparative review since its first 
release in 1993 (Statsoft, 2016). STATISTICA adopt a five steps solution to 
enhance and increase opportunities of getting benefits of sentiment analysis 
to sustain customers’ retention, which are: Measure the Sentiment by con-
verting comments into a single numeric index that summarizes attitudes and 
views, Track Changes by receiving early notifications of customer s’ feed-
back, Easy Integration with Other Analysis to build predictive models and 
optimize marketing campaigns, Multiple Language Support to follow cus-
tomers all over the globe, and Take advantage of modern hardware and soft-
ware technologies.
•	
Facebook Insights: It is a Facebook’s version of web page analysis; it allows 
managers to track information about users’ interaction on Facebook, such as 
page views, fan statistics, wall posts, photo share, video and audio play and 
more. Also, it helps in tracking the number of active users to better under-
stand page performance. Effective use of this tool will help in determining 
the best time of day to post, the best day of the week to post and what type of 
content is most popular, therefore loyal customers will be managed better and 
follow their concerns in real time actions.
•	
Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK): NLTK is a free, open source, commu-
nity-driven project platform used to build python programs which applied on 
human language data, it can use over 50 lexical resources and a set of text 

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
213
processing libraries, such as classification, tokenization, stemming, tagging, 
parsing, and semantic reasoning, it is used by linguists, engineers, students, 
educators, researchers, and industry users alike (NLTK, 2016).
•	
Google Analytics: Free web analytic service provided by Google, suitable 
for small and medium-sized retail websites, used to turn customer insights 
into real gains. Some features of Google Analytics tool include: data visual-
izing tools like dashboard and scorecards to view change in data over time, 
create custom reports based on segmenting analysis into subsets like conver-
sion, integrating analysis with Google products, and allowing email sharing 
and communication. All you need to gain benefits of Google analytic is hav-
ing a Google account.
Sentiment Analysis Platforms
The evolution of web 2.0 and the social media is the number one motivation for 
the sentiment analysis studies and its adaption among business owners as a method 
to study target customers, their intentions, needs, and feedback. In a study held by 
Prem and his colleague (2009) they have tested applying a technique based both 
on a lexical and machine learning methods to analyze sentiments around specific 
products in blogs. The testing data used in this study was about three targets, which 
are Lotus IBM collaborative software, political elections and movies. The first step 
in their approach is to manually label a number of blog posts related to the target 
focusing only on the post body and ignoring its title and other details, and then use 
the labeled data as a testing and validation data for the machine learning algorithm.
Recent surveys have estimated that a massive number of internet users turn to 
online forums to collect recommendations for products and services, guiding their 
own choices and decisions by the opinions that other consumers have publicly ex-
pressed. The trust placed on the opinion of another consumer is often much greater 
than that placed on advertisements for a product (Li, Sindhwani, Ding, & Zhang, 
2010). On the other hand, business owners and politicians, looking to study people 
opinions would benefit from being able to determine not just whether a document or 
text snippet is opinionated but also the intensity of the opinion. Furthermore, know-
ing the types of attitude being expressed (e.g., positive versus negative evaluations) 
would enable a natural language processing (NLP) application to target particular 
types of opinions (Chalothom & Ellman, 2015).
The researchers state that “we notice that the accuracy of sentiment classification 
is significantly higher for lotus than for politics. The Lotus posts originate from a 
small set of blogs, and there is almost a one-to-one correspondence between blogs 
and sentiment, i.e., each blogger either loves or hates Lotus. This conforms better 
with the assumptions of our generative model compared to the Politics posts, which 

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
214
Originate from many disparate sources that have positive and negative commentary 
about different electoral candidates. As a result, our methods perform better at clas-
sifying sentiment in the Lotus blogs compared to the Politics blogs.”
A research to extract sentiment analysis from users’ reviews using an unsuper-
vised learning method was conducted by Brody and Noemie (2010). As mentioned 
in their paper the reasons for using an unsupervised method is that: due to the wide 
range and variety of products and services being reviewed, and the nature of the data. 
Online reviews are often short and unstructured, and may contain many spelling and 
grammatical errors, as well as slang or specialized jargon.” To measure the accuracy 
of their method the researchers have defined an aspect-related gold standards, and 
worked and have used a manual method to label these standards, after that they have 
tested the algorithm once using the manual feed set and the other unsupervised. The 
manual feed set has yield more accurate results but the unsupervised method has 
also proven its ability to be used in this domain efficiently.
In an interesting study on Twitter as a tool of sentiment analysis the researchers 
was trying to find out if people opinions expressed through twitter can affect the 
stock market (Bollena, Mao, & Zeng, 2011). Their case of study is Dow Jones In-
dustrial Average (DJIA). They used two tools; Opinion Finder and Google Measure 
of mood to analyze text content of daily twitter posts. After that the findings were 
cross validated and tested using an election example back on the year of 2008. Once 
data is validated it was fed to a self-organizing fuzzy neural network study its impact 
on stock market. This method proved an accuracy of 87.6% on predicting daily up 
and low changes of the closing values of DJIA, and a reduction in the mean average 
percentage error by 6%. Table 3 summarizes samples of research methodologies 
used in references used to write this literature review.
SENTIMENT ANALYSIS TO GAIN BETTER UNDERSTANDING 
OF YOUR CUSTOMERS
Food industry presents a rich and important industry that will involve strongly 
in social network world, based on various features of different social networks’ 
platforms, Facebook and Twitter will play an important increasingly role in food 
industry, a survey conducted by Brandau discuss that about half of the customers 
had looked for a food restaurant by searching and monitoring recommendations by 
reading online reviews and information posted on Facebook and Twitter (Brandau, 
2010). 85% of pizza-chain brands are strongly tied to promotions and discounts 
mostly acquired through social networks, also, many pizza brands have employed 
qualified staff members with responsibilities to engage customers and build an 
online community and employ social network as customer service tool, therefore 

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
215
Table 3. Previous research in sentiment analysis field
Research
Platform
Method
Results
( Ibrahim, Abdou, 
& Gheith, 2015 ) 
Blogs and 
Twitter
Symbolic (manual) 
analysis SVM 
Classifiers
The experimental 
results indicate high 
performance levels, 
with accuracies of 
over 95%
Help business to 
market products, 
identify new 
opportunities and 
manage reputations
( Duwairi & 
Qarqaz, 2014 ) 
Facebook 
and Twitter
Supervised learning 
method “machine 
learning approach” 
The Naïve Bayes, 
SVM and KNN 
classifiers were 
used
show that SVM gives 
the highest precision 
while KNN (K=10) 
gives the highest 
Recall
( Rosenthal, Nakov, 
Kiritchenko, 
Mohammad, Ritter, 
& Stoyanov, 2015 ) 
Twitter
Supervised learning 
method “machine 
learning approach”
Build a 
comprehensive data 
set over three ears 
shows how businesses 
growth and enhanced 
over that period
Decision makers and 
analyst can study 
weakness point from 
data set to identify 
down curve area to 
focus their efforts to 
avoid any potential 
previous errors
( Korayem, 
Crandall, & Abdul-
Mageed, 2012 ) 
Blogs and 
Twitter
Hybrid techniques 
(mix of manual and 
machine learning)
A nuanced method 
to build a sentiment 
analysis system for 
Arabic employs 
not only language 
independent, but 
also Arabic-specific 
features
Businesses and 
institutions can 
monitor feelings 
about their products 
and services. Private 
citizens can also 
be able to compare 
sentiments about 
competing products.
( Mourad & 
Darwish, 2013 ) 
Reviews
Symbolic 
(Manually) - 
Unsupervised 
learning method
Create a dictionary 
of processed data 
taken originally from 
public comments 
and reviews of hotels 
and restaurants 
reservations
Help people to make 
decisions about 
possible reservations, 
and allow businesses 
to improve their 
services and 
reputations
( Bollena, Mao, & 
Zeng, 2011 ) 
Twitter
Fuzzy neural 
networks
Proved a 86.7% 
accuracy in 
predicting values
Predicting stock 
markets ups and 
downs
( Brody & Noemie, 
2010 ) 
Reviews
Unsupervised 
learning method
Although it is 
less accurate than 
supervised learning 
methods, but this 
method has proven 
good results in 
measuring sentiment 
in reviews
Help individuals 
or firms make a 
purchase decision

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
216
customers can engage in activities of producing and enhancing pizza’s products 
(He, Zha, & Li, 2013)
The simplest rule to grow a business’s customer base is to not lose current cus-
tomers, creating good customer relationship save money and cost instead of attract-
ing new possible customers. Let’s take an example of two companies each have a 
customers’ base of 10000 customers. Company A retain 80% of its customers each 
year, while Company B retains 70%, both companies have net growth of 20% of new 
customers each year, the following table represents net growth of customers’ base
Number of customers = current customer *retain percent + net growth*current 
customer number
e.g. first year: Company A → 10000*(80/100)+10000*(20/100) = 10000	
Company B→ 10000*(70/100)+10000*(20/100)= 90000	
Comparing previous results, we can see that despite company A customer’s base 
didn’t grow in 7 years, yet it create a competitive advantage over company B just 
by saving current customer’s base, company B lose more than half of its original 
customers. This create a significant hint about importance of retaining current cus-
tomers for any business. Traditional suggested strategies to retain customers include:
•	
Reducing attrition and invest wisely in customer’s relationship, don’t waste 
time or effort on customers who you might abandon in any situation. Make 
your expenses in right place and for right purposes.
•	
Frequent communication calendar use sequence of letters, events, special of-
fers, follow-ups, magic moments, and cards or notes with a personal touch. 
Customers will feel valued and important.
Table 4. Customer retention in numbers for both companies A, and B
Company A
Company B
Year 1 
10000
9000
Year 2 
10000
8100
Year 3 
10000
7290
Year 4 
10000
6561
Year 5 
10000
5904.1
Year 6 
10000
5313.69
Year 7 
10000
4782.321

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
217
•	
Extraordinary customer service, extraordinary service builds fortunes in 
repeat customers, such services include: consider customer satisfaction a 
priority, provide immediate response, going above and beyond the call of 
duty, consistent on-time delivery, and a zero-defects and error-free-delivery 
process.
Beside obvious classic customers’ retention strategies, we can find a set of in-
novative strategies and tools that are available and created through the web, such 
as focusing on blogs, surveys and questionnaires, communities and groups, and 
social networks. Social networks represent a wealth domain of customers’ feedback, 
either current customers with their opinions about products/ services, or potential 
new customers with their needs and preferences. Potential customer searches the 
web for feedback in the form of comments and reviews of certain products, while 
current customers create these feedback through posting photos, writing comments, 
tweets, and reviews which describe their experience and attitude toward the prod-
ucts/ service, firms and marketers use these feedback to analyze current customer 
trends and potential customers needs and preferences to improve their services and 
business process to maximize benefits for all parts.
As a golden standard, we can advise businesses to “always listen and hear what 
their customers say”; social media create an open two way interactive platform, 
where customers can connect to business products/ services and communicate with 
each other, when listening to your customers, take into account what changes your 
organization should make from this feedback, and then follow through. We can use 
the following methods to gather feedback from customers:
•	
Surveys.
•	
Focus Groups.
•	
Observation.
•	
Point of Sale.
•	
Customer Service.
•	
Social Media.
•	
Communities and Groups.
•	
Email and Web Forms.
In a study conducted by De Beule (2015) on fast food industry in USA, includ-
ing six major brands: McDonald’s, Taco Bell, Pizza Hut, KFC, Burger King, and 
Dunkin’ Donuts, researchers found that these brands do not interact appropriately 
on social networks with their customers. Where in average quarter of the interac-

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
218
tions are negative, yet 90% of the communication is from customers’ side only since 
these brands neglect to respond. Pizza Hut registered highest responding rate with 
15% active response in just under 1.5 hour, McDonald’s took an average of 5 hours 
minutes to reply, and in the opposite Dunkin’ Donuts never responded to customers. 
A plan of simple three steps to insure customers’ retention through monitoring and 
analyzing online customers’ interaction is presented as follow:
•	
Organize All Incoming Messages and Posts: Before replying and establish-
ing any automatic communication with customers, organization should group 
messages, posts, comments, and any form of interaction into specific folders 
by analyze social network content, this will make the process much easier to 
establish the tone needed for each response. Also, it guarantee to response to 
each customer for the right manner.
•	
Turn negative comments into positive conversations.
•	
Think About the Quantity: People that pass through a McDonald’s or 
Burger King drive-thru on a daily basis. Because there’s a much higher vol-
ume of customers than typical sit-down restaurants, there will be a higher 
volume of social chatter around their quality of food and service. Instead of 
acknowledging negative comments with a generic response, find creative and 
positive ways to address each situation. This not only fosters transparency on 
social, but also cultivates a feeling of genuine care for customers.
REAL IMPLICATIONS OF SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
Apptrace is the fastest free app analysis service around, it provides daily ranking 
and sentiment analysis services for applications on its website, http://www.apptrace.
com/, to monitor application’s performance, type the name of the application or the 
application ID and start monitoring and analyzing it. Facebook application, which 
Figure 2. Explanation of key words in sentiment analysis

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
219
Table 5. Feedback of customers about the application
Time Frame
Positive
Addictiveness
Crash
Negative
Oct, 2014
40%
0%
60%
80%
Nov, 2014
10%
10%
40%
40%
Dec, 2014
28%
14%
42%
42%
Jan, 2015
5%
11%
16%
50%
Feb, 2015
10%
0%
20%
30%
Mar, 2015
20%
0%
13%
33%
April, 2015
0%
0%
25%
37%
May, 2015
25%
12%
25%
50%
June, 2015
0%
0%
0%
100%
July, 2015
22%
11%
44%
33%
Aug, 2015
17%
13%
34%
39%
Sep, 2015
13%
6%
33%
26%
Oct, 2015
7%
7%
46%
53%
Nov, 2015
0%
0%
24%
36%
December, 2015
16%
16%
16%
50%
Jan, 2016
0%
11%
44%
55%
Feb, 2016
16%
11%
38%
55%
Mar, 2016
23%
14%
14%
38%
Figure 3. Graphic presentation of sentiment analysis

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
220
is available in 155 countries and has overall 453,544,178 rating with average of 3.5, 
is within the top 1% applications in the world. Facebook used sentiment analysis 
option on apptrace to measure customer satisfaction regarding the application, 
based on its usefulness, enjoyment, and ease of use, where results will help the 
firm to get feedback from customers about applications and its’ content to follow 
up market needs and customers’ preferences. Table 5 represents results of analyzing 
application’s feedback in a time frame from Oct, 2014, to Mar, 2016. Studying this 
table and the figure will help firms to measure effectiveness of the application to 
overcome any potential problems or issues and to concentrate on improving strength 
position (Apptrace, 2014).
Figure 3 represents a line charts which display trends of user sentiments over 
time.
REFERENCES
Abdul-Mageed, M., Diab, M., & Korayem, M. (2011). Subjectivity and Sentiment 
Analysis of Modern Standard Arabic. The 49th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (pp. 587-591).
Abdulla, N. A., Ahmed, N. A., Shehab, M. A., Al-Ayyoub, M., Al-Kabi, M. N., & 
Al-rifai, S. (2013). Towards Improving the Lexicon-Based Approach for Arabic 
Sentiment Analysis. International Journal of Information Technology and Web 
Engineering, 9(3), 55–71. doi:10.4018/ijitwe.2014070104
Ajmal, M. (2009). Critical Factors for Successful KM Initiatives in Project Back-
ground. Communications of IBIMA, 8(1), 1–8.
Apptrace. (2014). Facebook Application. Retrieved 2016, from Apptrace.com: http://
www.apptrace.com/app/facebook/id284882215/sentiments
BBC. (2014). BBC. Retrieved November 2015, from BBC Web Site: http://www.
bbc.co.uk/arabic/mobile/scienceandtech/2012/12/121220_arabic_language_inter-
net_arab_days.shtml
Bebensee, T., Helms, R., & Spruit, M. (2011). Exploring Web 2.0 Applications 
as a Mean of Bolestering upKnowledge Managment. The Electronic Journal of 
Knowledge Management, 9(1), 1-9.
Belk, R. (2014). Sharing Versus Pseudo-Sharing in Web 2.0. Anthropologist, 18(1), 
7–23.

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
221
Bhojaraju, G. (2005). Knowledge Management: Why Do We Need It For Corporates. 
Malaysian Journal of Library & Information Science, 10(2), 37–50.
Bollena, J., Mao, H., & Zeng, X. (2011). Twitter mood predicts the stock market. 
Journal of Computational Science, 2(1), 1–8. doi:10.1016/j.jocs.2010.12.007
Brandau, M. (2010). Study: Consumers hungry for restaurants. Retrieved from http://
nrn.com/corporate/study-consumers-hungry-restaurants#ixzz1iB3TbprN
Brody, S., & Noemie, E. (2010). An unsupervised aspect-sentiment model for on-
line reviews. The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 804-812). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Chalothom, T., & Ellman, J. (2015). Simple Approaches of Sentiment Analysis via 
Ensemble Learning. Information Science and Applications, 631-639.
Culnan, M. J., McHugh, P. J., & Zubillaga, J. I. (2010). How large US companies 
can use Twitter and other social media to gain business value. MIS Quarterly Ex-
ecutive, 9(4), 243–259.
Dang, Y., Zhang, Y., & Chen, H. (2010). A Lexicon Enhanced Method for Senti-
ment classification: An experiment on online product reviews. Intelligent Systems, 
25(4), 46–53. doi:10.1109/MIS.2009.105
De Beule, S. (2015, January 8). 3 Steps for Fast Food Brands to Build Customer 
Loyalty on Social Media. Retrieved March 16, 2016, from Engagor, A Clarabridge 
Company: http://www.engagor.com/blog/3-steps-for-fast-food-brands-to-build-
customer-loyalty-on-social-media/
Duwairi, R. M., & Qarqaz, I. (2014). Arabic Sentiment Analysis using Supervised 
Classification. Arabic Sentiment Analysis using Supervised Classification (pp. 
579–583). Barcelona, Spain: IEEE.
Empathica. (2010). Empathica consumer insights panel: Consumer use of social. 
inmoment.
Facebook. (2015). Facebook. Retrieved 2015, from facebook web site: http://www.
facebook.com
Frost, A. (2010). Knowledge Management. Retrieved November 2015, from KMT 
An Educational KM Site: http://www.knowledge-management-tools.net/

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
222
Gertler, M. S. (2003). Tacit knowledge and the economic geography of context, or 
The undefinable tacitness of being (there). Journal of Economic Geography, 3(1), 
75–99. doi:10.1093/jeg/3.1.75
Gretsch, S., Mandl, H., & Schätz, R. (2012). Implementation Process of a Knowledge 
Management Initiative: Yellow Pages. INTECH Open Access.
Hays, C. A., Spiers, J. A., & Paterson, B. (2015). Opportunities and Constraints in Dis-
seminating Qualitative Research in Web 2.0 Virtual Environments. Qualitative Health 
Research, 25(11), 1576–1588. doi:10.1177/1049732315580556 PMID:25870449
He, W., Zha, S., & Li, L. (2013). Social media competitive analysis and text mining: 
A case study in the pizza industry. International Journal of Information Manage-
ment, 33(3), 464–472. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.01.001
He, W., Zha, S., & Li, L. (2013). Social Media Competitive Analysis and Text 
mining: A Case Study in the Pizza Industry. International Journal of Information 
Management, 33(3), 464–472. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.01.001
Ibrahim, H. S., Abdou, S. M., & Gheith, M. (2015). Sentiment Analysis For Mod-
ern Standard Arabic And Colloquial. International Journal on Natural Language 
Computing, 4(2), 95–109. doi:10.5121/ijnlc.2015.4207
Khan, A., & Khan, R. (2012). Embracing new media in Fiji: The way forward for 
social network marketing and communication strategies. Strategic Direction, 28(4), 
3–5. doi:10.1108/02580541211212754
Khasawneh, R. T., Wahsheh, H. A., Alsmadi, I. M., & Al-Kabi, M. N. (2015). 
Arabic Sentiment Polarity Identification Using a Hybrid Approach. Information 
and Communication Systems (ICICS), 2015 6th International Conference on (pp. 
148-153). IEEE.
Kietzmann, J. H., Hermkens, K., McCarthy, I. P., & Silvestre, B. S. (2011). Social 
media? Get serious! Understanding the functional building blocks of social media. 
Business Horizons, 54(3), 241–251. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2011.01.005
Korayem, M., Crandall, D., & Abdul-Mageed, M. (2012). Subjectivity and senti-
ment analysis of arabic: A survey. In Advanced Machine Learning Technologies 
and Applications (pp. 128–139). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Levy, M. (2009). WEB 2.0 implications on knowledge management. Journal of 
Knowledge Management, 13(1), 120–134. doi:10.1108/13673270910931215

Sentiment Analysis of Social Media as Tool to Improve Customer Retention
223
Li, T., Sindhwani, V., Ding, C., & Zhang, Y. (2010). Bridging Domains with Words: 
Opinion Analysis with Matrix Tri-factorizations. SDM, 293-302.
Morente-Molinera, J., Perez, I., Chiclana, F., & Herrera-Viedma, E. (2015). A novel 
group decision making method to overcome the Web 2.0 challenges.Proceedings 
of the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 
(SMC2015). IEEE. doi:10.1109/SMC.2015.390
Mourad, A., & Darwish, K. (2013). Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis of Modern 
Standard Arabic and Arabic Microblogs.4th Workshop on Computational Approaches 
to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, (pp. 55-64).
NLTK. (2016, April). Natural Language Toolkit. Retrieved April 10, 2016, from 
NLTK Org: http://www.nltk.org/
Prem, M., Wojciech, G., & Richard, L. (2009). Sentiment analysis of blogs by com-
bining lexical knowledge with text classification. KDD ‘09 Proceedings of the 15th 
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 
(pp. 1275-1284). New York: ACM.
Rosenthal, S., Nakov, P., Kiritchenko, S., Mohammad, S. M., Ritter, A., & Stoyanov, 
V. (2015). SemEval-2015 Task 10: Sentiment Analysis in Twitter.Proceedings of 
the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval. doi:10.18653/
v1/S15-2078
Statsoft. (2016). Stats Of Art. Retrieved April 10, 2016, from Dell Software: http://
www.statsoft.com/
Turban, E., Shadra, R., & Delen, D. (2011). Decision Support and Business Intel-
ligence Systems (9th ed.). Prentice Hall.
Wiebe, J., Wilson, T., & Cardie, C. (2005). Annotating expressions of opinions 
and emotions in language. Language Resources and Evaluation, 39(2), 165–210. 
doi:10.1007/s10579-005-7880-9
Wiig, K. M. (1997). Knowledge management: Where did it come from and where 
will it go? Expert Systems with Applications, 13(1), 1–14. doi:10.1016/S0957-
4174(97)00018-3
Wikipedia. (2015). Wikipedia. Retrieved November 2015, from Wikipedia Website: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_used_on_the_Internet

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch012
Chapter 12
224 
Can the Usage of 
Social Media Increase 
the Gregariousness 
of the Family to Grow 
Successful Family-
Owned Businesses?
The Usefulness of Social 
Media in Growing a Family-
Owned Business
ABSTRACT
The objective of the study was to collect data from family owned enterprises to assess 
and evaluate the effectiveness of social media as a strategy to grow the useful busi-
ness and to determine the subscription of family owned entities to social networking. 
Mambo Governor Mupepi
Grand Valley State University, USA
Patience Taruwinga
Saint Joseph’s College, USA
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah
Independent Researcher, Jordan

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
225
INTRODUCTION
Monkey survey tools were deployed to collect data which was then interpreted to 
inform the discussion in this chapter. The results show that those companies that 
subscribed to social media were more successful than those that did not. Certain 
social networks were much more useful than others and that it was not always 
important to have a website but useful to have a social network. The discussion is 
organized in four parts to answer the question: Can the social media usage increase 
the gregariousness of the family to grow successful family owned businesses? The 
first part introduces the topic and offers a description of some of the terms used in 
the debate. The second part reviews a charily selected literature to understand the 
sociability of families and their business interests. The third part discusses empiri-
cal evidence from Southern African and American family owned businesses on the 
impact of their Facebook, Twitter, Google+, You Tube, Flickr, and Skype to have 
clear and well-planned strategy to increase success opportunities. The fourth part 
draws a conclusion mentioning the limitations of the arguments presented and sug-
gests others areas of research in other on-line and traditional social media.
Rise in Mixed Media Communication Strategy
In Bethlahmy, Popat and Schottmiller (2011), the demand for global e-commerce 
is expected to exceed $1.4 trillion by year end 2015. Further estimates indicate 
that by the end of 2016 US online shoppers will spend $327 billion, and e-retail 
will account for 9 percent of total retail sales (Mulpuru, 2012). Many corpora-
tions including family owned businesses have seized this opportunity to adopt the 
The methodology included data collected from a total of 68 family owned firms 30 
in the USA and 38 in Africa SADC countries. Monkey survey tools were deployed 
to collect data. Results show that those companies that subscribed to social media 
were more successful than those that did not. Certain social networks were much 
more useful than others and that it was not always important to have a website but 
useful to have a social network. The debut of the popular Facebook was received 
with mixed views by many organizations but its subscription by many organizations 
demonstrate its usefulness as a tool to grow a business. The recommendations are 
that it is important for a family owned business to subscribe to a social network as 
a strategy to advance productivity.

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
226
electronic way of business. One important factor critical to electronic commerce 
success is the website. Nacheva-Skopalik and Green (2016) assert that usability of 
websites impact customers’ intention to return for more. The customers’ experience 
on websites should be positive.
Using Social Media Platforms to Model 
and Simulate Performance
Dubois, Moussa, Bach and de Bonnefoy (2008) propound that interactive systems 
are no longer expected to be used in confined and predefined places. By increasingly 
taking advantage of the physical environment, interactive systems are becoming 
mixed, that is, merging physical and digital worlds. Dubois et al (2008) argue that 
interactive systems support user’s mobility and thus can be referred to as mobile 
mixed systems. To overcome technology-driven development processes and to take 
into account their physical nature and mobile dimensions, specific design approaches 
are required. From this perspective, Dubois et al (2008) present the interweaving 
of an existing design model (ASUR) for mixed systems, and a 3-D environment 
(SIMBA) for simulating modeled mobile mixed system. The goals are to support 
the investigation of mobile mixed system design through the dedicated modeling 
approach, and to better understand the limit of the modeled solutions through their 
simulation. This constitutes a first step toward an iterative method of design for 
mobile mixed systems, based on mid-fidelity prototyping. In Chen, Paul, Kibaru, 
Ma, and Saparova (2015), it is suggested that to construct a user-friendly website, 
it is necessary to conduct a usability evaluation by taking into consideration users’ 
inputs from the early stages of website development. Chen et al (2015) propound 
that deploying prototype testing during an iterative design can yield the following 
unique advantages such as making the overarching purpose of designs clearer, aid-
ing communication and mutual understanding among team members; and locating 
main usability concerns and promoting early and fast incorporation of the desired 
design changes.
Damont (2015) argues that social media need to be understood as more than 
engagement tools as they also impact an organization’s internal systems. Using 
sociotechnical theory as a framework, the intersection of the family business’s 
technical, social, and behavioral systems are brought to the fore to better understand 
the strategic changes the business must undergo to better utilize social media tools 
to align with its mission. Damont (2015) argues that a key component of effective 
social media use is the ability to adapt its marketing and sales for online engage-
ment through integration of online and offline systems, so that online media align 
with offline messaging and the dynamic changes in the technological platforms.

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
227
In Nacheva-Skopalik and Green (2016), the social media is described as the fu-
ture of communication, a countless array of internet based tools and platforms that 
increase and enhance the sharing of information. Social media makes the transfer 
of text, photos, audio, video, and information in general increasingly fluid among 
internet users. Nacheva-Skopalik and Green argue that social media has relevance 
not only for regular internet users, but business as well. Platforms such as Facebook, 
Twitter, LinkedIn, and Google+, among others, have created online communities 
where people can share as much or as little personal information as they desire with 
other members. The Google+ platform has enabled communities that share the same 
interests to stay connected complete with pictures as well as instant messaging. This 
can be as good as talking to each other face-to-face in real-time. The result is that 
an enormous amount of business can be generated by communities as they cohere 
to advance their relationships.
Facebook
The Facebook is a computer-based platform that enables users to create pages which 
they can share with their friends. The user can send a message to any number of 
his/her friends at a time. Deleting a message from one’s inbox does not delete it 
from the inbox of other users, but a user can block unwanted friends from any com-
munications with him/her. In Nicholas (2010:2), Facebook platform statistics as of 
May 2010 are as follows:
More than one million developers and entrepreneurs from more than 180 countries
More than 550,000 active applications currently on Facebook Platform
Every month, more than 70% of Facebook users engage with Platform applications
More than 250,000 websites have integrated with Facebook Platform
More than 100 million Facebook users engage with Facebook on external websites 
every month 
Google Documents
Google Docs is a web-based application in which documents and spreadsheets can 
be created edited and stored on-line. Google Docs help individuals to share files in 
word or PDF format. It is popular among students as well as faculty. It is a handy tool 
in shared research environments. It helps individuals to create resumes or abstracts 
which can be shared by member

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
228
Interface
An I/O interface is required whenever the I/O device is driven by the processor. The 
interface must have necessary logic to interpret the device address generated by the 
processor. Handshaking should be implemented by the interface using appropriate 
commands (such as Busy, Ready and Wait). The processor can communicate with an 
I/O device through the interface. If different data formats are being exchanged, the 
interface must be able to convert serial data to parallel form and vice versa. There 
must be provision for generating interrupts and the corresponding type numbers for 
further processing by the processor if required (Mupepi & Mupepi, 2013).
Fidelity Prototyping
The importance of reliability in statistics is about the same in reliable protocols in 
the delivery of data to the intended parties. In Engelberg and Seffah (2002), there 
are three types of design protocols (1) Low-fidelity prototyping tools and methods 
are used for early design just after requirements analysis, to help conceptualize and 
envision the interface at a high level. These tools often support rough sketching of 
interface screens by freehand drawing with a mouse or tablet pen. (2) Mid-fidelity 
prototyping tools are used after early design, for the purposes of detailed design and 
usability validation. They present detailed information about navigation, function-
ality, content and layout, but in schematic (“wireframe”) or approximate form. (3) 
High-fidelity prototyping tools permit the creation of a lifelike simulation, normally 
for marketing purposes or sometimes for user tests, before the final version has 
been developed. High-fidelity prototyping tools tend to target developers, and are 
often general-purpose development tools. Due to the efforts required, high-fidelity 
prototypes are usually not “rapid”; nevertheless the expression RAD (Rapid Ap-
plication Development) is widely used in the field.
Twitter
Twitter is an online social networking service that enables users to send and read 
short messages called “tweets”. The Twitter Company (2015), reports that the most 
widespread Twitter accounts as of April 8, 2015, were:
1. 	
Katy Perry: 68,122,294.
2. 	
Justin Bieber: 62,528,766.
3. 	
Barack Obama: 57,753,487.
4. 	
Taylor Swift: 55,845,709.
5. 	
YouTube: 50,055,731.

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
229
6. 	
Lady Gaga: 45,568,739.
7. 	
Justin Timberlake: 44,094,709.
8. 	
Rihanna: 43,553,703.
9. 	
Ellen DeGeneres: 42,012,220.
10. 	 Britney Spears: 41,441,514.
Schaefer (2014) propound that Twitter can be applied by all types of organization 
as a useful marketing tool. Behind every Twitter triumph is a well-defined success 
formula. This is The Tao of Twitter: a path that holds the potential to improve the 
organization’s daily life. It includes what could be twitted such as new product 
break through research, or major announcements such as mergers and acquisitions. 
Schaefer (2014) propounds that one can build influence, and goodwill on Twitter.
AN OVERVIEW OF SOCIAL MEDIA PRACTICES
The ontology to progress the discourse on social media is drawn from de Sa, Car-
rico and Reis (2010), Nicholas (2010), Tang, Bin and Whinstone (2012), Barker 
(2013), Devaney and Stein (2013), Ruta, Imperatori, and Cavenaghi (2013), Mupepi 
and Taruwinga (2014), Aichner and Jacobs (2015), Tella and Tella (2015), Steven-
Jennings (2015), Baya’a and Deher (2016), Alkhouja (2016), Hensel (2016), Guidry 
and Pasquini (2016), Vishwakarma and Waheeda (2016), among many others.
An Informal Learning Organization
In Guidry and Pasquini (2016), Twitter is presented as an informal learning tool. 
Guidry and Pasquini (2016) examine user-created Twitter chats using one specific 
chat, #sachat, as a case study. #sachat is a weekly one-hour chat held on Twitter 
and populated by higher education professionals in the field of student affairs (e.g. 
college admissions, advising, housing, new student orientation). Guidry and Pas-
quini (2016) contrast this chat with other ways in which student affairs and higher 
education professionals are using Twitter. Using methods of computer-mediated 
discourse analysis, they then discover and elicit defining characteristics of #sachat. 
In conclusion the researchers suggest why this chat seems to be successful as an 
informal learning resource, and how it compares to other uses of Twitter by pro-
fessionals, and implications for other communities interested in using Twitter or 
similar tools to create informal learning. The learning organization presents how 
its members think and interact. In an informal group, the cohesion can be enhanced 
by members as they continue to share their passion regardless of their location or 
rank in their profession.

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
230
Creating a Customer Database
Turner and Mattson (2015) suggest that social media such as Google+ can be 
deployed to construct customer database. They investigate the use of social media 
and how Google + specifically can be implemented to understand the nature and 
description of customers. Turner and Mattson (2015) contend that social media 
can be utilized in organizational context to build capacity and enhance marketing 
effectiveness by the integration of Google+ into profitable operations. Appropriate 
databases can be exploited to advance the mission.
In developing economies mass media in general is controlled by the state. For 
example the South African Broadcasting Corporation is controlled by the state from 
the day it was founded by white minority governments. In Zimbabwe the state has 
the majority shares in Zimbabwe Papers Ltd as well as in the radio and television 
broadcasting. There are similar arrangements in all Southern African Develop-
ment Community (SADC) states which characterize a mixed economy where the 
state attempts to control the workings of supply and demand under the facades of 
state interests. The availability of social media via the mobile phone network has 
changed the fortunes of family owned businesses (Mupepi & Taruwinga, 2014). 
Steven-Jennings (2015) suggests that success and sustainability in African family 
businesses in Africa have succeeded largely due to social media such as Facebook 
and Skype. Using Skype the Family Owned Businesses (FOBs) is able to show 
products and other wares in real-time. The seller is able to conclude deals within 
minutes of Skyping. Other global businesses such as DHL courier services have 
been able to grow and expand with the growing African market. Steven-Jennings 
(2015) asserts that DHL has been able to take deliveries from Africa to anywhere 
in the world. On their Facebook pages DHL show a network of agents scattered 
in every city in Africa. DHL claims to know more about Africa and the African 
entrepreneurs than anyone else (DHL, 2015).
In Mupepi and Taruwinga (2014), social media technology is quickly becoming 
a vital tool in personal, educational, and professional lives. However, while social 
networking helps the world stay connected, its use must be further examined in 
order to determine any possible pitfalls associated with the use of this technology. 
Mupepi and Taruwinga (2014) suggest that the market has also become one huge 
global village where multiculturalism is part of everyday life at school, shopping, 
church, or work. It implies that students will need to recognize accept and adjust 
to cultural differences in communications to succeed in their studies as well as in 
their future careers.
In Kaplan and Michael (2010), social media are described as computer-mediated 
tools that allow people to create, share or exchange information, ideas, and pictures/
videos in virtual communities and networks. Kaplan and Michael (2010) proceed to 

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
231
describe the users of social media technology as a group of Internet-based applica-
tions that build on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 2.0, and 
that allow the creation and exchange of user-generated content (2010:2).
At Facebook or Twitter, and many others, users from around the world are 
constantly connected over the global networks. On these sites the users have the 
ability to connect, share, and collaborate at any time. To make the most of this new 
environment, researchers and software developers have to understand the needs and 
expectations of users (Kaplan & Michael 2010:3)
As the social media and networking continue to grow there are few industries 
that are not capitalizing on this effective development tool. Tella and Tella (2015) 
suggest that the concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications for any business 
to understand and apply to expand marketing and sales database can be drawn from 
data analytics generated from social media and other business information systems. 
As social technologies continue to evolve, it is apparent that librarians and their 
clientele would benefit through participation in the digital social world. While there 
are benefits to implementing these technologies, many businesses face challenges in 
the integration and usage of social media. Tella and Tella (2015) argues that most 
family-owned businesses situated in growing economies have taken advantage of 
the smartphone to join social networks such as Facebook or Twitter, among many 
others. Smith (2014) asserts that the smartphone has also penetrated into the Af-
rican market. Smith (2014) argues that Africa’s claim to be the mobile continent 
is even stronger than previously thought, with researchers predicting internet use 
on mobile phones will increase 20-fold in the next five years – double the rate of 
growth in the rest of the world. People in Africa use mobiles for online activities 
that others normally perform on laptops or desktop computers as the technology 
overcomes weak or non-existent landline infrastructure in large swaths of the world’s 
poorest continent (2014:2). Declining prices of handsets and data, along with faster 
transmission speeds, mean Facebook, Twitter and cash transfer services can reach 
both the growing African middle class and the remotest rural areas, where villagers 
often find ingenious ways of keeping phones charged. Consumers in Kenya, South 
Africa and Nigeria are increasingly using video and media services available on 
newly affordable smartphones (2014:4).
Frith (2015) suggests that society is increasing the usage of smartphones or 
location-enabled phones to find our way, locate services and find one another. The 
providers of these smartphones offer packages which businesses including the families 
managed enterprises cannot refuse. Frith (2015) argues that the telephone compa-
nies offer privacy but cannot completely guarantee they can stop eaves-dropping. 
Individuals are much more concerned with the delivery of a reliable service to stay 
connected with their friends and customers than worry about eaves-dropping. Jenkins, 
Ito, and Boyd (2015) posit that the new digital, networked, and mobile technology 

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
232
has enabled people to stay connected and participate in commerce, and discourses 
of interest. Jenkins et al (2015) argue that a new participation culture has developed 
as a result of the new social media technology. Facebook and many others can be 
sites to promote the things one is passionate about.
Ogualesi and Busari (2012) suggest that the mobile phone has transformed 
the economies of many African states. Data about diseases outbreak is able to be 
transmitted to the urban centers where help can easily be organized to aid victims 
and to contain the diseases. The mobile phone has replaced the former land lines 
which were only a few people could afford. About 100,000 phone lines in Nigeria, 
mostly landlines run by the state-owned telecoms bureaucratic organization NI-
TEL. Ogualesi and Busari (2012) argue that today such companies as NITEL are 
no longer in existence. Their demise can be attributed to a failure to articulate im-
minent technological change. Nigeria has close to 100 million mobile phone lines, 
making it Africa’s largest telecoms market, according to statistics by the Nigerian 
Communications Commission. Facebook (2015) has launched a campaign to help 
families in Africa. Its site is used to inform communities situated in remote parts in 
communal areas. It is used to collect data required by traders in the rural community 
such as family-owned businesses.
Carvill and Taylor (2013) posit that successful business organizations have been 
using social media to create images of themselves to the public. It is important to 
understand and utilize social media to advance the business. Carvill and Taylor 
(2013) argue that all business is a social network of entrepreneurs and customers 
who both have defined desires and needs. They explain how the benefits of social 
media can be harnessed and applied to grow a business successfully.
Everything about social media isn’t just about websites and smart phones. A 
family business in Indiana known as Peerless Potato Chips has been in business 
since the end of the First World War in 1918. The company provides snacks to a 
defined area covering greater Chicago including Gary Indiana and has no website 
or a Twitter account. But it has a Facebook account which it uses to take orders 
of customized snacks which are then delivered door to door. McKimmie (2014) 
propounds that the Peerless Potato Chips organization believes in getting to know 
its customers including the local grocery stores. McKimmie (2014) asserts that 
the company generates its revenue from the local markets and cuts on nationwide 
distribution and advertising costs.
Blogging has been a backbone of social media. Many businesses uses professional 
bloggers to continue to create diffuse and distribute the information stakeholders 
must hear, see, and talk about, all the time. Rettberg (2013) considers blogging as 
an important aspect of public relations and situates it as part of strategy. A website 

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
233
that contains online personal reflections, comments, and often hyperlinks provided 
by a writer can be a blog. Nowadays, websites and Facebook or Twitter, run concur-
rently resonating with each other in content, opinions, products or services available.
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE FROM SADC AND THE USA
Data was collected among FOBs in the SADC comprising fifteen African states: 
Angola, Botswana, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, 
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Seychelles, Tanzania, 
Zambia, and Zimbabwe, and in United State of America (USA).
In North America the numbers of Facebook, Twitter, or YouTube users are 
constantly rising. Figure 1 illustrates the increasing numbers of Facebook users in 
the SADC and the USA:
The data sample for this study consisted of 68 FOB randomly selected of which 
30 were from USA and 38 were from SADC.
Figure 1 shows a pie chart that illustrates the most frequently subscribed social 
media was Facebook, 27.4% and the least frequented was Flickr (0%) by the FOBs. 
Facebook is a popular social media and its ICT enables members to post files con-
Figure 1. N=68: Report on FOBs ’use of social media tools

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
234
taining pictures videos as well as narratives. Some of the FOBs have their family 
credo and logo occupying the first page. All visitors to the site can be greeted by a 
mission statement embedded in the logo or as part of the credo. The credo is a form 
of “I believe in” statement of religious belief. For example the Deseret Industries 
in Salt Lake City Utah, believe in serving others as part of their credo. It expands 
to include for example a re-edition of Love Thy neighbor Biblical Principles. The 
credo is appealing to those who share the same religious beliefs and values.
Google+ has 21.8% of total membership from the sample population N=68. It 
is the second highest membership and now known as Google Hangouts. It is an 
instant messaging and video chat platform developed by Google. It replaces three 
messaging products that Google had implemented concurrently within its services, 
including Google Talk, Google+ Messenger (formerly: Huddle), and Hangouts, a 
video chat system present within Google+.
Figure 2 shows pie chart that indicates that the most frequently used social media 
in USA is Facebook, 27.7%, and Flickr 0% is the least used by FOBs. Those compa-
nies that have been doing well because of social media suggest that Facebook page 
is the sizzle, and what is offered on the website should be the steak. Some of the 
offerings on Facebook include family reunions, high school reminiscences, whatever 
the FOB has to offer for sale, including new products and special discounts, among 
Figure 2. N=30 USA usage of a selected social media

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
235
many other perceived goodies. Some FOBs frequent Facebook more to present their 
wares and what is immediately available in stock and what can be delivered right 
away or within a few days after one has placed an order. At the end of the day, it is 
all about business.
Figure 3 illustrates that the most frequently subscribed social media in SADC 
is Facebook, 27.1%, and the least contributed to is Flickr (0%) amongst the FOBs. 
The chi-square test of independence of region and social media tools usage, gave a 
p-value of 0.1843, showing that the two variables were independent of each other. 
Table 1 shows that SADC dominated slightly in the subscription of Facebook, 
Google+, and Skype, whilst USA dominated in the deployment of Twitter and 
YouTube. Facebook (72.05%) was the most frequently used social media by FOBs 
in general
Table 1 demonstrates a cross-tabulation of data between the SADC and USA. 
The data indicate that the SADC is ahead of the US in the use of social media. The 
FOBs in the SADC could be more gregarious than those in the US because of many 
reasons. Some of them are associated with direct impact advertising on billboards, 
radio, television and door-to-door bulk advertising common in the US and not very 
familiar in the SADC growing economies. Another example is the cost and avail-
ability of alternative advertising media in the SADC compared to the US where 
Figure 3. N=38 SADC use of selected media

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
236
state-of-the-art technologies exist at competitive rates. The FOBs in the SADC ap-
pear to have mastered how to use Facebook to grow their businesses out of neces-
sity. Because television and billboards advertising are state controlled for most of 
the part and ridiculously priced. It is easier for FOB to share their passion on Face-
book than anywhere else. The purpose of Facebook page is not to sell stuff to 
people but to engage them. For example a Facebook page of a rock star might con-
tain a survey of who could have been the best drummer or guitarist supporting his 
or her act. Followers will get engaged while taking the survey. Many videos on the 
You Tube posted by FOBs in the SADC contain very entertaining acts.
Table 2 shows that the age-group 35 – 44 (35.3%) dominated in the use of social 
media, but the two variables social media use and age group were independent of 
each other, p-value = 0.9053. Facebook, Google and LinkedIn dominated all the 
social media regardless of age. This could be the case because LinkedIn is more 
of a professional network as compared to Facebook. Many of the FOBs tend to 
be managed by individuals who are in their early 30s and mid-40s. The same age 
group has increased usage of Skype, LinkedIn, and You Tube. In the USA family 
owned businesses such as the Yoders Inc., have varied customers and are selective 
in their use of social media. For example on their website they advertise that they 
are a one-stop shopping for groceries, pharmacy, flower shop, restaurant, and craft 
shop. They post driving directions from the nearest freeway and emphasize how 
environmental friendly and accommodating they are all persons. They probably use 
Gmail to grow membership and keep the stakeholders informed.
The bar chart above shows that in general Facebook (31.1%) was used by FOBs 
for business purposes and followed by Google+. LinkedIn and Skype share the same 
platform to champion interpersonal communications among FOBs. The advert on 
Skype’s website alludes to keeping the world talking and sharing about the things 
Table 1. N=68 cross tabulation of selected social media usage
Region Cross-Tabulation
Region
Total
USA
SADC
Social media tool used
Twitter
Count
9
6
15
Facebook
Count
23
26
49
Google+
Count
15
24
39
LinkedIn
Count
15
15
30
YouTube
Count
12
6
18
Skype
Count
9
19
28
Total
Count
30
38
68

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
237
they are passionate about. Google electronic mail featured more in usage than Twit-
ter or LinkedIn. All the seven social media applied the ITC applications to enable 
exchange of files, documents, and to effectively communicate and store information. 
The application of ICT in Gmail accounts renders the tool versatility in mobile 
devices such as i-Pads, Android, and iOS, and desktops. Google+ appears more 
popular with researching communities or those users who need to read emails as 
part of their work routine.
Table 2. N=68 age cross-tabulation of social media users
Age
Total
18 - 24 
Years
25 - 34 
Years
35 - 44 
Years
45 - 54 
Years
55 - 64 
Years
65 or 
Over
Social media 
tool used
Twitter
Count
2
3
8
1
1
0
15
Facebook
Count
2
15
17
7
7
1
49
Google+
Count
1
7
15
9
5
2
39
LinkedIn
Count
1
8
13
4
2
2
30
YouTube
Count
1
4
5
4
4
0
18
Skype
Count
2
6
10
6
4
0
28
Total
Count
2
16
24
12
11
3
68
Figure 4. N=68 usage social media by FOBs

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
238
Figure 5 illustrates that the USA based FOBs, deployed Facebook (31.1%) for 
business purposes. Publishing and software engineers share most of their achieve-
ments with relationships on Facebook. There are some marketing organizations that 
can combine all social media activities on a single and integrated software platform. 
The collaborative dashboard makes it easy to engage with audiences by selecting 
the right media to apply each time there is an announcement to make or in each 
time there are changes to inform customers or other stakeholders. The software al-
lows the user to view all messages and comments in one convenient feed and route 
them to specific users.
Figure 6 shows that for the SADC FOBs, Google+ (34.5%), and Facebook 
(29.3%) were frequently used for business purposes. Google+ has become the big-
gest social network in South Africa, Botswana, Zambia, Malawi, and Zimbabwe 
seeing its strongest growth yet in the past year – and overtaking Facebook for the 
first time. This study shows that Facebook has 29.3% out of 68 users which is about 
50%. Google+ maintains a lead probably because it supports learning and the ex-
change of information. Twitter saw one of the slowest growth at 1.7% sharing the 
same stats with You Tube at 1.7%. Flickr as a medium for exchange is not visibly 
subscribed to.
Figure 5. N=30: FOBs usage of social media in the US

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
239
CUSTOMER RETENTION IN FOBS STRATEGIES
A family owned business is a commercial organization in which managing and making 
decisions is influenced by multiple parts of a family who are closely identified with 
the firm through leadership or ownership. Where in general, the concept of family 
business gives an impression of small local business, but in fact some international 
family business brands proved themselves as entrepreneurial firms, such as: Sam-
sung in electronic devices market, Ford in vehicle market, Wal-Mart in shopping 
market, and Mango in fashion market. Family businesses need to have a long term 
focus on some points such as commitment to quality where it is associated with 
the family name, create an organizational commitment environment to strengthen 
employees’ loyalty to their firms, which should be reflected in the services provided 
to customers and raise a care and concern theme for their customers. FOBs strongly 
rely on the family reputation where it might be affected in a bad or a good way on 
brand name in general, therefore any followed strategy should cover business and 
family aspects at the same time.
Some general customer retention strategies are: know your customers’ needs 
and expectations from you, respond to their feedback, and provide better products/
services than your competitors. For family businesses it is important to note that 
Figure 6. N=38 FOBs usage of social media in the SADC

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
240
keeping your customers satisfied will increase brand loyalty which is strongly con-
nected to the family name. This section focus is on presenting advices and tactics 
followed by family business which aimed to satisfy their customers and improve 
customer retentions.
Achieving customers’ retention is more than planning a strict strategy, it is im-
portant to go beyond planning and adopting a strategy to effectively implement it 
and go for a real-time adaptations to each customer’s need. Communicating with 
customers on a consistent basis is the first tactic to achieve customer retention, where 
clients need to be fully informed about new projects and potential campaigns, phases 
and expected final results. This communication creates strong bonds with clients, 
where they feel that they are truly “part of the family”, consistent communication 
should not be exclusive to new projects or what to be offered, businesses should 
follow up their customers to get in field data about most desired services or prod-
ucts, and to monitor competitors’ activities whether it affect customers’ decisions or 
not. A family base communication will increase potential benefits, where business 
targets all family members. Other tactics are reflected in the responses criteria by 
conditioning the response time within 24 hours mostly which will create a sense 
of responsiveness of business, creating honest trustworthy sustained relationships 
among lifecycle of process (pre-in-post purchase process). After depth analysis and 
studying of FOBs strategies related to customer retention purposes, we can sum-
marize a list of six points to take into consideration when planning/implementing 
customer retention strategy:
1. 	
Educate customers about business process and products, use social media 
and focus on the popular social media platform in your area. Customers with 
strong information base about their products and services create more trust, 
loyal, and connected customers; both with business and with other customers 
through social media.
2. 	
Distinguish your VIP customers with special promotions, and sending greeting 
cards on anniversaries and occasions such as Valentine’s Day, Mother’s Day, 
and this one-to-one communication offers a strong repeat purchase conversion 
which lead to increasing customer loyalty.
3. 	
Use frequent customer satisfaction surveys to track and trend customer satis-
faction, listen and be near to your customers, applying these surveys help to 
identify unhappy customers and stop the problems causing their discomfort 
and prevent these problems of reoccurring on future.
4. 	
Vary your presence on social media, use YouTube channel to provide updated 
relevant videos to customers. Having a presence on Facebook, Twitter, and 

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
241
Blogs platforms to share video from YouTube, posts, comments, and more 
where a wider range of customers can be reached in this way, LinkedIn also can 
be used to reach professionals and building relationship by engaging LinkedIn 
groups.
5. 	
Create an expert customer by using e-book guides containing details and how to 
lists, thus will convert your customer from a regular “buyer” customer into an 
expert in your domain, where they can use it to solve problems or give advices 
and suggestions in some situations, this leads to better customer expectations 
from customers.
6. 	
Create an engaged community on Facebook, to exchange their expertise and 
opinions, and to create a chance for instantly asking questions and getting 
quick responses from the sales and support teams.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Twitter accounts can be a useful tool to make members to a chat to learn about 
new products and services offered for sale by a family owned business. Google + 
email community can also be created and set-up to generate new product offerings 
such as “soup of the day” or “Today’s bargain” bulletins. In capitalism competi-
tion can overwhelm those companies that are not aware of what is going on in the 
environment they operate. There are differences in the business environments in 
which businesses in the USA and SADC. The use of social media is a strategy to 
progress a presence in a market where everything has to do the internet technology 
or telephony and wireless technologies. In Hensel (2016) the video is projected to 
be the advertising media of the future for many reasons. YouTube and Snapchat had 
one of the best years of any social platform in 2015 and will continue to generate 
plenty of buzz in the foreseeable future.
In Indiana the winner of the 22nd Annual Entrepreneurial Excellence Awards in 
2013 was a family confectionary business…Albanese Confectionary in Hobart. The 
family promoted their enterprise on the internet on a website bearing their name 
and supported their products with a Facebook account. The Albanese candy-coated 
story is now worth more than $130 million annually.
It is important for the small businesses operating in any industry to maintain 
presence in an environment where the World Wide Web has enabled greater competi-
tion. The research shows that this is where businesses of all types situated in varied 
global locations are creating wealth. In the tourism industries in growing economies 
it has been compelling for the FOBs to maintain Facebook accounts for the purposes 

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
242
of growing their brand and creating effective marketing and sales data-bases. The 
Safari operator in Masaai Mara or Hwange national parks has to maintain visibility 
among the hunters and African adventure seekers situated anywhere on planet, or 
the World Wide Web.
REFERENCES
Aichner, T., & Jacob, F. (2015). Measuring the Degree of Corporate Social Media 
Use. International Journal of Market Research, 57(2), 257–275.
Alkhouja, M. (2016). Social Media for Political Change: The Activists, Govern-
ments, and Firms Triangle of Powers during the Arab Movement. In Social Media 
and Networking: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 55-66). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8614-4.ch004
Barker, M. (2013). Social Media Marketing: A strategic approach. Melbourne, 
Australia: Cengage.
Barker, S., & Green, H. (2008). Social media will change your business. Accessed 
05/02/15 http://www.bloomberg.com/bw/stories/2008-02-20/social-media-will-
change-your-businessbusinessweek-business-news-stock-market-and-financial-
advice
Baya’a, N., & Daher, W. (2016). Facebook as an Educational Environment for 
Mathematics Learning. In Social Media and Networking: Concepts, Methodologies, 
Tools, and Applications (pp. 143-162). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8614-4.ch009
Bethlahmy, J., Popat, B., & Schottmiller, P. (2011). The Global E-Commerce Gold 
Rush: How Retailers Can Find Riches Overseas. Accessed 02/28/16 http://www.
cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/retail/Global- eCommerce_POV_IBSG.pdf
Carvill, M., & Taylor, D. (2013). The Business of Being Social: A Practical Guide 
to Harnessing the Power of Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn and YouTube for All 
Businesses. London, UK: Crimson Publishing.
Chen, W., Paul, A., Kibaru, F., Ma, Y., & Saparova, D. (2015). Two-Phase Usability 
Evaluation of Insurance Website Prototypes. International Journal of E-Business 
Research, 11(1), 1–22. doi:10.4018/ijebr.2015010101

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
243
Damont, G. E. (2015). Aligning the Virtual with the Physical: Social Media, Strategy, 
and Arts and Gardens. In H. Asencio & R. Sun (Eds.), Cases on Strategic Social 
Media Utilization in the Nonprofit Sector (pp. 184–208). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference; doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8188-0.ch007
de Sá, M., Duarte, C., Carrico, L., & Reis, T. (2010). Designing Mobile Multimodal 
Applications. In S. Kurkovsky (Ed.), Multimodality in Mobile Computing and Mobile 
Devices: Methods for Adaptable Usability (pp. 106–135). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference; doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-978-6.ch005
Devaney, T., & Stein, T. (2013). How to make Facebook work for your business. 
Accessed 05/07/15 http://www.forbes.com/sites/capitalonespark/2013/05/13/how-
to-make- Facebook-work-for-your-business/
DHL Inc. (2015). How we made it in Africa: Insights into business in Africa. Ac-
cessed 05/12/15 from http://www.howwemadeitinafrica.com/category/articles/dhl/
Dubois, E., Moussa, W. A., Bach, C., & de Bonnefoy, N. (2008). Modelling and 
Simulation of Mobile Mixed Systems. In J. Lumsden (Ed.), Handbook of Research 
on User Interface Design and Evaluation for Mobile Technology (pp. 346–363). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference; doi:10.4018/978-1-59904-871-0.ch022
Engelberg, D., & Seffah, A. (2002). A Framework for Rapid Mid-Fidelity Prototyping 
of Web Sites. Accessed 02/28/16 http://www.idemployee.id.tue.nl/g.w.m.rauterberg/
lecturenotes/MFP-Prototypying.PDF
Facebook. (2015). Helping families and kids in Africa. Accessed 05/07/15 https://
www.facebook.com/pages/Helping-kids-and-Family-in-Africa/378555982243224
Frith, J. (2015). Smartphones as locative media. New York: Polity.
Guidry, K. R., & Pasquini, L. A. (2016). Twitter Chat as an Informal Learning Tool: 
A Case Study using #sachat. In Professional Development and Workplace Learning: 
Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 1122-1139). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8632-8.ch062
Hensel, A. (2016). 3 Biggest Social Media Trends to Know for 2016. Accessed 02/29/16 
http://www.inc.com/anna-hensel/what-to-watch-2016-social-media-trends.html
Jenkins, H., Ito, M., & Boyd, D. (2015). Participatory culture in a networked era. 
New York: Polity.

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
244
Kaplan, A. M., & Michael, H. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges 
and opportunities of social media. Business Horizons, 53(1), 61. doi:10.1016/j.
bushor.2009.09.003
McKimmie, K. (2014). Made in Indiana: Peerless Potato Chips: Times have 
changed, but the chips are as tasty as ever. Northwest Indiana Business Quarterly 
Winter-Spring.
Mulpuru, S. (2012). How Big Trends will influence your international expansion 
in 2012. Accessed 02/29/16 http://blogs.pb.com/ecommerce/2012/01/24/how-five-
big-trends-will-influence-your-international-expansion-in-12/
Mupepi, M., & Mupepi, S. (2013). Appreciating Rapid Technology Integration in 
creating value in enterprises. In Social E-Enterprise: Value Creation through ICT. 
Hershey, PA; IGI Global Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2667-6.ch003
Mupepi, M. G., & Taruwinga, P. (2014). Cultural Differentials Modify Change: 
Comparativeness of the SADC and the US. International Journal of Sustainable 
Economies Management, 3(2), 50–79. doi:10.4018/ijsem.2014040105
Nacheva-Skopalik, L., & Green, S. (2016). Intelligent Adaptable e-Assessment for 
Inclusive e-Learning. International Journal of Web-Based Learning and Teaching 
Technologies, 11(1), 21–34. doi:10.4018/IJWLTT.2016010102
Nicholas, C. (2010). At last—the full story of how Facebook was founded. Retrieved 
from http://www.businessinsider.com/how-facebook-was-founded-2010-3?op=1
Ogualesi, T., & Busari, S. (2012). Seven ways mobile phones have changed lives in 
Africa. Accessed 05/07/15 http://www.cnn.com/2012/09/13/world/africa/mobile-
phones-change-africa/index.html
Rettberg, J. W. (2013). Blogging (2nd ed.). New York: Polity.
Ruta, D., Imperatori, B., & Cavenaghi, J. (2013). The effects of ICT on sports fan 
management. In T. Torres-Coronas & M.-A. Vida-Blasco (Eds.), Social E-Enterprise: 
Value Creation through ICT (pp. 243–262). Hershey, PA: IGI Global Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2667-6.ch014
Schaefer, M. (2014). The TAO of Twitter: Changing Your Life and Business 140 
Characters at a Time. London, UK: McGraw-Hill Education.
Smith, D. (2014). Internet use on mobile phones in Africa predicted to increase 
20-fold. Accessed 05/7/15 http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/05/internet-
use-mobile-phones-africa-predicted-increase-20-fold

Can the Usage of Social Media Increase the Gregariousness of the Family
245
Steven-Jennings, C. (2015). Success and sustainability in African Family Business. 
Accessed 05/12/15 http://www.howwemadeitinafrica.com/success-and-sustainabil-
ity-in-african-family-business/31190/
Tang, Q., Gu, B., & Whinston, A. B. (2012). Content Contribution for Revenue 
Sharing and Reputation in Social Media: A Dynamic Structural Model. Journal of 
Management Information Systems, 29(2), 41–75. doi:10.2753/MIS0742-1222290203
Tella, A., & Tella, A. O. (2015). The Promise of Open Source Systems/Software 
in Developing Requisite E-Government Solutions for the Developing Countries: 
A Review of Literature. In Open Source Technology: Concepts, Methodologies, 
Tools, and Applications (pp. 191-207). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-7230-7.ch011
Turner, A., & Mattson, K. (2015). Friend Raising: How the United Way of Ches-
ter County Uses Social Media to Drive Change. In H. Asencio & R. Sun (Eds.), 
Cases on Strategic Social Media Utilization in the Nonprofit Sector (pp. 301–331). 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8188-0.ch011
Twitter. (2015). Twitter Reports First Quarter 2015 Results; Lowers Full-Year 
2015 Expectations. Accessed 02/29/16 https://investor.twitterinc.com/releasedetail.
cfm?ReleaseID=909177
Vishwakarma, A., & Waheeda, S. W. (2016). Changing Dynamics of Network Se-
curity involving Hacking/Cracking with Next Generation Firewalls (NGFW). In D. 
G., M. Singh, & M. Jayanthi (Eds.), Network Security Attacks and Countermeasures 
(pp. 313-328). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-8761-5.ch013

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1686-6.ch013
Chapter 13
246 
Using Social Strategy 
to Retain Customers:
Cases and Tips
ABSTRACT
Customer retention is the process of keeping your current customers’ set satisfied 
and loyal to your product, successful customer retention is not only related to the 
applied product or services, but strongly related to how the organization provide 
the services and the reputation it creates within and across the marketplace. This 
chapter mentions four different cases of using social media to achieve customer 
retention. Cases will be named based on services provided by the firm, theme park, 
personal care business, food business, and suppling athlete tools. Also set of tips 
and guidelines about planning social strategy presented, finally suggested tools 
support different platforms were mentioned.
INTRODUCTION
Organizations’ structure is shifting toward customer-based structure rather than 
product-based structure, customer-based structure aims to consider the set of cus-
tomers as the source of revenue, not the products or services, customer-base is a 
group of customers who purchase and get benefits of organization’s products and 
services repeatedly, behaviors and actions of customers can be defined and predicted 
Wafaa A. Al-Rabayah
Independent Researcher, Jordan

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
247
based on market researches and previous experiences (Ryals & Knox, 2001). This 
strategy is followed by large companies mainly, there are many factors driving this 
shift, like introducing Customer Relationship Management (CRM), convergence 
of Information Systems (IS), and developing supporting software. Organizations 
concern in building strong enough strategies to insure achieving their goals. Busi-
ness strategy is the process of identifying major goals, objectives, policies, plans 
and initiatives of that business and implementing specific techniques and tools to 
achieve these objectives (Teece, 2010), based on consideration of resources and an 
assessment of the internal and external factors represented in strength/weakness 
points, and threat/opportunities might face the business (Porter, 1979) Various 
models and frameworks were introduced to assist in strategic planning process in 
a competitive dynamics environment, like SWOT analysis, experience curve, and 
industry structure and portfolio. Figure 1 is the graphic representation of SWOT 
analysis (Jackson, Joshi, & Erhardt, 2003).
Strategies in general aims to achieve a specific goal, i.e. increase profits, niche 
products, expand market. One of most important goals is managing customers’ 
relations, either current customers or potential customers (Teece, 2010). It is im-
portant to keep your current set of customers satisfied and loyal, at the same time 
to look forward to maximizing this set by attracting new customers. This chapter 
discusses the retention of current customers, it will contain three sections, the first 
section will go over the general concept of customer retention by discussing the 
Figure 1. SWOT analysis matrix

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
248
concept definition, importance, and challenges. Three cases of real life companies 
applied social media strategies to ensure customer retention were mentioned in the 
second section, third section discuss social networks managing tools. And finally 
a set of guidelines and tips were mentioned to achieve customer retentions in the 
last section.
CUSTOMER RETENTION
The simplest definition of customer retention is the set of steps planned and imple-
mented to reduce customer defections or churn rate. Keeping customers is more 
about keeping their lifetime value either in term of their expenses or their influence 
power on other potential customers, where retaining existing customers is profit-
able in about five times more than attracting new customers (Han & Hyun, 2015; 
Eid, 2011), there are four main reasons why retained customers are more profitable 
(Ryals & Knox, 2001; Meldrum & McDonald, 1995):
1. 	
Acquisition of new customers could be high in cost, therefore to have profit-
able customers, organization should keep the relationship with the same set 
of customers for more than one season or year.
2. 	
Profit stream of current customers will grow continuously after acquisition 
costs are covered, where customers tend to increase their purchases from places 
they already tried and go to it.
3. 	
Customer retention is strongly connected to a satisfied customer, satisfied 
customers are more likely to become positive referrals and encourage other 
potential customers and enhance organization’s image in market in a cost-
effective way.
4. 	
In backward looking, customers also get benefits of customers’ retention, where 
they will spend less time in comparing prices against competitors so that they 
tend to become less price-sensitive.
The core of customers’ retention is about defining needs and desired products/
services and addressing them before losing the customer to another competitor, 
researchers define set of factors to ensure customer retentions such as: product and 
service quality, satisfaction, and commitment, (Dimitriades, 2006; Han & Hyun, 
2015), senior management commitment, customer focused cultures, a clearly tar-
geted marketing campaign and the identification of switching barriers (Ennew & 
Binks, 1996), these factors contribute to affect retention and loyalty of customers. 
The explosion of communication platforms and technologies in recent years reshape 
strategies and technique adopted in managing customers’ relations and processes of 

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
249
retaining customers, using web 2.0 technologies provide the opportunities to instant 
interaction and capturing customer’s feedback adequately about provided products/
services (Sashi, 2012).
Problems may face organizations regarding keeping current customers which 
may be raised from issues like poor employee training, lack of dedicated resources, 
security and privacy issues in e-commerce environment, or unaddressed customer 
needs regarding needed products or services (Eid, 2011). Adding value to a product 
will overcome a huge problem in keeping customers, there are many components 
for adding value to a product such as: customers’ service, quality, image, price, 
awareness, truth, and trust (Martisiute, Vilutyte, & Grundey, 2010).
Organizations and researchers face serious challenges when analyzing and plan-
ning techniques to retain current customers, such challenges include: appropriate 
differentiation of customers, where each customer demand a different set of serviced 
and customized products. Another challenge is gaining a satisfied employee. Where 
the more satisfied employees are the better the quality of the job delivered and that 
leads to better customers’ management and retention. Self-reinforcing relation-
ship strongly developed using internal marketing, an effective internal marketing 
strategy helps to strengthen customers’ oriented service culture through enhancing 
employees’ perceptions of their role and importance within the organization (En-
new & Binks, 1996).
After understanding the concept of customer retention, its importance, and 
challenges facing it, it is important to know the main strategies to achieve customer 
retention. Strategies have different goals, many strategies are developed to expand 
sales through market dominating, market penetrating, finding new market, and ex-
panding the product range. Where other strategies developed to focus on employees 
to achieve commitment and satisfaction so that the job quality enhance and keep a 
pool of qualified employees, lastly strategies may be developed to concentrate on 
customers’ relations (Meldrum & McDonald, 1995). Customer retention strategies 
include building effectively committed customers using a loyalty program, sending 
direct mailings, provide service calls, employing sales visits, that provide economic 
incentives; another important points is to compete other competitors variables such 
as competitive loyalty programs. Organizations should adopt regular research ac-
tivities to analyze their customers’ needs and study market status and competitors 
position (Verhoef, 2003).
Social Networks
Web has evolved from one way communication into more dynamic attractive en-
vironment. Social Networks (SNs) creates the opportunity to open communication 
channels between customers to share their experience and opinions regarding specific 

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
250
products, service, or brand in general (Mangold & Faulds, 2009). SNs create a new 
phenomenon of administrating business; it contributes in enhancing and creating 
new strategies to bond relations with allies, competitors, and customers, where it 
is essential for firms to keep following online presence presented in social network 
to avoid lagging behind a very dynamic competitive environment, online presence 
should deliver a tangible value in return for customers’ time, attention, endorse-
ment and data, so that customers will engage strongly with businesses’ social pages 
(Heller & Parasnis, 2011). Firms can gain benefits of SNs by designing content with 
value to foster more intimate relationships with current and potential customers 
(Nezamabad, 2011). In fact, SNs is a double edged sword, it creates social capital 
for firms, by opening customers’ relations, personal views, opinions, and attitudes 
to firms; so that analyst can follow the customers’ status, updates, followings, and 
interests to create more related and successful plan; where the increase in customer 
retention by just 5 percent, can lead to increase in the firms’ profits by 25 percent 
to 95 percent (Stillwagon, 2014), however at the same time SNs have increased 
challenges by opening the world and empower bargaining of customers, almost all 
information available online through SNs, so that firms should be aware of what to 
publish and how to communicate through SNs. This chapter will view a set of SNs 
implemented strategies cases from various domains and how do these cases help in 
changing and improving firm’s position. Keeping customer’s retention goes beyond 
giving the customer what they expect; it’s more about exceeding their expectations 
to create a loyal customers advocate for your brand.
Social networks varies in its purposes and features, for example Facebook is a 
social network used to connect with friends and community by sharing posts, pho-
tos, and videos; organizations use it as a marketing platform, where LinkedIn is a 
more professional social network used to follow professionals, job opportunities and 
marketing qualifications of users. Whatsapp is smartphone based messenger which 
use the Internet to share texts, photos, videos, locations, and audio messages between 
contacts. Instagram is photo and video sharing stage supported by smart phones, 
both WhatsApp and Instagram applications started as a standalone platforms, but 
later on Instagram was acquired by Facebook for approximately 1 billion US$, and 
WhatsApp was also acquired by Facebook for approximately 19.3 billion US$. The 
following table presents a set of most important social networks and some of their 
features, important numbers related to each platform are mentioned.
METHODOLOGY
In this section, we will go over four different cases, of real businesses who integrate 
social network into their marketing strategy to insure customer retention objectives. 

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
251
Table 1. Popular social platforms
Social Platform
Features
Statistics
Facebook 
• News Feed 
• Comments 
• Friends and followers 
• Wall and Timeline 
• Like, Love, HaHa, WoW, Sad, and Angry emotions 
• Messages and inbox 
• Notifications 
• Networks and groups 
• Private/Public options
• 12,691 employees. 
• 1.4 billion daily active 
user. 
• 934 million mobile daily 
active users. 
• 70+ supported language.
Twitter 
• Write and read tweets (tweets and retweets) 
• Messaging (only 140 character) 
• Adding and following content 
• Send and receive updates via website, SMS, RSS, emails or a 
third party application. 
• Private/Public options 
• Third party application to send messages like Tweetie, 
Twitterrific, and Feedalizr.
• 3,900 employees. 
• 305 million monthly 
active user. 
• 80% active users on 
mobile. 
• 35+ languages supported.
WhatsApp 
• Messaging application with sharing photo, video, location, 
contact and documents options. 
• Sound messages. 
• Rich and unique set of emotion options. 
• Pinch-to-Zoom videos for iOS users only. 
• Save link history. 
• Group of 256 members.
• 1 billion user. 
• 55 employees. 
• 32 languages supported.
YouTube 
• Create personal channel and upload videos 
• view, pause, stop, rate, share and comment on videos, track 
• Auto-start track/ Series playlists 
• Monetization 
• Longer videos 
• Custom thumbnails 
• Paid subscriptions 
• Unlisted videos 
• Private videos 
• Live events 
• Channel customization
• Over a billion users. 
• 50% of users are active on 
mobile. 
• Launched local versions 
in more than 70 countries 
in total of 76 different 
languages.
LinkedIn 
• Marketing personal qualifications 
• Connecting groups: used to amplifying messages through 
groups and nurture network. 
• Posting multimedia content including PDF files 
• Endorsements lists 
• Profile views report
• 9200 employee. 
• 414 million active user. 
• 24 languages supported.
Blog 
• Create posts including multimedia and location. 
• Publish RSS feeds. 
• Host your blog. 
• Find support: either personalized assistance or answer questions.
• 275.9 million users. 
• 155 million monthly 
active users.
Instagram 
• Part of Facebook, Inc. 
• Photographic filters. 
• Exploring tab. 
• Adding lux effect to pictures. 
• Uploading videos 
• Instagram direct: including private photo and video sharing, 
instant messaging, and sharing post and profiles from feeds 
directly to the user.
• 13 employees. 
• 300 million users. 
• 25 languages supported.

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
252
Cases will be named based on services/products provided by the business, which 
are: theme park, personal care business, food business, and athlete tools supplies. 
In each case we discuss which social network platform is used and how.
Case 1: Theme Park
This business is considered one of the largest eldest international entertainment 
businesses, it has more than 650 million guests since its opening. In March 2005, 
reports revealed that 65,700 jobs are supported by the resort, including about 20,000 
direct employees and 3,800 third parties. They used SNs for different purposes, each 
platform supports different goals. For example, they use YouTube to create more 
entertainment value videos rather than to sell their products, their videos were rich 
in recognizable and popular characters, thus will make their audience talk about 
their products. Another platform is the Facebook were they create 267 pages across 
different countries they are constantly posting and talking to consumers; including 
individual pages for their consumer products. These pages are in a never-ending 
selling cycle, and need to advertise and endorse products around the year.
Managers create an engagement plan based on SNs features; they focused on 
two key principals:
•	
Reaching families and enthusiasts, encouraging them to share personal relat-
ed content, SNs provide a sharing stage for voice, photos, and videos stories, 
this communication form of sharing fans’ experience and endearing itself to 
customers in the process does three things: promotes firm’s core values, cel-
ebrates its brand advocates and invites participation, which encourage brand 
loyalty
•	
Getting guests talking about the content and sharing it beyond their own pro-
file, it is crucial for any business to have a strong expanded social media 
presence, it improve the opportunity to grow and ensure that consumers will 
be talking and passing on business related information to friends, family and 
peers.
Social Network’s Activities
Using YouTube creates a challenge of providing entertaining, satisfying teases the 
paid for content at the same time to avoid seeming like you’re providing nothing of 
value, provokes engagement and ultimately attract subscribers, the firm provides 
various channels for film trailers, music videos, and documentaries on the parks. 
The key for success in social media interaction is having good content, so keep 
your eyes open and be aware of what you post. Another important tip to consider 

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
253
the online presence is valuable for both customers and the firm, is the exclusivity 
of the content, where the firm provides an attractive content that users won’t find 
anywhere else.
This firm runs an excellent Pinterest page, fully with a variety of boards, which 
makes the page visually interesting and improve brand reach. Pinterest content offer 
a rich valuable mixture content such as visual splendor, informative how-to-guides, 
behind-the-scenes photos, vintage treats from the past, sneak peeks of the future, 
which separates firm’s brand identity from its competitor. The holiday board is 
updatable with pins relevant to the time of the year such as Christmas time, each 
pin contain a how-to guide on making a decoration or gift for the season. Another 
incredible success board is the recipes. Another used platform is the Instagram, where 
the firm provides a set of exclusive new content such as odd cheeky but necessary 
merchandise snap, and cute moments captured from around the park.
Unfortunately, frim’s successful strategies failed in Facebook, Twitter, and 
Google+. Despite these platforms are more direct one-to-one channels, and provide 
great and regular content, but each one is used identically to the other, therefore a 
redundant content is available on these channels, audience will receive the same 
broadcasting three times, thus decrease the engagement with the large communities.
Based on this experience, what to do? Be careful of your content, and be aware of 
your broadcast. You don’t need to be available on all SNs, you should have to focus 
on the right form that support your field, managers realize that multimedia “video 
mainly” will add a value to its present, so focus on YouTube to create a strategic 
plan to reach and strength relations with customers, while using Facebook, Twit-
ter, and Google + add more burden on the firm to provide the same broadcast or 
information in three locations, but it should appear as new unique at each platform.
Case 2: Personal Care Business
This 32 years old “earth friendly” firm makes products for personal care, health, 
beauty, and personal hygiene. The total manufactured products in 2007 was over 197 
products for facial and body skin care, lip care, hair care, baby care, men’s grooming, 
and outdoor remedies, they disturbed their products in nearly 30,000 retail outlets 
across the United States, United Kingdom, Ireland, Canada, Hong Kong, and Taiwan.
Social Network’s Activities
In celebrating its 30th birthday, customers were encouraged to submit their happy 
birthday wishes into Facebook, Blog, and Twitter; these wishes were then shared 
and read aloud on the firm’s location. As a result of collaborating and inviting com-
munities to celebrate this milestone the firm received wishes from people around 

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
254
the globe, the support and passion from customers strengthened the relation with 
existent community and enlarged it, managers are eager to offer interactive and 
compelling content to keep relation with customers sustainable and productive.
Managers employ classic products into their brand’s personality, they produced 
a series of six-second stop motion novellas, this campaign help the firm to earn an 
entirely new online audience generating more than 2,000 likes, 580 Revines, and 
close to 1,000 new followers.
As cosmetic business, the firm introduced a new service of online tutorials into 
its social strategy, you can see a 20-to-30-second social media lessons which gives 
the customers another reason to interact with the brand without products being the 
main focus, also set of product viral videos about the products’ best using way, 
and advices of taking care in faces and hair improve relation among firm and its’ 
customers.
The company goes beyond traditional social platforms, and added promotional 
messages and reminders to people’s Yahoo, Google, Apple, or Microsoft calendars. 
Customers are invited to click on a link that automatically added a series of eight 
weekly calendar items, like “Workshop of best ways of personal hygiene”, this teach 
us not to be afraid to experiment with new social tools or reach new audiences.
The last point is using hashtags strategically; the brand doesn’t limit itself to using 
only campaign-related hashtags in its tweets and Facebook posts. It aims to reach a 
broader stage of audience; therefore it incorporates popular, existing hashtags. Take 
into consideration that limiting you to a specific or limited hashtag(s) set harm than 
good. Use keywords that your customers may use to find your brand or products 
and turn them into hashtags on social media
Case 3: Food Business/ Snacks
This case talks about large snack producer; the product was introduced before 100 
years. Snacks market has very wide products categories; it is a challenge to keep in 
forefront of the market. Nevertheless this product has successfully proved its qual-
ity and dominated a wide portion of snacks market. Over the last three years it has 
followed an agile marketing strategies to insure its position. In total, this product 
has signed up to the creative direction and now has a catalogue of important online 
discussion topics, typically using Twitter as its vehicle.
Social Network’s Activities
Achieving success is a target, but sustaining this success is a strategy. To achieve 
success this brand act in agile to stay ahead of the curve by adopting flexible visions 

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
255
and acting in responsive and adaptive way; the targeted platforms were Twitter, 
Instagram, and Pinterest. The following is a set of main points they focused on and 
working to achieve best results:
•	
Twitter: They used Twitter as a quick response stage, where customers’ in-
quiries and communications were responded to in seconds. The product was 
collaborate with the huge electronic game producer, Sony, to create custom-
ized PS4 controller where they integrate the product’s design into control 
hand, which leads to another modification of Xbox product to be introduced 
to support this specific brand. Thus a user watches brands and interacts with 
these brands in different times, therefore the personal engagement among 
various products at the same time increases product’s followers and brand 
loyalty.
•	
Instagram: Was another support channel for the product; it knows exactly 
what makes its channel attractive for a user to follow. Lists of interesting im-
ages full of delicious looking food. This product was used over 100 years in 
same look, but the successful marketing secret lies on using the product itself 
as a blank canvas. A highly adaptable, moldable food stuff that the brand 
aren’t afraid to mess with. Combination of multi strategies including sharing 
regular recipes’ ideas, bizarre recipe ideas, and old school adverts, this prod-
uct introduce a great entertainment. Lately, Instagram’s video functionality 
was adopted to create added value communication channel.
•	
Pinterest: This platform used as main stage that contains all published ma-
terials on social channels, which creates a chance to acknowledge the brand’s 
loyal followers by showcasing their pictures and creativity. Being visual, dif-
ferent, and resourceful create the opportunity to encourage interaction, brand 
loyalty, and spread awareness.
Case 4: Athlete Tools Supplies
This case discuss a multinational corporation, specialized in designing, developing, 
manufacturing and worldwide marketing and sales of footwear, apparel, equipment, 
accessories and services. It was launched in 1964 as distributer for foreign products, 
now after more than fifty years, it is known as one of the most popular supplier 
of athlete shoes and apparel. Facebook page of this corporation has more than 23 
million likes, Twitter page of main account has more than 5.85 million followers, 
and more than 38 million followers on Instagram. Managers design corporation’s 
strategy to achieve sustainable, long-term growth across its global portfolio of 
brands and businesses.

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
256
Social Network’s Activities
•	
Instagram: This brand has the optimal exploitation of Instagram Features, 
from captivating, carefully shot photographs, to arty videos. Online material 
is always really high quality and befitting with brand image, that encourages 
high energy activity and adventure. They have developed a set of brand’s 
hashtags, including trademark hashtag. They launch feminine support cam-
paign to empower women in sport and create hashtag for this campaign. 
These hashtags are frequently adopted by other Instagram users; which help 
in forming brand’s community to share their own fitness journeys. This en-
courages customers to frequently visit Instagram page to view latest updates 
and community events.
•	
Twitter: This brand start with one product, with time the corporation had 
grown and branched out into a number of departments. To support vision and 
goals of each department, separated Twitter accounts have been created, the 
summation of followers on these accounts is more than 8 million followers. 
They keep their tweets brief and tend to use sentence-long motivational state-
ments, also tweets are enriched with photos; despite the simplicity of their 
tweets, they generally receive a couple of thousand retweets and favorites. 
They encourage their customers to engage with them on Twitter by asking 
questions about what their favorite products are and encouraging them to 
send in pictures of their own brand gear.
•	
Facebook: Facebook page not only works as a normal fan page, it also has 
customized tabs that link followers directly to their Instagram account and 
support page. In addition to this there is also a ‘Shop Now’ button that redi-
rects users to their online store. Like on Twitter, they have multiple accounts 
on Facebook key account, and smaller specialized pages. Page’s contents 
tend to receive a high level of engagement and a community of keen runners 
has been formed, who use the page as a forum for discussing their hobby, 
sharing tips and finding out about new products and events. Responding rate 
on Facebook is high, they make the effort to reply to nearly every comment 
or post on the page, whether it is in response to a purchase enquiry or just a 
general remark about a post.
SOCIAL NETWORK MANAGING TOOLS
Social network is one of the most effective means for businesses and organizations 
to adopt in marketing and managing their activities, it creates an open atmosphere 
between organization and the customers, allows infinite ways to communicate and 

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
257
deliver benefits for both sides. The complexity of creating appropriate social network 
strategy rises from the availability of various platforms of social networks with wide 
range of features and properties, where it is impossible to create fix standard strategy 
to follow in all social platforms, therefore it is better to plan and implement set of 
strategies instead of adopting one strategy. Any organization planned to measure 
success degree of its strategy, but it is difficult to measure exact earnings achieved 
based on social strategies. This section will introduce set of tools used to manage 
social network activities, help in implementing planned strategy, provide feedback 
of these strategies, and help in measuring success degree. Some of these tools avail-
able online for free, while other tools you have to pay for its services.
•	
CrowdBooster: Offers analytics with suggestions and tools to help improv-
ing online presence on Twitter and Facebook, it create the opportunity to 
schedule social media posts and offers important and relevant measurements 
in simplified charts (CrowdBooster, 2010), the most pros of this tool are:
◦◦
Targeted recommendations: helps in understanding whom to engage 
with on Twitter and Facebook.
◦◦
Clean and very intuitive user interface.
◦◦
Fast and easy to get started.
◦◦
Provide insightful and real time social media analytics
◦◦
Empower its analytical results with graphs and percentage reports
•	
HootSuite: This tool allows managing up to 100 social profiles, scheduling 
up to 350 messages at a time, collaborating with others, and getting valuable, 
in-depth data with enhanced analytics. HootSuite provides 159 applications 
to facilitate managing of different social platforms, 84 free apps and 75 pre-
mium applications (HootSuite, 2008). Some of these applications are listed 
below
◦◦
Geopiq for Twitter: This application used to monitor posts on Twitter 
by location, keywords, language or username. You can use combination 
of search terms for powerful targeting. It allows you to monitor and 
engage with users that are posting in your area, or an area you choose to 
follow, also you can monitor events to see what is being posted, by who, 
and to engage with them. It costs 4.99 US$ monthly
◦◦
Tailwind for Pinterest: This free application used to manage Pinterest 
platform, it used to create new Pins, schedule drafts for later, or Pin to 
multiple boards at once.
◦◦
Crowd Analyzer: This free application used as monitoring and analyt-
ics platform. It enables you to precisely listen and engage with your cus-
tomers on social media. Crowd Analyzer monitors major social chan-
nels like Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
258
•	
TweetDeck: Is multi-platform desktop and web dashboard application, it is 
an effective tool for real-time tracking, organizing, and engagement Twitter 
accounts (TweetDeck, 2010), TweetDeck helps to:
◦◦
Use one friendly interface to monitor multiple timelines.
◦◦
Create schedule for future tweets posting.
◦◦
Keep up with emerging information through turn on alerts.
◦◦
Filter searches based on criteria like engagement, users and content 
type.
◦◦
Build and export custom timelines to put on your website.
◦◦
Use intuitive keyboard shortcuts for efficient navigation.
◦◦
Mute users or terms to eliminate unwanted noise.
◦◦
TweetDeck timelines stream in real-time, therefore there is no need to 
refreshing the page.
◦◦
Work in group to manage a Twitter account.
•	
Audiense (Formerly SocialBro): Is a Twitter community analysis tool 
(Audiense, 2016), most important features of SocialBro are:
◦◦
Define famous followers: the accounts of celebrities that have been veri-
fied by Twitter.
◦◦
Define and validate new followers.
◦◦
Knowing inactive friends – sort your friends by the date of their last 
tweet.
◦◦
Search all Twitter when building list: lists will automatically sync up 
with Twitter, and it will saving transfer time.
◦◦
Follower bio tag cloud: through checking out the top keywords that ap-
pear most in the bios of followers.
◦◦
Advanced search among friends or followers: search for connections 
from specific locations, mentioning specific keywords, or naming them-
selves in a specific manner.
◦◦
Analyzing your lists: analyze your own lists as well as public lists cre-
ated by other users
•	
Tagboard: Hashtag managing tool, support Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, 
Google+, and Vine. Managers can use Tagboard to search hashtags activities, 
which overlap and which match social marketing plan. This tool fit when a 
multi-platform strategy planned, it helps mangers to find out influencers to 
connect with and hot topics organization can cover (Tagboard, 2016).
Following table represent a summary of used managing tools, some of these 
tools provide free services, while other set provide free trial almost for one month, 
then the user should pay for full services version, which provide an entrepreneurs 
and professional view of managing tools.

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
259
ONLINE CUSTOMER RETENTION TIPS
Based on readings and researches, a set of important guidelines can be introduced 
to create solid strategy which aims to insure customer retentions, following are set 
of 8 main points to take into consideration:
•	
Be easy to find: keep consistent in user name and browsing image in all social 
networks, so that users will find you easily when they need you. Namech_K, 
Table 2. Social media management tools
Cost
Managing Tool
Objective
Supported Platform
Free 
Hyperalerts
Create monitoring system
Facebook
TweetDeck
Create a monitoring system
Twitter
WhosTalkin
Monitor and Search social network content
Multi-platform 
Twitter, Facebook, 
LinkedIn, 
Google+,… etc
Mentionmapp
View Twitters’ connection in tree graphical 
representation, contains people connections, 
mentioned hashtags in recent tweets.
Twitter
Paid 
Sprout Social
Monitoring and managing multiple social 
networks
Multi-platform 
Twitter, Facebook, 
LinkedIn, 
Google+,… etc
Visually Google 
Analytics Report
Analysis tool
Google
Free trial for 
30 days 
Paid for 
premium 
features 
ShortStack
Add functionality
Facebook
Tagboard
Find trending hashtags
Multi-platform 
Facebook, twitter, 
Instagram, Google+, 
and Vine
Hootsuite
Managing multi account
Multi-platform 
Twitter, Facebook, 
LinkedIn, 
Google+,… etc
Crowdbooster
Analysis tool
Facebook and 
Twitter.
Agorapulse
Monitoring and managing multiple social 
networks
Multi-platform 
Twitter, Facebook, 
LinkedIn, 
Google+,… etc
KnowEm
Search Social Network to find if brand’s, 
trademark, or names mentioned
Multi-platform 
Twitter, Facebook, 
LinkedIn, 
Google+,… etc

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
260
Knowem, and Usernamecheck are example of tools used to check username 
availability across hundreds of online networks.
•	
Know your loyal customer: it is very important to know you customer, through 
online profiles activities, even better to communicate with them based on 
their preferences, interests and hobbies. Proactively engage with them about 
their favorite sports, music, foods, and media shows.
•	
Follow you brand on social network: use listening tools like Google Alerts, 
and Hootsuite, which provide immediate notifications to brand mentions and 
key phrases, that allow organizations to know their reputation and customer’s 
opinion directly, this create the opportunity to avoid any potential problems 
and capture available but hidden opportunities.
•	
Keep your strategy dynamic by combining both consistent posting items and 
at the same time scheduling some posts to be productive, tools like Hootsuite, 
Buffer, and TweetDeck are examples of scheduling tools for future posts. 
Figure 2 represents Hootsuite options for scheduling post into tow social plat-
forms which are Twitter and Facebook.
•	
Make each platform content unique, you can post shared information on all 
social platforms, but don’t make you presence on various social platforms 
look like multiple versions of the same copy, give your customers reason to 
follow you on all social platforms. As you reach your customers on various 
different platforms, they will be more likely to build a long-term relationship 
with your business.
•	
Be close to your customers, businesses are available intensively in social plat-
forms, you should be available all times for your customer, try to provide a 
Figure 2. Scheduling option in Hootsuite tool

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
261
real time engagement with customers, answer support questions on social 
platforms., where any asked question will be answered in fast time. Use a 
qualified employee/team “based on your business size” to follow and manage 
your social media presence.
•	
Be careful of your personality and tone: customers are opening to other busi-
nesses on social networks, pay attention to how your audience engages on 
each specific platform.
•	
Be aware of outside potential customers: don’t let your concerns focused only 
on your current customers, create a list up to 20 of people who are strangers 
to you and your business, use social platforms to communicate with them 
daily, but avoid spam unsolicited communications, contribute to their discus-
sions and interesting’s field, until they recognize you and your business.
CONCLUSION
Social network is now real trend in business world, business strategies built based 
on features of social networks to achieve various goals, such as improve customer 
retention opportunities. Cases discussed in this chapter showed how the firms planned 
its strategy based on social networks features to achieve required goals and to retain 
their customers’, cases cover various ranges of businesses. Applying social network 
strategy is important and crucial step, yet managers can’t be very sure about success 
degree or worthiness of effort applied on this strategy; list of tools is suggested, 
classified based on its cost, each tool can manage one social platform or various 
platforms. And each tool is specified to achieve specific goal.
REFERENCES
Audiense. (2016). Audiense. Retrieved 2016, from Twitter: https://www.audiense.
com/
CrowdBooster. (2010). CrowdBooster. Retrieved 2016, from CrowdBooster web 
site: http://crowdbooster.com/about/
Dimitriades, Z. S. (2006). Customer satisfaction, loyalty and commitment in service 
organizations: Some evidence from Greece. Management Research News, 29(12), 
782–800. doi:10.1108/01409170610717817
Eid, M. (2011). Determinants of e-commerce customer satisfaction, trust, and loyalty 
in Saudi Arabia. Journal of electronic commerce research, 12(1), 78-93.

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
262
Ennew, C. T., & Binks, M. R. (1996). The Impact of Service Quality and Service 
Characteristics on CustomerRetention: Small Businesses and their Banks in the 
UK. British Journal of Management, 7(3), 219–230. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8551.1996.
tb00116.x
Han, H., & Hyun, S. S. (2015). Customer retention in the medical tourism industry: 
Impact of quality, satisfaction, trust, and price reasonableness. Tourism Manage-
ment, 46, 20–29. doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2014.06.003
Heller, C. B., & Parasnis, G. (2011). From social media to social cus-
tomer relationship management. Strategy and Leadership, 39(5), 30–37. 
doi:10.1108/10878571111161507
HootSuite. (2008). HootSuite Corporation. Retrieved 2016, from HootSuite web 
site: https://hootsuite.com/
Jackson, S. E., Joshi, A., & Erhardt, N. L. (2003). Recent Research on Team and 
Organizational Diversity: SWOT Analysis and Implications. Journal of Manage-
ment, 29(6), 801–830. doi:10.1016/S0149-2063(03)00080-1
Mangold, G. W., & Faulds, D. J. (2009). Social media: The new hybrid element 
of the promotion mix. Business Horizons, 52(4), 357–365. doi:10.1016/j.bush-
or.2009.03.002
Martisiute, S., Vilutyte, G., & Grundey, D. (2010). Product or Brand? How Inter-
relationship between Customer Satisfaction and Customer Loyalty Work. European 
Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies, 2(1), 5-15.
Meldrum, M., & McDonald, M. (1995). Customer Retention Strategies. In Key 
Marketing Concepts (pp. 199-204). doi:10.1007/978-1-349-13877-7_38
Nezamabad, M. (2011). The Impact and Benefits of Internet on Marketing Mix. 
Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences, 5(9), 1784–1789.
Ryals, L., & Knox, S. (2001). Cross-Functional Issues in the Implementation of 
Relationship Marketing Through Customer Relationship Management. European 
Management Journal, 19(5), 534–542. doi:10.1016/S0263-2373(01)00067-6
Sashi, C. (2012). Customer engagement, buyer-seller relationships, and social media. 
Management Decision, 50(2), 253–272. doi:10.1108/00251741211203551
Stillwagon, A. (2014, Sep 11). Did You Know: A 5% Increase in Retention Increases 
Profits by Up to 95%. Retrieved April 20, 2016, from Small Buisness Trends: http://
smallbiztrends.com/2014/09/increase-in-customer-retention-increases-profits.html

Using Social Strategy to Retain Customers
263
Tagboard. (2016). Tagboard. Retrieved from Tagboard Web site: https://tagboard.com/
Teece, D. J. (2010). Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation. Long Range 
Planning, 43(2-3), 172–194. doi:10.1016/j.lrp.2009.07.003
TweetDeck. (2010). TweetDeck. Retrieved 2016, from Twitter web site: https://
tweetdeck.twitter.com/
Verhoef, P. C. (2003). Understanding the Effect of Customer Relationship Manage-
ment Efforts on Customer Retention and Customer Share Development. Journal of 
Marketing, 67(4), 30–45. doi:10.1509/jmkg.67.4.30.18685

264
Compilation of References
Aaker, D. (1991). Managing Brand Equity: Capitalising on the Value of a Brand Name. New 
York, NY: Free Press.
Abaidi, I., Maubisson, L., & Ranchoux, C. (2012, September). Perception de la page Facebook 
d’une marque: le cas de RugbysHop et d’Air France. Paper presented at the 11th journée de 
recherche sur le e-marketing, Université Paris 1 Panthéon, Sorbonne, Paris.
Abdulla, N. A., Ahmed, N. A., Shehab, M. A., Al-Ayyoub, M., Al-Kabi, M. N., & Al-rifai, S. 
(2013). Towards Improving the Lexicon-Based Approach for Arabic Sentiment Analysis. Inter-
national Journal of Information Technology and Web Engineering, 9(3), 55–71. doi:10.4018/
ijitwe.2014070104
Abdul-Mageed, M., Diab, M., & Korayem, M. (2011). Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis of 
Modern Standard Arabic. The 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies (pp. 587-591).
Abulaish, M., Doja, M. N., & Ahmad, T. (2009). Feature and opinion mining for customer review 
summarization. In Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence (pp. 219–224). Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-11164-8_35
Acquisti, A., & Gross, R. (2006, June). Imagined communities: Awareness, information sharing, 
and privacy on the Facebook. In Privacy enhancing technologies (pp. 36–58). Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/11957454_3
Adamy, G. (2013). Le web social et la e-réputation. Paris, France: Gualino Lextenso éditions.
Adamy, G. (2014). Développer sa marque avec les réseaux sociaux. Limoges, France: Vitrac 
éditions.
Agnihotri, R., Kothandaraman, P., Kashyap, R., & Singh, R. (2012). Bringing ‘Social’ into Sales: 
The Impact of Salespeople’s Social Media Use on Service Behaviors and Value Creation. Journal 
of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32(2), 333–348. doi:10.2753/PSS0885-3134320304
Ahuja, V., & Yajulu, M. (2010). Corporate blogs as e-CRM tools–Building consumer engagement 
through content management. Journal of Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, 
17(2), 91–105. doi:10.1057/dbm.2010.8

Compilation of References
265
Aichner, T., & Jacob, F. (2015). Measuring the Degree of Corporate Social Media Use. Interna-
tional Journal of Market Research, 57(2), 257–275.
Ajmal, M. (2009). Critical Factors for Successful KM Initiatives in Project Background. Com-
munications of IBIMA, 8(1), 1–8.
Alexander, D., & Turner, C. (2001). C.R.M Pocketbook. Management Pocketbooks Ltd. Avail-
able at: www.pocketbook.co.uk
Al-Kabi, M. N., Gigieh, A. H., Alsmadi, I., & Haidar, M. (2014). Opinion Mining and Analysis 
for Arabic Language. International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 
5(5), 181-195.
Alkhouja, M. (2016). Social Media for Political Change: The Activists, Governments, and Firms 
Triangle of Powers during the Arab Movement. In Social Media and Networking: Concepts, 
Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 55-66). Hershey, PA: Information Science Refer-
ence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8614-4.ch004
All, A. (2011). Lack of integration Holding Back Social CRM. ITBusinessEdge. Retrieved April 
11, 2014, from http://www.itbusinessedge.com/cm/blogs/all/lack-of-integration-holding-back-
social- crm/?cs=48679
Alonso, S., Pérez, I. J., Cabrerizo, F. J., & Herrera-Viedma, E. (2013). A linguistic consensus 
model for Web 2.0 communities. Applied Soft Computing, 13(1), 149–157. doi:10.1016/j.
asoc.2012.08.009
Alqahtani, F. A., & Saba, T. (2013). The impact of Social Networks on Customer Relation 
Management (CRM) in Prospectus of Business Environment. Journal of American Science, 
9(7), 480–486.
Alsmadi, I., et al. (2013). Video spam and public opinion in current Middle Eastern conflicts. 
International Journal of Social Network Mining, 1(3-4), 318-333.
Alt, R., & Reinhold, O. (2012). Social Customer Relationship Management: State of the Art and 
Learnings from Current Projects. 25th Bled eConference.
Alt, R., & Reinhold, O. (2012). Social Customer Relationship Management (Social CRM). Ap-
plication and Technology.Business & Information Systems Engineering. doi:10.1007/s12599-
012-0225-5
Alvarado, C. (2012). Social Media in the Financial Service Industry - Reap the Benefits of 
Building a Strong Brand. iUriel. Retrieved November 7, 2014, from http://www.iuriel.com/
featured/online-brand-management-social-media-in-the-financial-service-industry-reap-the-
benefits- of-a-strong-brand
Alves, G., & Antunes, J. (2015). New paradigm in communication — The social networks 
between Brands and Consumers. In Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), 2015 10th 
Iberian Conference.

Compilation of References
266
Amoako, G., Arthur, E., Bandoh, C., & Katah, R. (2012). The impact of effective customer rela-
tionship anagement (CRM) on repurchase: A case study of (GOLDEN TULIP) hotel (ACCRA-
GHANA). African Journal of Marketing Management, 4(1), 17–29.
Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural equation modeling in practice: A review and 
recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin, 103(3), 411–423. doi:10.1037/0033-
2909.103.3.411
Andrews, J. C., & Shimp, T. A. (1990). Effects of involvement, argument strength and source 
characteristics on central and peripheral processing in advertising. Psychology and Marketing, 
7(3), 195–214. doi:10.1002/mar.4220070305
Andrieu, O. (2008). Réussir son référencement web. Paris, France: Eyrolles éditions.
Andriole, S. J. (2010). Business impact of Web 2.0 technologies. Communications of the ACM, 
53(12), 67–79. doi:10.1145/1859204.1859225
Ang, L. (2011). Community relationship management and social media. Journal of Database 
Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, 18(1), 31–38. doi:10.1057/dbm.2011.3
Angulakshmi, G., & ManickaChezian, R. (2014). An Analysis on Opinion Mining: Techniques 
and Tools. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication En-
gineering, 3(7), 7483–7487.
Anon. (2010). Social Media and Banking. Retrieved July 5, 2014, from http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=ZMiQKuGkaPQ&feature=related
Anon, . (2012). A more equal footing: How social media have transfromed customer relation-
ships. Emerald Article, 28(6), 4–6.
Anon. (2013). What are some examples of business process reengineering where Social Media 
has enabled an organization to revamp itself? Received May 25, 2014, from http://www.quora.
com/What-are-some-examples-of-business-process-reengineering-where-Social-Media-has-
enabled-an-organization-to-revamp-itself
Apptrace. (2014). Facebook Application. Retrieved 2016, from Apptrace.com: http://www.ap-
ptrace.com/app/facebook/id284882215/sentiments
Aral, S., & Walker, D. (2010). Creating Social Contagion Through Viral Product Design: A 
Randomized Trial of Peer Influence in Networks. Management Science. Available at http://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1564856
Assaad, W., & Gomez, J. (2011). Social Network in marketing (Social Media Marketing) Op-
portunities and Risks. International Journal of Managing Public Sector Information and Com-
munication Technologies, 2(1), 13–22.
Audiense. (2016). Audiense. Retrieved 2016, from Twitter: https://www.audiense.com/

Compilation of References
267
Bago, P., & Voros, P. (2011). Social Customer Relationship Management. Act Sci Soc, 33, 61-75. 
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2505401
Bahrami, M., Ghorbani, M., & Arabzad, M. S. (2012). Information technology (IT) as an im-
provement tool for customer relationship management (CRM). Procedia: Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, 41, 59–64. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.04.008
Baird, C. H., & Paramis, G. (2011). From Social Media to Social CRM: Reinventing the cutomer 
relationship. IBM. Retrieved January 9, 2014, from http://public.dhe.ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/
en/gbe03416usen/GBE03416USEN.PDF
Balasubramanian, S. K., Karrh, J. A., & Patwardhan, H. (2006). Audience Response to Product 
Placements: An Integrative Framework and Future Research Agenda. Journal of Advertising, 
35(3), 115–141. doi:10.2753/JOA0091-3367350308
Barker, S., & Green, H. (2008). Social media will change your business. Accessed 05/02/15 http://
www.bloomberg.com/bw/stories/2008-02-20/social-media-will-change-your-businessbusiness-
week-business-news-stock-market-and-financial-advice
Barker, M. (2013). Social Media Marketing: A strategic approach. Melbourne, Australia: Cengage.
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and frequency of instantiation as determinants 
of graded structure. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 
11(4), 629–654. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.11.1-4.629 PMID:2932520
Baya’a, N., & Daher, W. (2016). Facebook as an Educational Environment for Mathematics Learn-
ing. In Social Media and Networking: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 
143-162). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8614-4.ch009
BBC. (2014). BBC. Retrieved November 2015, from BBC Web Site: http://www.bbc.co.uk/arabic/
mobile/scienceandtech/2012/12/121220_arabic_language_internet_arab_days.shtml
Bebensee, T., Helms, R., & Spruit, M. (2011). Exploring Web 2.0 Applications as a Mean of Boles-
tering upKnowledge Managment. The Electronic Journal of Knowledge Management, 9(1), 1-9.
Becker, J. M., Rai, A., Ringle, C. M., & Völckner, F. (2013). Discovering unobserved heteroge-
neity in structural equation models to avert validity threats. Management Information Systems 
Quarterly, 37(3), 665–694.
Beckwith, H. (1997). Vendre l’invisible: un guide Pratique de Marketing Moderne. Québec, 
Canada: Ada édition.
Belk, R. (2014). Sharing Versus Pseudo-Sharing in Web 2.0. Anthropologist, 18(1), 7–23.
Bellinger, G., Castro, D., & Mills, A. (n.d.). Data, Information, Knowledge, & Wisdom. Systems 
Thinking. Retrieved December 14, 2014, from http://systems-thinking.org/dikw/dikw.htm

Compilation of References
268
Ben Farhat, O. (2014). Impact des réseaux sociaux sur l’image de l’entreprise: Cas Tunisie 
Telecom. (Unpublished Master Thesis). Virtual University of Tunisia, Tunis, Tunisia.
Berry, D. S., & Miller, K. M. (2001). When boy meets girl: Attractiveness and the five-factor 
model in opposite-sex interactions. Journal of Research in Personality, 35(1), 62–77. doi:10.1006/
jrpe.2000.2304
Bethlahmy, J., Popat, B., & Schottmiller, P. (2011). The Global E-Commerce Gold Rush: How 
Retailers Can Find Riches Overseas. Accessed 02/28/16 http://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/
about/ac79/docs/retail/Global- eCommerce_POV_IBSG.pdf
Betsch, C., Brewerb, N. T., Brocardc, P., Daviesd, P., Gaissmaiere, W., Haasea, N., & Strykm, 
M. et al. (2012). Opportunities and challenges of Web 2.0 for vaccination decisions. Vaccine, 
30(25), 3727–3733. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.02.025 PMID:22365840
Bettman, J. R., & Park, C. W. (1980). Effects of prior knowledge and experience and phase of the 
choice process on consumer decision processes: A protocol analysis. The Journal of Consumer 
Research, 7(3), 234–248. doi:10.1086/208812
Beuker, I. (2009). How digital brands can succeed and thrive in the engaged era. Journal of 
Digital Asset Management, 5(6), 375–382. doi:10.1057/dam.2009.28
Bhojaraju, G. (2005). Knowledge Management: Why Do We Need It For Corporates. Malaysian 
Journal of Library & Information Science, 10(2), 37–50.
Bollena, J., Mao, H., & Zeng, X. (2011). Twitter mood predicts the stock market. Journal of 
Computational Science, 2(1), 1–8. doi:10.1016/j.jocs.2010.12.007
Bolotaeva, V. & Cata, T. (2011). Marketing Opportunities with Social Networks. Journal of 
Internet Social Networking and Virtual Communities.
Bolotaeva, V. and Cata, T. (2010). Marketing opportunities with social networks. Journal of 
Internet Social Networking and Virtual Communities, 1-8.
Bonsón, E., Royo, S., & Ratkai, M. (2014). Facebook Practices in Western European Municipali-
ties: An Empirical Analysis of Activity and Citizens’ Engagement. Administration & Society. 
Available at: http://aas.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/09/04/0095399714544945.abstract
Bonsón, E., & Flores, F. (2011). Social media and corporate dialogue: The response of global 
financial institution. Online Information Review, 35(1), 34–49. doi:10.1108/14684521111113579
Bonsón, E., & Ratkai, M. (2013). A set of metrics to assess stakeholder engagement and so-
cial legitimacy on a corporate Facebook page. Online Information Review, 37(5), 787–803. 
doi:10.1108/OIR-03-2012-0054
Borgatti, S., & Foster, P. C. (2003). The Network Paradigm in Organizational Research: A Review 
and Typology. Journal of Management, 29(6), 991–1013. doi:10.1016/S0149-2063(03)00087-4

Compilation of References
269
Bortree, D., & Seltzer, T. (2009). Dialogic strategies and outcomes: An analysis of environmental 
advocacy groups’ Facebook profiles. Public Relations Review, 35(3), 317–319. doi:10.1016/j.
pubrev.2009.05.002
boyd, d. (2007). Why youth heart social network sites: The role of networked publics in teenage 
social life. In D. Buckingham (Ed.), Youth, identity, and digital media: The John D. and Catherine 
T. MacArthur Foundation series on digital media and learning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
boyd, d., & Ellison, N. B. (2008). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, 210-230.
Boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social Network Sites: Definition, History, and Scholar-
ship. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 1(13), 210–230. doi:10.1111/j.1083-
6101.2007.00393.x
Boyd, D., & Ellison, N. (2008). Social network sites: Definition, history and scholarship. Journal 
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(11), 210–230.
Brandau, M. (2010). Study: Consumers hungry for restaurants. Retrieved from http://nrn.com/
corporate/study-consumers-hungry-restaurants#ixzz1iB3TbprN
Broderick, A., & Mueller, R. D. (1999). A theoretical and empirical exigesis of the consumer 
involvement construct. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 7, 97–108. doi:10.1080/10
696679.1999.11501855
Brody, S., & Noemie, E. (2010). An unsupervised aspect-sentiment model for online reviews. The 
2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (pp. 804-812). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Brown, J. J., & Reingen, P. H. (1987). Social ties and word-of-mouth referral behavior. The 
Journal of Consumer Research, 14(3), 350–362. doi:10.1086/209118
Brown, J., Broderick, A. J., & Lee, N. (2007). Word of mouth communication within online com-
munities: Conceptualizing the online social network. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 21(3), 
2–20. doi:10.1002/dir.20082
Bruhn, M., Schoenmueller, V., & Scha¨fer, D. (2012). Are social media replacing traditional 
media in terms of brand equity creation? Management Research Review, 35(9), 770–790. 
doi:10.1108/01409171211255948
Buchanan, L. (2010). Capping IT Off: A business framework and operating model for CRM & 
Social CRM. Capgemini.
Buckner, H. T. (1965). A theory of rumor transmission. Public Opinion Quarterly, 29(1), 54–70. 
doi:10.1086/267297

Compilation of References
270
Bueren, A., Schierholz, R., Kolbe, L. M., & Brenner, W. (2005). Improving performance of 
customer-processes with knowledge management. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 11(5), 
573–588.
Bulearca, M., & Bulearca, S. (2010). Twitter: A Viable Marketing Tool for SMEs? Global Busi-
ness and Management Research: An International Journal, 2(4), 296–309.
Buss, A. H., & Briggs, S. R. (1984). Drama and the self in social interaction. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 47(6), 1310–1324. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.47.6.1310
Buttle, F. (1998). Word of mouth: Understanding and managing referral marketing. Journal of 
Strategic Marketing, 6(3), 241–254. doi:10.1080/096525498346658
Byrne, D. E. (1971). The attraction paradigm. New York: Academic Press.
Camille, A. (2009). Definition of reputation. Retrieved January 10, 2009, from http://cadderepu-
tation.over-blog.com/article-32456974.html
Carfi, C. (2012). Ant’s Eye Vie. The Social Engagement Journey. Available at: http://www.
slideshare.net/antseyeview/social-engagement-journey-13578584/
Carvill, M., & Taylor, D. (2013). The Business of Being Social: A Practical Guide to Harnessing 
the Power of Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn and YouTube for All Businesses. London, UK: 
Crimson Publishing.
Cavazza, F. (2009). Une définition des médias sociaux. Retrieved April 17, 2016, from www.
mediassociaux.fr
Celsi, R. L., & Olson, J. C. (1988). The role of involvement in attention and comprehension 
processes. The Journal of Consumer Research, 15(2), 210–224. doi:10.1086/209158
Centola, D., & Macy, M. (2007). Complex Contagions and the Weakness of Long Ties. AJS, 
113(3), 702–734.
Chalothom, T., & Ellman, J. (2015). Simple Approaches of Sentiment Analysis via Ensemble 
Learning. Information Science and Applications, 631-639.
Chan-Olmsted, S., Cho, M., & Lee, S. (2013). User Perceptions of Social Media: A Compara-
tive Study of Perceived Characteristics and User Profiles by Social Media. Online Journal of 
Communication and Media Technologies, 3(4), 149–178.
Chary R. (2014). Social Media Marketing-The Paradigm Shift in International Marketing. IOSR 
Journal of Business and Management, 16(9), 11-13.
Chaturvedi, S. & Gupta, S. (2014). Social media promotions – Can we restrict it under laws?. 
International Journal of Research – GRANTHAALAYAH, 1(1), 43-50.

Compilation of References
271
Chen, W., Paul, A., Kibaru, F., Ma, Y., & Saparova, D. (2015). Two-Phase Usability Evaluation 
of Insurance Website Prototypes. International Journal of E-Business Research, 11(1), 1–22. 
doi:10.4018/ijebr.2015010101
Chen, Y.-S., Cheng, C. H., Lai, C. J., Hsu, C. Y., & Syu, H. J. (2012). dentifying patients in 
target customer segments using a two-stage clustering-classification approach: A hospital-
based assessment. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 42(2), 213–221. doi:10.1016/j.comp-
biomed.2011.11.010 PMID:22177941
Cheung, C., & Thadani, D. (2010). The Effectiveness of Electronic Word-of Mouth Commu-
nication: A Literature Analysis. 23rd Bled eConference eTrust: Implications for the Individual, 
Enterprises and Society.
Chikandiwa, S. T., Contogiannis, E., & Jembere, E. (2013). The adoption of social media 
marketing in South African banks. European Business Review, 25(4), 365–381. doi:10.1108/
EBR-02-2013-0013
Cho, C. H. (2003). Factors influencing clicking of banner ads on the www. Cyberpsychology & 
Behavior, 6(2), 201–215. doi:10.1089/109493103321640400 PMID:12804033
Choudhury, M. M., & Harrigan, P. (2014). CRM to social CRM: The integration of new technolo-
gies into customer relationship management. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 22(2), 149–176. 
doi:10.1080/0965254X.2013.876069
Christakis, N., & Fowler, J. (2011). Connected: The Surprising Power of Our Social Networks 
and How They Shape Our Lives -- How Your Friends’ Friends’ Friends Affect Everything You 
Feel, Think, and Do (2nd ed.). Back Bay Books.
Christofides, E., Muise, A., & Desmarais, S. (2009). Information disclosure and control on 
Facebook: Are they two sides of the same coin or two different processes? Cyberpsychology & 
Behavior, 12(3), 341–345. doi:10.1089/cpb.2008.0226 PMID:19250020
Chua, A. Y.K., & Banerjee, S. (2013). Customer knowledge management via social media: the case 
of Starbucks. Journal of Knowledge Management, 17(2), 237 – 249. 10.1108/13673271311315196
Chu, S., & Kim, Y. (2011). Determinants of consumer engagement in electronic word-of-
mouth (eWOM) in social networking sites. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 47–75. 
doi:10.2501/IJA-30-1-047-075
Clemons, E. K. (2009). The complex problem of monetizing virtual electronic social networks. 
Decision Support Systems, 48(1), 46–56. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2009.05.003
Cocheo, S. (2009). Banks wade into new media stream. ABA Banking Journal, 101(5), 14–29.
Cohen, D. (2015). Infographic: Explosive Active User Growth for Pinterest, Tumblr. Retrieved 
from http://www.adweek.com/socialtimes/infographic-gwi-pinterest-tumblr/620098

Compilation of References
272
Cohen, L.S. (2010). CT banks delve into social media marketing. Connecticut Banking, 12-15.
Cohen, J. B. (1983). Involvement and you; 1000 great ideas. Proceedings: Association for Con-
sumer Research, 10, 325–328.
Constantinides, E., & Fountain, S. J. (2008). Web 2.0: Conceptual Foundations and Marketing 
Issues. Journal of Direct. Data and Digital Marketing Practice, 9(3), 231–244. doi:10.1057/
palgrave.dddmp.4350098
Corritore, C. L., Kracher, B., & Wiedenback, S. (2003). On-line trust: Concepts, evolving themes, 
a model. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58(6), 737–778. doi:10.1016/
S1071-5819(03)00041-7
Cramers, M. (2012). Data Driven Social Media: the shortest distance to a rational conversation, 
Elstree, UK: Salesforce Radian6. Retrieved December 30, 2012, from http://www.radian6.com/
wp-content/uploads/2012/09/SFMC_FSIReport_FINAL.pdf
CrowdBooster. (2010). CrowdBooster. Retrieved 2016, from CrowdBooster web site: http://
crowdbooster.com/about/
Culnan, M. J., McHugh, P. J., & Zubillaga, J. I. (2010). How large US companies can use twitter 
and other social media to gain business value. MIS Quarterly Executive, 9(4), 243–259.
Culnan, M. J., McHugh, P. J., & Zubillaga, J. I. (2010). How large US companies can use Twitter 
and other social media to gain business value. MIS Quarterly Executive, 9(4), 243–259.
Curtis, L., Edwards, C., Fraser, K. L., Gudelsky, S., Holmquist, J., Thornton, K., & Sweetser, 
K. D. (2010). Adoption of social media for public relations by nonprofit Organizations. Public 
Relations Review, 36(1), 90–92. doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2009.10.003
Damont, G. E. (2015). Aligning the Virtual with the Physical: Social Media, Strategy, and Arts 
and Gardens. In H. Asencio & R. Sun (Eds.), Cases on Strategic Social Media Utilization in the 
Nonprofit Sector (pp. 184–208). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference; doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-8188-0.ch007
Dang, Y., Zhang, Y., & Chen, H. (2010). A Lexicon Enhanced Method for Sentiment classifica-
tion: An experiment on online product reviews. Intelligent Systems, 25(4), 46–53. doi:10.1109/
MIS.2009.105
Darwish, A., & Lakhtaria, K. I. (2011). The Impact of the New Web 2.0 Technologies in Com-
munication, Development, and Revolutions of Societies. Journal of Advances in Information 
Technology, 2(4), 204–216. doi:10.4304/jait.2.4.204-216
Das, B., & Sahoo, J. (2011). Social Networking Sites – A Critical Analysis of Its Impact on 
Personal and Social Life. International Journal of Business and Social Science, 2(14), 222–228.

Compilation of References
273
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User Acceptance of Informa-
tion Technology. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 13(3), 319–340. doi:10.2307/249008
De Beule, S. (2015, January 8). 3 Steps for Fast Food Brands to Build Customer Loyalty on Social 
Media. Retrieved March 16, 2016, from Engagor, A Clarabridge Company: http://www.engagor.
com/blog/3-steps-for-fast-food-brands-to-build-customer-loyalty-on-social-media/
De Bruyn, A., & Lilien, G. L. (2008). A multi-stage model of word-of-mouth influence through 
viral marketing. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 25(3), 151–163. doi:10.1016/j.
ijresmar.2008.03.004
De Chernatony, L. (1999). Brand Management Through Narrowing the Gap Between Brand 
Identity and Brand Reputation. Journal of Marketing Management, 15(1-3), 159–179. 
doi:10.1362/026725799784870432
de Sá, M., Duarte, C., Carrico, L., & Reis, T. (2010). Designing Mobile Multimodal Applications. 
In S. Kurkovsky (Ed.), Multimodality in Mobile Computing and Mobile Devices: Methods for 
Adaptable Usability (pp. 106–135). Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference; doi:10.4018/978-
1-60566-978-6.ch005
Debourg, M. M., Clavelin, J., & Perrier, O. (2004). Pratique du marketing. Berti éditions.
Decesare, M. (2013). Moms and Media 2013: Media Multitaskers. Edison Research Center. 
Available online http://www.edisonresearch.com/moms-and-media-2013-media-multitaskers/
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1991). A motivational approach to self: Integration in personality. 
In Proceedings of Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (vol. 38, pp. 237-288). Lincoln, NE: 
University of Nebraska Press.
Dehkordi, G., Rezvani, S., Rahman, M., Fouladivanda, F., Nahid, N., & Jouya, S. (2012). A 
Conceptual Study on E-marketing and Its Operation on Firm’s Promotion and Understanding 
Customer’s Response. International Journal of Business and Management, 7(19), 114–124.
Denecke, K. (2008, April). Using sentiwordnet for multilingual sentiment analysis. In Data 
Engineering Workshop, 2008. ICDEW 2008. IEEE 24th International Conference on (pp. 507-
512). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICDEW.2008.4498370
Denny’s. (2015a). CORN ON THE. Retrieved from http://blog.dennys.com/post/129381733083/
corn-on-the
Denny’s. (2015b). STACKSOPHONE, BABY! Retrieved from http://blog.dennys.com/
post/128364753433/stacksophone-baby
Denny’s. (2015c). Untitled. Retrieved from http://blog.dennys.com/post/128214110323/what-
in-the-heck-tumblr-what-is-this-streamlined

Compilation of References
274
Derieux, E., & Granchet, A. (2013). Réseaux sociaux en ligne: Aspect juridiques et déontologiques. 
Editions Lamy.
Dessart, L., Veloutsou, C., & Thomas, A. M. (2015). Consumer engagement in online brand 
communities: A social media perspective. Journal of Product and Brand Management, 24(1), 
28–42. doi:10.1108/JPBM-06-2014-0635
Devaney, T., & Stein, T. (2013). How to make Facebook work for your business. Accessed 
05/07/15 http://www.forbes.com/sites/capitalonespark/2013/05/13/how-to-make- Facebook-
work-for-your-business/
DHL Inc. (2015). How we made it in Africa: Insights into business in Africa. Accessed 05/12/15 
from http://www.howwemadeitinafrica.com/category/articles/dhl/
Dillon, W. R., Madden, T. J., Kirmani, A., & Mukherjee, S. (2001). Understanding what is in a 
brand rating: A model for assessing brand and attribute effects and their relationship to brand 
equity. JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 38(4), 415–429. doi:10.1509/jmkr.38.4.415.18910
Dimitriades, Z. S. (2006). Customer satisfaction, loyalty and commitment in service or-
ganizations: Some evidence from Greece. Management Research News, 29(12), 782–800. 
doi:10.1108/01409170610717817
Ding, X., Liu, B., & Yu, P. S. (2008, February). A holistic lexicon-based approach to opinion 
mining. In Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining 
(pp. 231-240). ACM. doi:10.1145/1341531.1341561
Donath, J., & Boyd, D. (2004). Public displays of connection. BT Technology Journal, 22(4), 
71–82. doi:10.1023/B:BTTJ.0000047585.06264.cc
Dong, J. Q., & Wu, W. (2015, June). Business value of social media technologies: Evidence 
from online user innovation communities. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 24(2), 
113–127. doi:10.1016/j.jsis.2015.04.003
Doyle, P. (1998). Marketing Management and Strategy (2nd ed.). Harlow, UK: Prentice-Hall.
Dubois, E., Moussa, W. A., Bach, C., & de Bonnefoy, N. (2008). Modelling and Simulation of 
Mobile Mixed Systems. In J. Lumsden (Ed.), Handbook of Research on User Interface Design 
and Evaluation for Mobile Technology (pp. 346–363). Hershey, PA: Information Science Refer-
ence; doi:10.4018/978-1-59904-871-0.ch022
Duggan, M., & Brenner, J. (2013). The Demographics of Social Media Users- 2012. Pew Research 
Center. Available at http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Social-media-users.aspx
Dupin, A. (2010). Communiquer sur les réseaux sociaux: les méthodes et les outils indispensables 
pour vos stratégies de communication sur les médias sociaux. Fyp Editions.

Compilation of References
275
Durgam, P. (2011). Transformation of Customer Knowledge management through Social CRM. 
Aalto School of Economics.
Dutot, V. (2013). A New Strategy for Customer Engagement: How Do French Firms Use Social 
CRM?. International Business Research, 6(9), 54-67. doi:.10.5539/ibr.v6n9p54
Duwairi, R., & Qarqaz, I. (2014). Arabic Sentiment Analysis using Supervised Classification. The 
1st International Workshop on Social Networks Analysis, Management and Security (SNAMS 
- 2014). doi:10.1109/FiCloud.2014.100
Duwairi, R. M., & Qarqaz, I. (2014). Arabic Sentiment Analysis using Supervised Classification. 
Arabic Sentiment Analysis using Supervised Classification (pp. 579–583). Barcelona, Spain: IEEE.
Eagly, A. H., Makhijani, M. G., Ashmore, R. D., & Longo, L. C. (1991). What is beautiful is good, 
but: A meta-analytic review of research on the physical attractiveness stereotype. Psychological 
Bulletin, 110(1), 109–128. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.110.1.109
Easley, D., & Kleinberg, J. (2010). Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning about a Highly 
Connected World. Cambridge University Press.
East, R., Hammond, K., & Lomax, W. (2008). Measuring the impact of positive and negative 
word of mouth on brand purchase probability. Intern. J. of Research in Marketing, 25(3), 215–224. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijresmar.2008.04.001
Eccleston, D., & Griseri, L. (2008). How does Web 2.0 stretch traditional influencing patterns? 
International Journal of Market Research, 50(5), 591–616. doi:10.2501/S1470785308200055
Eid, M. (2011). Determinants of e-commerce customer satisfaction, trust, and loyalty in Saudi 
Arabia. Journal of electronic commerce research, 12(1), 78-93.
Eirinaki, M., Pisal, S., & Singh, J. (2012). Feature-based opinion mining and ranking. Journal 
of Computer and System Sciences, 78(4), 1175–1184. doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2011.10.007
El-Gohary, H. (2010). E-Marketing - A Literature Review From A Small Businesses Perspective. 
International Journal Of Business And Social Science, 1(1), 214–244.
Ellison, N. B., Steinfeld, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of Facebook ‘‘friends’’: Explor-
ing the relationship between college students’ use of online social networks and social capital. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 12(4). doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2007.00367.x
Ellison, N., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2011). Connection Strategies: Social Capital Implica-
tions of Facebook-enabled Communication Practices. New Media & Society, 13(6), 873–892. 
doi:10.1177/1461444810385389
Empathica. (2010). Empathica consumer insights panel: Consumer use of social. inmoment.

Compilation of References
276
Engelberg, D., & Seffah, A. (2002). A Framework for Rapid Mid-Fidelity Prototyping of Web 
Sites. Accessed 02/28/16 http://www.idemployee.id.tue.nl/g.w.m.rauterberg/lecturenotes/MFP-
Prototypying.PDF
Ennew, C. T., & Binks, M. R. (1996). The Impact of Service Quality and Service Characteristics 
on CustomerRetention: Small Businesses and their Banks in the UK. British Journal of Manage-
ment, 7(3), 219–230. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8551.1996.tb00116.x
Erragcha, N., & Romdhane, R. (2014). Social networks as marketing tools. Journal of Internet 
Banking and Commerce, 19(1), 1-12.
Escalas, J. E., & Bettman, J. R. (2003). You are what they eat: The influence of reference 
groups on consumer connections to brands. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 13(3), 339–348. 
doi:10.1207/S15327663JCP1303_14
Escalas, J. E., & Bettman, J. R. (2005). Self-construal, reference groups and brand meaning. The 
Journal of Consumer Research, 32(3), 378–389. doi:10.1086/497549
Facebook. (2015). Facebook. Retrieved 2015, from facebook web site: http://www.facebook.com
Facebook. (2015). Helping families and kids in Africa. Accessed 05/07/15 https://www.facebook.
com/pages/Helping-kids-and-Family-in-Africa/378555982243224
Fanfan, Y. (2012). Knowledge management: making a core competency in today’s business world. 
In 2012 3rd International Conference on System Science, Engineering Design and Manufacturing 
Informatization. Retrieved January 14, 2014, from http://0-ieeexplore.ieee.org.wam.city.ac.uk/xpl/
articleDetails.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6340781&contentType=Conference+Publications&searchW
ithin%3DSearch_Index_Terms%3A.QT.corporate+strategy.QT.%26searchField%3DSearch_All
Fan, Y., & Miao, Y. (2012). Effect of Electronic Word-of-Mouth on Consumer Purchase In-
tention: The Perspective of Gender Differences. International Journal of Electronic Business 
Management, 10(3), 175–181.
Farooq, F., & Jan, Z. (2012). The Impact of Social Networking to Influence Marketing through 
Product Reviews. International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Research, 
2(8), 627–637.
Fashion Runways. (2015a). Dolce & Gabanna at Milan Fashion Week Spring RTW 2016 - Head-
wear. Retrieved from http://fashion-runways.tumblr.com/post/130351439421/dolce-gabbana-at-
milan-fashion-week-spring-rtw
Fashion Runways. (2015b). Valentino. Retrieved from http://fashion-runways.tumblr.com/tagged/
valentino
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7(2), 117–140. 
doi:10.1177/001872675400700202

Compilation of References
277
Fitzgerald, B. R. (2014). Yahoo: Tumblr to Make Over $100 Million in Revenue Next Year. 
Retrieved from http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2014/10/21/yahoo-tumblr-to-make-over-100-million-
in-revenue-next-year/
Flavián, C., Guinaliu, M., & Gurrea, R. (2006). The role played by perceived usability, satisfaction 
and consumer trust on website loyalty. Information & Management, 1(1), 1–14. doi:10.1016/j.
im.2005.01.002
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobserv-
able variables and measurement error. JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 18(1), 39–50. 
doi:10.2307/3151312
Freeman, R. E. (1984). Strategic management: a stakeholder approach. Boston: Pitman press.
Frith, J. (2015). Smartphones as locative media. New York: Polity.
Frost, A. (2010). Knowledge Management. Retrieved November 2015, from KMT An Educational 
KM Site: http://www.knowledge-management-tools.net/
Fuduric, M., & Mandelli, A. (2014). Communicating social media policies: Evaluation of cur-
rent practices. Journal of Communication Management, 18(2), 158–175. doi:10.1108/JCOM-
06-2012-0045
Gaiman, N. (2015a). July 5th, 2015 at 12:43 PM. Retrieved from http://neil-gaiman.tumblr.com/
post/123294903396/neil-gaiman-can-you-give-me-a-lengthy-answer-about
Gaiman, N. (2015b). July 7th, 2015 at 8:40 PM. Retrieved from http://neil-gaiman.tumblr.com/
post/123509154296/what-are-your-thoughts-about-amazons-decision-to
Gallaugher, J., & Ransbotham, S. (2010). Social media and customer dialogue management at 
Starbucks. MIS Quarterly Executive, 9(4), 197–212.
Ganassali, S. (2014). Enquêtes et analyse de données avec Sphinx. Paris, France: Edition Pearson.
Gangeshwer, D. (2013). E-Commerce or Internet Marketing: A Business Review from Indian 
Context. International Journal of u- and e- Service. Science and Technology, 6(6), 187–194.
Gap. (2015). New York photographer Brian Morr wears his Gap 1969 Japanese selvege denim 
for a day of exploring. Retrieved from http://gap.tumblr.com/post/128736242093/new-york-
photographer-brian-morr-wears-his-gap
Garcia, A. O., Exposito, M. M., Verdugo, M. C., & Mejias, M. S. (2014). Consumer – brand 
engagement on Facebook: Liking and commenting behaviors. Journal of Research in Interactive 
Marketing, 8(3), 203–223. doi:10.1108/JRIM-12-2013-0081
Garrigos-Simon, F., Alcamı´, R., & Ribera, T. (2012). Social networks and Web 3.0: Their impact 
on the management and marketing of organizations. Management Decision, 50(10), 1880–1890. 
doi:10.1108/00251741211279657

Compilation of References
278
Garton, L., Haythornthwaite, C., & Wellman, B. (1997). Studying online social networks. Journal 
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 3(1).
Gensler, S., Völckner, F., Liu-Thompkins, Y., & Wiertz, C. (2013). Managing Brands in the 
Social Media Environment. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 27(4), 242–256. doi:10.1016/j.
intmar.2013.09.004
Gerani, S., Carman, M., & Crestani, F. (2010). Proximity-based opinion retrieval.Proceedings 
of the 33rd international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information 
retrieval. ACM.
Gerbert, H., Geib, M., Kolbe, L., & Brenneret, W. (2003). Knowledge-enabled customer relation-
ship management: Integrating customer relationship management and knowledge management 
concepts[1]. Journal of Knowledge Management, 7(5), 107–123. doi:10.1108/13673270310505421
Gerrard, P., Cunningham, J. B., & Devlin, J. F. (2006). Why consumers are not using 
Internet banking: A qualitative study. Journal of Services Marketing, 20(3), 160–168. 
doi:10.1108/08876040610665616
Gertler, M. S. (2003). Tacit knowledge and the economic geography of context, or The undefinable 
tacitness of being (there). Journal of Economic Geography, 3(1), 75–99. doi:10.1093/jeg/3.1.75
Giammona, C. (2015). Denny’s Revival Provides Blueprint for McDonald’s Turnaround. Retrieved 
from http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-06-03/denny-s-revival-provides-blueprint-
for-mcdonald-s-turnaround
Gibbert, M., Leibold, M., & Probst, G. (2002). Five styles of customer knowledge management, 
and how smart companies use them to create value. European Journal of Economics, Finance, 
and Administrative Services, 20(5), 459–469.
Gilbert, E., & Karahalios, K. (2009). Predicting Tie Strength with Social Media.Proceedings of 
the 27th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and recall. Psycho-
logical Review, 91(1), 1–67. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.91.1.1 PMID:6571421
Gilly, M. C., Graham, J. L., Wolfinbarger, M. F., & Yale, L. J. (1998). A dyadic study of in-
terpersonal information search. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 26(2), 83–100. 
doi:10.1177/0092070398262001
Godes, D. (2011). Opinion Leadership and Social Contagion in New Product Diffusion. Market-
ing Science, 30(2), 224–229. doi:10.1287/mksc.1100.0605
Godes, D., & Mayzlin, D. (2004). Using Online Conversations to Study Word-of-Mouth Com-
munication. Marketing Science, 23(4), 545–560. doi:10.1287/mksc.1040.0071

Compilation of References
279
Godfrey, A., Seiders, K., & Voss, G. B. (2011). Enough is enough! The fine line in executing 
multichannel relational communication. Journal of Marketing, 75(4), 94-109.
Goi, C. L. (2014). The Impacts of Social Media on the Local Commercial Banks in Malaysia. 
Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce, 19(1).
Govindarajan, M. (2013). Sentiment Analysis of Movie Reviews using Hybrid Method of Naive 
Bayes and Genetic Algorithm. International Journal of Advanced Computer Research, 3(4), 
139–145.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78(6), 
1360–1380. doi:10.1086/225469
Greenberg, P. (2009b). Social CRM Comes of Age. Retrieved February 11, 2014, from http://
www.oracle.com/us/products/applications/crmondemand/036062.pdf
Greenberg, A. S. (2012). The role of visual attention in Internet advertising. Journal of Advertis-
ing Research, 52(4), 400–404. doi:10.2501/JAR-52-4-400-404
Greenberg, P. (2009a). CRM at the Speed of Light: Social CRM Strategies, Tools, and Techniques 
for Engaging Your Customers. McGraw-Hill.
Greenberg, P. (2010). The impact of CRM 2.0 on customer insight. Journal of Business and 
Industrial Marketing, 25(6), 410–419. doi:10.1108/08858621011066008
Gretsch, S., Mandl, H., & Schätz, R. (2012). Implementation Process of a Knowledge Manage-
ment Initiative: Yellow Pages. INTECH Open Access.
Gritten, A. (2011). New insights into consumer confidence in financial services. International 
Journal of Bank Marketing, 29(2), 90–106. doi:10.1108/02652321111107602
Guesalaga, R. (2016). (in press). The use of social media in sales: Individual and organizational 
antecedents, and the role of customer engagement in social media. Industrial Marketing Man-
agement.
Guidry, K. R., & Pasquini, L. A. (2016). Twitter Chat as an Informal Learning Tool: A Case 
Study using #sachat. In Professional Development and Workplace Learning: Concepts, Meth-
odologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 1122-1139). Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8632-8.ch062
Hadar, L., & Sood, S. (2014). When Knowledge Is Demotivating: Subjective Knowledge and 
Choice Overload. Psychological Science, 25(9), 1739–1747. doi:10.1177/0956797614539165 
PMID:25037963
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., Anderson, R. E., & Tatham, R. L. (2006). Multivariate 
data analysis (6th ed.). Pearson Prentice Hall.

Compilation of References
280
Han, H., & Hyun, S. S. (2015). Customer retention in the medical tourism industry: Impact of qual-
ity, satisfaction, trust, and price reasonableness. Tourism Management, 46, 20–29. doi:10.1016/j.
tourman.2014.06.003
Hansen, M. T. (1999). The search-transfer problem: The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across 
organization subunits. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(1), 82–111. doi:10.2307/2667032
Hans, R., Peter, V. C., & Bijmolt, T. H. (2014). Dynamic effects of social influence and direct 
marketing on the adoption of high-technology products. Journal of Marketing, 78(2), 58–62.
Hardey, M. (2009). The social context of online market research: An introduction to sociabil-
ity of social media. International Journal of Market Research, 51(4), 562–564. doi:10.2501/
S1470785309200785
Harrison, T. M., & Barthel, B. (2009). Wielding new media in Web 2.0: Exploring the history 
of engagement with the collaborative construction of media products. New Media & Society, 
11(1-2), 155–178. doi:10.1177/1461444808099580
Hays, C. A., Spiers, J. A., & Paterson, B. (2015). Opportunities and Constraints in Disseminating 
Qualitative Research in Web 2.0 Virtual Environments. Qualitative Health Research, 25(11), 
1576–1588. doi:10.1177/1049732315580556 PMID:25870449
He, X., & Jiménez, R. P. (2015). Chinese social media strategies: Communication key features 
from a business perspective. El profesional de la información, 24(2), 200-209.
Heller, C. B., & Parasnis, G. (2011). From social media to social customer relationship manage-
ment. Strategy and Leadership, 39(5), 30–37. doi:10.1108/10878571111161507
Hendriks, B. (2011). Knowledge management in times of social media.mov. Retrieved January 
7, 2015, from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qnfYzKiW50Q
Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. (2004). Electronic Word of Mouth 
Via Consumer-Opinion Platforms: What Motivates Consumers to Articulate Themselves on the 
Internet? Journal of Interactive Marketing, VOL., 18(1), 38–52. doi:10.1002/dir.10073
Hensel, A. (2016). 3 Biggest Social Media Trends to Know for 2016. Accessed 02/29/16 http://
www.inc.com/anna-hensel/what-to-watch-2016-social-media-trends.html
Heude, R. P. (2003). Guide de la communication pour l’entreprise. Paris, France: édition Maxima.
He, W., Zha, S., & Li, L. (2013). Social media competitive analysis and text mining: A case 
study in the pizza industry. International Journal of Information Management, 33(3), 464–472. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.01.001
Holtham, C., & Rich, M. (2012). Non‐formal management learning through electronic experiential 
fiction. Journal of Management Development, 31(3), 287–297. doi:10.1108/02621711211208916

Compilation of References
281
HootSuite. (2008). HootSuite Corporation. Retrieved 2016, from HootSuite web site: https://
hootsuite.com/
Horowitz, M. D., Jeffrey, R. A., & Christopher, J. A. (2007). Medical tourism: Globalization of 
the healthcare marketplace. Medscape General Medicine, 9(4), 33. PMID:18311383
Hoyer, W. D., & Brown, S. P. (1990). Effects of brand awareness on choice for a common, repeat 
purchase product. The Journal of Consumer Research, 17(2), 141–148. doi:10.1086/208544
Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analy-
sis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 6(1), 1–55. 
doi:10.1080/10705519909540118
Hu, M., & Liu, B. (2004). Mining and Summarizing Customer Reviews. In Proceedings of the 
10th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining.
Hüttinger, L., Schiele, H., & Veldman, J. (2012). The drivers of customer attractiveness, supplier 
satisfaction and preferred customer status: A literature review. Industrial Marketing Management, 
41(8), 1194–1205. doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2012.10.004
Ibeh, K. I. N., Ying, L., & Dinnie, K. (2005). E-branding strategies of internet companies: Some 
preliminary insights from the UK. Journal of Brand Management, 5(12), 355–373. doi:10.1057/
palgrave.bm.2540231
Ibrahim, H. S., Abdou, S. M., & Gheith, M. (2015). Sentiment Analysis For Modern Standard 
Arabic And Colloquial. International Journal on Natural Language Computing, 4(2), 95–109. 
doi:10.5121/ijnlc.2015.4207
IMTJ. (2014). Retrieved 2016, from the IMTJ Medical Travel Award Winners in 2014: http://
awards.imtj.com/results/2014-winners/
Injazz, C. J., & Popovich, K. (2003). Understanding customer relationship management (CRM) 
People, process and technology. Business Process Management Journal, 9(5), 672–688. 
doi:10.1108/14637150310496758
Iyengar, R., Bulte, C., Choi, J., (2011). Distinguishing between Drivers of Social Contagion: 
Insights from Combining Social Network and Co-location Data. Academic Press.
Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (2000). When Choice is Demotivating: Can One Desire Too 
Much of a Good Thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(6), 995–1006. 
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.6.995 PMID:11138768
Jackson, S. E., Joshi, A., & Erhardt, N. L. (2003). Recent Research on Team and Organiza-
tional Diversity: SWOT Analysis and Implications. Journal of Management, 29(6), 801–830. 
doi:10.1016/S0149-2063(03)00080-1

Compilation of References
282
Jagtap, B., & Dhotre, V. (2014). SVM and HMM Based Hybrid Approach of Sentiment Analysis 
for Teacher Feedback Assessment. International Journal of Emerging Trends & Technology in 
Computer Science, 3(3), 229–232.
Jamet, T., & Altmann, O. (2013). Les nouveaux défis du Brand Content: au-delà du contenu de 
marque. Paris, France: Edition Pearson.
Jaques, P. A., & Viccari, R. M. (2006). Considering students’ emotions in computer-mediated 
learning environments. In Z. Ma (Ed.), Web-based intelligent e-learning systems: Technologies 
and applications (pp. 122–138). Hershey, PA: Information Science Publishing. doi:10.4018/978-
1-59140-729-4.ch006
Jaser, J. (2010). The case against social media in banking. New Jersey Banker, 26-33.
Jekimovics, L., Wickham, M., & Danzinger, F. (2013). Revolution or e-business as usual? Social 
Networking and e-CRM, 1, 153-162.
Jenkins, H., Ito, M., & Boyd, D. (2015). Participatory culture in a networked era. New York: Polity.
Jessen, T. L., & Rodway, P. (2010). The effects of advertisement location and familiarity on 
selective attention. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 110(3), 941–960. doi:10.2466/pms.110.3.941-
960 PMID:20681345
Jiang, H., Luo, Y., & Kulemek, O. (2016, May). Leading in the digital age: A study of how social 
media are transforming the work of communication professionals. Telematics and Informatics, 
33(2), 493–499. doi:10.1016/j.tele.2015.10.006
Jin, W., Ho, H., & Srihari, R. (2009). A novel lexicalized HMM-based learning framework 
for web opinion mining.Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine 
Learning. doi:10.1145/1553374.1553435
Jirehbandei, S., & Pour, A. (2011). A new model for e-CRM in e-commerce using live-operator. 
World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, 56, 552–554.
JMD. (2014, April). Jordan Medical Directory. Retrieved 10th, May 2016, from http://www.
jormedic.com/
Joenn, A. (2012). Operational CRM. CRM Insights - The CRM Blog. Retrieved December 10, 
2012, from http://info.collierpickard.co.uk/blog/bid/87997/operational-crm?source=Blog_Email_
[Operational%20CRM]
Junco, R. (2011). The relationship between frequency of Facebook use, participation in Facebook 
activities, and student engagement. Computers & Education, 58(1), 162–171. doi:10.1016/j.
compedu.2011.08.004
Jungsun, A., & La Ferle, C. (2008). Enhancing recall and recognition for brand names and 
body copy a mixed-language approach. Journal of Advertising, 37(3), 107–117. doi:10.2753/
JOA0091-3367370308

Compilation of References
283
Jung, Y., Gray, R., Lampe, C., & Ellison, N. (2013). Favors from Facebook Friends: Unpacking 
Dimensions of Social Capital.Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. doi:10.1145/2470654.2470657
Junho, S. (2005). Roadmap for e-commerce standardization in Korea. International Journal of 
IT Standards and Standardization Research, 3(2), 1–4. doi:10.4018/jitsr.2005070101
Kane, G. C., Alavi, M., Labianca, G., & Borgatti, S. P. (2014). What’s Different About Social 
Media Networks? A Framework and Research Agenda. Management Information Systems 
Quarterly, 38(1), 275–304.
Kaplan, A. M., &Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportuni-
ties of Social Media. ESCP Europe, 53, 59-68.
Kaplan, A. M., & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges and oppor-
tunities of Social Media. Business Horizons, 1(53), 59–68. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003
Kapp, K. (2011). Relationship Maintenance and Facebook. (Master Thesis). Gonzaga University.
Karakostas, B., Kardaras, D., & Papathanassiou, E. (2005). The state of CRM adoption by 
financial services in the UK: An empirical investigation. Information & Management, 42(6), 
853–863. doi:10.1016/j.im.2004.08.006
Karl, K., & Peluchette, J. (2011). “Friending” Professors, Parents and Bosses: A Facebook Con-
nection Conundrum. Journal of Education for Business, 86(4), 214–222. doi:10.1080/088323
23.2010.507638
Katty. (2011). Lloyds Banking Group on Social Media Strategy, Team Structure, KPIs and 
ROI - YouTube. Retrieved July 7, 2012, from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zZDosreg5W0
Kaushik, C., & Mishra, A. (2014). A scalable, lexicon based technique for sentiment analy-
sis. International Journal in Foundations of Computer Science & Technology, 4(5), 35–43. 
doi:10.5121/ijfcst.2014.4504
Kazienko, P., Musial, K., & Kajdanowicz, T. (2011). Multidimensional Social Network and 
Its Application to the Social Recommender System. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics. Part A, Systems and Humans, 41(4), 746–759. doi:10.1109/TSMCA.2011.2132707
Keller, E., & Fay, B. (2012). Word-of-mouth advocacy: A new key to advertising effectiveness. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 52(4), 459–464. doi:10.2501/JAR-52-4-459-464
Keller, K. L. (1993). Conceptualizing, measuring and managing consumer-based brand equity. 
Journal of Marketing, 57(1), 1–22. doi:10.2307/1252054
Kent, M., & Taylor, M. (1998). Building dialogic relationships through World Wide Web. Public 
Relations Review, 24(3), 321–334. doi:10.1016/S0363-8111(99)80143-X

Compilation of References
284
Khan, A., Khan, R., (2012). Embracing new media in Fiji: the way forward for social network 
marketing and communication strategies. Academic Press.
Khan, A., & Khan, R. (2012). Embracing new media in Fiji: The way forward for so-
cial network marketing and communication strategies. Strategic Direction, 28(4), 3–5. 
doi:10.1108/02580541211212754
Khasawneh, R. T., Wahsheh, H. A., Alsmadi, I. M., & Al-Kabi, M. N. (2015). Arabic Sentiment 
Polarity Identification Using a Hybrid Approach. Information and Communication Systems 
(ICICS), 2015 6th International Conference on (pp. 148-153). IEEE.
Khasawneh, R. T., Wahsheh, H. A., Alsmadi, I. M., Al-Kabi, M. N. (2015). Arabic sentiment 
polarity identification using a hybrid approach. Information and Communication Systems (ICICS), 
2015 6th International Conference on. IEEE.
Khasawneh, R., & AbuShanab, E. (2013). E-Government and Social Media Sites: The Role and 
Impact. World Journal of Computer Application and Technology, 1(1), 10–17.
Khasawneh, R., & Alazzam, A. (2014). Towards Customer Knowledge Management (CKM): 
Where Knoweldge and Customer Meet. A book chapter in. In M. Chilton & J. Bloodgood (Eds.), 
Knowledge Management for Competitive Advantage: Issues and Potential Solutions. IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4679-7.ch007
Khattri, V., & Sharma, N. (2013). Evaluation of the scope and influencers’ of social media 
marketing. Asian Journal of Management Research, 4(1), 92–104.
Khodakarami, F., & Chan, Y. (2011).Evaluating the success of customer relationship management 
(CRM) systems. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Information Management 
& Evaluation (pp. 253-262). Toronto, Canada: IEEE.
Kietzmann, J. H., Hermkens, K., McCarthy, I. P., & Silvestre, B. S. (2011). Social media? Get 
serious! Understanding the functional building blocks of social media. Kelley School of Busi-
ness. Indiana University, 54, 241–251. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2011.01.005
Kim, Y. A., & Srivastava, J. (2007). Impact of social influence in e-commerce decision making. 
International Conference on Electronic Commerce. doi:10.1145/1282100.1282157
Kintsch, W., & Young, S. R. (1984). Selective recall of decision-relevant information from texts. 
Memory & Cognition, 12(2), 112–117. doi:10.3758/BF03198424 PMID:6727632
Kiron, D., Palmer, D., Phillips, A. N., & Kruschwitz, N. (2012). Social Business: What Are 
Companies Really Doing? MIT Sloan Management Review.
Klimis, C. (2010). Digital marketing: The gradual integration in retail banking. EFMA Journal, 
4(226), 16–19.

Compilation of References
285
Koehn, D. (2003). The nature of and conditions for online trust. Journal of Business Ethics, 
43(3), 3–19. doi:10.1023/A:1022950813386
Kolsky, E. (2010). A learning journey to a social CRM framework. Retrieved November 13, 
2012 from http://www.mycustomer.com/topic/social-crm/learning-journey-social-crm- frame-
work/114484
Korayem, M., Crandall, D., & Abdul-Mageed, M. (2012). Subjectivity and sentiment analysis of 
arabic: A survey. In Advanced Machine Learning Technologies and Applications (pp. 128–139). 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Kotadia, H. (2012). Knowledge management critical in Social CRM. Blog on Big Data Analytics, 
Social CRM. Retrieved December 13, 2012, from http://hkotadia.com/archives/2764
Kotler, P., & Keller, K. L. (2006). Marketing Management (12th ed.). Pearson Edition.
Kozinets, R. V. (2014). Social media engagement: A new idea. GFK Marketing Intelligence 
Review, 6(2), 8–15. doi:10.2478/gfkmir-2014-0091
Kumar, A., Bezawada, R., Rishika, R., Janakiraman, R., & Kannan, P. (2016). From Social to 
Sale: The Effects of Firm-Generated Content in Social Media on Customer Behavior. Journal 
of Marketing, 80(1), 7–25. doi:10.1509/jm.14.0249
Kumar, V., & Reinartz, W. (Eds.). (2012). Customer Relationship Management: Concept, Startegy, 
and Tools (2nd ed.). Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-20110-3
Kupper, T., Jung, R., Lehmkuhl, T., & Wieneke, A. (2014).Features for Social CRM Technol-
ogy - An Organizational Perspective. Twentieth Americas Conference on Information Systems.
Lange-Faria, W., & Elliot, S. (2012). Understanding the Role of Social Media in Destination 
Marketing. Tourism: An International Multidisciplinary Journal of Tourism, 7(1), 193-211.
Lanktree, C., & Briere, J. (1991, January). Early data on the trauma symptom checklist for 
children (TSC-C). Paper presented at the Meeting of the American Professional Society on the 
Abuse of Children, San Diego, CA.
Laurent, G., & Kapferer, J. N. (1985). Measuring consumer involvement profiles. JMR, Journal 
of Marketing Research, 22(1), 41–53. doi:10.2307/3151549
Lawson, L. (2011). Four Key Integration Steps for Better CRM. ITBusinessEdge. Retrieved April 
11, 2014 from http://www.itbusinessedge.com/cm/blogs/lawson/four-key-integration-steps-for-
better-crm/?cs=45941
Lee, M., & Youn, S. (2009). Electronic word of mouth (eWOM): How eWOM platforms influence 
consumer product judgment. International Journal of Advertising, 28(3), 473–499. doi:10.2501/
S0265048709200709

Compilation of References
286
Lee, T. (2005). The impact of perceptions of interactivity on customer trust and transaction inten-
tions in mobile commerce. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 6(3), 165–181.
Lendrevie, J., & Levy, J. (2013). Mercator 2013 Théories et nouvelles pratiques du marketing. 
Paris, France: Edition Dunod.
Lerman, D., & Garbarino, E. (2002). Recall and recognition of brand names: A comparison of word 
and non-word name types. Psychology and Marketing, 19(7/8), 621–639. doi:10.1002/mar.10028
Levy, M. (2009). WEB 2.0 implications on knowledge management. Journal of Knowledge 
Management, 13(1), 120–134. doi:10.1108/13673270910931215
Li, T., Sindhwani, V., Ding, C., & Zhang, Y. (2010). Bridging Domains with Words: Opinion 
Analysis with Matrix Tri-factorizations. SDM, 293-302.
Liébana, F. and Muñoz, F. (2013). Determinación de los perfiles de los usuarios de banca elec-
trónica a partir de la satisfacción online: una aplicación empírica. Revista de Estudios Empresari-
ales. Segunda época, 2, 84-113.
Liébana, F., Martínez, M., & Rejón, F. (2011). The economic crisis in the European Union: The 
confidence in the Spanish financial sector. Workshop: Crisis, Lisbon, EU policies and member 
states, Granada.
Lin, Y., Lyu, J., & Chan, C. (2002). Applications of Knowledge-Enabled CRM. In The Second 
International Conference on Electronic Business. Retrieved August 11, 2014, from http://iceb.
nccu.edu.tw/proceedings/2002/PDF/f212.pdf
Lipiäinen, H. S. M. (2015). CRM in the digital age: Implementation of CRM in three contem-
porary B2B firms. Journal of Systems and Information Technology, 17(1), 2–19. doi:10.1108/
JSIT-06-2014-0044
Lipsman, A., Mudd, G., Rich, M., & Bruich, S. (2012). The power of “like”: Brands reach (and 
influence) fans through social-media marketing. Journal of Advertising Research, 52(1), 40–52. 
doi:10.2501/JAR-52-1-040-052
Liu-Thompkins, Y. (2012). Seeding viral content: Lessons from the diffusion of online videos. 
Journal of Advertising Research, 52(4), 465–478. doi:10.2501/JAR-52-4-465-478
Logan, K. (2014). Why Isn’t Everyone Doing It? A Comparison of Antecedents to Following 
Brands on Twitter and Facebook. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 14(2), 60–72. doi:10.108
0/15252019.2014.935536
Logvinov, M. (2013). Banks Aren’t Social? Think Again. Bank Tech. Available at: http://www.
banktech.com/business-intelligence/banks-arent-social-thinkagain/240162041
Looy, A. V. (2016). Social Customer Relationship Management Springer Texts in Business and 
Economics. Springer International Publishing.

Compilation of References
287
Lowensohn, J. (2007). Tumblr: Microblogging done right. Retrieved from http://www.cnet.com/
news/tumblr-microblogging-done-right/
Lowrey, T. M., Shrum, L. J., & Dubitsky, T. M. (2003). The relation between brand-name lin-
guistic characteristics and brand-name memory. Journal of Advertising, 32(3), 7–17. doi:10.10
80/00913367.2003.10639137
Luden, I. (2014). Tumblr Overtakes Instagram As Fastest-Growing Social Platform, Snapchat Is 
The Fastest-Growing App. Retrieved from http://techcrunch.com/2014/11/25/tumblr-overtakes-
instagram-as-fastest-growing-social-platform-snapchat-is-the-fastest-growing-app/
Luhmann, N. (1988). Familiarity, confidence, trust: Problems and alternatives. In D. Gambetta 
(Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations (pp. 94–197). New York: Basil Blackwell.
Luxenmbourg, A. (2011). Social Media Maturity Model. M & I Partners. Available at: http://www.
socialmediamodels.net/social-media-adoption-models-category/social-mediamaturity model/
Madhoushi, M., Madhoushi, Z., & Saghari, F. (2011). Survey of Customer Knowledge Manage-
ment Impact on Customer Relationship Management (Iranian study). International Journal of 
Business and Social Science, 2(20), 215–226.
Majchrzak, A. (2009). Comment: Where Is the Theory in Wikis? Management Information 
Systems Quarterly, 33(1), 18–20.
Malhotra, N. (2011). Etudes marketing avec SPSS. Paris, France: Pearson Education.
Malhotra, A., Malhotra, C. K., & See, A. (2013). How to create brand engagement on Facebook. 
MIT Sloan Management Review, 54(2), 18–20.
Malthouse, E. C., Haenlein, M., Skiera, B., Wege, E., & Zhang, M. (2013). Managing customer 
relationships in the social media era: Introducing the social CRM house. Journal of Interactive 
Marketing, 27(4), 270-280.
Mangold, G. W., & Faulds, D. J. (2009). Social media: The new hybrid element of the promotion 
mix. Business Horizons, 52(4), 357–365. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2009.03.002
Manner, C., Blakley, S., Lawrence, S., O’Neill, E., & Raines, C. (2011). Understanding the 
Predictors of Negative Personal Relationship Experiences on Facebook. International Journal 
of Humanities and Social Science, 1, 16-19.
Mannes, T. (2012). Nordstrom, Kohl’s among most beloved retail brands. Retrieved from http://
www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/2012/may/16/poll-nordstrom-kohls-among-most-beloved-
retail-bra/
March, J., & Simon, H. (1993). Organizations (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Mariani, R., & Mohammed, D. (2014). “Like” A Global Endorsement. How Clicking “Like” 
Influences Facebook Users Brand Recall and Future Purchasing Intentions. Journal of Manage-
ment Policy and Practice, 15(4), 51.

Compilation of References
288
Marrese-Taylor, E., Velásquez, J. D., & Bravo-Marquez, F. (2014). A novel deterministic approach 
for aspect-based opinion mining. Academic Press.
Martisiute, S., Vilutyte, G., & Grundey, D. (2010). Product or Brand? How Interrelationship 
between Customer Satisfaction and Customer Loyalty Work. European Journal of Interdisciplin-
ary Studies, 2(1), 5-15.
Marwick, A., & boyd, . (2011). I tweet honestly, I tweet passionately: Twitter users, context collapse 
and the imagined audience. New Media & Society, 13(1), 96–113. doi:10.1177/1461444810365313
Maynard, D., Bontcheva, K., & Rout, D. (2012). Challenges in developing opinion mining 
tools for social media. In Proceedings of @NLP can u tag #usergeneratedcontent?! Workshop 
at LREC 2012.
McAllister, S. M. (2012). How the world’s top universities provide dialogic forums for marginal-
ized voices. Public Relations Review, 38(2), 319–327. doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2011.12.010
McCann, M., & Barlow, A. (2015). Use and measurement of social media for SMEs. Journal of 
Small Business and Enterprise Development, 22(2), 273–287. doi:10.1108/JSBED-08-2012-0096
McCarthy, J., Rowley, J., Jane, A. C., & Pioch, E. (2014). Managing brand presence through 
social media: The case of UK football clubs. Internet Research, 2(24), 181–204. doi:10.1108/
IntR-08-2012-0154
McCracken, G. (1989). Who is the celebrity endorser? Cultural foundation of the endorsement 
process. The Journal of Consumer Research, 16(3), 310–321. doi:10.1086/209217
McCroskey, J. C., Richmond, V. P., & Daly, J. A. (1975). The development of a measure of 
perceived homophily in interpersonal communication. Human Communication Research, 1(4), 
323–332. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.1975.tb00281.x
Mckay, L. (2009). Strategy and social media: everything’s gone social (Now). destinationCRM.
com. Retrieved February 11, 2014, from http://www.destinationcrm.com/Articles/Editorial/
Magazine-Features/Strategy-and-Social-Media-Everythings-Social-%28Now%29-54723.aspx
McKimmie, K. (2014). Made in Indiana: Peerless Potato Chips: Times have changed, but the 
chips are as tasty as ever. Northwest Indiana Business Quarterly Winter-Spring.
McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L. L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial trust formation in new 
organizational relationships. Academy of Management Review, 3(23), 473–490.
Meldrum, M., & McDonald, M. (1995). Customer Retention Strategies. In Key Marketing Con-
cepts (pp. 199-204). doi:10.1007/978-1-349-13877-7_38
Mende, M., Bolton, R., & Bitner, M. J. (2013). Decoding customer-firm relationships: How 
attachment styles help explain customers’ preferences for closeness, repurchase intentions, 
and changes in relationship breadth. JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 50(1), 125–142. 
doi:10.1509/jmr.10.0072

Compilation of References
289
Miller, R., & Lammas, N. (2010). Social media and its implications for viral marketing. Asia 
Pacific Public Relations Journal, 11, 1–9.
Mitchell, A. A. (1979). Involvement: A potentially important mediator of consumer behavior. 
Proceedings: Association for Consumer Research, 6, 191–196.
Mitic, M., & Kapoulas, A. (2012). Understanding the role of social media in bank marketing. 
Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 30(7), 668–686. doi:10.1108/02634501211273797
Mittal, V., Huppertz, J. W., & Khare, A. (2008). Customer complaining: The role of tie strength 
and information control. Journal of Retailing, 84(2), 195–204. doi:10.1016/j.jretai.2008.01.006
MiXT Media. (2008). Social Media Adoption Curve. Available at: http://www.socialmediamodel-
len.nl/socialmedia-organisatie-volwassenheidsmodellen/social-media-adoption-curve-model/
Moghaddam, S., & Ester, M. (2012). Aspect-based Opinion Mining from Online Reviews. New 
York: SIGIR.
Montalvo, R. E.(2011). Social Media Management.International Journal of Management & 
Information Systems, 15(3), 91-96.
Morente-Molinera, J., Perez, I., Chiclana, F., & Herrera-Viedma, E. (2015). A novel group decision 
making method to overcome the Web 2.0 challenges.Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International 
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC2015). IEEE. doi:10.1109/SMC.2015.390
Morgan, R. M., & Hunt, S. D. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of relationship marketing. 
Journal of Marketing, 58(3), 20–38. doi:10.2307/1252308
Mosadegh, M. J., & Behboudi, M. (2011). Using social network paradigm for developing a concep-
tual framework in CRM. Australian Journal of Business and Management Research, 1(4), 63–71.
Mosadegh, M. J., & Behboudi, M. (2011). Using Social Network Paradigm for Developing A 
Conceptual Framework in CRM. Australian Journal of Business and Management Research, 
1(4), 63–71.
Mourad, A., & Darwish, K. (2013). Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis of Modern Standard 
Arabic and Arabic Microblogs.4th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, 
Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, (pp. 55-64).
Mukhtar, M. (2015). Perceptions of UK Based Customers toward Internet Banking in the United 
Kingdom. Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce, 20(1), 1–38.
Mulpuru, S. (2012). How Big Trends will influence your international expansion in 2012. Ac-
cessed 02/29/16 http://blogs.pb.com/ecommerce/2012/01/24/how-five-big-trends-will-influence-
your-international-expansion-in-12/
Mupepi, M., & Mupepi, S. (2013). Appreciating Rapid Technology Integration in creating value 
in enterprises. In Social E-Enterprise: Value Creation through ICT. Hershey, PA; IGI Global 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2667-6.ch003

Compilation of References
290
Mupepi, M. G., & Taruwinga, P. (2014). Cultural Differentials Modify Change: Comparativeness 
of the SADC and the US. International Journal of Sustainable Economies Management, 3(2), 
50–79. doi:10.4018/ijsem.2014040105
Murray, L., Durkin, M., Worthington, S., & Clark, V. (2014). On the potential for Twitter to add 
value in retail bank relationships. Journal of Financial Services Marketing, 19(4), 277–290. 
doi:10.1057/fsm.2014.27
Muter, P. (1984). Recognition and recall of words with a single meaning. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10(2), 198–202. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.10.2.198
Nacheva-Skopalik, L., & Green, S. (2016). Intelligent Adaptable e-Assessment for Inclusive 
e-Learning. International Journal of Web-Based Learning and Teaching Technologies, 11(1), 
21–34. doi:10.4018/IJWLTT.2016010102
Nadeem, M. (2012). Social Customer Relationship Management (SCRM): How Connecting 
Social Analytics to Business Analytics Enhances Customer Care and Loyalty?. International 
Journal of Business and Social Science, 3(21), 88-102.
Nah, S., & Saxton, G. D. (2013). Modeling the adoption and use of social media by nonprofit 
organizations. New Media & Society, 15(2), 294–313. doi:10.1177/1461444812452411
Nair, M. (2011). Strategic Business Transformation: The 7 Deadly Sins to Overcome. Wiley edition.
Nasukawa, A. T., & Jeonghee, Y. (2003). Sentiment analysis: capturing favorability using 
natural language processing. In Proceedings of the KCA p-03, 2nd international conference on 
knowledge capture.
Nedungadi, P. (1990). Recall and consumer consideration sets: Influencing choice without alter-
ing brand evaluations. The Journal of Consumer Research, 17(3), 263–276. doi:10.1086/208556
Neti, S. (2011). Social media and its role in marketing. International Journal of Enterprise 
Computing and Business Systems, 1(2), 1–15.
Nezamabad, M. (2011). The Impact and Benefits of Internet on Marketing Mix. Australian 
Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences, 5(9), 1784–1789.
Ngai, E. W. T., Moon, K. L. K., Lam, S. S., Chin, E. S. K., & Tao, S. S. C. (2015). Social media 
models, technologies, and applications. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 115(5), 769–802. 
doi:10.1108/IMDS-03-2015-0075
Nicholas, C. (2010). At last—the full story of how Facebook was founded. Retrieved from http://
www.businessinsider.com/how-facebook-was-founded-2010-3?op=1
Nielsen. (2010). State of the media: The social media report. Nielsen, NM Incite.
Nisbet, E. C. (2006). The engagement model of opinion leadership: Testing validity within a 
European context. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 18(1), 3–30. doi:10.1093/
ijpor/edh100

Compilation of References
291
Nitu, C. V., Tileaga, C., & Ionescu, A. (2014). Evolution of CRM in SCRM. Economics, Man-
agement, and Financial Markets, 9(1), 303–310.
NLTK. (2016, April). Natural Language Toolkit. Retrieved April 10, 2016, from NLTK Org: 
http://www.nltk.org/
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company: How Japanese companies 
create the dynamics of innovation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nordstrom. (2015). Ann Demeulemeester at Paris Fashion Week. Retrieved from http://nordstrom.
tumblr.com/post/130401742690/ann-demeulemeester-at-paris-fashion-week-images
Norris, C. E., & Colman, A. M. (1992). Context Effects on Recall and Recognition of Magazine 
Advertisements. Journal of Advertising, 21(September), 37–46. doi:10.1080/00913367.1992.1
0673374
Novak, T. P., Hoffman, D. L., & Duhachek, A. (2003). The Influence of Goal-Directed and Ex-
periential Activities on Online Flow Experiences. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 13(January), 
3–16. doi:10.1207/S15327663JCP13-1&2_01
O’Brien, C. (2011). The emergence of the social media empowered consumer. Irish Marketing 
Review Journal, 21(1), 32-41.
Oates, B. J. (2010). Researching Information Systems and Computing. Sage Publications Ltd.
Oghojafor, B., Aduloju, S., & Olowokudejo, F. (2011). Information technology and customer 
relationship management (CRM) in some selected insurance firms in Nigeria. Journal of Eco-
nomics and International Finance, 3(7), 452–461.
Ogualesi, T., & Busari, S. (2012). Seven ways mobile phones have changed lives in Africa. Accessed 
05/07/15 http://www.cnn.com/2012/09/13/world/africa/mobile-phones-change-africa/index.html
O’Reilly, T. (2005). What Is Web 2.0. Retrieved April 16, 2016, from http://www.oreilly.com/
pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html
Ostrow, A. (2009). HOW TO: Gather Feedback with Social Media. Retrieved November 7, 2013, 
from http://mashable.com/2009/09/28/social-media-feedback/
Owyang, J. (2010). Social Businesses Forecast: 2011 The Year of Integration. Available at: 
http://www.slideshare.net/jeremiah_owyang/keynote-social-business-forecast-2011-the-year-
ofintegration
Ozdemir, S., & Trott, P. (2009). Exploring the adoption of a service innovation: A study of 
Internet banking adopters and non-adopters. Journal of Financial Services Marketing, 13(4), 
284–299. doi:10.1057/fsm.2008.25
Padmaja, S., & Sameen, F. (2013). Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis –An Assessment 
of Peoples’ Belief: A Survey. International Journal of Ad hoc Sensor & Ubiquitous Computing, 
4(1), 21–33. doi:10.5121/ijasuc.2013.4102

Compilation of References
292
Palka, W., Pousttchi, K., & Wiedemann, D. G. (2009). Mobile word-of-mouth: A grounded theory 
of mobile viral marketing. Journal of Information Technology, 24(2), 172–185. doi:10.1057/
jit.2008.37
Palmer, A., & Koenig-Lewis, N. (2009). An experiential, social network-based approach to direct 
marketing. Direct Marketing. International Journal (Toronto, Ont.), 3(3), 162–176.
Pang, B., & Lee, L. (2008). Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends in 
Information Retrieval, 2(1-2), 1–135. doi:10.1561/1500000011
Paniagu, J. (2014). Business performance and social media: Love or hate? Business Horizons, 
57(6), 719–728. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2014.07.005
Park, C. W., & Lessig, V. P. (1981). Familiarity and its impact on decision biases and heuristics. 
The Journal of Consumer Research, 8(2), 223–230. doi:10.1086/208859
Patil, M. Y. (2014). Social Media and Customer Relationship Management. IOSR Journal of 
Business and Management, 27-32.
Payne, A. (2007). CRM-kézikönyv: ügyfélkezelés felsőfokon. Budapest.
Pegoraro, A. (2010). Look Who’s Talking—Athletes on Twitter: A Case Study. International 
Journal of Sport Communication, 3, 501–514.
Peñalver-Martínez, I., Valencia-García, R., & García-Sánchez, F. (2011). Ontology-guided ap-
proach to feature-based opinion mining. Natural Language Processing and Information Systems 
(pp. 193–200). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-22327-3_20
Peppard, J. (2000). Customer Relationship Management (CRM) in Financial Services. European 
Management Journal, 18(3), 312–327. doi:10.1016/S0263-2373(00)00013-X
Peppers, D. (2011). The Social CRM eBook. Collier Pickard.
Pfeil, U., Arjan, R., & Zaphiris, P. (2009). Age differences in online social networking–A study 
of user profiles and the social capital divide among teenagers and older users in MySpace. Com-
puters in Human Behavior, 25(3), 643–654. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2008.08.015
Phua, J., & Ahn, S. J. (2014). Explicating the ‘like’ on Facebook brand pages: The effect of in-
tensity of Facebook use, number of overall ‘likes’, and number of friends ‘‘likes’ on consumers’ 
brand outcomes. Journal of Marketing Communications, 1-16.
Phulari, S., Khamitkar, S., Deshmukh, N., Bhalchandra, B., Lokhande, S., & Shinde, A. (2010). 
Understanding Formulation of Social Capital in Online Social Network Sites (SNS). International 
Journal of Computer Science Issues, 7(1), 92-96.
Pigg, K. E., & Crank, L. D. (2004). Building community social capital: The potential and promise 
of information and communications technologies. Journal of Community Informatics, 1(1), 58–73.

Compilation of References
293
Pornpitakpan, C. (2004). The persuasiveness of source credibility: A critical review of five decades 
of evidence. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34(2), 243–281. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2004.
tb02547.x
Prem, M., Wojciech, G., & Richard, L. (2009). Sentiment analysis of blogs by combining lexical 
knowledge with text classification. KDD ‘09 Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, (pp. 1275-1284). New York: ACM.
Prendergast, G., Ko, D., & Yuen, S. Y. V. (2010). Online word of mouth and consumer purchase 
intentions. International Journal of Advertising, 29(5), 687–708. doi:10.2501/S0265048710201427
Quintarelli, E. (2010). An Integrated Social CRM Process. The Social Enterprise. Retrieved 
January 7, 2013 from http://www.socialenterprise.it/en/index.php/2010/05/16/an-integrated-
social-crm- process/
Rababah, K., Mohd, H., & Ibrahim, H. (2011). Customer Relationship Management (CRM) 
Processes from Theory to Practice: The Pre-implementation Plan of CRM System. International 
Journal of e-Education, e-Business, e- Management Learning, 1(1), 22–27.
Rahmath, H. (2014). Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis - Challenges and Applications. 
International Journal of Application or Innovation in Engineering & Management, 3(5), 401–403.
Rappaport, S. D. (2010). Cutting Edges: Listening-Led Marketing Science, Media Strategies, and 
Organizations. Journal of Advertising Research, 50(3), 1–14. doi:10.2501/S0021849910091464
Reagans, R., & McEvily, B. (2003). Network structure and knowledge transfer: The effects of 
cohesion and range. Administrative Science Quarterly, 48(2), 240–267. doi:10.2307/3556658
Reinhold, O., & Alt, R. (2013). How Companies are Implementing Social Customer Relationship 
Management: Insights From Two Case Studies. 26th Bled eConference.
Rettberg, J. W. (2013). Blogging (2nd ed.). New York: Polity.
Ridings, C. M., Gefen, D., & Arinze, B. (2002). Some antecedents and effects of trust in virtual 
communities. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 11(3&4), 271–295. doi:10.1016/
S0963-8687(02)00021-5
Rill, S., Scheidt, J. D., Schutz, O., Reinel, D., & Wogenstein, F. (2012). A generic approach to gener-
ate opinion lists of phrases for opinion mining applications. Proceedings of the First International 
Workshop on Issues of Sentiment Discovery and Opinion Mining. doi:10.1145/2346676.2346683
Ritter, T., & Achim, W. (2012). More is not always better: The impact of relationship functions 
on customer-perceived relationship value. Industrial Marketing Management, 41(1), 136–144. 
doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2011.11.020
Roblyer, M., McDaniel, M., Webb, M., Herman, J., & Witty, J. V. (2010). Findings on Face-
book in higher education: A comparison of college faculty and student uses and perceptions 
of social networking sites. The Internet and Higher Education, 13(3), 134–140. doi:10.1016/j.
iheduc.2010.03.002

Compilation of References
294
Robson, K. (2012). Developing a Social Media Strategy: analytics, interactivity and engagement. 
Retrieved December 26, 2013 Available at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=USelRQf3Za4
Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusion of innovations (3rd ed.). New York: Free Press.
Rohlfs, A. (2015). The Half-Life of Social Media Posts: How to Improve Engagement on Twitter. 
Retrieved from http://www.pagemodo.com/blog/the-half-life-of-social-media-posts-how-to-
improve-engagement-on-twitter/
Rohm, A., Kaltcheva, V. D., & Milne, G. R. (2013). A mixed-method approach to examining 
brand-consumer interactions driven by social media. Journal of Research in Interactive Market-
ing, 7(4), 295–311. doi:10.1108/JRIM-01-2013-0009
Rollins, M., & Halinen, A. (2005). Customer knowledge management competence: Towards a 
theoretical framework. In Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences. IEEE. doi:10.1109/HICSS.2005.180
Rosenthal, S., Nakov, P., Kiritchenko, S., Mohammad, S. M., Ritter, A., & Stoyanov, V. (2015). 
SemEval-2015 Task 10: Sentiment Analysis in Twitter.Proceedings of the 9th International 
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval. doi:10.18653/v1/S15-2078
Rosman, R., & Stuhura, K. (2013). he implications of social media on customer relationship 
management and the hospitality industry. Journal of Management Policy and Practice, 14(3), 18.
Rotter, J. B. (1971). Generalized expectancies for interpersonal trust. The American Psychologist, 
26(5), 443–452. doi:10.1037/h0031464
Ruta, D., Imperatori, B., & Cavenaghi, J. (2013). The effects of ICT on sports fan management. 
In T. Torres-Coronas & M.-A. Vida-Blasco (Eds.), Social E-Enterprise: Value Creation through 
ICT (pp. 243–262). Hershey, PA: IGI Global Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2667-6.ch014
Ryals, L., & Knox, S. (2001). Cross-Functional Issues in the Implementation of Relationship 
Marketing Through Customer Relationship Management. European Management Journal, 19(5), 
534–542. doi:10.1016/S0263-2373(01)00067-6
Rybalko, S., & Seltzer, T. (2010). Dialogic communication in 140 characters or less: How Fortune 
500 companies engage stakeholders using Twitter. Public Relations Review, 36(4), 336–341. 
doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.08.004
Rydén, P., Ringberg, T., & Wilke, R. (2015). How Managers’ Shared Mental Models of Busi-
ness–Customer Interactions Create Different Sensemaking of Social Media. Journal of Interactive 
Marketing, 31, 1–16. doi:10.1016/j.intmar.2015.03.001
Sáez-Martín, A., Haro-de-Rosario, A., & Caba-Pérez, M. D. C. (2015). Using Twitter for Dia-
logic Communication: Local Government Strategies in the European Union. Local Government 
Studies, 41(3), 421–444. doi:10.1080/03003930.2014.991866

Compilation of References
295
Salehi, M., Mirzaei, H., Aghaei, M., & Abyari, M. (2012). Dissimilarity of E-marketing VS 
traditional marketing. International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sci-
ences, 2(1), 510–515.
Samuels, T. (2013). Banking on More Social Media. Socialnomics. Available at: http://www.
socialnomics.net/2013/08/20/banking-on-more-social-media
Sashi, C. M. (2012). Customer engagement, buyer-seller relationships, and social media. Man-
agement Decision, 50(2), 253–272. doi:10.1108/00251741211203551
Sawyer, S., & Tapia, A. (2005). The sociotechnical nature of mobile computing work: Evidence 
from a study of policing in the United States. International Journal of Technology and Human 
Interaction, 1(3), 1–14. doi:10.4018/jthi.2005070101
Schaefer, M. (2014). The TAO of Twitter: Changing Your Life and Business 140 Characters at 
a Time. London, UK: McGraw-Hill Education.
Schivinski, B., & Dabrowski, D. (2014). The effect of social media communication on consumer 
perceptions of brands. Journal of Marketing Communications, 1-26.
Schoenebeck, G. (2013). Potential Networks, Contagious Communities, and Understand-
ing Social Network Structure. International World Wide Web Conference Committee. 
doi:10.1145/2488388.2488486
Sellier, A.-L., & Dahl, D. W. (2011). Focus!! Creative Success Is Enjoyed Through Restricted 
Choice. JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, 48(6), 996–1007. doi:10.1509/jmr.10.0407
Sharma, N., & Chitre, V. (2014). Opinion Mining, Analysis and its Challenges. International 
Journal of Innovations & Advancement in Computer Science, 3(1), 59–65.
Sheskin, D. (2011). Handbook of parametric and nonparametric statistical procedure (5th ed.). 
Academic Press.
Sigala, M. (2011). eCRM 2.0 applications and trends: The use and perceptions of Greek tour-
ism firms of social networks and intelligence. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(2), 655–661. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.03.007
Simon, H. (1976). Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Admin-
istrative Organization (3rd ed.). New York: Free Press.
Singh, P., & Husain, M. (2014). Methodological study of opinionmining and sentiment analysis 
techniques. International Journal on Soft Computing, 5(1), 11–21. doi:10.5121/ijsc.2014.5102
Singh, S., Paul, S., & Kumar, D. (2014). Sentiment Analysis Approaches on Different Data 
set Domain: Survey. International Journal of Database Theory and Application, 7(5), 39–50. 
doi:10.14257/ijdta.2014.7.5.04

Compilation of References
296
Sirgy, M. J. (1982). Self-concept in consumer behavior: A critical review. The Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 9(3), 287–300. doi:10.1086/208924
Sirgy, M. J. (1985). Self-image/product-image congruity and consumer decision-making. Inter-
national Journal of Management, 2(4), 49–63.
Sirgy, M. J. (1986). Self-congruity: Toward a theory of personality and cybernetics. New York: 
Praeger.
Sirgy, M. J., Grewal, D., Mangleburg, T. F., Park, J., Chon, K., & Claiborne, C. B. et al. (1997). 
Assessing the predictive validity of two methods of measuring self-image congruence. Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 25(3), 229–241. doi:10.1177/0092070397253004
Sloane, G. (2014). Tumblr’s Top Draw as a Marketing Platform Is Its Wealthier User Base: 
Ringing up revenue for retailers. Retrieved from http://www.adweek.com/news/technology/
tumblr-s-top-draw-marketing-platform-its-wealthier-user-base-160103
Smiciklas, M. (2011). Social media learning curve strategy and framework. Available at: http://
www.socialmediaexplorer.com/social-media-marketing/social-media-strategy-learning-curveand- 
framework/
Smith, D. (2014). Internet use on mobile phones in Africa predicted to increase 20-fold. Accessed 
05/7/15 http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/05/internet-use-mobile-phones-africa-
predicted-increase-20-fold
Smith, H. A., & McKeen, J. D. (2005). Customer Knowledge Management: Adding Value for 
Our Customers. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 16, 36. Available 
at http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol16/iss1/36
Soares, A. M., & Pinho, J. C. (2014). Advertising in online social networks: The role of perceived 
enjoyment and social influence. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing, 8(3), 245–263. 
doi:10.1108/JRIM-01-2013-0004
Sofianti, T., Suryadi, K., Govindaraju, R., & Prihartono, B. (2009). Customer Knowledge Man-
agement in New Product Development. Asia Pacific Industrial Engineering & Management 
Systems Conference.
Statista. (2015). Statistics and facts about Tumblr. Retrieved from http://www.statista.com/top-
ics/2463/tumblr/
Statsoft. (2016). Stats Of Art. Retrieved April 10, 2016, from Dell Software: http://www.statsoft.
com/
Sternthal, B., Dholakia, R., & Leavitt, C. (1978). The persuasive effect of source credibility: Tests 
of cognitive response. The Journal of Consumer Research, 4(4), 252–260. doi:10.1086/208704

Compilation of References
297
Steven-Jennings, C. (2015). Success and sustainability in African Family Business. Accessed 
05/12/15 http://www.howwemadeitinafrica.com/success-and-sustainability-in-african-family-
business/31190/
Stieglitz, S., & Dang-Xuan, L. (2013). Emotions and Information Diffusion in Social Media - 
Sentiment of Microblogs and Sharing Behavior. Journal of Management Information Systems, 
29(4), 217–247. doi:10.2753/MIS0742-1222290408
Stillwagon, A. (2014, Sep 11). Did You Know: A 5% Increase in Retention Increases Profits 
by Up to 95%. Retrieved April 20, 2016, from Small Buisness Trends: http://smallbiztrends.
com/2014/09/increase-in-customer-retention-increases-profits.html
Stockdale, R., Ahmed, A., & Scheepers, H. (2012). Identifying Business Value From The Use 
Of Social Media: An Sme Perspective.Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS).
Stone, M. (2009). Staying customer-focused and trusted: Web 2.0 and Customer 2.0 in financial 
services. Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, 16(2), 101–131. doi:10.1057/
dbm.2009.13
Suleman, A. (2011). Knowledge Management & Social Media – YouTube. Retrieved October 16, 
2014 from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kJ15irk6hbE
Sullivan, J. L., & Transue, J. E. (1999). The psychological underpinnings of democracy: A se-
lective review of research on political tolerance, interpersonal trust, and social capital. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 50(1), 625–650. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.50.1.625 PMID:15012465
Suneetha, S., & Kumar, G. (2012). An in Depth Study on the New Age Technology – Social 
Media Marketing & its Impact on Business.Ninth AIMS International Conference on Manage-
ment, (pp. 975-997).
Suriya, M., Mahalakshmi, V., & Karthik, R. (2012). A study on customer perception towards 
internet banking. International Journal of Sales & Marketing Management Research and De-
velopment, 2(3), 15–34.
Sutcliffe, A., & Alrayes, A. (2012). Investigating user experience in Second Life for collaborative 
learning. Int. J. Human-Computer Studies, 70, 508–525.
Swift, T. (2015a). Untitled 1. Retrieved from http://taylorswift.tumblr.com/post/125996514805/
treacherousswiftie-taylorswift-im-getting-a
Swift, T. (2015b). Untitled 2. Retrieved from http://taylorswift.tumblr.com/post/121252728745/
seeyouinmywildestdreamsts-taylor-i-know-you
Syhu, H. S., & Kapoor, S. (2010). Corporate Social Responsibility Initiatives: An Analysis of 
Voluntary Corporate Disclosure. South Asian Journal of Management, 17(2), 47–80.
Tabbane, R. (2013), Impact of EWOM on the Tunisian Consumer’s Attitude Towards the Product. 
Advances in Business-Related Scientific Research Conference 2013.

Compilation of References
298
Taboada, M., Brooke, J., Tofiloski, M., Voll, K., & Stede, M. (2011). Lexicon-based methods 
for sentiment analysis. Computational Linguistics, 37(2), 267–307. doi:10.1162/COLI_a_00049
Tagboard. (2016). Tagboard. Retrieved from Tagboard Web site: https://tagboard.com/
Tang, Q., Gu, B., & Whinston, A. B. (2012). Content Contribution for Revenue Sharing and 
Reputation in Social Media: A Dynamic Structural Model. Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 29(2), 41–75. doi:10.2753/MIS0742-1222290203
Taylor, D. G., Lewin, J. E., & Strutton, D. (2011). Friends, fans and followers: Do ads work on 
social networks? Journal of Advertising Research, 51(1), 285–296. doi:10.2501/JAR-51-1-258-275
Teece, D. J. (2010). Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation. Long Range Planning, 
43(2-3), 172–194. doi:10.1016/j.lrp.2009.07.003
Tella, A., & Tella, A. O. (2015). The Promise of Open Source Systems/Software in Developing 
Requisite E-Government Solutions for the Developing Countries: A Review of Literature. In Open 
Source Technology: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (pp. 191-207). Hershey, 
PA: Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-7230-7.ch011
Thames, C. (2011). Business Process Reengineering & Enterprise Collaboraton A postion by 
Colby Thames Stryve Advisors. Academic Press.
Tirunillai, S., & Tellis, G. J. (2012). Does Chatter Really Matter? Dynamics of User-Generated 
Content and Stock Performance. Marketing Science, 31(2), 198–215. doi:10.1287/mksc.1110.0682
Tong, S. T., Van Der Heide, B., Langwell, L., & Walther, J. B. (2008). Too much of a good thing? 
The relationship between number of friends and interpersonal impressions on Facebook. Journal 
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(3), 531–549. doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2008.00409.x
Troggler, M. (2009). The functionality and usage of CRM systems. International Journal of 
Humanities and Social Science, 4(3), 164–172.
Tsai, W. H. S., & Men, L. R. (2013). Motivations and antecedents of consumer engagement with 
brand pages on social networking sites. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 13(2), 76–87. doi:1
0.1080/15252019.2013.826549
Tsimonis, G., & Dimitriadis, S. (2014). Brand strategies in social media. Marketing Intelligence 
& Planning, 3(32), 328–344. doi:10.1108/MIP-04-2013-0056
Tucker, T. (2011). Online Word of Mouth: Characteristics of Yelp.com Reviews. The Elon Journal 
of Undergraduate Research in Communications, 2(1), 37–42.
Turban, E., Shadra, R., & Delen, D. (2011). Decision Support and Business Intelligence Systems 
(9th ed.). Prentice Hall.
Turner, A., & Mattson, K. (2015). Friend Raising: How the United Way of Chester County Uses 
Social Media to Drive Change. In H. Asencio & R. Sun (Eds.), Cases on Strategic Social Media 
Utilization in the Nonprofit Sector (pp. 301–331). doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8188-0.ch011

Compilation of References
299
TweetDeck. (2010). TweetDeck. Retrieved 2016, from Twitter web site: https://tweetdeck.twit-
ter.com/
Twitter. (2015). Twitter Reports First Quarter 2015 Results; Lowers Full-Year 2015 Expecta-
tions. Accessed 02/29/16 https://investor.twitterinc.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=909177
Ugander, J., Backstrom, L., Marlow, C., & Kleinberg, J. (2012). Structural diversity in social 
contagion. PNAS, 109(16), 5962–5966.
Vadivu, V. M., & Neelamalar, M. (2015). Digital brand management — A study on the factors 
affecting customers’ engagement in Facebook pages. In Smart Technologies and Management 
for Computing, Communication, Controls, Energy and Materials (ICSTM),2015 International 
Conference. doi:10.1109/ICSTM.2015.7225392
Vanden Bergh, B. G., Lee, M., Quilliam, E., & Hove, T. (2011). The multidimensional nature 
and brand impact of user-generated ad parodies in social media. International Journal of Adver-
tising, 30(1), 103–131.
VandenBos, G., Knapp, S., & Doe, J. (2001). The role of reference elements in the selection 
of resources by psychology undergraduates. Retrieved October 13, 2001, from http://jbr.org/
articles.html
Varghese, R., & Jayasree, M. (2013). A survey on sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Inter-
national Journal of Research in Engineering and Technology, 2(11), 312–317. doi:10.15623/
ijret.2013.0211048
Vemuri, A. (2010). Getting social: Bridging the gap between banking and social media. Global 
Finance, 24(5), 20–21.
Verhoef, P. C. (2003). Understanding the Effect of Customer Relationship Management Efforts 
on Customer Retention and Customer Share Development. Journal of Marketing, 67(4), 30–45. 
doi:10.1509/jmkg.67.4.30.18685
Verhoef, P. C., & Lemon, K. N. (2013). Successful customer value management: Key lessons and 
emerging trends. European Management Journal, 31(1), 1–15. doi:10.1016/j.emj.2012.08.001
Vinodhini, G., & Chandrasekaran, R. (2012). Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining: A Survey. 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering, 
2(6), 282–292.
Vishwakarma, A., & Waheeda, S. W. (2016). Changing Dynamics of Network Security involving 
Hacking/Cracking with Next Generation Firewalls (NGFW). In D. G., M. Singh, & M. Jayanthi 
(Eds.), Network Security Attacks and Countermeasures (pp. 313-328). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-8761-5.ch013
Voyer, P. (1999). Word-of-Mouth Process Within A Service Purchase Decision Context. (Master 
Thesis). University of New Brunswick.

Compilation of References
300
Wallace, E. (2014). Who Likes You and Why? A typology of Facebook Fans. Journal of Adver-
tising Research, (March), 93–109.
Walther, J. B., Van Der Heide, B., Kim, S., Westerman, D., & Tong, S. T. (2008). The role of 
friends’ behavior on evaluations of individuals’ Facebook profiles: Are we known by the company 
we keep? Human Communication Research, 34, 28–49. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.2007.00312.x
Wang W. Y. C., Pauleen D. J., & Zhang, T. (2016). How social media applications affect B2B 
communication and improve business performance in SMEs. Industrial Marketing Management.
Wang, R., & Owyang, J. (2010). Social CRM: the new rules of relationship management. Altimeter 
Group. Retrieved from: http://www.slideshare.net/jeremiah_owyang/social-crm-the-new-rules-
of-relationship-management
Warren, M. E. (1999). Democracy and trust. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/
CBO9780511659959
Waters, R. D., Burnett, E., Lamm, A., & Lucas, J. (2009). Engaging stakeholders through social 
networking: How non-profit organisations are using Facebook. Public Relations Review, 35(2), 
102–106. doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2009.01.006
Wattal, S., Schuff, D., Mandviwalla, M., & Williams, C. B. (2010). Web 2.0 and politics: The 
2008 U.S. Presidential Election and E-Politics Research Agenda. Management Information 
Systems Quarterly, 34(4), 669–688.
Wei, W., & Gulla, J. (2010). Sentiment learning on product reviews via sentiment ontology tree. 
In Proceedings of Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2010).
Wiebe, J., Wilson, T., & Cardie, C. (2005). Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in 
language. Language Resources and Evaluation, 39(2), 165–210. doi:10.1007/s10579-005-7880-9
Wiig, K. M. (1997). Knowledge management: Where did it come from and where will it go? 
Expert Systems with Applications, 13(1), 1–14. doi:10.1016/S0957-4174(97)00018-3
Wikipedia. (2015). Wikipedia. Retrieved November 2015, from Wikipedia Website: https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Languages_used_on_the_Internet
Wilfley, D. (1989). Interpersonal analyses of bulimia: Normal-weight and obese. (Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation). University of Missouri, Columbia, MO.
Winer, R. S. (2001). A framework for customer relationship management. California Manage-
ment Review, 43(4), 89–105. doi:10.2307/41166102
Wirtz, B. W., Schilke, O., & Ullrich, S. (2010). Strategic development of business models: 
Implications of the Web 2.0 for creating value on the internet. Long Range Planning, 43(2-3), 
272–290. doi:10.1016/j.lrp.2010.01.005

Compilation of References
301
Wongsansukcharoen, J., Trimetsoontorn, J., & Fongsuwan, W. (2013). Social Customer Relation-
ship Management and Differentiation Strategy Affecting Banking Performance Effectiveness. 
Research Journal of Business and Management, 1-13.
Woodcock, N., Green, A., & Starkey, M. (2011). Social CRM as a business strategy. Journal 
Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management, 18(1), 50–64. doi:10.1057/dbm.2011.7
Wright, S. (2009). Political blogs, representation and the public sphere. Aslib Proceedings, 61(2), 
155–169. doi:10.1108/00012530910946901
Xiong, L., Yue, H., & Li, J. (2011). Creating competitive advantage through customer knowledge 
management in customer relationship management. In Proceedings ofInternational Conference 
on E-Business and E-Government (ICEE). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICEBEG.2011.5881994
Yaghoubi, N.M., Khaksar S.M.S., Banihashemi, S.A., Jahanshahi, A.A. & Nawaser, K. (2011). 
The Impact of Knowledge Management on Customer Relationship Management. European 
Journal of Economics, Finance, and Administrative Services, (34), 76 – 86.
Yazdanifard, R., Venpin, M., Yusoff, W., & Islam, M. (2011). Internet Marketing: The New Era 
of Innovation in E-commerce.International Conference on Software and Computer Applications 
IPCSIT, (vol. 9, pp. 192-197).
Zaichowsky, J. L. (1986). Conceptualizing involvement. Journal of Advertising, 15(2), 4–14. do
i:10.1080/00913367.1986.10672999
Zanjani, M. S., Rouzbehani, R., & Dabbagh, H. (2008). Proposing a conceptual model of customer 
knowledge management: a study of CKM tools in British dotcoms. In Proceedings of World 
Academy of Science, Engineering, and Technology. Retrieved May 25, 2012 from http://www.
waset.org/journals/waset/v38/v38-54.pdf
Zhai, Z., Liu, B., Xu, H., & Jia, P. (2011). Clustering product features for opinion mining.Pro-
ceedings of the fourth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining. ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1935826.1935884
Zhao, F. (2006). Maximize business profits through e-partnerships. Hershey, PA: IRM Press. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-59140-788-1
Zuckerberg, M. (2008). Thoughts on the evolution of Facebook. Facebook Blog. Retrieved from 
http://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=31033537130

  302
About the Contributors
Wafa’a A. Rabayah, born in Irbid, Jordan in 1985, she obtained her master 
degree of Management Information System from Yarmouk University, Jordan (2014), 
and her bachelor degree in computer science from Jordan University of Science and 
Technology, Jordan (2007), Wafaa has research interest in E-government, social 
network and decision support systems.
Rawan Tayseer Khasawneh is a full time lecturer in the department of Com-
puter Information Systems at Jordan University of Science and Technology. She 
obtained her master degree in Management Information Systems from Yarmouk 
University in Jordan (2013), and her bachelor degree in Management Information 
Systems from Yarmouk University in Jordan (2011). Khasawneh’s research inter-
ests include: e-government, social media and sentiment analysis, E-marketing and 
E-CRM, knowledge management systems and group decision support systems.
Izzat Alsmadi obtained his Ph.D degree in software engineering from NDSU 
(USA) and his second master in software engineering from NDSU (USA) and his 
first master in CIS from University of Phoenix (USA). He had a B.Sc degree in 
telecommunication engineering from Mutah University in Jordan. He has several 
published books, journals, and conference articles largely in software engineering 
and information retrieval fields.
* * *
Ameen Kamel Alazzam is a lecturer of Information System at Technical Col-
lege in Tai’f. He obtained his master’s degree in Management Information Systems 
from Yarmouk University\Jordan (2012), and his bachelor degree in Management 
Information Systems from Al- Balqa’ Applied University\Jordan (2006). Ameen 
has research interest in e-government topics like Trust, security issues and adoption 
of e-government. Also, he works on research projects in E-marketing and E-CRM, 
and knowledge management systems.

About the Contributors
Ahmed Alzyoud obtained his master degree in Computer Information system 
(CIS) from Yarmouk University in 2016. Beside social networks interests, he is 
interested in software testing domain, and web mining researches.
Olayiwola Bello obtained his Masters´ degrees in Information Science (2008) 
and Business Administration (2011) from the Universities of Ibadan and Obafemi 
Awolowo University in Nigeria respectively. In 2010 he was employed as a lecturer 
at the University of Ilorin in the department of Information and Communication Sci-
ence and is currently a doctoral researcher at Nova Unversidade de Lisboa, Lisbon 
Portugal with a focus on Information and Decision Systems. He writes and presents 
widely on issues of integrating information technology into work process in busi-
ness, governance and academics as well as telecommunications management. He 
is a Transparency International award winner, beneficiary of research grants from 
national and international bodies and a Certified Information Professional (CIP).
María del Carmen Caba-Pérez is a Professor in public management sector and 
general manager at the University of Almería (Spain). Her research concerns online 
transparency and communication of public administrations. Dr Caba’s strong research 
and teaching activity have led to her being accredited as a Full Professor by Agencia 
Nacional de Evaluación de la Calidad y Acreditación (ANECA), Spain’s National 
Agency for Quality Assessment and Accreditation. She is author of several articles 
published in Journal Citation Reports (JCR) publications including The American 
Review of Public Administration, International Review of Administrative Science, 
Online Information Review, Government Information Quarterly, Voluntas, Latin 
American Research Review, Public Administration and Development, Public Rela-
tions Review, Information Development and so on. Also, she has written more than 
15 book chapters (Kluwer Academic Publishers; IGI Global, Springer, Cappelen 
Akademisk Forlag).
Abdelmadjid Ezzine received his Phd with honor from Sidi Bel Abbes Univer-
sity. Dr. Ezzine is an assistant professor in Applied Mathematics at the Faculty of 
Economics, Sidi Bel Abbes University. His research focuses on Structural equation 
models with latent variables and applying of statics and data analysis methods in 
Marketing.
Nasir Faruk is a lecturer in the Department of Telecommunication Science, 
University of Ilorin, Nigeria since 2010. He received the PhD in Electrical and 
Electronics Engineering at University of Ilorin, Nigeria in 2015, Masters of Sci-
ence in Mobile & High Speed Telecommunication Networks with distinction from 
Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK in 2010 and Bachelor of Science in Physics 
  303

About the Contributors
with first class honors from Kano University of Science and Technology (KUST) 
Wudil, Kano State, Nigeria in 2007. From 2015-2016, he was a postdoctoral re-
searcher at the department of Communication and Networking, school of Electrical 
Engineering, Aalto University, Finland. He has received numerous research grants 
and fellowships with authorship of over 50 scientific publications. His research 
interests lie in the areas of telecommunication management and modeling, as well 
as in the use of information systems to drive qualitative management processes. He 
is a member of IEEE and IET.
Modupe Folarin received her MSc degree in Business Systems Analysis and 
Design from City University London with distinction in 2013. Before then she has 
been building a career in Business Analysis and IT and realized the intrinsic nature 
and impact social media has on organizations where she worked as a Business 
Analyst. She presently consults for businesses in areas of Project Management (IT 
and Business) as a Business Analyst.
Vehbi Gorgulu, M.A., is a doctoral Candidate in Media and Communication 
Studies at the Faculty of Communication, Galatasaray University and a research 
assistant at the Faculty of Communication, Istanbul Bilgi University. His most recent 
research is published by Information, Communication & Society and Third Text.
Arturo Haro-de-Rosario has a PhD in accounting and finance, assistant professor 
at the department of Economics and Business, University of Almería (Spain). His 
research interests are focused on the financial information disclosures on the Web 
(e-government) and on the management system and communication in the federal and 
local governments. He is author of numerous articles in national and international 
journals, including Small Business Economics, Social Science Computer Review, 
Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy, Local Government Stud-
ies and so on. Also, he has written some book chapters (IGI Global and Springer).
Mekki Marwa Imane received her Master in Marketing with honor from Uni-
versity of Sidi Bel Abbes. Miss. Mekki interest is studying brands in social media 
and applying statistical analysis techniques in marketing.
Mambo Governor Mupepi received his PH.D. in Organization Development, 
Business Administration, from Benedictine University. (2004), he has MBA in Strat-
egy Management, Business Administration, from Davenport University, and MA in 
Strategy Management, Business Administration, also from Davenport University. 
Now he is in the position of “Visitor Professor, Non-Tenure Track, Seidman Col-
lege of Business, Grand Valley State University, Michigan”. His research interest 
304  

About the Contributors
falled in the following fields: Organization Development and Change Management, 
Performance Management, Diversity and Productivity Management, and Interna-
tional Management.
Meriem Nouala received her Phd with honor from Sidi Bel Abbes University in 
2015. Dr. Nouala is an assistant professor in marketing at Sidi Bel Abbes University, 
Algeria. She heads the Marketing Innovation Research group, which focuses on the 
application of mathematical modeling and statistical analysis for marketing innova-
tion. Here research interests include innovation in marketing, service marketing, 
e-marketing, and applied mathematics for marketing analysis.
Alejandro Sáez-Martín is a researcher in government administration in the 
department of Economics and Business at the University of Almería (Spain), 
FPU/2013 grant from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (MCINN). 
He is the author of numerous articles in national and international journals, includ-
ing Social Science Computer Review, Transforming Government: People, Process 
and Policy, Local Government Studies, Information Development and so on. Also, 
he has written some book chapters (IGI Global and Springer).
Laura Saraite is a researcher in government administration in the department 
of Economics and Business at the University of Almería (Spain), FPU/2016 grant 
from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (MCINN).
Kristen Smirnov received her PhD in Marketing from the University of Alberta. 
She focuses on Consumer Behavior research in the area of technology and social 
media.
Patience Taruwinga teaches several classes in the Business Division at Saint 
Joseph’s College. Professor Taruwinga finds it rewarding when students acquire 
new skills, expand their knowledge, and learn something relevant and applicable 
to the real-world beyond academia. In the past he taught at IU South Bend’s Judd 
Leighton School of Business and Economics. Patience Taruwinga has experience 
in international trade and supply chain management. He is the owner and founder 
of Geek Investments LLC., and RPJ Truck and Equipment Sales LLC both export 
companies with sales in more than seven countries. He has research interests in the 
succession of family owned businesses
Kaan Varnali, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor of Marketing and the Vice Dean 
at the Faculty of Communication, Istanbul Bilgi University, where he teaches courses 
on consumer psychology, brand management, and digital product development. He 
  305

About the Contributors
is also the founding director of the master’s program in marketing communications 
(MA) in Istanbul Bilgi University, known as the brand school. His current research 
focuses on complaint management, brand communication in social media, and 
configural analysis. His prior research has appeared on several highly regarded 
scholarly journals including Journal of Business Research, International Journal 
of Information Management, Information, Communication & Society, Journal 
of Marketing Communications, Society, and Electronic Commerce Research and 
Applications. He also authored 3 books: “Mobile Marketing: Fundamentals and 
Strategy”, published by McGraw-Hill, New York, and two others written in Turkish 
both published by MediaCat, Istanbul.
306  

307
Index
A
analytics 6-7, 32-33, 42-43, 57, 62, 82, 
120, 211-213, 231, 257
B
blogging 53, 60, 62, 67, 78, 82-83, 232, 
244
brand impression 124, 127-128, 131-133, 
140
branding 8, 60, 62, 68, 71, 84, 86, 89, 91-
95, 102, 104
brand pages 125-126, 149-150
brand recall 124, 126-133, 136, 138-142, 
148
brand-related knowledge 125-126
buzz 84, 241
C
cases 73, 115, 117, 128, 136, 162, 176, 
195, 201, 203, 243, 245-246, 248, 
250, 252, 261
case study 55, 108, 113, 189, 209, 222, 
229, 243
choice overload 59, 61, 70, 75, 78, 81-82
co-creation 6, 15, 17-18, 26, 28, 33, 38
commitment 53-54, 66, 76, 120, 132, 161-
162, 164-166, 239, 248-249, 261
connection 1, 7, 12, 14-15, 53, 71, 79, 88, 
116, 141, 145, 173-174, 176-178, 
180-182, 184-185, 187-188, 199, 207
contagion 69, 71, 81, 173-174, 176-177, 
181-182, 184-186, 188-189
customer engagement 13, 15, 26, 28, 30, 
36-37, 41, 45-46, 49, 53-55, 57, 60, 
154, 156-158, 160-162, 165-166, 171, 
262
customer engagement life cycle 53
Customer Knowledge Management 11, 13, 
18, 41-44, 55-58
customer relationship management 11-15, 
18, 22, 28, 34, 39-46, 48-50, 54-58, 
104, 108-109, 121-123, 155-156, 247, 
262-263
customer retention 32, 207, 209, 216, 239-
240, 246-250, 259, 261-263
customer retentions 240, 248, 259
customers’ needs 3, 8, 49, 121, 207, 239, 
249
Customization 59
D
discussion boards 174
E
Electronic marketing 1-4, 7
E-mail Marketing 1, 3
engagement 1-2, 5, 8, 11-13, 15, 26, 28, 
30, 32, 36-38, 41, 43, 45-46, 49, 53-
55, 57, 59-60, 66, 68, 70-79, 82-83, 
87, 112, 121, 125-126, 128, 138, 141, 
144, 146-148, 150-151, 154-169, 171, 
184, 187-188, 226, 252-253, 255-256, 
258, 261-262
e-reputation 84, 94, 103

308 
Index
F
Facebook 2, 4-5, 7, 14, 48-49, 52, 55, 59, 
61-66, 68, 74, 77-78, 82-83, 88, 97, 
105, 112, 116-118, 120, 125-126, 
128-135, 137, 139-151, 154-157, 159-
162, 164-167, 171-172, 175-178, 181, 
187-190, 208-209, 212, 214, 218, 
220-221, 224-225, 227, 230-236, 238, 
240-244, 246, 250, 252-258, 260
factorial analysis 84, 86, 95-96, 101, 105
financial institutions 35, 154, 156-157
G
Gender 174, 178, 180, 187, 190
GIF 59, 65-66, 74-75
Google+ 7, 118, 120, 224-225, 227, 230, 
234-238, 253, 258
graphics 6, 59, 62, 74
gregariousness 224-225
I
ICT 45, 224, 233, 237, 244
Instagram 59, 61-63, 65-66, 68-69, 71-74, 
77-78, 81, 246, 250, 253, 255-258
integration 11-14, 28, 34-36, 39-40, 42, 46, 
49, 54-55, 106, 158, 162, 169-170, 
186, 212, 226, 230-231, 244
interactivity 5, 43, 124, 147, 159
interface 2, 110, 128, 224, 228, 243, 257-
258
Internet 1-4, 8-10, 52, 76, 84-89, 93-94, 
97, 101-103, 106-107, 110, 125, 146, 
157, 167, 169-172, 174-175, 178-179, 
188, 193-194, 198, 213, 220, 223, 
227, 231, 241, 244, 250, 262
Internet Marketing 3, 9-10
J
Jordan 1, 45, 108-109, 113, 115-116, 122, 
173, 193, 207, 224, 246
K
knowledge management 11-13, 16, 18, 21-
22, 28, 33-35, 37, 39, 41-44, 55-58, 
220-223
M
mass media 224, 230
medical 108-109, 113-118, 121-122, 262
microblogging 48, 60, 81-82, 89
millennials 66
Mobile Marketing 3
N
natural language processing 196, 199, 205, 
207-208, 213
new media 12, 84, 104, 148, 168-170, 187-
188, 222
News Feed 131, 134, 136-137, 139, 142, 
182, 184
Nordstrom 59, 64, 74-79, 81-82
notes 52, 67-68, 75, 83, 114, 136, 141, 216
O
opinion mining 193-208
opinion-rich resources 193
P
photoset 77-78, 83
Pinterest 59-60, 63-64, 68, 74, 80, 82-83, 
246, 253, 255, 257
popularity 63, 71, 124, 127-128, 133, 135, 
137-141, 155, 159, 161-162, 164-165
R
Really Simple Syndication (RSS) 174
reblog 67-68, 72-73, 75, 78, 83
S
sentiment analysis 193, 196, 198, 204-215, 
218-223
sentiment extraction 193

309
Index
sharing 4-5, 7, 12-14, 16, 18, 21, 48, 53-
54, 68-69, 71-72, 78-79, 83, 86-87, 
109-110, 120, 124, 128, 135, 138, 
140-143, 146, 155, 157, 171, 173-175, 
185, 208, 213, 220, 227, 236, 238, 
245, 250, 252, 255-256
Skype 115, 120, 225, 230, 235-236
social CRM tools 50, 119
Social Customer Relationship Management 
(Social CRM) 11, 13, 15-16, 19, 21, 
39-43, 45-46, 49-58, 108, 117-120, 
122, 262
social media 1, 4-15, 18, 21-23, 26, 28, 
31-37, 39-46, 48-61, 63, 66, 69-71, 
73-74, 76-78, 80-83, 85, 87, 89, 104-
105, 107-108, 110, 112, 114, 117-120, 
122, 124-126, 130, 140-142, 147-151, 
154-160, 162, 165-171, 174, 176, 178, 
181-182, 186-188, 193, 197, 199, 205, 
207-209, 211-213, 217, 221-227, 229-
246, 248, 252, 254, 257, 259, 261-262
Social media evolution 46, 54
social media marketing 1, 4, 6-10, 59, 63, 
77, 126, 168, 208, 242
social network 1-2, 8, 43, 45-46, 48, 53, 
57, 59, 62-63, 69, 88-89, 96-97, 100-
102, 104-105, 117, 119, 125, 127, 
143-144, 167, 169, 173, 179, 182, 
184-185, 187-189, 200, 204, 207-209, 
214, 218, 222, 225, 232, 238, 250, 
252-254, 256-257, 260-261
social networking 1-2, 4-5, 8-9, 48, 53, 84, 
88, 91, 104, 110, 122, 124, 126, 144, 
150, 167, 170-172, 174-175, 178-179, 
187, 196, 224, 228, 230
social networking sites 1-2, 4, 8, 91, 124, 
144, 150, 171, 187
Social network marketing 1-2, 184, 188, 
222
social networks 1-3, 6-9, 45-46, 49, 52, 
54-55, 62, 64, 71, 73, 84-86, 88-89, 
91, 95-102, 104-105, 111, 113-115, 
117, 119-120, 123, 125, 127, 134, 
139, 143, 145, 150, 167-168, 173-
182, 184-188, 193-195, 201, 203-204, 
208-209, 214, 217, 225, 231, 248-250, 
257, 259, 261
sponsored stories 125, 128, 137, 142
strategies 3, 15, 33, 41, 46, 53, 56-57, 63-
64, 73, 75, 77, 85, 88, 104, 106-107, 
110-112, 154, 156-158, 165-167, 171, 
175, 178, 181, 184, 187-188, 197, 
216-217, 222, 239-240, 247-250, 253-
255, 257, 261-262
strategy 3, 5-6, 8, 11-12, 14-16, 23, 25, 
28, 33, 36-37, 41-43, 45-50, 54-55, 
58, 60, 63-64, 66, 70, 72, 74, 79, 84, 
90, 104, 106, 109, 112, 114, 117, 
119, 121, 158, 161, 166, 171, 184, 
224-225, 232, 239-241, 243, 246-247, 
249-250, 254-255, 257-263
survey 42, 95, 112, 173, 175, 190, 205-
206, 209, 214, 222, 225, 236
T
tags 78, 83
Taylor Swift 59, 64, 70-73, 75-77, 79, 228
tips 6, 246, 248, 256, 259
tourism 108-110, 113-117, 122-123, 188, 
241, 262
traditional marketing 1, 3, 8-9, 63, 65, 76, 
184
Twitter 2, 4-5, 14, 48-49, 52, 59-63, 66-71, 
73-74, 77-78, 82-83, 88-89, 116, 118, 
120, 147-148, 155, 157, 168, 170-171, 
176, 186, 189, 209, 212, 214, 221, 
223, 225, 227-229, 231-233, 235, 
237-238, 240-246, 253-258, 260-261, 
263
U
user-generated content 48, 73, 82, 193, 231
V
Value Creation 26, 28, 33, 37-38, 40, 244
video sharing 48, 174, 250
virality 154, 159, 161-162, 165
virtual word of mouth 174, 176, 179-182, 
184-185

310 
Index
W
web marketing 1, 4
WordPress 60, 62, 83
Y
You Tube 225, 236, 238

