
© Copyright 2016, Al Kavadlo & Danny Kavadlo 
A Dragon Door Publications, Inc. production
All rights under International and Pan-American Copyright conventions.
Published in the United States by: Dragon Door Publications, Inc.
5 East County Rd B, #3 • Little Canada, MN 55117
Tel: (651) 487-2180  •  Fax: (651) 487-3954
Credit card orders: 1-800-899-5111 • Email: support@dragondoor.com • Website: www.dragondoor.com
ISBN 10: 1-942812-06-X      ISBN 13: 978-1-942812-06-7
This edition first published in September 2016
Printed in China
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without the prior written consent of the  
Publisher, excepting brief quotes used in reviews.
               
BOOK DESIGN: Derek Brigham • www.dbrigham.com • bigd@dbrigham.com
PHOTO CREDITS:  Michael Alago, Martijn Bos, Mary Carol Fitzgerald, Neil Gavin, Adrienne Harvey, David Holbrook, Al Kavadlo, 
Danny Kavadlo, Grace Kavadlo, Wilson Cash Kavadlo, Kenny Lombardi, Rachel Phillips, Michael Polito & Annie Vo
The Kavadlo brothers are contributors to Bodybuilding.com, where portions of this work have appeared.
DISCLAIMER:  The authors and publisher of this material are not responsible in any manner whatsoever for any injury that may 
occur through following the instructions contained in this material. The activities, physical and otherwise, described herein 
for informational purposes only, may be too strenuous or dangerous  for some people and the reader(s) should consult a phy-
sician before engaging in them.  The content of this book is for informational and educational purposes only and should not be 
considered medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Readers should not disregard, or delay in obtaining, medical advice for 
any medical condition they may have, and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such condi-
tions because of information contained within this publication.
STREET WORKOUT
Al Kavadlo & Danny Kavadlo 

— Table of Contents — 
FOREWORD 
By John DuCane..........................................................................................................................................................................V
AUTHORS’ NOTE .....................................................................................................................................................1
I – WHAT IS STREET WORKOUT?
	
Chapter 1. Street Workout At Dawn.............................................................................................................5
	
Chapter 2. Street Workout Culture............................................................................................................... 9
	
Chapter 3. Street Workout Training...........................................................................................................13
II – FOUNDATIONAL PROGRESSIONS
	
Chapter 4. Push............................................................................................................................................................ 19
	
Chapter 5. Pull............................................................................................................................................................... 59
	
Chapter 6. Squat.......................................................................................................................................................... 91
	
Chapter 7. Flex............................................................................................................................................................ 125
	
Chapter 8. Bridge.....................................................................................................................................................149
III – SKILLS & “TRICKS”
	
Chapter 9. Floor Holds...........................................................................................................................................171
	
Chapter 10. Bar Moves......................................................................................................................................... 215	
	
Chapter 11. Human Flag...................................................................................................................................245

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
IV
IV – PROGRAMMING
	
Chapter 12. Assessments.................................................................................................................................283
	
Chapter 13. Street Workouts..........................................................................................................................287
	
Chapter 14. Training Templates..................................................................................................................313
V – BONUS SECTION
	
Chapter 15. Ask Al.....................................................................................................................................................321
	
Chapter 16. Danny’s Dos & Don’ts..............................................................................................................335
	
Chapter 17. Building A Backyard Pull-Up Bar................................................................................347
	
Chapter 18. Taking It To The Streets......................................................................................................353
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS...........................................................................................................................364
ABOUT THE AUTHORS.......................................................................................................................... 365
INDEX OF EXERCISES .............................................................................................................................366

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
V
ife is mysterious. Small acts blaze up into wild firestorms. The glimmer of a 
slight desire transforms into an incandescent passion that seems to light the 
world. A single thought triggers a raging torrent of ideas. A casual encounter leads to the 
deepest of bonds. The force of creation sparks new patterns of beauty and insight.  Webs of 
interconnection form beneath the surface of our understanding. 
We wonder why we do what we do, from where we came and to where we go…
Of such stuff has been my friendship with two remarkable men, the brothers Al Kavadlo 
and Danny Kavadlo…
It was Paul Wade who nudged the Kavadlos into my consciousness for the first time. 
A couple of rangy, flamboyant, tat-drenched, muscular misfits who decked out Convict 
Conditioning 2 with their calisthenic stylings. Their Human Flag—set in the same 
Alcatraz rec yard once haunted by Al Capone and The Birdman—signaled that a new band 
had crashed the stage…
And it was Paul Wade again who made the next nudge—recommending Al’s writing to 
me and suggesting that I consider publishing him. So I checked Al out… 
What I discovered was not just Al himself, but a whole nother world…
I discovered that Al was an artist whose preferred medium is his own body. Calisthenics 
means “beautiful movement” and Al re-creates himself daily, on that basis, as on ongoing 
artwork. Now, artworks need a setting in which to best display themselves—and that set-
ting becomes an extension of the artwork. In his case, Al chooses to display himself against 
the gritty graffiti, scaffolding and distressed brick of down-and-dirty, “street” NYC. Al’s 
favorite workout spot? Tompkins Square Park—where the doors have been ripped off the 
toilets to cut down on the fix-traffic of local junkies…
L
F O R E W O R D

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
VI
As part of his art, Al cultivates a smiling, happy Zen-guy look—even when performing 
some of the toughest moves on the planet, like the one-arm pull-up or the front lever. Yet 
simmering beneath that Zen smile is a fierce will, a formidable drive and a fanatical commit-
ment to doing things just right. As with almost all great performers, Al’s rust never sleeps…
That other world that Al is a portal to? That would be the culture and international net-
work called “Street Workout”. If Al’s immediate setting is New York, his global context can 
be defined by those two words…He and his brother Danny represent the street workout 
ethos to the max. Their book, Street Workout, is not only a paean to this movement but is 
sure to become that movement’s Bible…
As a publisher with a passion to share the best-of-the-best when it comes to the realm 
of physical cultivation, I like to work with authors who are the “complete package”. The 
author as “complete package” combines many, many attributes: they bring innovation 
and insight to the table. They are creative, thorough and inquisitive. They walk their talk 
and look the part. They are natural leaders. They are relentless and skilled self-promoters. 
Their writing style scintillates with their individual, distinct, differentiated voice. They 
have a strong and loyal following. They know their stuff inside out, but remain open to new 
ideas and input. They are passionate about every aspect of their craft and their physical 
practice. And finally, they are a joy to work with. 
Rare to find? Yes. Very. Tall order? Yes. Very. Got some such “complete packages”? 
Why…yes, yes, I do…and Al Kavadlo is one of them…
So I both applaud myself and feel fortunate to have taken Paul’s hint and signed on Al as 
a Dragon Door author. Talk about small acts that blaze up into firestorms… We have gone 
on to publish a series of wonderful titles with Al: Raising the Bar, Pushing the Limits, 
Stretching Your Boundaries and Zen Mind, Strong Body. And now, the monumental 
Street Workout he has co-authored with brother Danny…
It’s not much of a surprise, then, that when Paul Wade and I were looking for a natural 
born leader for our Progressive Calisthenics Certification (PCC) program, we chose 
Al… who in turn recruited Danny to fellow-preach the new bodyweight exercise gospel. 
Right from the get-go Al and Danny knocked the PCC ball out of the park. From its 
launch in June 2013, the PCC has become the undisputed gold standard for calisthenics 
training—nothing else comes close. And there is no question in my mind that it will remain 
THE place to go for the finest bodyweight exercise instruction, globally. Al and Danny’s 
deep passion, humility, care, graciousness, kindness, knowledge and skill have inspired 
hundreds upon hundreds of practitioners to go forth and spread the good word about the 
wonders of calisthenic cultivation. It’s a great thing to behold…

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
VII
Street Workout is saturated with the vibe and brilliant teachings I have experienced 
from Al and Danny at every workshop I have attended. And you’ll see phenomenal pho-
tographs taken in almost all the countries they’ve taught in, be it Italy, Germany, Sweden, 
Ireland, England, Australia, China, Holland or the USA… “Rich” doesn’t begin to describe 
the breadth and depth of the creative artistry of the illustrations—off the charts. 
Now, one of the best things that has happened in my life is to count Mister Danny 
Kavadlo as a good friend—and to watch the rise and rise of this great man within the 
Dragon Door community. And how remarkable is it to have two brothers who can both live 
up to my “complete package” descriptor? Because Danny is most certainly also the “com-
plete package”.
A perfect foil for Grandmaster Al, Danny’s menacing scowl, bristling musculature, 
stacked intensity and punkoid posturing belie a heart of gold and a deep-felt love for his 
fellow humans. When Danny does smile, he lights up the room. When Danny’s booming 
cadence penetrates the room with his urgent inflections, it’s an outright delight to watch 
the fire of his passion ignite his students. So good…so good… 
And like brother Al, what a coach! Danny celebrates every achievement of every stu-
dent with an infectious, ecstatic roar that rings with authentic excitement and happiness 
for their accomplishment. Like Al, Danny squeezes greatness from his clients with his 
care-infused observations and skillful cueing. No one interacts with Danny without leav-
ing enriched…
Yes, Danny has his demons—don’t we all—but he is the ultimate celebrator of life. I have 
joked that Danny would see the worst situation as a “glass one-tenth full”—but mostly his 
glass appears to be more like “nine-tenths full”. Love it!
Danny is also a multifaceted artist, a creator, an instigator of transformation and a very 
literate gentleman. All three of his previous titles with Dragon Door, Everybody Needs 
Training, Diamond-Cut Abs and Strength Rules have shone with his distinct, flam-
boyant creativity. Danny knows how to plunge to the nitty-gritty of what’s really real in 
the fraud-filled fitness biz. He savages the flimflam of the supplement and packaged foods 
industry, in a way that is to-the-point, convincing and simultaneously amusing. He nails 
what you really need to do in your workouts to get real, lasting results—and keep on getting 
them.
And talk about “walking the walk”… Danny is a striding billboard for what the physical 
cultivation artist can achieve with calisthenics alone. Danny’s a specimen all right—but 
he radiates “hard-earned”. Brutally honest about all the training and diet follies he’s fallen 
for in his earlier years, Danny’s own body is his own best proof he’s got this training thing 
figured out finally!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
VIII
Many years in gestation and many years in the making, Street Workout is the brothers’ 
first collaboration in print. The two of them are a rock star act at the PCC workshops. But a 
book is a whole nother kettle of fish… Each brother has their very distinct personality, writ-
ing style and presentation method. To successfully merge two great artistic talents into one 
cohesive text is a major feat. 
Well, I’m here to report that the brothers have pulled it off…
Street Workout is one of those landmark titles that define a genre—the treasured 
lodestone and must-have reference for hardcore fans and raw beginners alike. The broth-
ers bring it—and then some.  I can tell that their trenchwork teaching at the dozens of 
worldwide PCCs, their previous experience authoring Dragon Door titles, their consistent 
engagement through blogs and articles with their constituency, and their constant absorp-
tion of new perspectives has elevated both their games to dizzying heights.
Al and Danny have listened well and grown accordingly. They have given and given 
so much—and have received back in equal measure. Street Workout is the fruit of that 
splendid dynamic.  
Whether it be the section on foundational progressions for push, pull, squat, flex and 
bridge… Whether it be the section on the skills and “tricks” you need to achieve floor holds, 
bar moves and the human flag… Whether it be the section on programming that covers 
assessments, street workout and training templates...—all is systematically revealed, with 
a mix of clarity, precision, intelligence, creativity, humor and pizzazz that have become the 
brothers’ hallmark.
Congratulations on your masterpiece, Al and Danny—and thank you for being in my life…
John Du Cane
Founder and CEO, Dragon Door Publications

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
IX


Dear Reader,
There is no doubt that the Street Workout movement has taken over the world. From 
the back alleys of New York, to the cobblestone streets of Europe, to the Australian out-
back, this modern explosion of urban calisthenics is simply undeniable. We consider our-
selves extremely lucky and grateful to have played a role in its ascendancy. Even more so, 
we are thankful to have had the amazing opportunity to connect with so many calisthenics 
enthusiasts from all over the planet, whether via social media, at your local pull-up bar or 
at Dragon Door’s acclaimed Progressive Calisthenics Certification. There is an instant 
camaraderie between those of us who train bodyweight. Calisthenics practitioners are 
known for supporting each other and spreading a positive attitude.
Over the last few years, we’ve had the privilege of teaching in dozens of cities and over 
ten countries, spanning across four continents. Street Workout has taken us places we 
never thought we would go and introduced us to many amazing people who we otherwise 
may never have met. The book you are holding is not only the most comprehensive compi-
lation of urban calisthenics exercises and progressions ever assembled, it is also an anthol-
ogy of our experiences. 
The photographs in this manual span the course of several years. They were compiled 
from our extensive travels, our interactive workouts, our going to your hometowns and 
our getting to know you. The thrill and joy of working out in the Street Workout style is 
trumped only by the experiences we’ve shared relating with you guys. 
We’ve both written books on calisthenics before, but never have either of us been 
involved in a project of this magnitude. While some of these exercises will seem famil-
iar (there’s always more to say about the basics), others will be brand new to you. We’ve 
refined our teachings over the years, and we’ve got some new tricks up our sleeve. Until 
we’re dead in the ground, our work is not over.
Please enjoy this book. Apply it. Challenge it. Expand it and make its contents your own. 
Our only hope is that you love using it as much as we loved making it.
Your friends, 
A U T H O R S ’  N O T E
S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
1

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
2

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
3
I
What Is
Street 
Workout?

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
4

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
5
n the beginning, we crawled. We hunted. We climbed. We played. 
We did a lot of things.
Early man used his arms, legs and entire body every time he pulled himself up a tree to 
pick fruit or hoisted up a mammoth carcass for the weekly feast. He didn’t isolate body 
parts when he fought to survive. He didn’t jump or sprint because it was “leg day.” He did it 
because a saber-toothed tiger was gonna rip him apart if he didn’t. 
Fast forward a few millennia and we find mankind erecting the Egyptian Sphinx, 
Stonehenge and the Great Wall of China. It takes a great deal of raw, physical strength to 
move mountain-sized boulders, but we had it. There was no isolation there, friends, just 
the full body working together in harmony. Trust me, these architects were not at the gym 
doing three sets of ten hammer curls.
The Acropolis. The Great Buddha of Kamakura. The Brooklyn Bridge. Our ancestors 
didn’t use any modern gym equipment to get in shape for masterfully designing and build-
ing these incredible structures. In fact, they built these amazing structures because they 
understood (from an architectural perspective) that leverage, one of the key principles of 
calisthenics, could help create something incredible, whether it’s a majestic pyramid or a 
sculpted human body.
I
C h a p t e r 1
Street Workout 
At Dawn

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
6
Training the body without the use of external resistance equipment is known as cal-
isthenics. It has been around since the dawn of humanity. Calisthenics, or bodyweight 
training, is the oldest and noblest form of exercise. Pressing, pulling and squatting are 
hard-wired into our DNA. Way before the invention of the modern gym, using only our 
bodies for resistance was not just the best way to train… it was the only way. It’s no wonder 
so many of us get excited, inspired and motivated by this phenomenon! In fact, the modern 
gym (sometimes called “globo-gym”), with all its fancy, bi-angular lat pull-down machines, 
shiny cable crossovers and digitized, fake bicycles is a recent invention of the 20th century. 
Calisthenics is timeless.
That’s not to say that gyms did not previously exist. They did, but not in the modern 
sense. The very first gyms (or “gymnasia”) of ancient Greece consisted of exclusively body-
weight exercise. The minimalist equipment used, for example, were parallel bars, climbing 
ropes and running paths. In fact the word “calisthenics” has its roots in Greek and trans-
lates approximately to “beautiful strength.”  It’s interesting to note that these gyms also 
taught wisdom, philosophy and linguistics.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
7
In the era in which we grew up, 
the aforementioned globo-gyms 
had become the standard. Strange 
but true. Thank goodness that in 
the 1980’s New York of our youth, 
we were too young and too broke to 
visit them. I guess we were lucky in 
that when we were kids, minimal-
ism wasn’t a trend; it was our only 
choice. Our fitness journey started 
out with push-up and pull-up con-
tests. In fact, the only equipment we 
owned at the start of our odyssey 
was a doorframe pull-up bar. (It was 
a piece of pipe, for the record, unlike the pre-fabricated ergonomic ones manufactured 
today and sold at retail conglomerates.) Man, we loved that thing!
For many years we’ve observed numerous big box fitness chains opening up all over the 
place. We even worked at a few of them. (Hey, hey, hey—everybody’s gotta make a living 
somehow.) But now on a global scale, it appears that fitness culture is returning to its roots. 
It’s nice to see. This resurgence, referred to as the Street Workout movement, taps into 
so many elements you simply can’t find in the contemporary big box gym.  These include 
the elegant minimalism of bodyweight training, the splendor of the great outdoors and the 
empowerment of owning a body that’s truly self-made.  Not to mention the bad-ass feats of 
strength associated with extreme calisthenics.
The improvisational element of Street Workout is equally appealing. When you use 
what the world has provided around you, rather than what you’ve been told to use by the 
corporate equipment manufacturers, you awaken a creative, even artistic, part of your 
mind. Whereas commercial gym members use multiple thousand-pound machines to 
train one muscle at a time, we can look at a pole, fence or street sign and come up with a 
dozen full-body exercises on the spot. It’s no wonder that so many have abandoned the gym 
entirely.
The ability to observe and use your surroundings is a human trait that’s dying these 
days. With our eyes constantly buried in GPS navigators and our hands crippled from text 
messaging people who aren’t there, it’s nice to actually get in touch with what’s physically 
around you.  People go to the gym, get on a treadmill and watch a TV screen. It seems that 
no one lives in the present anymore. But when you’re using your grip on your actual envi-
ronment, you’re living right here, right now. And it feels good. When it seems as though the 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
8
fitness world is nothing more than a bloated bastion of isolated movements and impracti-
cal applications, Street Workout is a breath of fresh air. Stop the oppression and free your 
minds, brothers and sisters!
We know it can be intimidating for a beginner to go to the local park to train, but fear not: 
this community is very inviting. Unlike a gym, there’s no fee for this club. We welcome all 
comers.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
9
C h a p t e r 2
Street Workout 
Culture
round the turn of the millennium, calisthenics crews convened in New 
York City and trained on construction sites and scaffolding, as well as in 
parks, playgrounds and other public pull-up stations. As more and more people identified 
with the new breed and moved further 
away from the gym, the culture grew. 
New groups emerged, including teams, 
meet-ups, boot camps and pull-up jams. 
We’ve personally witnessed the leg-
endary Tompkins Square Park in New 
York City go from a little known gym 
alternative far from the common path 
(early 2000’s), to being a global destina-
tion, enticing tourists from all over the 
planet to visit and get their reps in. On 
another note, as native New Yorkers, 
we cannot help but love the fact that a 
place like Tompkins Square Park which 
used to be known for its riots and home-
less junkies, is now a renowned fitness 
mecca. You can’t make this stuff up!
Ironically, while calisthenics is as ancient as humankind itself, a revolution of this magni-
tude could only exist in our current age of modern communication. While the planet has not 
changed in regard to its physical mass, there’s no denying that the world is getting smaller (fig-
uratively not literally). The internet and its many resources such as YouTube, Instagram and 
Facebook have all played a huge role in spreading the word. Now a kid in a small village in the 
Far East can learn pull-ups from a tutorial shot in New York City’s East Village!
A

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
10
Yes, outdoor calisthenics has been around as long as humanity itself. But what’s hap-
pening right now is on another level.
Over the years, the Street Workout phenomenon has spread all over these great States 
and across the ocean. Street Workout is now all over the planet. Europe has some of the 
fiercest calisthenics beasts we’ve seen. Asia, South America and Australia also boast some 
of the best. There are organized Street Workout competitions all over the world attended 
by thousands of fans, followers, friends and practitioners.
On a cultural level, Street Workout is revolutionary. The great anthropological equal-
izer if you will. Our community comes from different backgrounds and origins, assorted 
borders and parts of the world.  We are united for a common cause: a love of fitness, form 
and function, a passion for self-improvement and a need to inspire others. Young and old, 
male and female, black and white, gay and straight: we are all represented.  
But sociology aside, Street Workout is also the great equalizer of body types. Because 
calisthenics focuses on your pound-for-pound strength, the big guys and little guys have 
the same relative resistance: themselves. Allow us to elaborate; a muscular guy who’s 6’ 
2” and weighs 250 lbs. will naturally have a higher bench press than an equally muscled 
individual of 5’6” and 150 lbs. Assuming the same body composition, it’s simply a mat-
ter of physics. The heavier guy can lift more external weight. But if you put them both 
in a push-up contest, it’s an even playing field. Street Workout is an equal opportunity 
employer. If your body mass is going up and your reps in push-ups are going down, are you 
really getting stronger? 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
11
While still far from the mainstream, one need look no further than a local park or the 
internet to see that the popularity of Street Workout grows every single day. In fact, there is 
a whole new generation of fitness freaks who have never even been to a gym. All they know 
is Street Workout! We are the past, the present and the future. The posse’s getting bigger.
 
WE ARE NOT GYMNASTS
Yes, gymnasts and practitioners of Street Workout have a lot in common: 
We are both strong, we both use our bodyweight to train and we don’t care 
much for high-tech equipment. But make no mistake; we are not gymnasts. 
There is no doubt that gymnasts are some of the strongest athletes in the 
world. In fact, the finest gymnasts make some of our advanced moves look 
easy. But gymnastics is a specified discipline encompassing a very particular 
set of rules for scoring, using very strict judgment.
We aren’t really into judgment; it’s not our thing. We don’t like formal 
structure… that’s why we do pull-ups off of scaffolding! We celebrate improvi-
sation instead of punishing it. In fact, we love spontaneity. This team of misfits 
doesn’t care to adhere to formal structure. For us, working out and having fun 
aren’t distinguished from one another. Our training is our playtime.
The fact that we are NOT gymnasts is part of what makes us special.
We didn’t have National Team coaches. We are born from the streets. We 
don’t use smooth rings, adjustable straps or even chalk. We use a truck, a 
street sign or a mailbox. We are not gymnasts.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
12

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
13
C h a p t e r 3
Street Workout 
Training
e are born with a primal urge to be outside. We’re animals, not built to sit 
under florescent lights in a climate controlled, window-less room. It’s bad 
enough that so many good people have to do this at their jobs. Let’s not do it during our 
workouts.
Working out, like life, should be fun, adventurous, primal and pure. No training style 
embodies these elements quite like Street Workout does. Give us a traffic light and we’ll show 
you pull-ups, hand balancing, hanging knee raises and bar levers!  We don’t need anything 
fancy. To the Street Workout enthusiast, a well-equipped gym consists of two things: you and 
your environment. You can train in a park or off a ledge. Anything is fair game.
W

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
14
Street Workout celebrates the use of our whole body cohesively, rather than attempt-
ing to isolate small body parts one-at-a-time. And while there is no doubt that different 
exercises emphasize certain muscles more than others, we’d like to be crystal clear that 
100% isolation in any modality is impossible. The human body was built to be used as a 
whole. Further, employing numerous muscle groups promotes greater overall strength. 
Pull-ups, for example use the biceps, lats, abs, shoulders and more. There are no machines 
in a gym that come close to simulating the overall effect and strength gains. Someone who 
can confidently pull his or her body up and over a real object is a lot more impressive than 
somebody who moves a weight stack straight up and down a machine.
 
Take the bull by the horns.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
15
Street Workout moves signify the perfect marriage of strength, flexibility and balance, 
as all of those elements are necessary. Furthermore, there is an additional proprioceptive 
demand to many of these exercises, as they confuse the nervous system and challenge us to 
work on our spatial awareness within this world. Exercises such as the pistol squat, back 
lever, handstand and many others are perfect examples of this fusion.
Street Workout builds real world, universal strength.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
16

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
17
II
Foundational
Progressions
 ushing, pulling and squatting your own bodyweight along with 
forward flexion and back bridging represent the basics of getting 
brutally strong, solid and unbreakable. Detractors often argue that 
you need to incorporate external resistance to progress in your training. That 
assertion is completely false. In fact, one could spend a lifetime pursuing only 
the exercises in this section and constantly make gains. By utilizing basic prin-
ciples of progression such as the manipulation of leverage, adding or removing 
points of contact and/or increasing the range of motion, you can continue to 
get stronger without ever having to pick up a weight.
If you’re new to the world of Street Workout, you’ll need to spend a lot of 
time working on these foundational progressions. It’s important to be well 
rounded and have a solid base in these essentials before moving ahead. Within 
each section, the exercises are shown in approximate order of difficulty. 
Despite the simplicity of each basic movement pattern, the later progressions 
get extremely intense. Progress will not be the same for everyone. Trust your 
own first hand experience.
The nobility, virtue and integrity of these movement patterns are undeni-
able.  In fact, the lucid, broad strokes contained herein represent the heart and 
soul of Street Workout.
P

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
18

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
19
C h a p t e r 4
Push
pper body pushing is an essential element in every modality of strength train-
ing. Without a strong push, we couldn’t amply care for ourselves, carry out 
daily tasks or move heavy objects. When push comes to shove, this stuff is important!
The exercises in this section are divided in three categories: Horizontal Push, Overhead 
Press and Dip, depending on the spatial plane of motion and which muscles are primarily 
employed. Horizontal Push refers to any exercise in which you push your arm(s) out in front 
of your chest and away from your body. Overhead Press involves pressing your hands above 
your shoulders, which is typically done by inverting the body when training calisthenics. Dips 
involve pushing your hands down toward your hips while your torso is in an upright position. 
But make no mistake; there is a great deal of overlap as all of these exercises utilize the chest, 
shoulders, arms (particularly the triceps) and abs.
HORIZONTAL PUSH PROGRESSIONS
The noble push-up. Honest. Strong. True. The push-up is one of our all-around favorite 
exercises: it requires no equipment, it’s adaptable to any fitness level and it can be varied in 
an infinite number of ways to suit a vast array of goals. The push-up is such a simple move, 
but that’s where its beauty lies. As you will see, there are so many push-up modifications 
and progressions that no matter your needs, you can—and should—be incorporating sev-
eral variations into your routine. Whether for joint health, increased mobility, or simply 
to build spectacular strength, everybody can utilize some form of the push-up to help them 
improve. Though the push-up works the entire body, the main muscles emphasized are the 
chest, which acts primarily at the shoulder joint, and the triceps, which act at the elbow.
U

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
20
PLANK
The plank involves holding yourself horizontally in a straight line on just your forearms 
and your toes. Maintain tension throughout all of your muscles, including your abs, glutes 
and legs. Pull your shoulder-blades down and spread them apart while pressing into the 
ground with your elbows. Don’t let your shoulders shrug up by your ears.
You can also perform a plank on your palms, which is the same as the top position of a 
push-up. People who lack shoulder and arm strength may find it harder to hold the plank on 
their hands, while those who lack core strength will likely find the elbow plank to be more 
challenging.
As the angle of the body gets closer to being parallel with the ground, it becomes harder 
for the trunk muscles to stabilize and maintain form, though having the elbows bent takes 
some stress off the shoulders and arms. Experiment with both versions.
If the full plank is too difficult, you can modify it by lowering from your toes down to your 
knees, maintaining a straight line from the shoulders to the knees. By shortening the length 
of your body, the leverage changes, making the exercise less difficult. To make it harder, you 
can elevate your feet.
When holding the plank, be mindful not to let your hips sag. Watch out that they don’t 
wind up too high in the air either. You want a nice, straight line from your heels to the back 
of your head. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
21

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
22
PUSH-UP
Assume a plank position on your palms with your hands slightly wider than 
your shoulders. Your thumbs should wind up right beneath your armpits. 
Keeping your heels together and your body straight, lower until your chest is just 
above the floor, pause for a moment and then press yourself back up. Point your 
elbows back and keep them relatively close to your body; do not flare them out to 
the sides. Be sure to maintain a straight plank from your heels to the back of your 
head.
Your shoulder-blades should come together at the bottom of your push-up, but 
make sure to spread them apart at the top to get the most from each rep.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
23

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
24
KNEELING PUSH-UP
Kneeling push-ups involve bending your knees and resting them on the floor instead of 
your toes. Like the kneeling plank, shortening the length of your body changes the lever-
age, making the exercise less difficult. Note that for this variation you will hinge from your 
knees instead of your feet.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
25
STRADDLE PUSH-UP
Spreading your feet wide is a great way to make push-ups slightly more forgiving. In a 
standard push-up, the heels are together, but in a straddle push-up, they are apart. The 
wider stance provides a larger base of support, while keeping your legs straddled shortens 
the length of your body by several inches.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
26
HANDS ELEVATED PUSH-UP
Elevating your hands is another great way to make standard push-ups a bit less difficult. 
By positioning your body on an incline, you put more of your weight in your feet, making 
less work for your arms.
The higher the incline, the less difficult the push-up will be. Start with a high incline at 
first and work your way toward a lower one over time.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
27
FEET ELEVATED PUSH-UP
Just as placing your hands on an elevated surface can make the push-up less difficult, 
placing your feet on an elevated surface will have the opposite effect. The higher your feet, 
the more weight winds up in your hands and the more difficult the exercise becomes.
You can experiment with elevating your hands as well in order to allow room for your 
head to go all the way down.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
28
NARROW PUSH-UP
Bringing your hands closer together during push-ups will make the exercise more diffi-
cult and also shift more emphasis onto your triceps.
By decreasing the distance between your hands, you create less favorable leverage, 
thereby adding a new challenge—as well as multiplying the muscle-building potential of 
the classic push-up. The closer your hands get to each other, the more difficult the move 
becomes. 
When performing narrow push-ups, keep your hands beneath your chest and your 
elbows tight by your sides, rather than flaring them out. This will protect your joints and 
help you get the most from your triceps on every rep.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
29
WIDE PUSH-UP
Like the narrow push-up, most people will find that using a wide hand placement on 
push-ups will also add a degree of difficulty. Keeping your hands farther apart will put a bit 
more emphasis on your chest and can make the leverage more difficult. You may find that 
turning your hands out slightly works best for wide push-ups.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
30
 
HOLLOW BODY
The hollow body drill is a fantastic way to learn how to fully engage your 
core. This skill will have massive carryover into planks, push-ups and many 
other bodyweight exercises.
Lie on your back with your knees tucked close to your chest and hands at 
your sides. Brace your abs and press your lower back into the ground. Slowly 
begin extending your legs straight with your heels just a few inches from the 
floor, while still maintaining the flat-back (hollow) position.
If you are able to fully extend your legs without losing contact between the 
ground and your lower back, try tucking your chin and reaching your arms 
overhead to progress the difficulty. The longer you make your body, the harder 
it will become to hold the position. As such, your trunk muscles will have to do 
more work to maintain form, which will cause you to get stronger.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
31
KNUCKLE PUSH-UP
Push-ups performed on the tops of your closed fists are called knuckle push-ups. They 
allow for a bigger range of motion by creating space for you to go lower than flat palm push-
ups. They also pose a unique stability challenge due to the reduced surface contact between 
your body and the ground.
For people with wrist flexibility issues, however, the knuckle push-up can actually be more 
accessible than placing the palms flat with the wrists bent back for the standard variety. 
Additionally, the skin on your hands may be sensitive when starting out, so the simple 
discomfort of supporting your weight on your knuckles may be an obstacle.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
32
FINGERTIP PUSH-UP
Raising yourself up on your fingers adds a whole new element to your push-up training. 
In addition to involving a slew of often-neglected muscles, doing push-ups on your finger-
tips allows you to increase your range of motion by elevating you farther from the ground. 
As the hands are a key component of so many exercises, practicing fingertip push-ups will 
help your training across the board.
It’s important to note that the term “fingertip push-up” can be misleading. You don’t 
actually want to be all the way on the tips of your fingers, but rather on the pads of them 
with the tips slightly bent back. Some people’s digits will wind up bending more than oth-
ers. This is not a huge deal. Just don’t allow any part of your palm to touch the ground.
It’s also worth noting that practicing fingertip push-ups can be a nice way to counter all 
the hanging grip work that is such a large part of the Street Workout style of training.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
33
CLAW PUSH-UP
The claw push-up is an advanced variant on the fingertip push-up that has you all the 
way up on the very tips of your fingers with your hands resembling a claw-like position. 
Though some purists call this the “true fingertip push-up,” the one mentioned previously 
is still the industry standard. Semantics aside, it is a useful tool for advanced grip trainees.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
34
ONE LEG PUSH-UP
Removing a point of contact is one of the most universal ways to increase the intensity of 
almost any calisthenics exercise. In the case of the push-up, lifting one foot off the ground 
is a great way to introduce this concept. By reducing the number of contact points, your 
remaining limbs, as well as your core, are compelled to pick up the slack. You can even 
bring your knee toward your elbow for an added challenge.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
35
HINGE PUSH-UP
Begin in a standard push-up position, then lower yourself to the bottom. Instead of 
pressing yourself back up from there, however, shift your weight back onto your elbows. 
You’ll wind up in a forearm plank with your palms flat on the floor in front of your shoul-
ders. Pause here briefly, then slide forward, lift your elbows off the floor and press yourself 
back to the top. 
Your toes and feet will need to flex back and forth as you slide in and out. The hinge 
push-up also requires a lot of trunk stability, so remember to keep your abs, back and glutes 
engaged throughout.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
36
ARCHER PUSH-UP
For the archer push-up you will begin with a very wide hand placement—even 
wider than you would for a wide push-up. From there, keep one arm straight 
while you bend the other, so your body slides toward the side of the arm that 
bends. The archer push-up moves laterally as well as up and down. 
To make the move more manageable, you can start with your hands a bit closer 
and allow your straight arm to have a small bend in the elbow. In time, aim to 
eliminate that bend. Play around with gradually moving your arms farther out to 
allow for a full range of motion.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
37
Do your best to avoid twisting sideways or “snaking” at your hips when per-
forming archer push-ups. Like a standard push-up, you may want to start out 
practicing with your feet spread apart. As you gain strength and control, you can 
progress toward performing them with your heels touching. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
38
IGUANA PUSH-UP
To perform iguana push-ups, you’ll need a rail or straight bar to position under your 
body. A single bar from a pair of parallel bars can work nicely. Grip the bar tightly with both 
hands while you cross one leg over the other and perform your push-ups from this position. 
You’ll need to brace your core and go slowly in order to avoid tipping over. If you’re looking 
for a push-up that will give you a balance and stability challenge, look no further than the 
iguana push-up.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
39
ONE ARM PUSH-UP
A lot of the techniques we recommend for learning the one arm push-up are the same 
that we suggest for beginners who are learning to do push-ups with both arms. That said, 
you can start out working toward a one arm push-up by simply holding a plank on one arm. 
Once you’ve gotten a feel for that, try practicing a one arm push-up with your hand on an 
elevated surface. This will help you get a feel for the movement pattern without having to 
bear as much weight.
The higher the elevation, the less difficult the move becomes, so start with a fairly high 
surface and work your way down from there.
 
Hand elevated one arm push-up.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
40
The form of a one arm push-up is a bit different from the standard two arm version. Your 
legs will need to be farther apart than in a classic push-up and your pushing hand should be 
almost centered beneath your body, rather than off to the side. More like where it would be 
positioned for a narrow push-up than a standard one.
As a general guideline, the closer your feet are positioned to each other, the harder the 
exercise becomes. Begin with your feet nice and wide to help get the feel for the movement 
pattern. Eventually you may try working toward narrowing your stance.
 
Classic one arm push-up.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
41
Though it’s true that only one arm is in contact with the ground, the phrase “one arm 
push-up” is a little misleading. If you don’t contract your legs, abs, glutes—even your other 
arm—there’s absolutely no way you can do a proper one arm push-up. There is also a great 
deal of cross-tension required between the pushing arm and the opposite leg.  For exam-
ple when performing a one arm push-up with your left arm, make sure to remain flexed, 
solid and unwavering all the way down to your right leg. To take it a step further, you can 
even remove the left leg completely and perform a one arm push-up using only one arm 
and one leg.
As with a narrow push-up, your arm should remain close to your side on the way down as 
well as the way up. Your other arm can be held against your body, placed behind the back or 
extended out to the side. Experiment with different arm positions to find what works best 
for you. 
 
One arm one leg push-up.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
42
The Plyo-Matrix:  
Freestyle Push-ups
ANY EXPLOSIVE PUSH-UP WHERE THE BODY (OR PART OF IT) GETS AIRBORNE IS 
REFERRED TO AS A “PLYOMETRIC” PUSH-UP. ALTHOUGH THERE ARE MANY VARI-
ATIONS IN EXISTENCE, THEY ALL REQUIRE PUSHING INTO THE GROUND FAST AND 
HARD IN ORDER TO GENERATE THE REQUISITE FORCE NEEDED. 
THE MOST RECOGNIZABLE PLYOMETRIC PUSH-UP IS PROBABLY THE “CLAP-
PING” PUSH-UP, IN WHICH THE PRACTITIONER GETS HIS OR HER UPPER BODY 
HIGH ENOUGH OFF THE GROUND TO CLAP THEIR HANDS BEFORE RETURNING TO 
THE STARTING POSITION. CLAPPING PUSH-UPS CAN BE PERFORMED WITH THE 
HANDS BEHIND THE BACK AS WELL, OR EVEN WITH MULTIPLE CLAPS, WHERE THE 
SUBJECT SWITCHES FROM THE FRONT TO THE BACK OF THE BODY.
IT IS OF NOTE, HOWEVER, THAT THERE ARE MANY TYPES OF PLYOMETRIC PUSH-
UPS THAT DO NOT INVOLVE A CLAP AT ALL. IF YOU ARE NEW TO PLYOMETRICS, SIM-
PLY GETTING YOUR HANDS OFF THE GROUND FOR ANY DISTANCE OR DURATION IS 
A GREAT PLACE TO START. 
BY THE SAME TOKEN, THERE ARE VARIATIONS THAT INVOLVE GETTING BOTH 
YOUR HANDS AND FEET OFF THE GROUND, AND PUSH-UPS WHERE YOU TOUCH 
YOUR FINGERS TO YOUR TOES IN THE TOP POSITION. 
FREESTYLING IN THE PUSH-UP ARENA IS SUCH AN EXPANSIVE GENRE THAT IT 
IS NOT UNCOMMON TO WITNESS PUSH-UPS WHICH EXPLODE UP AND LAND IN AN 
ENTIRELY DIFFERENT PLACE THAN THEY STARTED. CIRCLING MOTIONS, TRANS-
FERRING 
FROM 
HANDS 
TO 
FOREARMS AND BACK, MOVING 
YOUR HANDS TO YOUR HEAD 
AND EVEN ONE-ARM PLYOMET-
RIC PUSH-UPS ARE ALL FAIR 
GAME IN THE WORLD OF FREE-
STYLE PUSH-UPS!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
43
OVERHEAD PRESS PROGRESSIONS
Your shoulders get a substantial workout from all upper body calisthenics strength 
training and are used in every exercise mentioned thus far. But when we change from the 
horizontal (push) plane to the vertical (press) plane, we switch the main emphasis from the 
chest to the shoulders. While it’s true that each of the following exercises still incorporates 
the chest (not to mention the arms, abs, glutes and back), the primary mover is now the 
shoulders.
Even those who can military press massive poundage in the weight room are often hum-
bled when they attempt many of these exercises, but if they stick with it, they’ll discover that 
there are astronomical gains to be had. Take these progressions slowly. Let’s get strong!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
44
HINDU PRESS
Start in a plank, then lift your hips all the way in the air, positioning your shoulders in a 
straight line with your hips and hands. Keep your legs as straight as you can, but be aware 
that folks with tight hamstrings will need to bend the knees slightly. 
Lower the top of your head 
towards the ground, keeping your 
hips high, then quickly drop your 
hips, swoop your torso up and 
look in the air. Keep your arms 
straight as you press your hips 
back to the starting position to 
begin the next rep. 
The Hindu press is a great 
lead-up step toward the pike press 
because it incorporates the inten-
sity of the negative phase but has 
a relatively easy pressing phase.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
45
PIKE PRESS
The pike press begins like the Hindu press with your hips in the air and shoulders in line 
with your hands and hips. From here, lower your head toward the ground, keeping your 
hips in the air, then press yourself back to the top position. As with most other pushing 
exercises, be mindful that your elbows point back, rather than flaring out toward the sides.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
46
HANDS ELEVATED PIKE PRESS
Like the standard push-up, placing your hands higher than your feet when you perform 
a pike press is a good way to make the move less difficult. You can practice on any number 
of objects that you might encounter. Again, the higher the elevation, the less of your body-
weight you will need to press.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
47
FEET ELEVATED PIKE PRESS
Elevating your feet makes the pike press more difficult, as it places more of your weight 
in your hands. As with all pike press variants, remember to make sure that your hips stay 
above your shoulders so that your pressing movement remains in a vertical plane.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
48
WALL HANDSTAND PRESS
The wall handstand press, aka handstand push-up, is among the best known advanced 
bodyweight exercises. 
Kick up into a handstand with your back facing a wall, then lower your head to the 
ground and press yourself back to the start position. Just like regular push-ups, you can 
experiment with various hand-widths and placements. Engage your glutes and abs in order 
to avoid excessively bending your back. 
Once you get a feel for handstand presses, you can try them facing toward the wall, 
rather than having your back to it for an added challenge.
Like the other pushing variations, you can experiment with narrowing your hand place-
ment on the handstand press in order to make the exercise more challenging. For more 
information on handstands, see Section III, Part 9 “Floor Holds.”

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
49
ULTIMATE HANDSTAND PRESS
When you perform a standard handstand press on the ground you can only go until the 
top of your head reaches the floor. You might be able to add an extra inch by tilting your 
head and going down to your nose. If you want to use a full range of motion for this exercise, 
however, you’ll need to elevate your hands to create room for your head to drop below sur-
face level. This is the ultimate handstand press!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
50
DIP PROGRESSIONS
The dip is the unsung hero of calisthenics strength training. In a universe of one-arm 
push-ups, handstand presses and other-worldly bodyweight feats of strength, do not forget 
that the humble dip is a key component in developing well-rounded pushing power. 
Any time you are pushing your body weight while your torso is in an upright position, 
you are doing a dip. Because of this different angle, dips place a greater emphasis on the 
triceps than the horizontal push or overhead press. Often overlooked and underrated, dips 
are in a class all their own.
BENCH DIP
The bench variation is the best way for beginners to get started with dips. Place both 
hands behind your back, palms down on a bench or other object that’s about 18-24 inches 
tall. Keep your back straight and bend from your elbows and shoulders to lower yourself 
down while keeping your torso upright, then press yourself back up to the top.
Beginners should start with knees bent and feet flat on the floor.  This will allow you to 
push gently with your feet in order to give your arms some assistance if they need it. As that 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
51
becomes easier, you can progress to doing dips with your legs straight and your 
toes pointed up.  Let your legs relax and allow your hips to hang down right below 
your shoulders.  Keep your chest up; don’t hunch your back or shrug. 
As you get stronger, you can elevate your feet to place more weight in your 
hands, making the exercise more difficult.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
52
PARALLEL BAR DIP
For this variation you will hold yourself upright between two parallel bars with your feet 
in the air the entire time. 
Grab the bars tightly and lower yourself 
down, bending at the elbows and shoul-
ders. Make sure your elbows point behind 
you instead of flaring out to the sides. This 
will keep the tension on your triceps and 
minimize shearing forces on the shoulder. 
Keep your chest up and your abs engaged 
to get maximal gains from every repeti-
tion.
When performing parallel bar dips, 
keep your legs fully extended with your 
feet slightly in front of you. (Think back 
to that hollow-body position.) This places 
greater emphasis on your core, making 
your body tighter and keeping your body 
weight in front of you.
Conversely, bent knees and feet behind 
you can alter the leverage of the exercise, 
making it more mechanically advanta-
geous and slightly more forgiving.
Beginners may feel more comfort-
able in the latter position, and may even 
choose to cross their ankles in order to 
generate more tension. Experiment to 
find what works best for you. It will not be 
the same for everybody.
You can also play with the nuances of 
elbow and shoulder flexion. The more you 
lean forward, the more you work your 
chest. The more upright you stay, the 
more you work your triceps and core.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
53
STRAIGHT BAR DIP
The straight bar dip is performed with both hands on a single bar positioned in front of 
the body. When you do a parallel bar dip, you lower yourself in between the bars, but when 
you dip on a straight bar, your body must move around the bar. As such, you’ll need to reach 
your legs out in front during the descent in order to keep balanced.
The simple change of having a single bar in front of you puts you at a greater mechanical 
disadvantage. With it comes a chance of slipping around and off the bar that does not exist 
with parallel bars. To avoid this, in addition to reaching your legs forward, you’ll need to 
pitch your upper body in front of the bar as well.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
54
PERPENDICULAR BAR DIP
This is a dip performed in between two bars that form a perpendicular angle. You can 
think of it as the halfway point between a parallel bar dip and straight bar dip. In the world 
of Street Workout we encourage you to explore your surroundings and experiment with 
varied set-ups.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
55
RUSSIAN DIP
Also known as a hinge dip, the Russian dip starts out like a standard parallel bar dip. 
When you reach the bottom of the normal range of motion, shift your weight back onto 
your elbows, putting your forearms in contact with the bars. Squeeze the bars tightly and 
contract your abs as you shift your weight back onto your hands, sliding your shoulders in 
front of your wrists, just before pressing yourself back to the start position. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
56
KOREAN DIP
A Korean dip is a behind-the-back dip that’s performed on a pull-up bar.  It’s almost like 
a bench dip, except your legs and feet are in the air.
This is one of the hardest dip variations, so make sure you are comfortable with the pre-
vious progressions before attempting the Korean dip. As it is difficult to control your body 
from this angle, you’ll really need to focus on engaging your abs and lower back muscles. 
You’ll likely find that your legs will need to reach behind the bar as you lower down in order 
to remain stable. As such, it helps to keep your hamstrings and glutes contracted. There is 
also a mobility component to the Korean dip, as having the bar behind your back can give 
your shoulders a deep stretch as well. Feel free to experiment with both overhand as well as 
underhand grips when practicing Korean dips.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
57
The Plyo-Matrix:  
Explosive Dips
LIKE ITS COUSIN THE PUSH-UP, THE DIP CAN ALSO BE DONE IN AN EXPLOSIVE 
FASHION. NOT ONLY IS IT IMPORTANT TO HAVE A SOLID FOUNDATION IN CLAS-
SIC DIPS BEFORE EMBARKING ON PLYOMETRIC DIPS, IT’S ALSO RECOMMENDED 
THAT YOU HAVE STRONG, CONDITIONED HANDS BEFORE TAKING THIS PATH. USU-
ALLY, WHEN SOMEONE TRIES A PLYOMETRIC DIP FOR THE FIRST TIME, THEY ARE 
SHOCKED AT HOW JARRING IT IS, DUE TO THE AMOUNT OF IMPACT THAT HAS TO BE 
ABSORBED BY THE WRISTS AND HANDS.
THE BASIC PLYOMETRIC DIP SIMPLY INVOLVES LIFTING YOUR HANDS OFF THE 
DIP BARS AT THE TOP OF THE REPETITION, THEN PLACING THEM BACK DOWN BE-
FORE THE NEXT REP. THE DIFFICULTY (AND YIELDS) CAN BE INCREASED BY LIFTING 
YOUR HANDS HIGHER IN THE AIR. THIS NATURALLY WILL CHALLENGE YOU TO GET 
MORE HEIGHT FROM YOUR BODY SO YOU WILL NEED TO GENERATE EXTRA FORCE. 
YOU CAN EVEN INCLUDE A CLAP AT THE TOP.
BEYOND THAT, ADVANCED 
VARIATIONS INCLUDE “HOP-
PING” ACROSS THE DIP BARS 
ON YOUR HANDS, OR EVEN 
GENERATING ENOUGH HEIGHT 
AND EXPLOSIVENESS TO RO-
TATE YOUR BODY 180 DEGREES, 
SO THAT YOU WIND UP FAC-
ING THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION 
FROM WHICH YOU STARTED. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
58

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
59
C h a p t e r 5
Pull
hen we were coming up, the question, “How much can you bench?” was 
very much en vogue, with little attention paid to the back muscles. You 
could say upper body pulling power is often underrated in traditional strength training. 
Even those in the gym who were focused on pulling used strange lat pull-down machines 
and cable rowing devices to work their backs. Quite the opposite of Street Workout, huh? 
Let’s be perfectly clear about one thing: there is no substitute for the pull-up.
Beyond the realm of fitness, we as a culture spend a lot of time leaning forward at desks, on 
mobile communication devices or driving automobiles, causing our chests to sink in and our 
spines to curve.  Balance is a key component of training and health. When we are constantly 
pushing forward, it becomes even more important to pull. Pull-ups help to restore and main-
tain this balance to your upper body.
The following exercises are divided into two categories: Horizontal Pull and Overhead Pull. 
Though we are dealing with two different planes of motion, all of the following pulling exer-
cises use the biceps when you flex at the elbow and the muscles of the upper back (lats, traps 
and rhomboids) as you pull your elbows back behind you or toward your sides. Horizontal 
pulling is when you pull your hands toward your chest, without your arms ever going above 
your head. Overhead pulling is any pull that begins hanging from an overhead structure.
HORIZONTAL PULL PROGRESSIONS
Horizontal pulls are often touted as a progression leading up to the vertical. However, they 
also stand alone as viable exercises in their own right. Because it is a different plane of motion, 
this movement pattern works the muscles from a different angle. The following Australian 
(Aussie) pull-ups belong in everybody’s program before, during and even after they are capa-
ble of performing overhead pull-ups.
W

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
60
AUSSIE PULL-UP
Get down under a bar that’s about waist height with your legs extended so you form a 
straight line from your head to your heels. Grip tightly and brace your entire body as you 
pull your chest toward the bar. Lower yourself back to the bottom with control. Like the 
push-up, be careful not to bend your hips or shrug your shoulders. Dig your heels into the 
ground for traction if you are starting to slide.
To make the Aussie pull-up more accessible to beginners, use a bar that is chest height 
instead of waist height, which will allow for more favorable leverage.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
61
BENT KNEE AUSSIE
Just as bending your knees and shortening your body length makes a push-up less diffi-
cult, bending your knees during an Aussie pull-up will have the same effect. In addition to 
improving your leverage, bending your knees will also allow you to press with your feet if 
you need to assist your upper-body.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
62
WIDE GRIP AUSSIE
A wide hand position will result in greater activation of your back muscles, with slightly 
less biceps recruitment. You can expect to feel this variation more in the rhomboids, lats 
and traps.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
63
NARROW GRIP AUSSIE
Bringing your hands closer together during an Aussie pull-up will change the subtleties 
of muscle recruitment. You may feel more activation in your forearms and biceps. The nar-
row grip will also require some additional wrist mobility.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
64
NEUTRAL GRIP AUSSIE
For some people, performing Aussie pull-ups with the hands facing each other can be 
more comfortable on the shoulder and elbow joints. You will need two parallel bars in order 
to perform this variation, which is known as a neutral grip Aussie pull-up. Dip bars work 
nicely. Even if you don’t have any issues with standard Aussie pull-ups, give these a try to 
hit your muscles from a slightly different angle.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
65
FEET ELEVATED AUSSIE
Just as a higher bar will make the Aussie pull-up easier, if you want to make your Aussie 
pull-up more difficult, you can use a lower bar. At a certain point, however, if the bar is too 
low then you’ll wind up on the floor when you extend your arms. The fix for this is elevating 
your feet on a bench or another bar. The higher your feet get in relation to your hands, the 
more difficult the exercise becomes.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
66
ARCHER AUSSIE
This is basically the reverse of the archer push-up. Get into position for an 
Aussie pull-up with your hands in a very wide grip. Keep one arm straight as you 
pull yourself toward the opposite side. When starting out, you may need to keep 
 your feet spread wide in order to maintain a straight torso. With practice, you 
can work toward performing them with feet together. Additionally, the hand of 
your straight arm may need to open and roll over the bar at the top of the range of 
motion, depending on your wrist mobility.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
67

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
68
ONE ARM AUSSIE PULL-UP
Get into position for a narrow grip Aussie pull-up, then widen your legs into a straddle 
stance. Remove one arm and place it against your side. The pulling arm should be kept 
closer to the center of your body than in a two arm Aussie. Brace your entire body and begin 
pulling your chest toward the bar. As is often the case with single-limb exercises, do your 
best to avoid rotating your torso, but be prepared that a small amount of twisting at the 
trunk may be unavoidable.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
69
 
“CALLOUS-THENICS”
When you train Street Workout, you work way more than just your mus-
cles. You strengthen your tendons, ligaments, bones and cartilage. And don’t 
forget the largest organ of your body… the skin!
Your hands are going to toughen up when you hit the bars and you will de-
velop callouses. This is a good thing. If you’re worried about the appearance of 
your hands, just remind yourself how much better the rest of your body looks.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
70
 
This is a bar hang.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
71
OVERHEAD PULL PROGRESSIONS
The overhead pull is the most universal exercise of the entire Street Workout movement. 
The pull-up and all its forms embody the true minimalistic spirit of calisthenics and employ 
the full body, not to mention the heart, soul and spirit. Any time you use your arms to pull your-
self up while hanging from an overhead apparatus, you are doing a pull-up, the foundation of 
all advanced bar moves and one of the greatest exercises in the history of human movement. 
We’re all here for the pull-ups!
BAR HANG
The most foundational move in bar calisthenics is the basic two-arm hang. Grasp an over-
head bar tightly with an overhand grip while you keep your shoulder-blades pulled down and 
back. Engage your abs and think about tucking your pelvis forward, like you would in a plank or 
hollow body position. Just as the plank is a good starting point for learning to do a push-up, this 
is a great starting point for beginners who are working toward their first pull-up.
 
FLEX HANG
A flex hang (or flexed arm hang) involves holding yourself at the top of a pull-up with your 
chin over the bar. Once you get comfortable with straight arm bar hangs, this is the next step 
toward a full pull-up.
If you’re new to the 
world of pull-up bar 
training, begin with an 
underhand grip. As you 
get stronger you can prog-
ress to an overhand grip, 
which most people will 
find more difficult.
Use a partner, a step 
or simply jump in order 
to get into position. Then 
hold your chin above the 
bar for time. If you can 
hold this position for even 
a few seconds, you are 
well on your way.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
72
NEGATIVE PULL-UP
The lowering phase of the pull-up, also known as a negative pull-up, is a great 
way to start preparing yourself for full pull-ups. Begin in a flex hang position, 
then do your best to lower yourself slowly to a full extension before coming off 
the bar.
In the beginning, it might be very difficult to perform a controlled negative, but 
with time you will be able to make your negative last for ten seconds or longer 
while lowering at a consistent pace. Once you can do this, a full pull-up will be 
within reach.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
73
PULL-UP/CHIN-UP
Grasp an overhead bar with your palms facing away from your body. Brace your trunk, 
pulling down and back through your scapulae as you bend your arms and pull your chest 
toward the bar. Lower yourself back down with control, being mindful to keep your abs 
engaged in order to avoid swinging. Your legs should remain straight and together through-
out the entire range of motion, but beginners may want to cross their ankles in order to gen-
erate more tension. Though you obviously have to lean back a bit to avoid hitting your head 
on the bar, your torso shouldn’t have to travel very far forward or backward.
As with the flex hang, most people will find starting out with an underhand grip (aka 
chin-up) to be less difficult. The disparity is due to the shift in muscle recruitment. The 
underhand grip allows you to use your arms more, while the overhand grip forces you to 
engage the muscles of your upper back to a greater degree (though both exercises work 
both muscle groups). Start with chin-ups, then begin to work on pull-ups after you can do 
several in a row, With time and practice, the disparity between the underhand and over-
hand grips will start to even out.
Also note that it’s normal for your grip to be narrower in an underhand chin-up than 
in an overhand pull-up. For chin-ups, the hands should be placed just narrower than the 
shoulders; the standard overhand width is just wider than the shoulders.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
74
WIDE GRIP PULL-UP
As your grip gets wider, the amount of elbow flexion decreases, putting greater emphasis 
on the lats and other upper-back muscles. As such, most people will find wide pull-ups to be 
more difficult than the standard variety.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
75
NARROW GRIP PULL-UP
Just like with push-ups, you are encouraged to play around with hand placement once 
you get comfortable with classic pull-ups and chin-ups. You will find that going narrower 
will place a bit more emphasis on the arms, particularly the biceps and forearms.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
76
MIXED GRIP PULL-UP
A mixed grip pull-up involves one hand holding the bar with an overhand grip while the 
other hand is turned under. This variation can make for an interesting stability challenge 
as you try to keep your torso stable and facing forward. It can also be a useful tool for begin-
ners who may be having a hard time transitioning from chin-ups to pull-ups.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
77
NEUTRAL GRIP PULL-UP
For some people, performing pull-ups with the hands facing each other can be more 
comfortable on the shoulder and elbow joints compared to either a palms-facing or palms-
away grip. You will need two overhead bars that are parallel to each other in order to per-
form this variation, which is known as a neutral grip pull-up. Even if you don’t have any 
issues with standard pull-ups, give neutral pull-ups a try to hit your muscles from a slightly 
different angle.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
78
COMMANDO PULL-UP
A commando pull-up is similar to a neutral grip pull-up, except both hands are 
holding a single bar in a narrow grip. As such, your body will be in the same plane 
as the bar. This means you will have to pull yourself toward the side on the way 
up, which creates a unique challenge. Make sure to alternate which side of the 
bar your head passes with each rep.  
It’s also good to practice switching the position of your hands on alternating 
sets with variations like mixed grip and commando pull-ups.  For example, if 
your right hand is closer to your face on the first set, keep your left hand closer 
on set number two. For this reason, aim to do an even number of sets if using this 
variation in your regimen.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
79
 
BUILD A MONSTER GRIP
As for pull-ups and all bar moves, there is no doubt that the surface from 
which you pull makes a difference. Fatter bars yield more grip strength. In the 
wild world of Street Workout, any surface is fair game so be prepared to also 
work your skin, bones and connective tissue, in addition to your muscles. You 
will find many objects unique unto themselves when you get creative!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
80
HEADBANGER PULL-UP
The headbanger pull-up begins with your chin just below the bar. From here the objec-
tive is to extend your body away from the bar while reaching your legs out to counterbal-
ance. Almost like a bodyweight biceps curl, the headbanger pull-up is also a great core 
exercise.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
81
BEHIND THE NECK PULL-UP
A somewhat controversial pull-up variant, the behind the neck pull-up requires 
a good deal of mobility in the shoulders and upper-back as well as a lot of upper-
body strength. Be careful with these as they can be stressful on the shoulders if you 
lack the requisite strength or mobility. Nonetheless, they are a worthwhile varia-
tion for those who can handle them.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
82
L PULL-UP
Keeping your legs at a 90 degree angle to your body while performing pull-ups adds a 
tremendous amount of difficulty to an already challenging exercise. Your abs, hip flexors 
and quadriceps will have to work extra hard to maintain this position as you pull yourself 
up. Additionally, the balance will change throughout the range of motion, forcing you to go 
slowly in order to maintain control.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
83
ARCHER PULL-UP
The archer pull-up is an advanced variation that involves keeping one arm straight 
while relying primarily on the opposite side to do the bulk of the pulling. Begin like you’re 
performing a very wide pull-up, but bend only one of your arms as you pull your chin over 
the bar. This means your torso will shift toward that side while the opposite arm stays 
straight. You’ll need to reach your legs slightly to the side to counterbalance. The hand of 
your straight arm may need to open and roll over the bar at the top of the range of motion, 
depending on your wrist mobility.
If you are unable to perform a full archer pull-up, you can allow your secondary arm to 
bend slightly in order to make the exercise less difficult. Once you get to the top, you can 
extend the arm fully and attempt a negative archer pull-up. In time, you shouldn’t have to 
bend the secondary arm at all.
As with the other pull-up variants, most people will find it easier to begin with the pri-
mary pulling arm in an underhand grip.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
84
ONE ARM 
HANG
Hanging from one arm 
is great for building grip 
strength and shoulder sta-
bility. It is also an excellent 
starting point for train-
ing toward the one arm 
pull-up. Focus on keeping 
your lats and shoulders 
engaged while you hang. 
In the beginning, just hold-
ing on for a few seconds 
may be very challenging. 
Eventually, you can work 
toward longer one arm 
hangs. If you have access 
to monkey bars, we also 
recommend 
you 
prac-
tice swinging across them 
for additional single arm 
shoulder stability work.
 
You can practice  
swinging across  
monkey bars for  
additional single  
arm work.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
85
ONE ARM FLEX HANG
Starting at the top position of a pull-up with your chin above the bar, brace your entire 
body and carefully remove one hand. Begin with an underhand grip, as doing so allows you 
to keep the bar near the center of your body, making for better leverage. Though the burden 
of supporting your entire bodyweight appears to rest solely on one arm, your chest, lats, and 
abdominals are also an important part of the equation.
The first time most people try a one arm flex hang, they fall as soon as they take the other 
hand away. Don’t be discouraged if that happens to you during your first few attempts. To 
help stay up, don’t just think about your arm; focus on squeezing your whole body tight, 
especially your abs. You may find it helpful to keep your legs tucked close to your trunk 
when starting out. Eventually work toward holding the position with your legs extended.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
86
ONE HANDED PULL-UP
You can practice a self-assisted one arm pull-up by holding the wrist of your pulling arm 
with the hand of your secondary arm. This is known as a one handed pull-up. Your primary 
arm is the only one gripping the bar, but your secondary arm can still assist with pulling. 
Over time, you can work on progressively lowering your assisting hand down toward your 
elbow. The farther from your wrist you go, the more work your primary arm will have to do. 
Eventually, you won’t need it at all.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
87
ONE ARM NEGATIVE
Once you can hold the top position of a one arm flex hang for several seconds, you can 
begin to work toward a controlled one arm negative. The idea is to start from a one-arm 
flexed hang position, then carefully lower yourself into a dead hang with as little momen-
tum as possible. Performing the eccentric phase of the one arm pull-up is a great way to 
prepare your tendons and ligaments for the stress of the full move while simultaneously 
training your central nervous system to acclimate to the unusual movement pattern.
The first time you try to do a one-arm negative, you will probably drop like a stone. When 
starting out, it may help to not even think of it as a negative; just try to keep yourself up and 
let gravity take care of the rest. The closer you get to a full hang, the harder it becomes to 
maintain control during the descent. Be prepared to spend a lot of time on this step. You’ll 
need to own every inch of the negative before you will be able to do a one arm pull-up.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
88
ONE ARM PULL-UP
The one arm pull-up is the granddaddy of them all! It is said that only 1 in 100,000 people 
will ever perform this exercise, but any able-bodied person who is willing to put in the time 
and effort can achieve a one arm pull-up in this lifetime.
Before you begin working toward a one-arm pull-up, make sure you spend plenty of time 
getting comfortable with all of the two arm varieties. Focus on getting to the point where 
you can perform at least 15 clean overhand pull-ups in one set without using momentum. 
Ideally, you should do closer to 20. This is the foundation for your one arm pull-up. Getting 
comfortable with archer pull-ups, one arm hangs and one arm negatives is also very helpful 
before embarking on the quest for the one arm pull-up. 
Due to the lopsided 
nature of using just 
one arm to pull your-
self, some trunk rota-
tion may be unavoid-
able. Your body will 
naturally twist as you 
go up. In the begin-
ning, you should use 
this to your advan-
tage, and practice 
turning in toward the 
bar as you pull. This 
will cause your grip to 
rotate from an over-
hand to an under-
hand position as you 
ascend. Eventually, 
you can work toward 
performing a one-
arm 
pull-up 
with 
less rotation, keep-
ing your hand in a 
pronated 
position 
throughout the whole 
range of motion.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
89
The Plyo-Matrix:  
Pull-Up  Jam
ANYONE WHO HAS EVER BEEN PART OF A PULL-UP JAM KNOWS THAT THERE 
ARE NO LIMITS TO WHAT YOU CAN DO ON THE BAR.
TO PERFORM A PLYOMETRIC PULL-UP, PULL THE BAR AS HARD AS YOU CAN SO 
THAT YOU GET HIGH ENOUGH TO REMOVE YOUR HANDS FROM THE BAR, EVEN FOR 
JUST A MOMENT. GO FOR POWER AND IN TIME, YOU CAN GO FOR HEIGHT. REMEM-
BER, THE HIGHER YOU GET, THE MORE ROOM YOU HAVE TO EXPERIMENT. ADD A 
CLAP OR SWITCH YOUR GRIP. KICK YOU FEET OUT AND TOUCH YOUR TOES OR PUT 
YOUR HANDS BEHIND YOUR BACK. IN A PULL-UP JAM, THE RULEBOOK GOES OUT 
THE WINDOW!
Because the one-arm pull-up is a very intense move, you have to be careful not to overdo 
it. Not only will beginning your one-arm pull-up training give a shock to your muscles, it 
will also rock your connective tissue and central nervous system. This type of training can 
be very stressful on the elbow and shoulder joints in particular. Tendinitis is avoidable, but 
you’ve got to respect your body or you will pay the price.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
90

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
91
C h a p t e r 6
Squat
ou’re not strong if you don’t have strong legs. Period. Without powerful posts, you 
could not navigate with confidence throughout our world. Anyone would be able to 
knock you down. You couldn’t stand tall.
Although the squat is the most foundational lower body calisthenics exercise, it is not 
the only one. As you will see, we will cover many moves here that are not squats at all. 
However, for organizational purposes, all movements that emphasize the legs are included 
in this section.
The squat is unique in that both the anterior (front) and posterior (back) of the legs are 
employed. Squats primarily utilize three joints: the hip, knee and ankle, with different 
muscles acting on each joint. The hamstrings and glutes facilitate the hip movement, the 
quadriceps extend at the knee and the calves are responsible for the ankles. Squats also 
recruit your tibialis, hip flexors, lower back, abdominals and more. That’s right, squats hit 
every muscle in your lower body and then some. Further, they can be infinitely adjusted to 
suit any and all fitness levels.
These exercises are grouped into two categories: Two Leg and Single Leg. Get experience 
working with both legs before beginning on the single leg variants. Squats can be progressed 
or regressed infinitely to accommodate the most elite practitioner or the raw beginner.
TWO LEG PROGRESSIONS
Two-legged squats are as fundamental as you get. Every primate in the animal kingdom 
squats. In fact, human toddlers learn to squat before they learn to walk. For most squats, it is 
recommended that you keep your heels flat on the ground. This helps ensure that your glutes 
and hamstrings are fully involved, but as you will see, there are many incarnations of this 
bodyweight basic, and there are exceptions to every rule.
Y

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
92
BENCH ASSISTED SQUAT
If you’re new to squatting, you can use a step, bench or other sturdy object to assist your-
self. Simply stand with your back to the object and sit down onto it, keeping both feet flat on 
the floor and reaching your arms forward to help with the balance. If you lose control, the 
object is there to catch you and prevent you from falling. With practice, you’ll get better at 
controlling yourself on the way down. Eventually you can move to a lower object. In time, 
you’ll be squatting all the way down without needing anything for support.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
93
POLE ASSISTED SQUAT
Using a pole is another simple way to assist yourself if you’re having a hard time with the 
balance and/or mobility aspects of the squat. Stand facing the pole (or doorframe or any 
other sturdy object you can hold onto for support). Grasp it gently as you squat, gradually 
lowering your hands down as you descend. Try to spend some time in the bottom position 
as it will provide a helpful stretch, then return to the top using your hands as needed.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
94
SQUAT
Stand tall with your feet shoulder width apart. Brace your trunk and sit back, bending 
your hips, knees and ankles to lower your butt towards your heels. It may help to raise your 
arms straight out in front of you on the way down to maintain balance, keeping your chin 
up and chest tall. Aim to get your hips below your knees before returning to the start posi-
tion. Ideally, your calves will be pressed into your hamstrings in the bottom of your squat. 
Watch out for excessive rounding of the spine and be careful not to let your heels come off 
the floor.
Some people will feel best with their feet parallel and facing forward, others will find 
that turning the toes out slightly feels better. Either way, make sure your knees are tracking 
in the same plane as your toes. Don’t let them bow inward or flare out.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
95
 
THE LOWDOWN 
For many individuals, the mobility is the most difficult part of performing a 
full range of motion squat. If you’re having issues getting low, we encourage 
you to spend extra time in the lowest position you can reasonably manage. It 
is helpful to press your elbows against the inside of your thighs for leverage. 
In time and with practice, your hips will learn to open up, allowing you to per-
form a deep squat.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
96
NARROW SQUAT
A narrow stance squat will place emphasis on the outer sweep of the thighs. The nar-
rower you place your feet, the more flexibility is required in the hips, hamstrings and ankles 
to get into the bottom position. As such, getting all the down may be a mobility challenge 
for some.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
97
WIDE SQUAT
Varying your foot position will change the subtleties of muscle recruitment during a 
squat. A wide foot placement tends to emphasize the glutes and inner thighs. It may also 
provide a stretch for your hips. Experiment with different widths to see what feels right 
to you.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
98
PRISONER SQUAT
The prisoner squat is a slightly more difficult variation of the standard squat that 
involves placing your hands behind your head with your fingers interlaced, rather than 
holding them in front or at your sides. As you begin descending into your squat, you will 
likely feel a stretch through your chest due to this change in arm position. Squeeze your 
shoulder blades down and back to help facilitate proper posture. You may be surprised by 
how much you feel this in your upper back. The balance may also be more difficult.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
99
SPLIT SQUAT
For this variation you will begin in a split stance with one foot behind the body and the 
other in front. Your back foot will be bent so you’re on your toes, while your front foot 
remains flat on the ground.
Keeping your torso upright, lower yourself down until both knees are bent to approxi-
mately 90 degrees, then return to the starting position.
It’s helpful to think about initiating the movement from your back leg in order to avoid 
leaning too far forward. Your center of gravity should be about halfway between your two 
feet, with your weight evenly distributed on both legs.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
100
WALKING LUNGE
Beginning in a standing position, take a big step forward, then carefully lower your back 
knee until it’s just above the ground. Your front foot should remain totally flat while your 
back foot bends, allowing the heel to come up—the same position as the bottom of a split 
squat. From here, stand up and take a step forward, bringing your feet together, then repeat 
on the opposite leg. Walking lunges can also be performed moving backwards for an added 
challenge.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
101
BULGARIAN SPLIT SQUAT
Get into a split stance with your rear foot elevated on a step, bench or other object. 
Place your front foot flat on the floor several inches in front of your hips. Bend both legs, 
lowering your back knee toward the ground, then return to the top position.
Elevating your rear foot during a split squat changes your weight-to-limb ratio, 
increasing the strength required from your front leg, while also giving you a stretch in 
the hip flexor of your rear leg. The higher the elevated object, the more intense the exer-
cise becomes.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
102
HINDU SQUAT
The Hindu squat is a squat that is intentionally performed on the tips of the toes. Though 
it is recommended to learn a standard squat with the heels down first, the Hindu squat 
can be a nice variant once you’ve established a solid foundation of leg strength. By lifting 
onto your toes, you can place more emphasis on the front of your thighs, as well as adding a 
unique balance component.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
103
CALF RAISE
Stand on a step or other elevated surface with your heels hanging off the edge. Press 
your toes down and flex your calves to lift yourself all the way up onto the tips of your toes. 
Lower back down and repeat. Try it on one leg for an added challenge!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
104
ARCHER SQUAT
Begin in a very wide squat stance with your toes partially turned out toward the 
sides. Slowly shift your weight toward one foot and begin squatting to that side 
while keeping your opposite leg straight.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
105
As you get near the bottom, let the foot of your extended leg roll up onto the 
heel with your toes pointing upward. You might feel a stretch in your groin and/or 
inner thigh. Keep your abs tight and make sure the heel of your squatting leg stays 
down the whole time.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
106
SINGLE LEG PROGRESSIONS
One of the biggest misconceptions about calisthenics strength training is that you are 
limited in the capacity of how intensely you can train your legs. As you will see in this sec-
tion, that is far from the truth.
As far as these variants go, it is important to train both legs evenly. One way to approach 
this is by alternating reps: right, left, right, left, etc. Another method is to perform a com-
plete set on your less strong leg first. This way you can give it extra attention by training it 
while you’re fresh, knowing that you’ll be able to match it with the stronger leg.
SINGLE LEG STAND
It may not look like much, but simply standing on one leg can be a surprisingly difficult 
task if done for long enough. Start with ten seconds per leg and work your way up from 
there. The higher your hold your elevated leg, the more difficult it becomes.
Single leg stands can be challenging for the often overlooked muscles in your feet, as well 
as your legs.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
107
STEP-UP
Stand in front of a step, bench or other sturdy object that is about knee-height. Lift one 
knee and place your entire foot firmly on the object. Step yourself up by pressing down 
through your heel until your leg is fully extended. Lower back down and repeat. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
108
DRINKING BIRD
Stand on one foot with your opposite leg hovering just above the ground behind 
you. Begin bending forward at your hips while reaching your extended leg out, 
maintaining a straight line from your heel to the back of your head. You’ll need to 
recruit the muscles of your lower back as you aim to get your trunk and extended 
leg parallel to the ground. You may feel a stretch in the hamstring of your standing 
leg. Brace your trunk as you return to the start position, being careful not to twist 
your body to the side on the way up. Your hands can be kept at your sides or placed 
overhead for an added challenge.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
109
You may need to bend the knee of your standing leg in order to get low enough. 
With practice, you can work toward keeping it straighter.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
110
BENCH ASSISTED PISTOL
Stand with your back facing a bench or other object that’s around knee-height. Lift one 
leg in the air, reach your arms in front of your body and carefully sit back onto the bench. 
(As with the two legged version of this exercise, it’s okay if you lose your balance at first.) 
Pause briefly at the bottom, then drive your heel into the ground and brace your trunk by 
contracting your abs as you stand up in order to maintain control.
The bench assisted pistol is a helpful starting point for someone who is working toward 
a full pistol squat.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
111
POLE ASSISTED PISTOL
Like the pole assisted two-legged squat, stand facing a pole (or doorframe or any other 
sturdy object you can hold onto for support). Grasp it gently and lift one leg into the air. 
With the other leg, lower yourself into the bottom of a single leg squat, gradually walking 
your hands down as you descend. Use your arms as much as you need to in order to control 
yourself on the way down and help get back to a standing position. With time you will learn 
to rely less on your arms. Eventually you won’t need them at all anymore. The pole assisted 
pistol or “assistol” is another great way to ease yourself into the full pistol squat.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
112
ELEVATED PISTOL
Stand on top of a bench or other object with one leg hanging off to the side. Reach your 
arms forward and slowly lower to the bottom of a one-legged squat while your opposite leg 
drops below the height of the bench.
Allowing your non-squatting leg to hang below parallel makes for more favorable lever-
age and balance than in a full pistol squat. It also requires less mobility in the hips and ham-
strings. The lower you let your leg hang, the less mobility is required. When you’ve built up 
to a few good reps, try holding your extended leg a bit higher. Eventually you will be able to 
keep it high enough to perform a pistol on level ground.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
113
PISTOL SQUAT
There are many types of one legged squats, but the pistol is the gold standard. It’s the 
perfect combination of strength, balance, flexibility and control.
From a standing position, reach one leg into the air with your knee straight, then squat 
down as low as possible on your standing leg. Pause briefly at the bottom, keeping tension 
in your abs, then return to the top position.
Don’t be surprised if you feel your non-squatting leg working during a pistol. You will 
need to engage your hip flexors and quads on that side in order to keep your leg in the air. 
The term “one legged squat” can be a bit misleading.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
114
WUSHU PISTOL
If you’ve spent some time working on pistol squats, you may have at some point expe-
rienced a cramp in your non-squatting leg as you fought to keep it in the air. To minimize 
this issue, many people find holding the toe of their squatting leg to be helpful, particularly 
in the bottom position. This is also useful for those who have a hard time keeping the 
non-squatting leg straight. This variant is often referred to as a Wushu pistol. Holding your 
foot also helps facilitate full body tension.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
115
ADVANCED PISTOL
Once you’ve built the strength and control to perform lots of standard pistol squats, 
there is still room to continue to challenge yourself. If pistols with your arms held in front 
are becoming too easy, try placing your hands behind your head, like a prisoner squat. Once 
that is no longer a challenge, try holding your hands behind your back. This simple change 
in leverage will make the move significantly more difficult.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
116
RAIL PISTOL
Performing a pistol squat while standing 
on a rail or bar takes the balance compo-
nent to a whole other level. The narrower 
the rail, the more difficult this becomes, so 
start out with something relatively wide 
and take it from there.
DRAGON PISTOL
The dragon pistol resembles a standard pistol squat, only with the extended leg threaded 
behind the squatting leg.
Like the traditional pistol squat, the dragon pistol requires serious strength, balance and 
mobility—but in a very unique way. This advanced variant can be surprisingly taxing on 
your inner thighs as well as your deep glute and hip muscles. And of course, all the other 
muscles that you work in a standard pistol will get hit as well.
Like the standard pis-
tol, beginning on an ele-
vated 
surface 
and/or 
holding onto the foot of 
your non-squatting leg 
are both great ways of 
easing into the full dragon 
pistol.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
117
HOVER LUNGE
The hover lunge is a one-legged squat that finds the non-squatting leg positioned behind 
the body, rather than in front, as it is with the pistol. It looks almost like a split squat or 
lunge, except the back foot never touches the floor (hence the name hover lunge). Unlike a 
lunge, however, you will need to reach your arms in front of your body and lean your torso 
forward to stay balanced, due to the fact that your rear foot never reaches the ground. As 
with many of the other squat variations, you may hold onto a pole or other sturdy object for 
assistance when starting out.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
118
SHRIMP SQUAT
The shrimp squat (aka skater squat) is a more difficult variant of the hover lunge 
which involves holding one of your ankles behind your back. By placing a hand 
behind your body, you alter the leverage, thus increasing the difficulty of the exer-
cise. The balance and flexibility elements are further increased as well.  Stand on 
one foot with one of your ankles held behind your back. Slowly begin bending from 
your opposite hip, knee and ankle, lowering your back knee until it gently touches 
the ground just behind the heel of your standing leg. 
You will need to lean forward in order to 
maintain your balance at the bottom. Keep 
your abs engaged as you press into the foot 
of your squatting leg to return to the top 
position. It may also help to think about 
pressing your back foot into your hand to 
create additional tension. 
It’s not uncommon for individu-
als who are new to this movement 
to fall down during their initial 
attempts, so you may want to place 
a soft object beneath the knee of 
your non-squatting leg when try-
ing this for the first time.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
119
ADVANCED SHRIMP
Just like pistols, you can make shrimp squats significantly harder by placing 
both hands behind your back. This simple change in positioning may not look like 
much, but it can make the move significantly more difficult. Make sure to lower 
yourself down slowly in order to avoid banging your back knee into the ground on 
the way down. Having both hands behind your back may also require you to lean 
farther forward to account for the change in balance.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
120
HAWAIIAN SQUAT
Whereas the pistol requires mobility in the hamstrings, and the shrimp demands 
a full range of motion in the quadriceps and hip flexors, the Hawaiian squat poses a 
unique flexibility demand on your hips’ rotational ability.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
121
To perform a Hawaiian squat, cross one leg over the other, ankle to knee, then 
squat down as low as possible on your standing leg. Again, feel free to start by hold-
ing onto a sturdy object or sitting back onto a bench for support if necessary.
As we’ve seen with other squat variants, reaching your arms in front during the 
exercise will be less difficult than having them behind your head. Placing them 
behind your back will be harder still.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
122
JUMBO SHRIMP
Unlike the pistol, which becomes easier when elevated, performing a shrimp on an ele-
vated surface increases the range of motion, as your knee can now drop down deeper than 
the level of your foot. The increased range of motion can make an already challenging exer-
cise considerably more difficult.
The flexibility demands of the jumbo shrimp are also greater due to this additional range 
of motion. You’ll likely need to allow your bottom knee to come forward as you pass below 
the depth of the elevated object on which you’re positioned.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
123
The Plyo-Matrix:  
Jump Around
ANY TYPE OF JUMP IS A FORM OF 
PLYOMETRICS. WHEN YOU PERFORM 
JUMP SQUATS, IT IS HELPFUL TO 
THINK OF PUSHING OFF WITH YOUR 
FEET WITH SO MUCH FORCE THAT YOU 
EXPLODE OFF THE FLOOR.
PLYOMETRICS ARE NOT LIMITED TO 
SQUATS AND CAN BE APPLIED TO JUST 
ABOUT EVERY VARIANT, INCLUDING 
SPLIT SQUATS, LUNGES, STEP-UPS, 
PISTOLS AND JUST ABOUT ANYTHING 
YOU CAN IMAGINE.
IT IS IMPORTANT TO BEND INTO 
YOUR HIPS, KNEES AND ANKLES 
WHEN YOU LAND, SO AS TO ABSORB 
THE IMPACT. TRAINING YOUR LEGS IN 
THIS CAPACITY FIRES UP NUMEROUS 
MUSCLE FIBERS AND IS AN AMAZING 
CONDITIONING WORKOUT FOR THE 
HEART, AS YOU WILL BE DEMANDING A 
LOT OF BLOOD FLOW TO THE LARGEST 
MUSCLES IN YOUR BODY.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
124

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
125
C h a p t e r 7
Flex
ull body forward flexion is sometimes inappropriately simplified to mean “abs 
exercise.” And while it’s true that the abdominal chain is the primary mover in 
these activities, to dismiss these exercises as exclusively abs workouts would irresponsi-
bly misrepresent the situation. Yes, these exercises emphasize the core, but many of them 
will also challenge your arms, legs, chest, shoulders and more.
This is not to discount the importance of your abs; they play a large role in stabilizing the 
trunk every time you do a squat, a push-up or even get out of bed in the morning, so it’s critical 
to train all abs muscles including the sides (obliques) and the deep abs stabilizers (transverse 
abdominals) to get a powerful, unbreakable center.
This section is separated into two categories: Grounded Flex and Hanging Flex, as dictated 
by the body’s placement in its environment. Changing the spatial plane in which we train 
alters the difficulty of the exercises by affecting leverage, a key component of bodyweight 
training in all its glorious forms. 
GROUNDED FLEX PROGRESSIONS
These exercises are performed lying or seated. If you are a beginner, it is recommended 
that you start out with the first few exercises in this category before moving onto Overhead 
Flexion, but make no mistake: the advanced grounded exercises are absolutely a force to be 
reckoned with in their own right.
F

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
126
LYING KNEE TUCK
Lie on your back with your hands by your sides, then lift your heels a few inches off 
the ground. Keeping your feet close to the floor, tuck your knees all the way to your chest, 
allowing your lower back to come off the ground slightly at the top. Stay in control as you 
extend your legs back to the start position, pressing your lower back into the ground to 
engage your deep abdominal stabilizers. This start position is essentially the same as the 
hollow body hold discussed on page 30.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
127
LYING BENT KNEE RAISE
Lie on your back with your feet flat on the floor, knees bent and hands at your sides. Draw 
your navel inward and roll your hips away from the ground, bringing your knees toward 
your chest. Carefully lower your legs back down and repeat. The angle at your knees should 
remain consistent throughout the range of motion, with the movement primarily taking 
place at the hips.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
128
STRAIGHT LEG RAISE
Lie on your back with your legs straight and hands at your sides. Draw your navel inward 
and roll your hips away from the ground, raising your legs straight into the air until they 
are perpendicular to the ground, then carefully lower them back down and repeat. To add 
difficulty, raise your hips at the top of the range of motion.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
129
GROUNDED WINDSHIELD WIPER
Lie on the floor with both legs straight in the air above your hips. Reach your arms out to 
the sides for stability and begin rotating your hips and legs toward the left until they form 
a 45 degree angle to the ground. Pause briefly, then reverse direction and lower your hips 
and legs to the opposite side, alternating left and right on each rep. The twisting movement 
at the trunk emphasizes your obliques in addition to working the “six pack” muscles on the 
front of the body.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
130
SEATED KNEE RAISE
Sit on a bench, chair or other object with your arms by your sides, gripping the bench for 
stability. Lean back and tuck your knees to your chest, then extend them out in front of your 
body, maintaining tension in your trunk throughout the range of motion. You may need to 
lean back a bit farther as your extend your legs away from your torso to maintain balance.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
131
BENT KNEE HOLD
Sit on the floor with your hands flat on the ground just outside of your hips. Extend your 
arms and push your hands into the ground, lifting your legs and upper-body into the air 
with your knees tucked toward your chest.
If you are having a hard time getting into position from the floor, practice on a raised 
object instead, as elevating your hands provides more leeway to lift into position.
 
The bent knee hold resembles the 
top position of the seated knee 
raise, only with the hips elevated 
and all of the body’s weight sup-
ported by the hands and arms.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
132
L-SIT
Sit on the floor with your hands flat on the ground just outside of your hips. Extend your 
elbows and push your hands into the ground, lifting your legs and upper body into the air 
with your legs straight so your body resembles a capital letter L, hence the name L-sit.
If you are having a hard time getting into position from the floor, practice on a 
raised object instead, as elevating your hands provides more leeway to lift into position. 
Additionally, performing the L-sit on parallel bars allows you to use your grip strength, 
which can make the exercise more achievable for some. You may also bend one knee to 
reduce the difficulty as you progress toward the full L-sit.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
133
Whichever method you employ, think about keeping your arms close to your body, with 
your elbows locked and pointed back behind you as much as possible. Focus on creating 
tension with every muscle in your entire body. Though the L-sit is often classified as an 
“abs” exercise, you may be surprised by how much you’ll need to use your arms and legs.
 
 
L-sit on  
raised object.
L-sit on parallel bars.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
134
V-SIT
Sit on the floor with your hands flat on the ground just outside of your hips. Extend your 
elbows and push your hands into the ground, lifting your legs and upperbody into the air 
with your legs as vertical as possible. You will need to lean your torso back and move your 
hips forward in order to get your legs close to perpendicular with the ground. As such, your 
body will resemble a capital letter V, hence the name V-sit.
Like the previous two exercises, practicing on an elevated surface will allow for better 
leeway to lift into position. Additionally, holding onto parallel bars can give you better 
leverage to lean back farther, thus achieving a more vertical leg position.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
135
 
“WRISTY” BUSINESS 
Training with an unconventional grip is fan-
tastic for building monstrous strength in your 
forearms. But training with no grip at all is a 
way to take it to the next level! While not for 
beginners, the following examples are great 
for anyone whose lifestyle demands wrists 
that can accept massive impact without buck-
ling under pressure, or anyone up for a new 
and unique challenge. You don’t need to be a 
boxer, martial artist or Street Workout com-
petitor to give these a try.
 
 
 
 
Step up your game 
with wrist push-ups.
The mighty wrist 
pull-up is an 
amazing forearm 
builder.
One arm wrist push-up! There’s 
always a way to progress…
This is harder than it looks. 
Behold the wrist L-sit!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
136
DRAGON FLAG
Lie on the ground or a bench, gripping a sturdy object behind your head. Tense your 
entire body as you lift your hips and legs into the air, stacking your body vertically above 
your shoulders. In addition to engaging your core, use your arms to lift yourself into posi-
tion. Be careful not to pull too hard against the back of your neck.
From the top position, carefully lower yourself down until you are hovering just above 
the ground, maintaining a straight line from your shoulders to your toes, then raise back up 
to the top position. Be mindful to avoid folding at the hips. In fact, it may even be useful to 
imagine overextending your hips in order to compensate for the body’s tendency to do the 
opposite.
While the full dragon flag requires both legs to be fully extended, it can be helpful to use a 
modified version with one or both knees tucked as a progression.
 
It can be helpful to 
use a modified  
version with one or 
both knees tucked.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
137
It can also help to start by practicing the negative phase. The idea behind this method is 
to gradually increase the load so that you can prime your neurological system for the full 
dragon flag. Once you get confident with negatives, you can start working on doing a static 
hold with your body hovering a few inches over the ground. After you can hold this position 
for a few seconds, you should be ready to start working on full dragon flags for reps.
 
The full dragon flag.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
138
HANGING FLEX PROGRESSIONS
These exercises are performed hanging from a bar (or tree, scaffold or lamppost, for 
those who truly embody the essence of Street Workout). The hanging position places your 
body in the vertical plane, thus increasing the mechanical disadvantage against gravity, as 
well as limiting your points of contact to only your hands. That’s why the following move-
ments recruit your arms, legs, chest, shoulders, back and grip to a greater degree than the 
grounded exercises. 
HANGING KNEE RAISE
Hang  with an overhand grip, then carefully lift your knees toward your chest. Focus on 
tilting your pelvis forward at the top in order to fully engage your abdominals. Lower your 
legs back to the bottom, being mindful not to swing or pick up momentum on the way down. 
Keep your elbows locked, squeeze the bar tightly and brace your trunk to maintain control.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
139
TWISTING HANGING KNEE RAISE
Hang with an overhand grip, then twist your trunk and pull your knees toward the oppo-
site armpit. Focus on tilting your pelvis forward at the top in order to fully engage your 
abdominals. Lower your legs back to the bottom, being mindful not to swing or pick up 
momentum on the way down, then repeat the movement on the opposite side. Keep your 
elbows locked, squeeze the bar tightly and brace your trunk to maintain control. Twisting 
at the trunk involves additional recruitment of the obliques and serratus muscles.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
140
HANGING LEG RAISE
Hang with an overhand grip, then carefully raise your legs to hip height. Focus on tilting 
your hips and pelvis forward at the top in order to fully engage your abdominals. Lower 
your legs back to the bottom, being mindful not to swing or pick up momentum on the way 
down. Keep your elbows locked, squeeze the bar tightly and brace your trunk to maintain 
control.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
141
TOES-TO-BAR HANGING LEG RAISE
Hang with an overhand grip, then raise your legs all the way up until your toes gently 
touch the bar. Focus on tilting your hips and pelvis forward in order to fully engage your 
abdominals, but do your best to maintain an upright torso. Lower your legs back to the bot-
tom, being mindful not to swing or pick up momentum on the way down. Keep your elbows 
locked, squeeze the bar tightly and brace your trunk to maintain control.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
142
 
PARALLEL UNIVERSE
Hanging abs exercises such as knee raises and leg raises can also be per-
formed while holding yourself upright between a pair of parallel bars. This is a 
more forgiving alternative for practitioners who are having an issue with grip 
strength or stability. Although generally less difficult than the hanging version, 
parallel bar knee and leg raises remain viable exercises in their own right.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
143
ROLLOVER
Perform a toes-to-bar hanging leg raise, then continue lifting your legs and hips until 
they are above your shoulders with your body fully inverted. Simultaneously give a pull with 
your arms, bending your elbows as you throw your hips over the bar until you roll around to 
the other side. You will end up with your torso above the bar in an upright position.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
144
HANGING WINDSHIELD WIPER
Hang with your hands in an overhand grip, then lift your toes all the way to the bar as you 
would in a toes-to-bar leg raise. When you get to the top, begin rotating your legs toward 
one side. Aim to get your legs parallel to the ground before reversing direction and lowering 
them to the opposite side. The twisting movement at the trunk emphasizes your obliques 
and serratus muscles. Do your best to avoid bending your elbows when performing wind-
shield wipers, though a slight kink may be unavoidable at first.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
145
ONE ARM HANGING LEG RAISE
Grab an overhead bar with two hands, then carefully take one away. Squeeze the bar 
tightly with your remaining hand, making sure to keep your shoulder, back and entire arm 
engaged as you raise your legs until they are parallel to the ground. For an added challenge, 
you can try lifting your legs all the way up until your toes touch the bar.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
146
MEATHOOK
Begin by performing a windshield wiper toward your dominant arm. When your legs are 
all the way over to the side, lift your hips toward your elbow, folding your body around your 
arm. The elbow pit of your primary arm should wind up by your hip. It may take some trial 
and error to get a feel for finding the “sweet spot” but at a certain point, you will feel your 
balance shift.
 
The elbow pit of your primary arm 
should wind up by your hip before you 
remove the other arm.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
147
Once your hips are in position, begin to loosen the grip on your secondary arm, gradu-
ally transferring all of your weight to the other side. When you feel confident enough to 
completely release your secondary hand from the bar, do so carefully. You’re now holding 
a meathook—congratulations! Stay here for a few seconds, then slowly reverse the move-
ment and try it on the other side.
If you are unable to take your other hand away, try removing a finger or two instead. Over 
time you can work toward relying on your secondary arm less as you progressively build 
the strength to perform the full meathook.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
148

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
149
C h a p t e r 8
Bridge
ir Isaac Newton’s third law states that for every action there is an equal and 
opposite reaction. Well sadly, this is not always true in the fitness world… but 
it should be! Consider bridging to be the sober yang to trunk flexion’s raging yin. Or some-
thing like that.
Americans tend to spend so much time slouching over  (at the computer, for example), that 
we often get stuck walking around all day with our backs rounded and heads drooped forward. 
Couple this with the fact that everyone seems so focused on wanting to look good in the mirror 
that they forget to work the muscles they can’t see. Like the pulling exercises previously dis-
cussed, bridging is an invaluable and often overlooked component of full body fitness. Bridge 
work will have a dramatic impact on your power, balance and flexibility.
The following bridge variants recruit the muscles along the back side of your body (glutes, 
legs, shoulders, upper and lower back), while at the same time stretching the ones in the front 
(chest, abs, hip flexors). This poses a unique set of circumstances depending on the body type 
of the practitioner. In the case of a highly muscular body, flexibility may be a great obstacle. 
Conversely, more mobile individuals will find the strength element to be the biggest challenge. 
This leads to the often-asked question: what’s “better,” performing a bridge for reps or as 
an isometric hold? The truth is that they are both beneficial. Sets and reps cause the muscle to 
contract repeatedly and are more likely to lead to muscle gains. Meanwhile static holds allow 
the body to take its time and slowly stretch out, which may make it preferable for mobility. 
You really can’t go wrong if you work on both.
Additionally, there are many types of bridges, requiring different points of contact with the 
earth beneath you. When training any unilateral or asymmetrical bridge, make sure you train 
both sides evenly. But enough talk. Like James Brown used to say, “Take ‘em to the bridge!” 
S

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
150
HIP BRIDGE
Lie on your back with your knees bent, feet flat and arms by your sides. Squeeze 
your butt and press your feet into the floor, raising your hips into the air as high 
as you can. When performing this move as a hold, it helps to wiggle your shoulder 
blades together and grab your hands in a palm-to-palm grip for more leverage, so 
that your biceps wind up behind your lats. If you’re going up and down for reps, 
then keep your hands at your sides.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
151

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
152
TABLE BRIDGE
Sit on the floor with your legs bent and feet flat on the ground in front of you, 
then place your hands palms-down outside of your hips. From here, squeeze your 
butt and press your heels into the ground, lifting your hips to shoulder height. Drop 
your head back and press your chest out to help open your shoulders and neck. 
Point your fingers away from your feet to further help open up your chest and 
shoulders. Feel free to experiment with different hand positions as well.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
153

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
154
STRAIGHT BRIDGE
Sit with your legs directly in front of you and your hands on the ground just behind your 
hips. From here, lift yourself up and straighten out your body by contracting your ham-
strings, glutes, lower back and other posterior musculature. Drop your head back, press 
your chest out and try to look behind you. You’ll wind up looking like an upside-down 
plank. Feel free to experiment with various hand positions.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
155
SHOULDER BRIDGE
Lie on your back with your hands at your sides and legs straight. Without bending your 
knees, dig your heels into the ground and roll onto your shoulders. Use your arms if needed 
to create an arch from your feet to your shoulders. Eventually you can try it with your 
arms off the ground, but don’t be in a rush. This bridge variant is more difficult than it may 
appear.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
156
CANDLESTICK BRIDGE
The candlestick bridge is basically a one-legged version of the hip bridge. As such, 
the strength requirement is doubled and a balance element is introduced. Lie on 
your back with your knees bent, feet flat and arms by your sides. Lift one leg straight 
above your hips and press into the ground with your opposite foot to raise your body 
up into the air. Beginners can start out in a hip bridge and then remove one leg once 
they are stable.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
157
CANDLESTICK STRAIGHT BRIDGE
The candlestick straight bridge is essentially a one-legged version of the straight 
bridge. Sit with your legs straight in front of you and your hands on the ground just 
behind your hips. Raise one leg in the air, then drive downward with the other leg 
to lift your hips into alignment with your shoulders and ankles. Drop your head 
back, press your chest out and try to look behind you. You can also get into position 
by starting out in a classic straight bridge then lifting one leg. As is often the case, 
there is an added strength and balance component when you remove a point of 
contact from the equation.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
158
NECK BRIDGE
Lie on your back with your knees bent, feet flat and hands placed palms-down next 
to your head. Press yourself up off of your back and roll onto the top of your head. Use 
your arms as much as you need to, but focus primarily on recruiting your legs, glutes 
and back. Though a good deal of your weight will be supported by your skull, this exer-
cise can also do a lot to strengthen your neck muscles. Once you get comfortable with 
the hand-assisted neck bridge, work toward taking your hands away for an added 
challenge. Remember to push your chest forward and arch your spine.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
159
FOREARM BRIDGE
From the neck bridge position, lower your forearms and elbows toward the ground and 
bring your hands behind your head. You can interlace your fingers or place them flat on the 
floor, whichever feels better. Once your forearms are on the ground, press your chest out-
ward, bringing your shoulders directly above your elbows. From here, lift your head off the 
floor (if you are able to) and continue pressing your chest outward to intensify the stretch 
in your upper-back and shoulders.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
160
BACK BRIDGE
Lie on your back with your knees bent, feet flat and hands placed palms-down 
next to your head. Press into the floor with your hands and feet, arching your 
back to extend your chest forward and raise your hips into the air. Aim to get your 
elbows fully locked in the top position (though a partial bend is acceptable when 
starting out).
 Do your best to keep the arc of your spine even throughout, and not too heavily 
pronounced in the lumbar region. If your upper back is stiff, which is quite com-
mon, you’ll need to be especially mindful of this. The better your flexibility, the 
closer together you’ll be able to get your hands and feet.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
161
ONE LEG BACK BRIDGE
Removing a point of contact increases the strength demands and adds a balance compo-
nent to the back bridge. There are two ways you can approach the one leg bridge. The less 
difficult method is to first get into a back bridge, then carefully lift one leg, placing that foot 
back down before switching sides. The more advanced method is to first lift one leg, then 
press up into your bridge with just the other leg.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
162
ONE ARM BACK BRIDGE
Like the one leg version, there are two ways you can approach the one arm bridge. 
Again, the less difficult method is to first get into a back bridge, then carefully lift 
one arm and hold, placing that hand back down before switching sides. The more 
advanced method is to press up into your bridge with just one arm, which is consid-
erably more difficult. To improve your leverage slightly, you can go with a wide foot 
stance when first attempting this exercise. By spreading your contact points further 
apart, you will be more stable.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
163
GECKO BRIDGE
A bridge held on just one arm and one leg is called a gecko bridge. The balance and sta-
bility it requires is tremendous, and it also demands major posterior chain strength. We 
recommend easing into this bridge gradually. Some will find that picking up one hand first, 
then lifting the opposite foot feels best. For others lifting the foot first feels better.
Though the gecko bridge is typically performed right leg/left arm or left leg/right arm, 
you can also experiment with lifting the arm and the leg on the same side. In time, you can 
work towards lifting the hand and foot simultaneously and holding it for longer periods of 
time. Eventually you may be able to press into a gecko bridge with one arm and one leg ele-
vated from the start. Experiment with different hand and foot positions to see what works 
best for you.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
164
BRIDGE ROTATION
Begin on the ground in a seated position with your hands by your sides, knees bent and 
feet flat on the floor in front of your body. Turn your wrists out away from your body, press 
your weight off of your butt and reach one arm into the air. Slowly begin to spin your body 
around on your opposite palm, eventually 
bringing the other hand to the floor, so you 
wind up in a back bridge position. Though you 
will likely need to bend your elbows in order 
to rotate all the way around, aim to minimize 
any arm flexion. Once you are in a bridge, you 
can return to the start position, or lift the 
opposite hand and rotate to the other side.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
165
WALL CRAWL
Stand a few feet from a wall, so you are facing away. Place your hands on your lower 
back, drop your head and look behind you as you begin bending backward as far as 
you can. Once you can see the wall, reach your arms out and overhead, pressing your 
hands against it for support as you slowly walk your hands down the wall into a back 
bridge. Hold briefly, then crawl your way back to the top. On the way up, aim to pull 
yourself off the wall with your core and legs—don’t do too much of the work with your 
arms. Though you may need to go up on the balls of your toes at first, aim to perform 
the move with flat feet.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
166
STAND-TO-STAND BRIDGE
The stand-to-stand bridge is essentially a wall crawl without the wall. Stand tall, push 
your hips forward and bend backward as far as you can. Once you can see the ground 
behind you, reach your arms away from your body and reach for the floor. Be prepared to 
actively press the ground away the moment your hands make contact. Failure to do so can 
result in crashing down on your head.
From the back bridge position, press into the ground with your arms and aim your hips up 
and out over your toes to shift your weight back completely onto your feet. It may be help-
ful to reach one arm in the air before the other and/or go on the balls of your feet for better 
leverage, though the ultimate aim should be to perform the movement with the heels down.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
167
The Plyo-Matrix:  
Kipping Up
THE REALM OF PLYOMETRIC MOVEMENTS IS NOT LIMITED TO YOUR CLASSIC 
STRENGTH TRAINING EXERCISES. ALTHOUGH NOT A STRICT ARCH PER SE, THE KIP-
UP IS STILL CONSIDERED AN EXPLOSIVE VARIANT OF THE BRIDGE NONETHELESS. 
IT IS A FANTASTIC DRILL IN FULL BODY COORDINATION AND PLYOMETRIC POWER, 
AS WELL AS A BREATHTAKING VISUAL.
TO PERFORM IT, START BY LYING ON YOUR BACK WITH YOUR PALMS FLAT ON THE 
FLOOR AND ON EITHER SIDE OF YOUR HEAD. ROLL YOUR THIGHS UP TOWARD YOUR 
SHOULDERS, THEN KICK YOUR LEGS UP AS YOU PUSH OFF WITH YOUR HANDS AND 
ARMS. EXPLODE FROM THE HIPS AND LAND YOUR FEET ON THE GROUND, IN A FULL 
STANDING POSITION. TIMING IS OF THE ESSENCE.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
168

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
169
III
Skills & “Tricks”
irst things first. There are no tricks. The following exercises embody 
strength and proficiency in all their magnificent splendor. They 
reflect patience, practice and perseverance in the face of adversity. 
Detractors often claim that many of these moves do not represent func-
tional strength or absolute power, even implying that there is some sort of 
“hack” to performing them, but that is far from the truth. These moves are only 
learned—or rather, earned—through countless hours of technical and muscu-
lar training. Whether it’s muscle-ups, handstands or human flags, you must 
put in the time and train hard. That’s right. There are no tricks. As for skill, 
well, that’s another story…
Skill training is very much a practice. Just like learning a foreign language 
or a musical instrument, consistency and effort are key. For many of these 
exercises, you are better off training with frequency, but not necessarily to 
failure, so your body can “rehearse” the movement pattern on a regular basis. 
You might want to take a video of yourself or have a spotter to let you know 
when you’re in the correct position, as it can be difficult to feel where you are 
in space.
The beautiful thing about making your priority learning a skill is that you 
will very likely, along the way, increase your strength and improve your overall 
fitness. Often it’s more enjoyable to immerse yourself in skill training rather 
than chasing numeric goals. If we had to tell you what the “trick” is, the answer 
would be days, months and years in the humble pursuit of the seemingly 
unachievable.
The following section is broken down into three categories, Floor Holds, 
Bar Moves and Human Flag. Within each, the moves are shown in approxi-
mate order of difficulty, though different individuals will discover their own 
strengths and weaknesses.
F

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
170

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
171
C h a p t e r 9
Floor Holds
he pure minimalism of training with nothing but your own physical body and the 
raw earth beneath you is the ultimate expression of primal simplicity and animal 
splendor. This section represents directness, clarity and integrity in training.
The exercises contained herein are divided into four categories: Frog, Crow & Crane serves 
as an introduction to hand balancing. The Headstand & Handstand section is a comprehen-
sive guide to inversions from the most basic to the most advanced, as well as a history lesson 
on how the current standards came to be. The Elbow Lever grouping takes us to a realm where 
we exploit our skeletal anatomy and physical awareness in order to literally find a balance. 
The final category, Planche, represents calisthenics strength, precision, skill and fortitude in 
its most advanced forms.
Are you ready to work hard?
FROG, CROW AND CRANE PROGRESSIONS
Because the body is kept closer to the ground in these exercises than it would be with full 
inversions (handstands, headstands, etc.), it is shorter in length, giving a mechanical advan-
tage when starting out. However, although more favorable leverage is provided, you will see 
that these exercises can be progressed from very basic to extremely advanced.
The frog, crow and crane have their origins in yoga. One of the most profound aspects of 
Street Workout is that it fuses elements from many different styles and disciplines of move-
ment. Calisthenics, break dancing, martial arts and, yes… yoga! It’s all bodyweight training. 
The body moves the way the body moves, in spite of any classification. There is no need to 
over categorize things. These exercises demand a certain skill level, but make no mistake: in 
addition to rehearsing the skill, a baseline of strength in the hands, arms, shoulders and core 
is required.
T

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
172
FROG STAND
Get into the bottom of a deep squat, then place your palms flat on the floor, just wider 
than shoulder width. Bend your elbows back and rest the insides of your thighs and calves 
against your triceps, almost like you’re using your arms as a shelf to support your lower 
body. The more contact you have between your arms and legs, the easier it will be to bal-
ance. From here, continue to bend your elbows until they are around 90 degrees and tip all 
of your weight forward, lifting your feet off the ground. Think about looking in front of your 
hands rather than in between them in order to stay balanced.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
173
CROW HOLD
Get into the bottom of a deep squat, then place your palms flat on the floor, at 
approximately shoulder width. Bend your elbows back and rest only your knees 
against your triceps. From here, tip all of your weight forward, lifting your feet 
off the ground. Think about looking in front of your hands rather than in between 
them in order to stay balanced. The crow hold is similar to the frog stand, only your 
hands will be slightly closer together and your elbows will have less of a bend in 
them.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
174
CRANE POSE
Get into the bottom of a deep squat, then place your palms flat on the floor, at 
approximately shoulder width. Keep your elbows completely locked and rest your 
knees as high against your triceps as your flexibility will allow. Ideally, they will 
be up by your armpits. From here, tip all of your weight forward, lifting your feet 
off the ground. Think about looking in front of your hands rather than in between 
them in order to stay balanced. You will also need to lean forward from your wrists 
in order to keep from bending at the elbow. As such, this move requires consider-
able strength and flexibility in the wrists.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
175
SIDE CROW
Get into the bottom of a deep squat, then twist to one side and place both arms on the 
outside of one leg with your hands on the ground. Similar to the standard crow hold, your 
elbows should bend back toward your legs, except this time making contact with only one 
leg and at two points: near your knee and the other by your hip. Lift your hips and shift all 
your weight onto your hands, with your knees stacked together.
If you do not have the flexibility to do the above variation, you can start by placing your 
hands further apart and only use one elbow as a contact point. Try to line up your elbow 
mid-thigh, before lifting your hips and shifting your weight onto your hands. Make sure to 
practice the balance on both sides.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
176
ONE LEG CROW
By removing a leg from the equation, you can quickly and easily increase the difficulty of 
the standard crow pose in both the balance and strength departments. Start in a basic crow, 
then carefully shift one leg off of your arm and bring it toward the center. Once you have a 
feel for this, you can begin extending that leg to add further difficulty.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
177
ONE ARM/ONE LEG CROW
The one arm/one leg crow, or “air baby” as it’s known in the breakdancing world, is one 
of the most challenging and visually impressive moves in all of calisthenics.
Begin in a one leg crow, then start to stack your hips vertically as you gently begin taking 
some of the weight off of the hand that is not supporting your leg. Try to gradually shift 
weight away from that side, removing contact points one finger at a time, until only one 
remains on the ground. Eventually you will learn to float that finger up and off the ground as 
well, leaving all your weight supported on just one hand.
Bear in mind that this move requires a lot of strength as well as very precise balance. 
Think about actively pressing the ground away with your primary arm as you shift your 
weight off of the other side.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
178
HEADSTAND & HANDSTAND 
PROGRESSIONS
When it comes to calisthenics training, the handstand is often overlooked (even dis-
missed) as a “skills-only” practice, rather than a strength move. But we assure you: one 
cannot attain a solid handstand without a foundation of physical power in the arms, core, 
chest, back and, particularly, the shoulders and traps. In fact, many well-meaning members 
of the fitness community have wondered how they can emphasize those sensational shoul-
der muscles when performing bodyweight exercises. Well, the answer is the handstand and 
its many forms. Because a handstand involves supporting your entire body in an inverted 
position, with arms extended and hands flat on the floor, a great degree of overhead press-
ing capability, along with hand and finger strength, is involved. Of course, there is also a 
huge skill component. Hand balancing is an entire discipline unto itself, even beyond the 
realm of Street Workout. We encourage you to pursue all forms of training.
The headstand allows you to use your head as an additional point of contact and is often 
seen as a progressive step leading up to the handstand, but it is a legitimate pursuit in its 
own right. Both these exercises require a tremendous degree of balance, as well as a neces-
sary capacity for spatial adaptation, as everything appears literally upside-down and back-
ward to the practitioner. These inversions require both strength and skill.
Beyond the aforementioned elements, handstands and headstands place your heart over 
your head, reversing your blood flow. This invigorates the circulatory and immune sys-
tems. Many believe it rejuvenates the spirit as well.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
179
TRIPOD
Get into the bottom of a deep squat, then place your palms flat on the floor in front of you 
at approximately shoulder width. Bend your elbows back and place the top of your head on 
the floor, higher than your hands, not in between them, so that the three points of contact 
form a triangle, hence the name tripod. Raise your hips over your shoulders and bring your 
knees to rest on the backs of your arms. Engage your abdominal and lower back muscles 
and begin lifting your knees off of your arms. You can think of this move like a headstand 
with your knees tucked. Shortening the length of the body makes the balance easier while 
letting you get a feel for being completely inverted.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
180
TRIPOD 
HEADSTAND
From the tripod position, begin 
lifting your legs off your arms and 
carefully extend them over your 
head. Squeeze your glutes and 
engage your legs in order to get 
your body fully extended. You can 
also use your shoulders, arms and 
hands to stay balanced by pressing 
into the ground. You can start out 
with your back to a wall if you are 
worried about tipping over.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
181
ELBOW 
HEADSTAND
Place the top of your head on 
the ground with your fingers inter-
laced behind the back of your 
head. Your forearms will rest on 
the ground with your elbows on 
the floor in front of your shoul-
ders, rather than off to the sides. 
Walk your feet in toward your 
head and raise your hips above 
your shoulders. When your hips 
get high enough, lift or kick your 
legs up, stacking your body in a 
straight line. Start out with your 
back to a wall if you are worried 
about tipping over.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
182
STRADDLE HEADSTAND
From either the tripod or elbow headstand, spreading your legs into a straddle can make 
extended holds less difficult. When you reach your legs out to the sides, you’re essentially 
shortening the length of your body while simultaneously lowering your center of gravity, 
both of which make it easier to balance. Straddling your legs also takes some weight off 
your head and relieves pressure from your lower back.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
183
ULTIMATE HEADSTAND
Performing a headstand with no point of contact other than your skull is the ultimate 
progression. Begin in a tripod headstand and gradually shift your weight off of your hands 
until you are supported only by your head and fingertips. At this point, experiment with 
taking fingers away. As discussed previously, straddling your legs can help. Though it will 
take much trial and error, you may eventually be able to shift all of your weight to your head 
and remove your hands from the ground completely. The ultimate headstand requires tre-
mendous neck strength and even greater balance. Holding it for even one full second takes 
lots of practice.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
184
WALL HANDSTAND
When you are ready to begin handstand train-
ing, the first step is to practice kicking up and 
holding your handstand with your back facing 
toward a wall. You can do this by placing your 
hands on the ground several inches away from 
the wall, then kicking your legs up into position, 
or by starting with your arms raised overhead, 
then leaping into the handstand as you place your 
hands on the ground. Either way, make sure you 
are mindful to actively extend your elbows and 
press the floor away the entire time. Otherwise, 
you may come crashing down. You can also place 
something soft on the ground beneath your head 
if this is a concern. Work toward holding your 
handstand against a wall for at least 30 seconds 
before moving on.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
185

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
186
HANDSTAND 
FACING THE 
WALL
Begin in a plank position with 
your feet against the wall, then 
start walking your feet up as you 
gradually crawl your hands back 
toward it. Get your palms as 
close to the wall as possible while 
lengthening your entire body and 
pressing the ground away. When 
you’ve gotten as close as you can, 
actively shrug your shoulders, 
press your chest toward the wall 
and point your toes. Practicing 
your handstand while facing a wall 
is a great way to start to get the feel 
for the gymnastic style straight-
back handstand.
When you need to come down, 
you can reverse the movement that 
you used to get up, or cartwheel 
your legs to the side.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
187
FOREARM STAND
Kneel down and place your forearms approximately parallel to each other 
against the floor with your palms down. Look in between your hands and kick your 
legs into the air while keeping your weight centered between your elbows and 
hands in order to find the balance. Again, use a wall for support when starting out.
You can also get into a forearm stand by starting in an elbow headstand, then 
carefully lifting your head and looking in between your hands.
The forearm stand can be held with a flat back or an arch. The arched position is 
often known as a scorpion hold.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
188
STRADDLE HANDSTAND
Spreading your legs into a straddle position during a handstand can make holding the 
position less difficult. When you reach your legs out to the sides, you’re essentially short-
ening the length of your body while simultaneously lowering your center of gravity, both of 
which make it easier to balance. Straddling your legs also distributes mass away from your 
balance point, which further decreases your chances of toppling over.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
189
 
ARCH RIVALS
The old school strongmen of yesteryear were often seen performing hand-
stand holds with an arched back. In modern gymnastics, however, it was de-
cided that the flat back (hollow body) handstand would be the standard within 
that sport. Arched handstands are considered incorrect in the world of gym-
nastics. As a result, some people are under the unfortunate misconception that 
the strongman style or arched back handstand is universally wrong and/or 
dangerous. The truth is, both styles of handstand are valuable and worth pur-
suing, though most people will find the arched handstand comes more natu-
rally when starting out. The straight handstand is typically more difficult as 
it requires significantly more shoulder flexibility and stricter body alignment. 
(For those who have that range of motion, however, the straight handstand 
may prove less difficult.)
We ultimately recommend training both versions, though you are encour-
aged to work toward balancing on your hands in any way that suits your in-
terests. No matter which style you choose to practice, there is going to be a 
lot of trial and error in the beginning. Nobody learns to hold a freestanding 
handstand without lots of practice, patience and falling.
Why were so many of the 
old school strongmen prac-
ticing arched handstands? 
Here’s one theory: When 
holding a freestanding hand-
stand, it can be helpful to 
look in between your hands, 
as having a visual connec-
tion to the ground directly 
beneath you provides a lot 
of proprioceptive feedback. 
When you look in between 
your hands, however, it auto-
matically encourages arching 
the spine. This is one of the reasons why the straight back handstand can be 
more difficult to learn; it’s tough to look between your hands while keeping 
your back totally straight. Instead, you need to tuck your chin and look toward 
the horizon. The other reason is that having your arms completely vertical over 
your head requires more mobility than many adults naturally have. As such, a 
lot of flexibility work tends to be required in order to achieve a straight body 
handstand.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
190
STRONGMAN STYLE 
HANDSTAND
To begin practicing the strongman 
style handstand, start by kicking up into a 
wall handstand, as described earlier, then 
gradually begin to take your heels away 
from the wall. You can experiment with 
removing them one at a time or together.
It can help to think about initiating 
this movement from your hands by press-
ing into the floor with your fingers and 
flexing your wrists against the ground, 
rather than initiating it from your legs 
or feet. This technique of “grabbing the 
ground” can also be useful to correct your 
balance should you find yourself about to 
tip over onto your back while practicing 
away from the wall.
Do your best to avoid flaring your 
elbows out to the sides when practicing 
your handstand. Remember to keep your 
elbows in a fully locked position during 
the kick up. You want your arms to be as 
straight as possible so that your bones 
can do some of the work to hold you up.
Focus on keeping your hips stacked 
above your hands. Your hips are your 
center of gravity and if they go forward 
or backward, the rest of you probably will 
as well.
Eventually you will get comfortable 
enough to begin practicing the strongman 
handstand in an open space by kicking up 
or pressing your body into position with-
out relying on a wall for support.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
191
GYMNASTIC STYLE  
HANDSTAND
Get into a handstand while facing a wall 
with your chin tucked toward your chest 
as described earlier. Pull your hips away 
from the wall slightly and stack them 
directly above your shoulders so that only 
your toes and the tops of your feet are 
against the wall. Shrug your shoulders, 
suck in your stomach and squeeze your 
glutes as you carefully pull your feet away 
from the wall while maintaining a hollow 
body position and tensing your fingers 
against the ground for support.
Eventually you will get comfortable 
enough to begin practicing the gymnas-
tic style handstand away from the wall 
by kicking up or pressing your body into 
position.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
192
HOLLOWBACK HANDSTAND
For this variant, also known as a Mexican handstand, you’ll not only be arching your 
back, you will intentionally aim to make that arch as significant as possible. It’s almost like 
combining a handstand with a back bridge. As such, make sure you are comfortable with 
both handstands and back bridges individually before attempting the hollowback hand-
stand. Like the other handstand variants, it’s helpful to practice with a wall for support in 
the beginning, although for this variant, you’ll need to kick up a bit farther from the wall to 
allow room to arch your back and reach your legs behind you. Focus on pressing your chest 
away from your legs to counterbalance their weight. Eventually you can work toward per-
forming a freestanding hollowback handstand.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
193
PIROUETTE
If you feel like you are about to tip over while attempting to hold a freestanding hand-
stand, the pirouette is a great way to bail out safely. This involves lifting one hand and plac-
ing it in front of your body, then immediately turning your hips and letting your legs come 
down one at a time, almost like they would if you were performing a gymnastic cartwheel. 
It may seem intimidating, but performing a pirouette is not particularly difficult. In fact, it 
will happen pretty naturally for most people.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
194
HANDSTAND ON PARALLEL BARS
Holding a handstand on parallel bars is a slightly different skill than holding a 
handstand on flat ground. Squeezing the bars can potentially allow you to control 
and correct your handstand better than you can when flat-palming the ground, 
though if you are used to practicing only on the floor, bars can make for a unique 
challenge at first.
One advantage of practicing your handstand on parallel bars is that should you 
start to tip over, you can attempt to correct your balance by flexing your wrists 
against the direction in which you are falling. Should you feel like you are dropping 
back toward your toes, think about flexing your wrists toward your shoulders to 
pull yourself back into position. If you find yourself tipping over toward your back, 
aim to flex your wrists away from your shoulders in order to correct the balance.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
195
FREESTANDING HANDSTAND PRESS-UP
A merger of balance, control and strength, the freestanding handstand press-up (aka 
freestanding handstand push-up) is a fantastic display of overall calisthenics prowess. 
Before you attempt this move, make sure you are comfortable holding a freestanding hand-
stand as well as performing handstand press-ups against a wall.
When working toward a freestanding handstand press-up, it’s helpful to practice hold-
ing a bent arm freestanding handstand, which is essentially the bottom position of the 
exercise. In this position, it’s important to look in front of your hands rather than right in 
between them (or behind them) as you might when holding a handstand with your arms 
straight. In order to stay balanced with your arms bent, you will need to have your head in 
front of your hands. It’s almost like a tripod headstand except that your body will be at a 
slight angle and your head will be off the floor.
To press yourself up from this bottom position, maintain tension in your trunk and 
legs as you extend your arms overhead. Shift your gaze back between your hands as you 
straighten your elbows.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
196
ONE ARM HANDSTAND
Once you’ve gotten comfortable with handstands, you can up the ante significantly by 
practicing on just one arm. When starting out, use a wall for support the same way you 
would when learning the two-arm version; practice both with your back to the wall as well 
as facing it.
Once you’re able to hold a one arm handstand against a wall and can hold a freestanding 
handstand for a minute or longer, you can begin working toward a free standing one arm 
handstand. Even more than with the two-arm version, holding your legs in a straddle will 
make the balance much more favorable in a one arm handstand.
Start in a straddle handstand, then slowly begin shifting your weight towards one hand. 
If and when you feel ready, attempt to lift the other hand onto the fingertips. Spread your 
legs as wide as you can and stack your hips over your primary hand. Then you can gradually 
remove one finger at a time from the assisting hand. With enough patience and practice, 
you may eventually be able to completely remove your opposite hand from the ground.
The freestanding one arm handstand is one of the most difficult and elusive skills in the 
world. Do not expect to get it without putting in a tremendous amount of work.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
197

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
198
ELBOW LEVER PROGRESSIONS
The classic elbow lever is a calisthenics staple and a breathtaking visual demonstration. 
The move involves holding your body extended horizontally over the ground, supported 
only by your two hands, with your elbows leveraged against your sides. It fuses precise bal-
ance, physical prowess and an iron will. 
When learning the early elbow lever progressions, it’s generally helpful to start on a 
bench, step or any other flat, raised object. This will allow more room to lift your legs into 
position, as opposed to the limited amount of space available when your hands are placed 
on the floor. But once you get a feel for it, you can perform this move just about anywhere!
Like many bodyweight exercises, the elbow lever has roots in several styles of physical 
culture, and while some may know this move by other names, such as peacock pose, it 
remains a fantastic exercise no mater what you call it.
To the untrained eye, the elbow lever can be mistaken for a planche. And although they 
do look similar, the elbow lever is a less difficult skill, due to the fact that your upper body 
rests on your arms (or just one arm, in more advanced versions). But make no mistake: the 
elbow lever stands on its own as a remarkable exercise in its own right.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
199
CLOSED UMBRELLA
Begin by placing your hands flat on an elevated object with your fingers facing toward 
your feet and your palms a few inches apart. You can also wrap your fingers around the edge 
if you prefer. Bend your elbows and think about making a shelf with the backs of your arms 
upon which you will rest your hip bones and torso. Lean forward and bend your knees as 
you place your elbows against your abdomen. Next, tense your midsection and shift your 
weight forward until your feet start to lift up off the floor. Let your legs hang for now and 
just get a feel for this position before moving on.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
200
STRADDLE ELBOW LEVER
Once you get a feel for supporting yourself on your elbows, you can start to work toward 
straightening your back and extending your legs out to the sides. A straddle-leg position 
is the perfect intermediate step after you can hold the closed umbrella but before you are 
ready for a full elbow lever.
As you lengthen your legs and extend your chest forward, you’ll need to alter the angle at 
your elbows. Many people will bend the elbows too much, while others will not bend them 
enough. The ideal angle for your elbows is somewhere around 130 degrees.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
201
ELBOW LEVER
One way to learn the full elbow lever is to transition from the straddle elbow lever. 
Carefully close your legs together while pitching your torso slightly farther forward. Go 
slowly in order to avoid losing your balance. 
When you get more confident holding the elbow lever, you can lift your legs directly into 
position, bypassing the straddle. When performing it this way, be mindful to keep your abs 
contracted and extend your lower back as you lift your feet off the floor. Your legs tend to 
feel heavier when they’re straight.
For either method, it is important to pitch your upper body forward in order to counter-
balance the weight of your bottom half. Open your elbows while doing so; make sure the 
fulcrum point remains just below waist level. Remember, the ideal angle for your elbows is 
around 130 degrees. You may also experiment with different hand positions.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
202
 
ELBOW LEVER SETUP 
To set up for the elbow lever, your elbows must be inside of your hips. As 
such, a certain amount of rotational ability is required at the shoulders. If you 
are experiencing difficulty getting or keeping both arms into position simultane-
ously, or if you feel your elbows slipping out, you can try practicing the bound 
eagle stretch to increase your mobility.
Until it improves, you 
may be better off try-
ing a variant where one 
arm is inside of the hip 
while the other arm re-
mains off to the side un-
til you achieve a better 
range of motion in your 
shoulders. This one arm 
in/one arm out variant 
is a more viable option 
for folks with mobility 
issues.
 
 
Elbow lever setup.
One arm in/ one arm 
out elbow lever.
 
Bound eagle stretch.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
203
ONE ARM ELBOW LEVER
When you need a new challenge beyond the classic elbow lever, you can begin working 
toward a one arm elbow lever. Start on an elevated surface with one arm in and one arm 
out—the same position we advised on the two arm elbow lever for those experiencing 
shoulder mobility issues. From there, you can spot yourself with your outside hand and 
gradually shift your weight off your fingers and onto your main hand.
It takes a lot of trial and error to find the sweet spot for the one arm elbow lever, so be 
patient. With enough practice, however, you will eventually get the feel for completely 
removing your assisting arm and holding all of your weight on just one side. Then you can 
start to work toward longer holds.
 
Spot yourself with your outside 
hand and gradually shift your 
weight off your fingers.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
204
Begin with your legs in a straddle, reaching your free arm out and away from your body 
to help counterbalance your legs. Holding the position with your feet together requires sig-
nificantly more balance and stability. 
Though sometimes people mistakenly put their elbow too close to their navel, the point 
of contact between your elbow and your body should be pretty much the same as in the two 
arm version. The ideal elbow placement can vary a bit from person to person, but it is gen-
erally best to keep your elbow close to your hip. As such, you will need to rotate your body 
ever so slightly toward your primary arm in order to stay balanced.
 
It takes a lot of trial and error to find the sweet spot 
for the one arm elbow lever.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
205
 
Holding the one 
arm elbow lever 
with your feet 
together requires 
significantly more 
balance and  
stability.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
206
ADVANCED ONE ARM ELBOW LEVER
When you hold a one arm elbow lever, having your opposite arm outstretched is helpful 
for balance. Therefore, removing that assistance from the equation by placing the free arm 
along your side makes the balance considerably more difficult. Like the conventional one 
arm elbow lever, start with your legs in a straddle, then gradually work toward closing them 
as you gain strength and confidence in the position. Try gripping onto your side to create 
more tension.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
207
SIDE ONE ARM ELBOW LEVER
For this variation, your torso will be turned to the side instead of facing down toward the 
ground as it is in the standard one arm elbow lever. As such, you will need to rotate your 
elbow farther outside of your hip, requiring a great degree of mobility at the shoulder.
It’s common to find this side-on position more difficult as compared to the standard 
one arm elbow lever. Since you can’t really straddle your legs here, try bending your bot-
tom knee to shorten the lever and make the balance a bit easier. Eventually you can work 
toward holding the position with both legs straight.
Like the standard one arm elbow lever, using your non-balancing arm to spot yourself 
can be very helpful. As you get more comfortable with the move, you can gradually start to 
shift your weight off that arm until you can take the hand away from the ground altogether.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
208
PLANCHE PROGRESSIONS
The planche is the “Big Kahuna” of all floor holds. It is one of the beastliest displays of 
brute strength, sound technique and implausible balance in the entire domain of calisthen-
ics training. 
With its roots in gymnastics, the planche has been widely adapted and celebrated in the 
Street Workout world. It really is a sight to behold: the human body parallel to the ground, 
with a straight line from the shoulders to the hips to the feet. The only point of contact with 
the ground is the hands. We discussed how the planche is sometimes confused with the 
elbow lever, but they are clearly birds of a different feather. The planche requires the prac-
titioner’s arms to be totally straight, without supporting the rest of the body. It looks almost 
like a plank with the feet floating in the air. Astonishing!
Without a doubt, the planche is a hard-won move, unbelievably difficult and extraor-
dinarily advanced. Be prepared to spend a long time with this one. Take it slow and stay 
the course.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
209
PLANCHE LEAN
Start at the top of a push-up with your hands and fingers turned out partially toward the 
sides. Begin to gradually shift your weight forward as you flex into your wrists and walk your 
toes forward, actively pushing the ground away in order to maintain straight arms. Spread 
your shoulder-blades apart and continue slowly taking weight off your feet until your hands 
are supporting as much of the load as they can handle. In a full planche, all of your weight 
will be in your hands; this position can start to give you a feel for what that entails.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
210
TUCK PLANCHE
Once again, we will be shortening the length of the body in order to scale a difficult exer-
cise down to a more approachable level. Make no mistake, however, the tuck planche is a 
fairly early progression toward a full planche, but it is still an intense move in its own right. 
Think of it like the crane pose discussed earlier, only without any contact between your 
arms and legs.
Get into a narrow squat position with your heels off the ground and knees tucked by your 
chest. Place your hands on the floor partially turned out and begin gradually shifting your 
weight into your fingers and palms. Flex into your wrists, spread your shoulder-blades 
apart and press into the ground with your hands, arms and the rest of your upper body. 
Finally, raise your hips into the air and pick your feet up off the floor, transferring all of 
your weight into your hands. 
At first, you can allow your lower back to round in order to shorten your body length as 
much as possible. Once you’ve gotten a feel for this, you can begin to extend through your 
lower back and slide your knees and feet farther from your trunk.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
211
STRADDLE PLANCHE
From the tuck planche position, continue leaning farther forward into your wrists and 
reach your legs out to the sides. The leap from the tuck planche to the straddle planche is 
fairly significant, so be prepared to put in a lot of time with the tuck position before moving 
on to the straddle. As is often the case, the farther you can spread your legs, the more favor-
able your leverage will become.
You can also experiment with lowering into the straddle planche from a straddle hand-
stand. If you choose this method, be mindful to pitch your chest forward and flex deep into 
your wrists as you descend, actively pressing into the ground and flaring your lats on the 
way down.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
212
SCORPION PLANCHE
This planche variation again shortens the length of the body for increased leverage, this 
time by keeping the knees bent above and behind the body, rather than beneath. Begin in a 
handstand with your hands turned out slightly, then bend your knees, arch your back and 
gradually begin to lower your hips down while pitching your torso forward and bending 
into your wrists. As with the other planche variants, make sure to actively spread your 
shoulder blades apart and press into the ground with your hands and arms.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
213
PLANCHE
After you’ve spent adequate time on the previous progressions, you can start to explore 
the full planche, which can be approached in a few different ways.
The first method is to begin in a tuck planche, then slowly extend your body out into the full 
planche position, transitioning through the advanced tuck and straddle planche positions 
along the way. Gradually increasing the load on your muscles by starting in a tuck position 
allows you to prime your nervous system for the incredibly unfavorable leverage involved 
with holding your body completely horizontal to the ground with your feet in the air.
You can also lower into the planche from a freestanding handstand, which again gives 
you the opportunity to “charge up” neurologically as you increase the load on your arms. 
Remember to pitch your chest forward and bend into your wrists as you descend into posi-
tion. Again, it can be helpful to turn your hands outward to allow for deeper wrist flexion.
Like the freestanding handstand, you may find that practicing the planche while holding 
parallel bars can be slightly less difficult than performing the hold with your hands flat on 
the ground. Using parallel bars allows you to fully engage your grip strength and does not 
require as much mobility in the wrists. Additionally, being elevated can provide more room 
to lift into position.
Regardless of which method you employ, be mindful to avoid bending at your elbows or 
sagging at the hips when executing the planche. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
214

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
215
C h a p t e r 10
Bar Moves
othing screams “Street Workout” like bar moves. Many practitioners of 
advanced calisthenics were roped in the first time they saw these advanced 
exercises because they are such a spectacular visual to behold. We sure were!
But there’s more to these moves than just looking cool. They require strength, technique 
and perseverance. The muscle-up, back lever and front lever are all full body exercises even 
if they emphasize different muscle groups as primary movers; none of them isolate the upper 
body completely.
The following gravity-defying feats will suspended you in mid-air, as if you’re flying over 
the earth beneath you, and will make you feel like the king or queen of the world!
MUSCLE-UP PROGRESSIONS
The muscle-up is a gatekeeper of sorts between intermediate and advanced bar-work. 
Muscle-ups beckon us to take our game to the next level, as they work the entire upper body in 
a way that no other single exercise can. They’re also a lot of fun!
To the untrained eye, the muscle-up appears to simply be a combination of a pull-up and a 
dip, but be assured, it’s a unique animal unto itself. It’s the only upper-body exercise that com-
bines both a pull and a push. Beyond that, muscle-ups also require an explosive generation of 
power, along with a notoriously difficult transition around the bar. In the calisthenics county, 
the muscle-up is tops!
N

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
216
EXTENDED RANGE-OF-MOTION PULL-UP
Once you can do several clean pull-ups with your chin going over the bar, extending the 
range of motion can be the next step toward a muscle-up. Yank down hard on the bar as fast 
and powerfully as you can, using your entire body to generate force.
At first, aim to pull the bar down 
toward your chest. Once you can do 
that, start aiming for your abdomen. 
Eventually you will be able to pull your-
self fast enough and with enough force 
to get your elbows higher than your 
wrists.
 
 
At first, aim to pull the bar 
down toward your chest.
Once you can do that, start 
aiming for your abdomen.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
217
NEGATIVE MUSCLE-UP
Training the negative (or eccentric) phase of a movement pattern is a useful technique 
for learning many Street Workout exercises, though it can be especially helpful for the 
muscle-up. Practicing the negative phase helps you get a feel for the movement pattern 
from the top down.
Get above the bar just like you would for a straight bar dip, then carefully lower yourself 
to the bottom of your dip position. From here, continue lowering yourself as slowly as you 
can while you extend your legs forward, bracing your entire body and squeezing the bar as 
hard as possible as your hand rolls from the dip position into the pull-up position. At first, 
you may drop very quickly, but you’ll gain control of the descent with practice. Eventually, 
that control will transfer into reversing the movement.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
218
 
FALSE GRIP 
Part of the challenge of the muscle-up is timing the transition so your hands 
roll from the pull-up grip into the dip position at just the right time. Using a 
“false grip” can sometimes fix this issue.
The false grip involves cocking your wrists over the bar before you start your 
pull so they won’t need to roll around it during the transition. By starting with 
your palms facing toward the ground rather than away from your body, you 
will automatically be in the right position to begin the pushing phase once you 
get to the top of your pull. The false grip can be especially helpful when work-
ing on performing a strict muscle-up.
Some people find an exaggerated false grip with their closed fists resting 
on the bar to be ideal. In this variant, the bar will wind up in the crook of your 
wrists, allowing for more of your hand to be on top of the bar. This can create 
better leverage, particularly if you lack the wrist mobility for a standard false 
grip muscle-up.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
219
MUSCLE-UP
The mighty muscle-up begins like a pull-up, but continues until your entire torso goes up 
and over the bar. Grip the bar slightly narrower than you would for a pull-up, then lean back 
and pull the bar down your body as low as possible. At the top of your pull, reach your chest 
over the bar and extend your arms.
Though the first phase of the muscle-up shares a lot in common with the pull-up, the two 
movement patterns are subtly different. When you do a muscle-up, you’ll be driving your 
elbows behind your body, rather than toward your sides as you would in a standard pull-up. 
This is why a narrower grip tends to work better for the muscle-up.
It’s also helpful to think about leaning away from the bar during the pulling phase before 
pitching forward at the top. This creates a movement pattern that’s more of an “S” shape 
than a straight line, allowing you to better maneuver your body around the bar.
When starting out, we encourage you to use momentum and be explosive. It may take a 
lot of practice to get a feel for the timing, though if you are solid on your pull-ups and dili-
gent in practicing the previous steps, the muscle-up will eventually be yours.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
220
 
CHICKEN WINGING 
It is common for people new to muscle-ups to find that one arm will get over 
the bar before the other. Though “chicken-winging” can be a helpful way to first 
get a feel for the crucial transition from pull to push, it’s best to try to shake 
this habit as soon as possible, as doing so can be stressful on the shoulders and 
elbows.
If you have to chicken wing in the beginning, it’s not necessarily a problem, 
but make it your mission to learn to get both arms over the bar at the same time.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
221
STRICT MUSCLE-UP
Once you can do a few muscle-ups in a row, it’s time to begin eliminating the use of any 
momentum, instead performing the move with nothing more than solid technique and raw 
strength.
A strict muscle-up involves maintaining straight legs while avoiding any swinging or hip 
movement as you pull and push your entire torso over the bar from a dead hang. You will 
need to brace your abs and tense your legs to in order to perform a strict muscle-up. You 
may also find it helpful to reach your legs forward as you transition from the pulling phase 
into the pushing phase.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
222
REVERSE GRIP MUSCLE-UP
Unlike pull-ups, which are typically harder with an overhand grip, the muscle-up is 
significantly more difficult to perform using an underhand grip. Due to the change in hand 
position, the transition from pulling to pushing becomes even more challenging. As such, 
you will need to generate even more explosive force during the pull in order to roll your 
hands around. It’s also important to be careful to avoid placing too much pressure on your 
thumbs during the transition. A mixed grip muscle-up (one arm in an overhand position 
and the other one underhand) can serve as a helpful step toward learning a reverse grip 
muscle-up.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
223
The Plyo-Matrix:  
Muscle-Mania
PERFORMING A PLYOMETRIC MUSCLE-UP IS THE ULTIMATE EXPRESSION OF 
EXPLOSIVE POWER. IN ORDER TO EXECUTE THIS EXERCISE, YOU MUST GO FOR AS 
MUCH HEIGHT AS POSSIBLE. IN OTHER WORDS, KEEP PRACTICING THOSE EXPLO-
SIVE PULL-UPS AND DIPS.
ONCE YOU CAN GENERATE ENOUGH HEIGHT ON THE BAR, TRY REMOVING YOUR 
HANDS AT THE TOP OF THE MUSCLE-UP FOR JUST A MOMENT. THIS IS HOW THE 
PLYOMETRIC MUSCLE-UP BEGINS. IN TIME, YOU CAN TRY KEEPING YOUR HANDS 
OFF THE BAR FOR LONGER, ADDING A CLAP, PUTTING YOUR HANDS BEHIND YOUR 
BACK OR EVEN CROSSING YOUR HANDS OVER ONE ANOTHER.
THE MOST ADVANCED PLYOMETRIC MUSCLE-UPS ENTAIL JUMPING OVER THE 
BAR (SOMETIMES REFERRED TO AS A “MUSCLE-OVER”) OR DOING A COMPLETE 
360, IF YOU CAN BELIEVE IT. INDEED, THIS EXERCISE EMBODIES THE TRUE ES-
SENCE OF STREET WORKOUT IN ALL ITS SPLENDOR!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
224
BACK LEVER PROGRESSIONS
It’s a bird. It’s a plane. It’s… a back lever! 
While a back lever will not actually give you the power of flight, executing this incredible 
feat is sure to make you feel like Superman.
The full back lever involves gripping the bar with your body in a prone position, parallel to 
the ground. A superhuman amount of strength is required, as you’ll be recruiting your many 
muscle groups, including your arms, abs, shoulders, back, glutes and even your legs. Because 
this incredible spectacle trains your sensory awareness in addition to rocking your muscles, 
back lever practice provides a fantastic workout for your mind, body and spirit.
SKINNING THE CAT
Before you embark on learning the back lever, you need to familiarize yourself with a calis-
thenics skill commonly referred to as skinning the cat.
Hang from a pull-up bar in an overhand grip, then pull your knees all the way toward your 
chest. When you can’t get them any higher, begin rotating your body beneath the bar so your 
legs and feet pass behind it on the other side. Continue lowering yourself until your legs 
are fully extended with your arms positioned behind your back. This is known as a German 
hang. It’s a great stretch for your shoulders. Pause here briefly, then tuck your knees toward 
your chest, raise your hips up toward the bar and thread your legs back around, returning to 
the start position. 
When starting out, you may have to cross your ankles in order to get your legs under the 
bar. Folks with limited mobility tend to have a particularly hard time with this. There is 
also a great deal of shoulder flexibility required. Do your best to avoid bending your elbows 
during this exercise.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
225
 
The bottom position of  
skinning the cat is called a  
German hang.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
226
TUCK BACK LEVER
From a German hang, begin lifting your hips, pulling your knees toward your chest and 
flattening out your back. Aim to get your torso parallel to the ground with your heels up by 
your butt. Focus on extending through your lower back to avoid excessive rounding.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
227
ONE LEG BACK LEVER
Extending one leg while keeping the other tucked is a helpful intermediate step 
between a tuck back lever and the full version. From the tuck back lever position, carefully 
reach one leg behind while pitching your chest forward and increasing the tension in the 
rest of your body.
STRADDLE BACK LEVER
Holding your legs outstretched to the sides is a bit less difficult than holding the full back 
lever, as the straddle leg position shortens your body length slightly. Give it a shot once the 
single leg version is no longer as challenging, yet the full back lever still remains out of reach.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
228
BACK LEVER
The Street Workout style back lever is typically performed with an overhand pull-up 
grip, holding the entire body horizontally above the ground with your hands grasping 
the bar behind your lower back. Full body tension is very much necessary, as you must 
squeeze not only with your hands against the bar, but with your arms against your body.
Once you’ve gotten comfort-
able with the previous steps, 
there are a few different ways 
you can experiment with getting 
into position for a full back lever. 
You are encouraged to experi-
ment with all three.
The first method is to lift your 
body in the air vertically so you 
wind up facing downward with 
your feet above the bar and the 
bar behind your waist. Once you 
establish tension in your entire 
body, you can slowly begin low-
ering yourself until you are par-
allel to the ground. This gradu-
ally increases the muscular load 
and primes your neurology for 
the feeling of supporting your 
full body weight in a back lever. 
Pitch your torso forward as you 
come down in order to control 
the descent and avoid being 
pulled down too forcefully by the 
weight of your legs. 
 
Slowly lowering yourself 
into position is one method 
of getting into a back lever.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
229
The second method is to start in a tuck back lever, then carefully unfurl your legs (one at 
a time or simultaneously). As you extend your legs, remember to pitch your chest forward 
to keep the length of your body even on both sides of the bar. Your hands should wind up 
behind your hips rather than behind your shoulders.
The last method (and typically the most difficult) is to lift your body into position from 
a German hang without ever bending at the hips or knees. You’ll need to think about pull-
ing the bar toward your back as you extend through your back and legs in order to lift into 
position.
One of the most common issues with the back lever is excessive curvature of the back. 
Actively engage your abs, legs and glutes to avoid falling into this trap. It might even help 
to think about folding forward slightly as a means of overcompensating, almost like an 
upside down version of the hollow body position. Furthermore, maintaining a narrow grip 
can help facilitate greater tension between your torso and your upper arms, which can aid 
in holding the back lever, whereas a wider grip will make the move more difficult. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
230
REVERSE GRIP BACK LEVER
Unlike a pull-up, performing a back lever with the palms in a chin-up grip is more diffi-
cult than the other way around. Due to the change in arm position, significantly more load 
is placed on the biceps than in the standard Street Workout style back lever. As such, this 
variation can be especially stressful on the tendons surrounding the elbow joint. Though 
this grip is commonly seen when back levers are performed in gymnastics, we recommend 
learning the Street Workout style back lever first, then going back to the earlier progressions 
with a chin-up grip in order to build toward this variation. Like the reverse grip muscle-up, 
you can also experiment with a mixed grip as a transitional step between the classic Street 
Workout back lever and the reverse grip.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
231
ONE ARM BACK LEVER
The ultimate back lever progression entails holding the pose with just one arm. This 
move is sometimes referred to as “the shark,” due to its visual resemblance to nature’s great-
est predator as well as its own ferocious bite. Make sure you’ve got a very solid two arm back 
lever before diving in!
If you’re ready to try it, begin in the standard two arm back lever position, then slowly 
start shifting your weight toward your primary arm. Before you take your other arm away, 
it can help to rotate your hips and trunk toward your main arm while reaching your legs 
behind you for balance. It may help to bend your knees as well. Carefully loosen your grip on 
the opposite side, ultimately removing that hand altogether when the time comes. Once you 
take that arm away, reach it overhead, lengthen your whole body and slowly start rotating 
your body back toward more of a face down position.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
232

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
233
FRONT LEVER PROGRESSIONS
The awe-inspiring front lever is one of the most advanced bar moves in the entire body-
weight empire and one of the most impressive sights you are ever likely to behold. Visually, 
it’s the opposite of the back lever. You are parallel to the ground in both, but this time, you’re 
facing up, like laying down on a bed of air, floating above the world beneath you.
The full expression of the front lever involves keeping your arms locked out at the elbow, 
with a straight line from your shoulders to your hips to your feet. From a pure strength per-
spective, the front lever is harder than the back lever. However, it is less spatially disorient-
ing and therefore possibly more accessible for some. The primary muscles involved are the 
lats and abs, though the entire upper body plays a role, as do the glutes and legs.
Execution of this formidable force is a long road. It can take months, even years, to 
achieve a full front lever hold for just a few seconds. Train hard, friends!
EXAGGERATED BAR HANG
Remember how we told you to pull your shoulder blades down and back when you do 
a pull-up? Your very first step toward performing a front lever is simply taking that basic 
bar hang and cranking it up a notch. For the exaggerated bar hang you are going to lean 
back, depressing and squeezing your scapulae together as hard as you can. Now begin to 
think about dragging the 
bar toward your hips 
while keeping both arms 
straight. You may not be 
able to raise your body 
very far yet, but practic-
ing this move will start to 
give you a feel for pulling 
from your arms without 
bending at the elbows, 
which is crucial to per-
forming a front lever.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
234
TUCK FRONT LEVER
From the exaggerated bar hang, begin tucking your knees toward your chest just like you 
were performing a hanging knee raise. When your knees reach the top position, continue 
pulling your hips up toward the bar until your torso is parallel to the ground. Again, it can 
help to imagine that you are trying to drag the bar down toward your hips in order to engage 
your lats.
In the beginning, it’s okay to let your lower back round so you can bring your knees close 
to your chest. The closer your knees are to your chest, the less difficult the hold will be. 
As such, you can progress this exercise by moving into what you might call an “advanced 
tuck” position with the lower back completely flat and the knees above the hips, rather than 
tucked toward the chest.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
235
STRADDLE FRONT LEVER
As with the other types of levers, holding a straddle leg position is a helpful progression 
just before performing the full front lever hold with your body totally extended. Holding 
your feet apart essentially shortens the body, rendering this exercise more mechanically 
forgiving than the full front lever.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
236
ONE LEG FRONT LEVER
From the tuck front lever position, extend one leg while keeping the other tucked. 
You can adjust the difficulty of this move depending on how much flexion you have 
in your bent knee. The closer it gets to straight, the harder the move becomes.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
237

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
238
FRONT LEVER
As with the back lever, there are a few ways to approach getting into the full front lever.
The first method involves pulling yourself into an inverted position with your legs above 
your shoulders and the bar in front of your hips. From here, tense your entire body, then 
carefully lower yourself into the front lever position. It’s helpful to pause every inch or two 
in order to stay in control. As we’ve seen before, lowering your body down from an angled 
position allows you to experience incremental increases in resistance. 
The next method is to start from a tucked front lever, then gradually extend your legs. The 
straighter your legs get, the more tension you will need to generate in order to hold the position.
The third method is simply to pull yourself into the front lever from a dead hang. This 
is typically the most difficult (and arguably most impressive) method. It starts out like the 
exaggerated bar hang but continues until your body is completely parallel to the ground.
 
Lowering down from an angled position allows you to experience 
incremental increases in resistance.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
239
One more way to get into a front lever is to begin above the bar in the top position 
of a muscle-up. From here, lower your chest over the bar and begin performing a 
muscle-up negative. As your chest passes below the bar, extend your arms, lean back 
and reach your legs into the front lever position.
Whichever method you employ, think about contracting every single muscle in 
your body while using your arms and lats to actively pull the bar toward your hips.
It’s very common for people to inadvertently fold at the hips when attempting the 
front lever. Do your best to avoid this pitfall by looking at your toes to make sure you 
are maintaining a straight line from shoulders to heels.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
240
FRONT LEVER CURL
Begin by hanging from an overhead bar in a position similar to the headbanger pull-up, 
with your arms flexed and your head close to the bar. From here, maintain tension in your 
abs, legs, glutes and shoulders as you extend back into the front lever position, extending 
your arms while keeping the rest of your body rigid. Pause here briefly then return to the 
start position and repeat.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
241
This move, sometimes known as an “ice cream maker,” can help you get a feel for the 
proper alignment of the front lever without having to hold it for very long. As long as you 
keep your body rigid, using some momentum from the hinging movement at the elbows can 
help you swing into position, giving you a taste of what holding a front lever feels like.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
242
FRONT LEVER PULL-UP
Though a proper front lever is typically performed with the arms straight, hitting a front 
lever position then pulling your body to the bar with bent arms is a serious and worthwhile 
challenge. It’s almost like an Aussie pull-up with your feet floating in the air.
If you aren’t ready for full front lever pull-ups, you can use the tuck, one leg or straddle 
variations. In fact, these variations can be a helpful accessory exercise on your way to hold-
ing a front lever.
When practicing tuck front lever pull-ups, it’s helpful to use a parallel bar (neutral grip) 
set-up like you would for dips. This will allow room for your knees to pass beyond the height 
of your hands without obstruction.
 
When practicing tuck front lever pull-ups, 
it’s helpful to use a parallel bar (neutral 
grip) set-up like you would for dips.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
243
 
THE IMPOSSIBLE POSSIBLE
In the early 20th Century, there was an American Sideshow performer who 
went by the moniker “The Impossible Possible.” He ate fire without getting 
burned, swallowed swords whole, danced on broken glass and hammered nails 
into his eye sockets. Sounds impossible, huh?
It wasn’t. Nothing is.
In the world of calisthenics, there are some moves that people consider im-
possible. Exercises that seem to exist in theory only. When folks speak of the 
“impossible” dip, they are referring to a parallel bar dip, in which the shoulders 
are stationary, with flexion occurring only at the elbows and wrists. The rest 
of the body remains perfectly vertical, perpendicular to the ground. The chest 
does not pitch forward to any degree. The hips do not hinge. The “impossible” 
muscle-up is a muscle-up also completely devoid of any bending of the body. 
No maneuvering around the bar; no feet coming out front; no leaning forward 
at the chest. And the “CTI” or “close to impossible,” made famous by legendary 
calisthenics practitioner Jasper Benincasa, is a bar lever where the performer 
holds himself upright, away from the bar, arms completely extended and par-
allel to the ground, straight in front of the body. Although you may never have 
seen these “impossible” moves in person, does that mean they can’t be done?

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
244

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
245
C h a p t e r 11
Human Flag
he full press flag has become synonymous with Street Workout. Try performing 
it in public and just watch spectators’ reactions. Heads spin. Jaws drop. Hearts 
pound. As anyone who’s ever witnessed it knows, nothing attracts a crowd like human flag!
Beyond the amazing visual, there is a tremendous amount of upper body strength needed 
to perform the numerous types of human flags. Observers often mistakenly think that all 
the power comes from the lateral chain, but that is far from the truth. Though the sides of 
the body play a large role in the human flag, beastly arms, shoulders, chest and back are most 
certainly required, so make sure you have a solid foundation in push-ups, pull-ups and dips. 
Additionally, the glutes, abs and legs have to work harder than one may think. The flag is also 
an enormous proprioceptive challenge.
Do you have what it takes?
CLUTCH FLAG PROGRESSIONS
Between the elbow lever and the press flag lies the mighty clutch flag. When you perform 
a clutch flag, your arms are not over your head; they are clutching the pole against your chest, 
as you leverage against your elbow. Therefore, the length of your body is shorter than in a full 
press flag, due to the fact that your head and shoulders are on the other side of the pole.
Although these clutch flag variants are considered to be progressions leading up to the full 
human flag, as they prime the body in terms of muscular loading, spatial awareness and neu-
rology, the clutch flag is a legitimate force in its own right.
T

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
246
The clutch flag also necessitates employing almost every muscle in the body, as 
well as having tough skin and a high tolerance for discomfort. Because the body tends 
to rotate away from the pole, you must squeeze hard with the entire arm. Be prepared 
for the bar to rub against your hide. Furthermore, as we saw with the elbow lever, the 
placement of the lower arm can take some getting used to. But fear not, friends: with 
enough practice, you can incorporate this move into your regular training, for a unique 
display of strength, precision and full body unity.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
247
SIDE PLANK
The very first step toward performing a human flag is holding a basic side plank. Get into 
a standard push-up position and begin shifting all of your weight onto one hand. Rotate 
your body so that your chest faces sideways instead of toward the ground, stacking your 
feet, ankles and legs as you remove the opposite hand from the ground and reach it into the 
air. This is a great way to begin training to tense your body in a lateral position.
To make the move more difficult, you can elevate your feet, thus placing more weight in 
your hand as well as increasing the workload for your trunk by placing your body in a fully 
horizontal position.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
248
 
CLUTCH FLAG ARM SETUP 
The following three clutch flag variants all share the same arm set-up, which 
is crucial for generating the leverage needed to perform the exercise correctly.
Grasp a vertical pole just below waist height using an underhand grip so 
your elbow points down. Now bend that arm and bring your hip bone to rest on 
your bottom elbow, similar to how you would for an elbow lever. Reach your 
top arm around the pole so it winds up in your armpit, keeping your elbow 
above your shoulder, with your thumb facing down.
As with the elbow 
lever, the rotational 
flexibility needed to 
get the bottom elbow 
into the proper po-
sition will be a chal-
lenge. Use the same 
“bound eagle” stretch 
discussed in the elbow 
lever section to work 
on this crucial aspect 
of the move.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
249
LOW HANGING CLUTCH FLAG
Once you’ve established your arm position, squeeze the pole firmly with both 
hands. Turn your chest toward the pole and begin shifting your weight off your 
feet and into your hands. Make sure to maintain contact between your hip and 
your bottom elbow so you can leverage your torso against your arm. The aim here 
is simply to get your feet of the ground with your legs hanging low. Knees bent is 
okay here as well.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
250
TUCK CLUTCH FLAG
Begin in a low hanging clutch flag, then lift your hips to shoulder level as you tuck your 
knees toward your chest. By shortening the length of your legs you’ll make the move less 
difficult. The tuck clutch flag is a great way to get a feel for holding your torso completely 
sideways without having to overcome as much resistance as you need to for a full clutch flag.
Once you get a feel for holding the clutch flag with both legs tucked, you can begin to 
extend one leg, which is a great intermediate step toward the full expression of the exercise.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
251
CLUTCH FLAG
Set up your arms as described earlier. Then tense your entire body, shift your 
weight onto your bottom elbow and squeeze the pole as hard as you can. Focus on 
keeping your body tense and completely sideways, being mindful not to face down-
ward. This is where the previously discussed shoulder mobility can be an issue. 
Aim for the pole to wind up pressed flat against your upper chest. Remember to 
squeeze your glutes and legs.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
252
CLUTCH LEVER
You can think of this exercise as a hybrid between a clutch flag and a front lever. Grasp 
a vertical pole at chest height and reach your opposite arm behind your back, gripping the 
pole just outside your hip. Squeeze tightly with both hands and lean your trunk back, using 
your forearm beneath you for support as you lie back into a horizontal position. Allow your 
top arm to extend as you lean back; feel free to experiment with varying degrees of elbow 
flexion. Make sure to maintain tension through your entire body and be careful not to lean 
your weight too much toward the pole. Doing so can cause you to spin out and lose control.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
253
X CLUTCH FLAG
This is a difficult clutch flag variant that finds the arms crossed in an X shape in 
front of the pole while the body is extended behind it.
Begin by getting your bottom arm (top hand) in position by reaching across your 
body and grabbing the pole in an overhand grip just above waist height. Reach your 
top arm over and grab the bar in front of your other arm, so the hand of your top arm 
winds up beneath your other hand, with the bottom arm underneath. This creates 
the X formation of the arms.
Squeeze the bar and tense your entire body as you lean over, thinking about 
uncrossing your arms like you were trying to rip the pole apart in order to create the 
tension needed to stay up.
It’s hard to avoid folding in half at the hips when attempting this exercise, so be 
prepared to compensate for this by extending through your legs and lower back.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
254
 
ALTERNATIVE GRIPS 
As is often the case with Street Workout, the possibilities are endless when 
it comes to the clutch flag. Practicing on unique objects and with creative hand 
positions calls upon your ingenuity and imagination in unexpected ways. Leave 
it to your environment and your own sense of adventure to continually keep the 
clutch flag fun and interesting.
 
Yes, I’ll hold.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
255
PRESS FLAG PROGRESSIONS
Picture a human being suspended sideways on a vertical pole, completely parallel, 
elbows locked, with no points of contact other than their own two hands. Mind-blowing. 
Riveting. Spellbinding. Whether you saw it at the playground or on YouTube, no one can 
forget the first time they witnessed this feat of super-human strength. The combination of 
power, precision and control never fails to leave an indelible impression. 
Spatially, the press flag is entirely its own entity, so be prepared for some trial and error. 
Though the idea is to perform the press flag as a static hold, you will have to overcome 
many opposing forces. The body doesn’t just move up and down or front to back. It actually 
rotates against the pole. This torqueing or twisting of the flagger himself is a challenge in 
its own right. Counter this by squeezing the pole extra tightly and maintaining tension in 
your entire body including your abs, glutes and even your legs, not just the upper body. 
You must learn to use every muscle together. Take your time with these progressions. The 
human flag can take years to attain and a lifetime to master. Train hard and have fun with 
it. Get ready to let your freak flag fly!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
256

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
257
SUPPORT PRESS
This flag variant will start to give you a feel for the full press flag while allowing 
for more favorable leverage. Grab an overhead bar with one hand while using your 
opposite hand to press into the vertical support beam that holds up your bar. Make 
sure to keep both arms totally straight with your shoulders and lats engaged. Lift 
your feet as you press into the support beam with your bottom hand while pulling 
from your top arm. Avoid bending at the elbows as you tense your entire body, hold-
ing yourself at approximately a 45 degree angle to the ground. The closer your top 
hand gets to the vertical pole, the more challenging the move becomes, so start out 
by placing it fairly far away and gradually work toward getting it closer.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
258
 
PRESS FLAG ARM SETUP 
Most of the following human flag variants will involve using the same grip. 
Grasp a vertical pole with your top hand in an overhand grip and your bottom 
hand turned under facing the opposite direction. The bottom arm will be posi-
tioned so that the elbow faces downward. This is the foundation of the human 
flag. The bottom arm’s job is to support most of your body weight. To do this, 
you’re going to have to press into the pole as hard as possible. Aim to fully 
extend your elbow and keep it locked out. It is essential to have a solid grip in 
order to execute the move properly.
Try to maximize the amount of contact between your hands and the bar. It 
may be helpful to point your index finger down depending on wrist mobility and 
bar thickness. Squeeze the pole tightly and straighten both arms.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
259
 
KEEP IT WHEEL 
When performing any of these press flag variations, it is helpful to imagine 
that you are turning a giant steering wheel by pulling from your top arm while 
pressing from your bottom arm. It’s of note that while your top arm will be 
pulling, it should not bend. The pull happens from the shoulder joint, similar 
to packing your shoulders during a pull-up. The pressing arm should also avoid 
bending at the elbow, with the press being initiated from the shoulder.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
260
CHAMBER HOLD
Once you’re able to comfortably hold the support press for several seconds, you can 
begin the transition to practicing with both hands on a vertical pole. As the leverage here 
becomes significantly more difficult than the support press, we’ll be elevating the hips above 
the shoulders and bending both legs to compensate. Changing the angle and shortening the 
length of your body will allow you to get a feel for holding yourself sideways against a verti-
cal pole without having to overcome your entire body weight. In the beginning, you’ll need 
to learn to jump and kick your legs to get your hips up, which can take some practice. It’s 
helpful to aim to overshoot the kick up when starting out, as it’s higher than it often seems.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
261
VERTICAL FLAG
After establishing a solid chamber hold, you can begin lengthening the legs to prepare for 
what it will feel like to move toward a full press flag. For this variant, keep your body closer 
to vertical than horizontal, almost like a crooked handstand. We’ll also allow some leeway 
here with the elbow position. In other words, if you need to bend your top arm a bit, it’s okay 
in the beginning. The vertical flag requires less strength than a full press flag but starts to 
give you a taste for the full expression of the move.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
262
LOW HANGING FLAG
The low hanging flag is a nice step to practice concurrently along with the chamber hold 
and the vertical flag. Some people may find it less difficult; others may find it to be more diffi-
cult. Progressions are not always experienced in the same linear fashion by all.
Just as the vertical flag is less difficult than the full human flag, a low hanging flag incor-
porates the same principle, only with the legs below horizontal rather than above. Either 
way, you are closer to the pole, which allows for more favorable leverage. Get your hands in 
position as previously described, then tense your entire body as you lift your legs, allowing 
them to hang down while your hips stay below shoulder height.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
263
HIGH ANGLED FLAG
The high angled flag is basically halfway between a vertical flag and a full press 
flag. Begin in a vertical flag, then slowly start lowering your trunk and legs. Think 
about positioning your body so that your bottom arm, hips and legs create a straight 
line at a 45-degree angle to the pole. From here, you can slowly work toward steady-
ing your trunk and continuing to lower your legs closer toward the floor.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
264
BICYCLE FLAG
Practicing the human flag with one leg tucked and the other leg extended is a 
nice intermediate step before the full human flag. It’s helpful to practice alternating 
which leg is tucked, almost like you are pedaling an imaginary bicycle while floating 
in the air. This bicycle flag technique works particularly well when utilized in the 
angled position.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
265
STRADDLE FLAG
By straddling your legs during a human flag, you can essentially shorten your body length, 
which will improve your leverage, making the move less difficult. It’s a nice in-between step 
after you can hold an angled flag but before you are ready to move onto the full human flag.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
266
HIGH SUPPORT PRESS
If you take the standard support press and bring your top hand closer to the verti-
cal pole, you will find it’s very similar to the full human flag, only less difficult. Due to 
your hands being closer together than in a standard support press, the angle of your 
body will wind up almost parallel to the ground, rather than at a 45 degree angle, put-
ting your torso and legs in just about the same position as a full press flag. However, 
the offset hand position of the top arm will allow for slightly better leverage.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
267
PARALLEL BAR FLAG
Performing a human flag in between a pair of parallel bars is another fantastic 
way to practice the move. Though the parallel bar flag appears similar to the press 
flag performed on a vertical pole, most people will find this variation less difficult. 
A more stable foundation can be achieved due to the fact that the hands face each 
other in a neutral grip. Make sure your hands are stacked directly above one another, 
however, as a staggered hand placement can cause you to spin out of control.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
268
PRESS FLAG
There are essentially two ways of getting into position for your human flag: from the bot-
tom up, and from the top down. For the top down method, which is generally less difficult, 
kick into a vertical flag, then slowly transition into an angled flag, then a straddle flag, finally 
closing your legs together after you’re locked in position. The idea behind the top down 
method is to gradually increase the load on your body so that you can prime your neuro-
logical system for the full weight of your body being supported by just your two hands on a 
vertical pole.
 
When training the press flag, it can be 
helpful to rotate your body so that it’s 
partially facing upward.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
269
The bottom up method is more difficult as it involves pressing yourself up into the hori-
zontal position from the floor. Get your grip, then lift into a low hanging flag. From here, lift 
your hips, pull from your top arm and press from your bottom arm to lift yourself into the 
horizontal position, keeping your trunk actively engaged the entire time.
When training the press flag, it can be helpful to rotate your body so that it’s partially fac-
ing upward. This will give you greater support from your spine. In time and with practice, 
you can work toward holding your flag in the full sideways position.
 
Work toward holding your flag 
in the full sideways position.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
270
HOOK HAND/FLAT PALM FLAG
This fun variant on the standard human flag is helpful for flagging on many unconven-
tional surfaces. This particular grip not only involves an altered top-hand placement, but 
also an adjusted lower-hand position. When performing a traditional flag, you use your top 
hand to grab the pole as you would if you were grabbing a pull-up bar. This time, however, 
your fingers must hook over the top in a neutral grip, rather than around the pulling surface.
While the hook hand (top hand) requires extra grabbing from the fingers, the flat palm 
(bottom hand) eliminates any gripping at all. But that doesn’t mean it’s easier. The lack of grip 
from the bottom hand can force you to press even harder and tense your body even tighter.
 
Hook hand, flat palm.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
271
You can further increase the difficulty of this variation by performing it on the ground, 
placing your flat palm on the floor instead of on a vertical object. The farther your flat palm 
hand gets from your hook hand, the more difficult it becomes (almost the opposite of the 
support press). Depending on the surface employed, some kinking at the top arm may be 
unavoidable.
 
Hook hand, floor palm.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
272
SHOULDER FLAG
This eye-catching move is a brutal hybrid between a dragon flag and a classic 
press flag. Once you are solid with both individually, you can start experimenting 
with the unique challenge of combining them.
To perform a shoulder flag, you’ll be placing the vertical pole firmly against one 
of your traps, while grabbing the pole with both hands next to your head. Squeeze 
your arms tight against your body for maximal leverage. One of the biggest obstacles 
toward achieving this hold is the unpleasant sensation of having the bar jammed 
against your collar area. You’ll need to make peace with that feeling if you wish to 
perform a shoulder flag.
 
As a lead up to the full shoulder flag, you can 
practice with one or both knees tucked.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
273

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
274
SWITCH GRIP FLAG
If you have good wrist mobility you can try a switch grip (aka pole dancer’s grip) on the 
vertical pole. This involves rotating the top hand all the way around so that your thumb 
points up instead of down. Get your top arm in place first by reaching behind your back. 
Then turn your body to get into position, as you grip the pole with the bottom hand in the 
same fashion as a classic press flag. Though many will struggle with the rotational mobility 
needed from the top arm, those who are able to do so may find this hand position allows for 
better leverage, while also helping to keep the top arm from bending. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
275
HUMAN FLAG CRUCIFIX
This unusual human flag variant finds the pole positioned behind the neck with 
both arms fully extended along the pole like a crucifix. In order to keep the body sup-
ported, the bottom arm must actively press against the bar to lift the body up, while 
the top arm must pull aggressively, as if trying to bring the bar toward the body. Keep 
your hands and forearms wrapped around the pole for stability.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
276
ONE ARM FLAG
The one-arm flag takes tremendous neck strength and full body power to execute, as 
your head will be placed against the flagging surface instead of your bottom arm. It’s not 
enough for the head simply to support the body, however. You must actively press it into the 
surface from which you are flagging. (We recommend wearing a hat.) It is also worth men-
tioning that this progression cannot be performed on a pole, since a flat area for your head is 
required. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
277
HUMAN FLAG AND HUMAN FLAG POLE
The human flag is impressive enough when performed on a steel pole, but when it’s per-
formed on another human being it is even more amazing!
At first glance, it’s easy to discern that the flagger has some extra work on his hands. 
Obviously, no one’s skin is completely taut, no matter how hard they train, so the flagger 
must constantly adjust his grip—and many other nuances—to the uncontrollable wavering 
of his partner’s skin.
The flagger must also be extremely conscious of where he places his hands. The lower 
hand must be placed close to the foot to maximize stability. If you put it too high, not only 
will you put yourself in a mechanically disadvantageous position, you may snap your part-
ner’s shinbone!
The partner being flagged upon (the human flag pole) faces an enormous task as well. 
First of all, you’ve got to be as solid as a rock—both physically and in your mental focus—for 
someone to flag off of you. Secondly, be prepared to subtly lean away from the flagger as 
they lift their feet off the ground to get into position. Failure to counter the flagger’s weight 
will result in both of you toppling over. It may be helpful to extend your free arm to help 
strike a balance.
As with any partner workout, communication is key. It took us plenty of time and prac-
tice to finally nail it.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
278
 
ALTERNATIVE GRIPS 
The human flag can be progressed in ways that move past the pole itself. 
Whether you’re flagging on a rock formation, subway station, tree or fence, 
many objects lack something obvious to grab onto in the first place. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
279
 
Employing odd surfaces, uneven grips or staggered hand patterns for your 
flagging purposes not only takes your training over the edge, but also gets your 
creative juices flowing! One of the core philosophies of Street Workout is not 
only to accept, but to embrace, the fact that we must improvise. Sometimes the 
rulebook has to go out the window.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
280

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
281
IV
Programming
hen it comes to programming, there are many options. Full body 
workouts, split routines, circuits, pyramid sets and more all have 
their place in the world of strength training. Yet there is no method that is uni-
versally the best for all people and all goals. Though it’s nice to have a guideline, 
we encourage you to use the following assessments, templates and workouts as a 
starting point, rather than the final verdict.
Oftentimes in the fitness world, the tendency is to overanalyze programming. 
While it is an important aspect, you sell yourself short if you underestimate the 
power of observation and the value of improvisation. Don’t be afraid if you need to 
make changes in the moment or deviate slightly from the plan. The truth is that any 
program will work if you’re prepared to work hard over an extended period of time. 
Strength training makes you stronger. 
W

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
282

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
283
C h a p t e r 12
Assessments
ying to know where you stack up against the best of the best in the bodyweight 
kingdom? The following charts can help you assess your calisthenics compe-
tency across a broad array of classic street workout exercises.  These charts can also serve 
as a guideline to help you determine when it is appropriate to move onto harder exercises.
There is one chart for dynamic exercises (those that you perform for reps) and another for 
isometric exercises (those that you hold for time). In both cases, the exercises are listed in 
approximate order from least difficult to most difficult. Each includes a baseline standard, an 
advanced standard and an elite standard. 
The numbers in the first chart refer to reps performed in one continuous set. In the sec-
ond chart, the numbers refer to how many seconds the position is held. Strict form must be 
adhered to in all cases. 
The baseline number represents what can potentially be achieved within your first 6-12 
months of consistent training, while the advanced figure can take years to achieve. As for the 
elite standard, well, just keep training hard and keep the dream alive!
This stuff has to be earned the old fashioned way, and that’s the beauty of it. Depending on 
where you are starting from, your personal journey may take more or less time. Additionally, 
different individuals may find that they progress quicker with certain exercises than others. 
Again, this is part of the beauty of the Street Workout phenomenon.
D

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
284
D y n a m i c E x e r c i s e s
Exercise	
Baseline	
Advanced	
Elite
Squat	
40	
100	
200
Push-up	
30	
60	
100
Hanging Knee Raise	
20	
40	
60
Aussie Pull-up	
20	
40	
60
Pike Press	
20	
40	
60
Parallel Bar Dip	
15	
30	
50
Pull-up	
10	
20	
30
Hanging Leg Raise	
10	
20	
30
Handstand Press	
1	
10	
20
Pistol Squat	
1	
10	
20
Shrimp Squat	
1	
10	
20
Muscle-up	
1	
10	
20
One Arm Push-up	
1	
5	
10
One Arm Pull-up	
–	
1	
5

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
285
I s o m e t r i c E x e r c i s e s
Exercise	
Baseline	
Advanced	
Elite
Headstand	
60	
120	
240
Crow Hold	
60	
120	
240
Back Bridge	
60	
120	
240
L-sit		
20	
60	
120
Elbow Lever	
20	
60	
120
Freestanding Handstand 	
20	
60	
120
Tuck Back Lever	
10	
30	
60
Clutch Flag	
10	
30	
60
Tuck Front Lever	
10	
30	
60
Tuck Planche	
10	
30	
60
Back Lever	
–	
5	
10
Press Flag	
–	
5	
10
Front Lever	
–	
5	
10
Planche	
–	
3	
5

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
286

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
287
C h a p t e r 13
Street
Workouts
ere are sample workouts that give you a good overview of different ways that 
you can approach your training. Perform them as written or modify them as 
you see fit. 
As you will see, there are various templates that your workouts can follow. Which one is the 
best? Try them all and see what works best for YOU!
H

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
288

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
289
START ME UP
As the name implies, this beginner workout is the perfect place to get started if you 
are new to strength training. Start Me Up is a compilation of all the major foundational 
strength movements put in a capacity that the starting practitioner will find accessible.
When you begin, rest as much as you need in between sets, completing all reps of each 
exercise before moving onto the next. Once this becomes comfortable, try not to rest for 
more than 1-2 minutes in between sets.
As your conditioning improves, you can mix it up by performing the workout as a circuit. 
Do one set of each exercise in succession. Then repeat them all until you’ve done three sets 
of each. This method employs active recovery and can prevent your training from growing 
stagnant.
After several workouts, you can progress to full push-ups, unassisted squats and straight 
leg Aussies.
3 sets of 10 Hands Elevated Push-ups
3 sets of 10 Bench Assisted Squats
3 sets of 10 Bent Knee Aussie Pull-ups
3 sets of 10 Lying Bent Knee Raises
3 sets of 10 Hip Bridges

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
290

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
291
50 REP CHALLENGE
The 50 rep challenge consists of doing 50 reps of a fairly difficult exercise in one workout, 
no matter how many sets it takes. Even if it means you are doing sets of one rep by the end.
For example, you might start out with a set of 10, followed by a set of 8, followed by a set 
of 7, then 2 more sets of 5, 3 sets of 3, 2 sets of 2, and end with a couple sets of 1. This could 
take a while at first, but over time the amount of sets that you can do this in should decrease.
Choose an exercise that you can do between 5-15 of reps in one set, and focus on keeping 
your form clean and avoiding failure. You can take as long of a break between sets as you 
need. In fact, you are encouraged to take long breaks. Stretch. Breathe. Ponder the beauty 
and simplicity of Street Workout.
This method is a fantastic way to increase your maximum reps on basics like squats, 
push-ups or pull-ups, though advanced trainees can use it for more difficult exercises like 
muscle-ups and pistol squats as well. Make sure to do both legs!
At first we recommend doing this only once a week per body part, as it can be a bit of 
a shock to your system. Eventually, however, you can condition yourself to doing this 
regularly.
Additionally, if 50 reps is just not realistic for you right now, pick a smaller number 
(maybe 30?) and build up from there. 
When 50 is no longer a challenging number, pick a harder exercise or raise the total reps 
to 100 or more.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
292

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
293
THREE AMIGOS 
This is a very simple workout based on a pyramid training protocol that will work every 
single muscle in your body—including your heart! 
Start by performing one squat, then immediately grab an overhead bar and do one 
pull-up, then drop down and do a push-up. Next do two squats, two pull-ups and two push-
ups. Continue to add one rep to each exercise until you fail to get through the circuit. Then 
start taking one rep away and work your way back down. 
Aim to keep breaks to a minimum, but rest enough to maintain strict form. If you’re not 
strong enough to do full push-ups or pull-ups, substitute knee push-ups and Aussie pull-
ups in their place.
1 Squat 
1 Pull-up 
1 Push-up
2 Squats 
2 Pull-ups 
2 Push-ups
3 Squats 
3 Pull-ups 
3 Push-ups...

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
294

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
295
STATIC ELECTRICITY 
This isometric workout infuses strength and skill training into a diverse collection of 
static holds. It is likely that different individuals will have various strengths and weak-
nesses amongst this group of exercises. For any exercise that you cannot hold for the sug-
gested amount of time, we recommend breaking it up into several smaller sections. For 
example, if you can hold an L-sit for only ten seconds, then perform four 10 second holds.
Many of these exercises have a mobility component in addition to the strength and skill 
factors. If you have limitations that prevent you from performing the full expression, then 
use one of the earlier progressions. For example, if the neck bridge is inaccessible, you can 
substitute a hip bridge.
Plank (90 seconds)
 Side Plank (30 seconds per side) 
Crow Pose (90 seconds) 
Elbow Lever (40 seconds) 
L-Sit (40 seconds)
 Neck Bridge (90 seconds) 
Wall Handstand (90 seconds)

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
296

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
297
UP ABOVE 
While the advocacy of full body training is a principle we stand behind, using a split 
routine is also a viable way to train, provided your schedule allows for it. After all, you can’t 
go for full body exhaustion every day. Furthermore, changing up your system can be a valu-
able training tool. This is a basic upper body workout that will leave you in stitches.
The workout is divided into two rounds, focusing on the same movement pattern with 
slight alterations to target the muscles differently. 
Round 1:
2 sets of 20 Push-ups
2 sets of 8 Pull-ups
2 sets of 15 Parallel Bar Dips
2 sets of 10 Wide Aussie Pull-ups
2 sets of 10 Hanging Knee Raises
Round 2:
2 sets of 15 Wide Push-ups
2 sets of 8 Chin-ups
2 sets of 15 Feet Elevated Bench Dips
2 sets of 10 Narrow Aussie Pull-ups
2 sets of 10 Twisting Hanging Knee Raises

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
298

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
299
DOWN BELOW 
This is a general lower body workout that incorporates several basic movements. The 
first exercise is a lower body “push” where you remain in a stationary place as you press 
your feet against the ground beneath you, while the following two exercises incorporate 
movement patterns which demand that you travel either linearly or up and down. Next, 
we emphasize some often overlooked lower body muscles that tend to get neglected. And 
finally, the last movement is a pull or “hinge,” as well as an exercise in balance, which per-
fectly complements the start of the workout. This versatile workout is sure to get you going. 
Legs do it!
2 sets of 20 Squats
2 sets of 20 Walking Lunges (per leg)
2 sets of 20 Step-ups (per leg)
2 sets of 20 Drinking Birds (per leg)
2 sets of 20 Calf Raises

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
300

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
301
FULL FRONTAL 
This intermediate workout focuses on the anterior chain of the body, including the 
quadriceps, chest, abs and shoulders. While it is of note that several of the exercises 
included will require a degree of stability from the rear muscles, particularly the low back 
and hamstrings, the front muscles are preeminent.
3 sets of 20 Narrow Squats
3 sets of 10 Bulgarian Split Squats (per leg)
3 sets of 15 Wide Push-ups
3 sets of 15 Feet Elevated Push-ups
3 sets of 10 Pike Press-ups
3 sets of 15 Hanging Leg Raises
3 sets of 20 Grounded Windshield Wipers (10 per side)

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
302

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
303
BACK FOR MORE 
As we know by now, the posterior muscles of the body often go neglected in our culture, 
which prioritizes looking good in a mirror (or a selfie) over full body holistic health. This 
workout is designed to combat that by focusing primarily on the muscles on the back of the 
body, such as the lats, back, hamstrings and glutes. Be prepared to exert hard as you may be 
forced to emphasize some muscles that you may not be used to employing.
The first four exercises are to be performed for sets and reps, while the last three are 
static holds. For these holds, please feel free to break them up into multiple sets if you are 
incapable of holding them for the full duration. For example, three full bridge holds of 20 
seconds each will work in place of one 60 second hold if that is what your skill level dic-
tates. Do the best you can. Back it up!
3 sets of 10 Wide Grip Pull-Ups 
3 sets 10 Wide Grip Aussies 
3 sets of 10 Candlestick Bridges (per leg) 
3 sets of 10 Drinking Birds (per leg) 
Tuck Back Lever (20 second hold) 
Neck Bridge (60 second hold)
Full Bridge (60 second hold)

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
304

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
305
WIZARD’S CAULDRON 
This intermediate/advanced level workout uses a little calisthenics magic by pairing 
each primary exercise with a regressed version of the same movement pattern. By warm-
ing up with the less difficult exercise, you can prepare your muscles and nervous system to 
activate more powerfully and get maximal strength gains when you crank it up a notch for 
the working sets. As this template is designed to get the highest possible strength yields, we 
recommend taking long breaks in between sets. Anywhere from 2-4 minutes is fair game if 
you need it, particularly as the workout goes on.
Warm Up: 	 20 Walking Lunges (per leg)
Work Sets: 	 3 sets of 5 Pistol Squats (per leg)
Warm Up: 	 20 Narrow Push-ups
Work Sets: 	 3 sets of 3 One Arm Push-ups (per arm)
Warm Up: 	 10 Pull-ups
Work Sets: 	 3 sets of 3 Archer Pull-ups (per arm)
Warm Up: 	 10 Hanging Knee Raises
Work Sets: 	 3 sets of 5 Toes-to-Bar Leg Raises
Warm Up: 	 10 Hip Bridges
Work Sets: 	 3 sets of 3 Wall Crawls

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
306

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
307
DANNY’S INFERNO 
This is an elite upper body bar workout. Though Danny’s Inferno is extremely quick, it’s 
also incredibly intense. You will get maximum efficiency in minimal time. Be sure to put in 
your hours on the pull-up bar before embarking down this road.
Perform all exercises without coming off the bar. After all 25 reps are completed, come 
off the bar, rest 2-3 minutes and repeat. Aim to repeat the entire circuit 3-5 times. Feel the 
burn!
5 Muscle-Ups
5 Straight Bar Dips
5 Front Lever Curls
5 Pull-Ups
5 Toes To Bar Leg Raises

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
308

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
309
LEG DAZE 
The following lower body workout is a brief but powerful way to smoke your legs when 
time is of the essence. Leg Daze begins with a warm up of 3 progressive exercises. It is to be 
performed once at the start of the workout to prepare your legs on a muscular and neuro-
logical level for what is to follow. The workout set consists of a total of fifteen reps per leg of 
three different exercises. After completing each leg, rest 3 minutes before repeating. Shoot 
for a total of 3-5 rounds, depending on your strength level. 
Warm Up:
1 set 20 bodyweight squats
1 set of 15 split squats (per leg)
1 set of 10 archer squats (per leg)
Workout (repeat 3-5 times):
5 pistols (per leg)
5 shrimp squats (per leg)
5 Hawaiian squats (per leg)

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
310

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
311
DESTROYER OF WORLDS 
This workout is not for the faint of heart! Aim to complete each exercise in as few sets as 
possible, while adhering to strict form. A truly devoted Street Workout warrior can even-
tually train to perform each exercise in a single unbroken set with little to no rest between 
exercises, but you should definitely plan to give yourself several breaks during your first 
attempt. Make sure you take at least one rest day both before and after attempting this gru-
eling workout for the first time.
100 Squats
50 Push-ups
20 Pull-ups
10 Pistol Squats (per leg)
30 Dips
20 Aussie Pull-ups
10 Hanging Leg Raises
5 Handstand Press-ups
5 Muscle-ups

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
312

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
313
C h a p t e r 14
Training  
Templates
ere are some sample training templates that you can incorporate into your 
programming. They serve as examples of how you can approach your rou-
tines. On some days, full body strength workouts are suggested. On others, we propose a 
program that emphasizes certain muscle groups or physical skills. Finally, certain days are 
reserved for rest and recovery. 
Full body training is a great way to train. It involves working the whole body as a cohesive 
unit and does not separate it into components. On these days, because you will be training 
just about every part of your body, it is not generally suggested that you do every exercise to 
absolute exhaustion; there is a need for muscular recovery at times. This is not to say that you 
should not work hard: quite the contrary. In fact, you will not get results without hard work. 
We simply wish to assert that working every single muscle to complete exhaustion is an unre-
alistic plan when you train them all with great frequency.
For that reason, sometimes split routines are devised. Split routines play on the principle 
of active recovery, meaning that while certain muscles bear the brunt of the workout, the 
muscles that play a less substantial role can recover. It’s of note that in the world of Street 
Workout, a split routine focuses on one section of the body per day (as opposed to one muscle 
per day, which is sometimes the case in other disciplines). In other words, even in a split rou-
tine, we stress the notion of “emphasis” over “isolation,” and still encourage various muscles 
and muscle groups to work in harmony. 
H

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
314
Upper body/lower body splits are common in all worlds of strength training. The term 
upper body refers to training exercises where the primary movers are above the waist. This 
includes all forms of push-ups, press-ups, dips, all bar work and more. Lower body incorpo-
rates leg exercises such as squats, lunges, calf raises and drinking birds.
A front/back (sometimes called a “push/pull”) split is another fantastic way of using active 
recovery. Front exercises emphasize (though they do not isolate) the muscles found on the 
anterior of the body—the ones you see when you look in the mirror. These include push-ups, 
press-ups, all abs flexion, front lever progressions and most squatting patterns. Back exercises 
are the ones that emphasize the posterior chain, such as pull-ups, Aussie pull-ups, drinking 
birds, back lever progressions and bridge variations. 
On the days that are designated for skill, we propose that you work on those exercises that 
have a greater technical element than strength component. As we’ve stated earlier in these 
pages, all Street Workout exercises require some level of both skill and power, but for the 
exercises to be performed on these days, finesse is a greater priority than force. Such exercises 
include hand balancing, headstands and elbow levers. It can be helpful on these days to think 
in terms of “practice” rather than “training.”
Like all programs, these splits are suggestions, devised to serve as examples, but still sub-
ject to interpretation. That goes for your rest days, too. The term “rest” does not mean that 
we advise you to sit on the couch all day, with your most strenuous activity being flipping the 
channels on your remote control. No. You can still take a bike ride, jog or work on flexibility. 
It’s okay to be on your feet and active. On the other hand, there are times when we train harder 
than we perceive at the time. If this is the case, then taking it easy is most certainly an option. 
You may need to recover for two days at times, even if the template suggests only one. Let your 
own experience dictate.
All of the exercises in this book can be incorporated into your program. Your fitness and 
skill level will dictate which specific moves are appropriate for you. You can use the same 
templates indefinitely, so long as you switch out the exercises for harder ones when called 
for. Remember, in each section exercises are presented in approximate order of least to most 
difficult. For example, a beginner who starts out doing hands elevated pushups can eventually 
progress to classic push-ups, feet elevated push-ups and ultimately one arm push-ups.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
315
Template A: Old Faithful
Template B: Terminator
 
DAY 1 Full Body
DAY 2 Rest
DAY 3 Full Body
DAY 4 Rest
DAY 5 Full Body
DAY 6 Rest
DAY 7 Rest
 
DAY 1 Full Body
DAY 2 Rest
DAY 3 Upper Body
DAY 4 Lower Body
DAY 5 Rest
DAY 6 Skills
DAY 7 Rest

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
316
Template C: Terminator II
Template D: The Gauntlet
 
DAY 1 Full Body
DAY 2 Rest
DAY 3 Front 
DAY 4 Back
DAY 5 Rest
DAY 6 Skills
DAY 7 Rest
 
DAY 1 Upper Body
DAY 2 Lower Body
DAY 3 Rest
DAY 4 Front
DAY 5 Back
DAY 6 Skills
DAY 7 Rest

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
317
Template E: Mad Skills
Template F: Sharpshooter
 
DAY 1 Full Body
DAY 2 Rest
DAY 3 Skills
DAY 4 Full Body
DAY 5 Rest
DAY 6 Skills
DAY 7 Skills
 
DAY 1 Upper Body
DAY 2 Lower Body
DAY 3 Skills
DAY 4 Upper Body
DAY 5 Lower Body
DAY 6 Skills
DAY 7 Rest

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
318

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
319
V
Bonus Section
eyond the moves and past the programming, there is still so much 
more to discuss. Transcending the text is where your journey truly 
begins. Once you take that first step, you will see that there are aspects of Street 
Workout that defy standard categorization, as well as unanswered questions, 
unresolved issues and other proverbial stones that remain unturned. 
How do we take what we’ve learned and put it to action?
What happens when we encounter unforeseen obstacles?
How can we apply our newfound skills to various real world situations?
In the following pages, we’ll show you how to put it all together and start getting 
stronger right now. Be it in your very own backyard jungle gym or in the urban jun-
gle outside your front door, here’s the real deal on how to maximize these training 
tactics. The world is your playground. 
B

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
320

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
321
C h a p t e r 15
Ask Al
get asked a lot of questions! What follows are some of the most common ones I’ve 
gotten throughout my career as a fitness trainer, along with the most pragmatic 
answers I can give. A lot of them are about my observations as a personal trainer, while 
others are about my own personal training. Chances are that most questions you have 
are already answered here, though they may be phrased slightly differently in your head. 
Hopefully you will be able to apply these general answers to your particular situation.  
If not, that’s okay. You can always drop me a line on Facebook or Instagram. 
I

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
322
What is your diet like?
I don’t really follow any diet. My only rule is to avoid heavily processed fake foods and to 
keep my portions from getting out of control. I don’t count calories and I don’t concern myself 
with food groups, fats, proteins or carbohydrates. I usually get most of my calories in the sec-
ond half of the day, but that’s just when I tend to get hungry.
Do you take any supplements?
No, I do not take any powders, pills, or other supplements of any kind.
But what about...
No Supplements. No creatine, no glutamine, no BCAA’s, no fish oils, or anything else. I don’t 
take any exercise/dietary supplements whatsoever. None.
Ok, I get that you don’t use supplements. But what about protein 
powder?
Noooooooo!!!!!!!!
Do you lift weights?
No. Though I did lift during my teens and early twenties, weight training has not been part 
of my lifestyle for over a decade. On occasion if I’m in a gym I might pick up a weight just for 
the heck of it, but that is a rare occurrence.
Contrary to what some people will tell you, however, I have nothing against weight training. 
I fully acknowledge that lifting weights is an effective way to build strength and muscle. It’s 
just not my thing.
What about adding weights to calisthenics exercises, like wearing 
a weighted vest for push-ups?
Again, not my thing, but if that’s what you’re into, then don’t let me stop you. You don’t have 
to add weights. Just look for a harder exercise. We’ve got a lot of them in this book.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
323
But what if I want to get big? Don’t I need to lift?
For the last time, no, I don’t believe weights are necessary to gain muscle mass. If you want 
to gain mass, do lots of sets and reps of the basics (4-5 sets of 10-20 reps per exercise) and eat a 
lot of clean food. Also be aware that individual genetics will play a factor. Check out my friend 
Coach Wade’s book C-Mass if you want more info on gaining mass with calisthenics.
Can I combine weights and calisthenics in the same program?
For sure! Just because I don’t, doesn’t mean that you can’t. Do whatever you like!
What about cardio?
I like to go for a run or jump rope from time to time, but I don’t do it for weight loss, I do it 
for fun!
 
The only weight 
I lift is me.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
324
But don’t I have to do cardio to get ripped?
No. If you want to be well-rounded in your fitness, I recommend you get some cardiovascu-
lar exercise, but if you just want to get strong and look good with your shirt off, strength train-
ing is far more effective than cardio. If you need to lose fat, changing your eating habits will do 
more for you than any workout.
What do you think of Crossfit/P90X/Zumba/etc?
I am a fan of anything that inspires people to exercise, which all of those brands have suc-
cessfully done. That’s the most important thing. There is no best program and all of them will 
work if they are implemented with consistency and intensity, so pick something that appeals 
to you and stick with it. Obviously, the exercises in this book are my favorites. That’s why 
they’re here! But all forms of exercise are beneficial.
I heard isometric holds are better than reps, but then I read that 
someone else said the opposite. Who’s right?  
It’s great to practice both isometric holds like planks and L-sits as well as rep out on moves 
like push-ups and pull-ups. The two complement each other very nicely and practicing both 
will help you develop better body control than just practicing one or the other.
 
Calisthenics makes you ripped.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
325
Why am I better than my friend at some exercises, but my friend is 
better than me at others?
Though some people have more natural aptitude than others in certain areas, we all get 
better at the things we practice consistently. So if your friend is better than you at pull-ups, 
practice more pull-ups and you’ll get better. If you struggle to hold a handstand, spend time 
practicing your handstand. Work on the stuff you need to work on and you’ll get better at 
everything.
Do you wear gloves when you work out?
The only time Danny or I wear gloves when we train is if we would be wearing them any-
way. If you’re worried about getting callouses on your hands, Street Workout is not for you. If 
there’s snow on the bar, however, that’s a different story.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
326
Do you still train outdoors in the rain/snow/cold? If so,  
what modifications do you need to make?
I prefer outdoor workouts over training indoors, but sometimes being warm and dry is a 
higher priority, so I do train at home or in a gym sometimes. The great thing about working out 
in the cold, however, is that if you wear enough layers and keep moving, eventually you won’t 
notice that it’s cold out. Then it starts to feel really good!
As for modifications, when I train in the cold, I tend to focus on exercises that I can perform 
more reps of, so I won’t need to take as much rest. I will also often do circuit workouts where I 
alternate between upper and lower body exercises. Both of these things allow me to keep mov-
ing, which helps me keep warm. Isometric holds like planks and L-sits also help generate body 
heat. I recommend wearing several layers to start, so as you warm up you can begin to remove 
some clothing. Moves that require extreme mobility or place a great deal of emphasis on a 
single joint (like the back bridge and one arm pull-up, respectively) are better kept to warmer 
circumstances.
Do you ever get scared that you are going to fall and get hurt when 
practicing moves like elevated handstands, human flags, etc?
If my instincts tell me not to try something, I’ll usually listen. Then I’ll look for something 
similar that’s less intimidating and try that first. Once I’ve done the less-scary move a few 
times, I might be able to go back to the original challenge with newfound courage. Sometimes 
that confidence even starts to extend into other aspects of my life.
What’s better: high reps at a moderate intensity or fewer reps  
at a higher intensity?
Both of these training methods will make you stronger and promote muscular growth, but 
the emphasis will be slightly different. Conventional wisdom says that performing 5 sets of 
5 reps at a higher intensity will place more of an emphasis on strength, while performing 3 
sets of 15-20 reps at a moderate intensity is better for growth. However, the strongest, most 
muscular people tend to be able to perform well across the board. The idea that strength and 
endurance are on opposite sides of the spectrum is not always applicable in the world of cal-
isthenics. I assure you, the same folks who are performing one arm pull-ups and human flags 
are also capable of 20 pull-ups in a single set. In short, it doesn’t matter much which type of 
program you use, just as long as you train hard and are consistent with your workouts.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
327
 
Street Workout 
takes big balls.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
328
Is it okay to work out every day?
Absolutely. As long as you aren’t going all out every single day. If you want to train daily, the 
best ways to do so are to split up your training so certain days are focused on certain exercises 
or to do a quick full body routine every day that leaves you invigorated rather than exhausted.
Your muscles need time to recover between strength training sessions, so if you feel sore the 
next day after your training, it can be best to give yourself a day off, but you can also practice 
“active recovery” if you don’t like taking rest days. This simply means that you do some form of 
physical activity on the days that you are not strength training. This can be jogging, swimming, 
hiking, cycling or any other low-to-moderate level physical activity of your choosing.
How do I know when I am ready to move onto harder progressions?
As a general rule, get comfortable with the basic versions from each family of exercises 
before you move onto more advanced exercises. This book is laid out in such a way as to guide 
you through the progressions, with the more difficult moves toward the end of each section, 
but it’s ultimately up to you to control your destiny. How hard you work is going to be the most 
important factor that determines your progress. Having said that, take your time and embrace 
the process.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
329
How long is it going to take before I can do a pistol squat/ 
muscle-up/human flag/etc.?
It depends on a lot of individual factors, so I can’t give a definite timeline that will be accu-
rate for everyone. As a general rule, however, it’s important to make sure you have a solid foun-
dation in the basics before you attempt advanced moves. If you are new to strength training, be 
prepared to spend at least six months working on things like push-ups, pull-ups, dips, squats 
and lunges before moving onto anything advanced. For many people it will be much longer. 
Take your time. There is no rush!
I train karate/wrestling/football/etc. Which exercises should I be 
doing to get stronger at my martial art/sport?
The best thing you can do to improve at any martial art, sport or other discipline (other than 
developing the skills specific to that sport, like kicking or throwing) is to get stronger. General 
strength training exercises like push-ups, pull-ups and squats are ideal for this.
You will not magically become better at your sport because you learned to do an elbow 
lever, but getting stronger will make you better at everything (including elbow levers).
How can I further develop my upper chest, lower chest, biceps peak, 
calves or other body part?
If there is a specific body part that you feel is lagging behind the others, you can try to target 
that body part by doing additional exercises, sets or reps of moves that emphasize that area. 
For example, you could do more push-ups if you feel your chest is lagging or do additional 
chin-ups to target your biceps.
It’s important to remember, however, that individual genetics are a huge factor that affects 
all of our physical appearances. While you can change the size of your muscles with strength 
training, you can’t do much to change the shape of your muscles. Some people have a natural 
peak on their biceps, while others do not. Some of us have crooked abs, while others have boxy 
abs. Some people’s chest tends to develop more in certain places than others. It’s just like how 
some people have brown eyes and others have blue eyes. Do the best with what you got and try 
not to obsess over your perceived imperfections. Regardless of where you are at today, you can 
still improve and expand your physical capabilities.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
330
I had an injury to my shoulder/knee/wrist and it hurts to do 
squats/push-ups/pull-ups/dips/etc. What should I do?
It’s impossible to give one-size-fits-all rehab programming because each injury is unique. 
The best thing I can tell anyone who wants to train while healing an ailment is to avoid any-
thing that feels like it is exacerbating the situation.
That said, do whatever you can do without causing pain. If you can’t work your upper-body 
for a little while, then focus on your legs. If you’ve got a busted ankle, then focus on pull-ups. 
If all you can do is walk, then walk. If you can only do push-ups on your knuckles, then so be it. 
There is always something productive you can do no matter the situation.
My friend/trainer/someone on the internet says pistols squats are 
bad for your knees/bridging is bad for your back/muscle-ups are bad 
for your shoulders/etc. Is that true?
The wrong exercise for the wrong person can be detrimental. Is a 500 pound deadlift bad 
for you? No, not if you’re strong enough to handle it. But if your grandma tried to lift that much 
she might break her back. The same is true for advanced calisthenics: Try to do too much, too  

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
331
quickly, and you could run into a problem. Furthermore, employing poor technique can 
potentially lead to mishaps. However, if you are smart about building up to advanced 
moves, there is very little risk involved.
Keep in mind that no matter what exercise you choose, someone on the internet has proba-
bly written an article about how it is going to kill you. That’s just the world we live in. There is 
a lot of fear mongering in this world, but we’re here to empower you. In the end, it’s up to each 
individual to use their own common sense and make their own decisions.
It hurts when I do a push-up/pull-up/bridge/etc. Should I keep 
doing it anyway?
No. Pain is a signal from your body that whatever you are doing is causing harm. However, 
a burning sensation in your muscles (and/or lungs) is to be expected, though it should not be 
mistaken for pain.
If you are experiencing actual pain (it shouldn’t be too hard to tell the difference), then you 
are likely performing an exercise incorrectly, attempting an exercise that is outside of your 
current capabilities and/or you may have an injury/ailment that is causing the problem. Do 
your best to make adjustments accordingly. If you are unable to find a solution, seek the help 
of a medical professional.
 
Use your head.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
332
I read the whole book and I still don’t know what to do. There’s so 
many different exercises in here! What should I do?
Start wherever you are and do whatever you can. We have done our best to give you the tools 
to build the body you always wanted, but you have to take action. Use the workout plans in this 
book as a guide, but make whatever adjustments you have to. Focus on consistent training 
more than the details of said training, and be honest with yourself. You reap what you sow.
I really want to start training, but I think I need to get in better 
shape first. What should I do?
If you’re looking for an excuse not to train, you’ll always be able to find one. But the truth is, 
it doesn’t matter where you are starting from, it only matters that you start.
But I’m too old to start now, right?
I’ve heard the “I’m too old” excuse from folks as young as 20 years old. I’ve also met fit indi-
viduals who didn’t begin training until well after their retirement. It’s never too late to start, 
and there’s no better time than right now. Let’s do it.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
333
 
We’re Working Out!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
334

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
335
C h a p t e r 16
Danny’s Dos 
and Don’ts
1. DO WORK HARD.
If your training doesn’t feel strenuous, then it isn’t. And it’s probably not working. Sweat, 
muscular soreness, and an accelerated heart rate are all byproducts of exercise. In life and 
fitness, results do not often come without hard work. It’s not supposed to be effortless. By 
the same token, be weary of fitness claims that boast of easy, proven methods. No matter 
what anyone says, fitness must be earned. Almost everything worthwhile does.
In other words, you gotta try. When I say that, I do not mean acting out a half-hearted 
attempt at something special. I don’t mean simply showing up and going through the 
motions. That is not trying. I am referring to effort and hours and elbow grease. Be honest 
and don’t kid yourself.  Hell, even 
if you’re good at exercise and 
in shape, you still have to work 
hard to make improvement. 
That’s the beauty of it.
You see, ambition wins over 
talent every time. No matter 
what situation you were born 
into, or even earned, you cannot 
excel without drive and moti-
vation. Put in the time. Make 
the effort. Be consistent and 
accountable.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
336
2. DO SET REALISTIC GOALS.
There are long term goals and there are short term goals. Be realistic about your time-
line. If your goal is to do a muscle-up, but you cannot do one proper pull-up, then the mus-
cle-up should probably be a long term goal.
On that note, if your goal is to do a muscle-up in two weeks (or any other short, absolute 
time frame), but you are incapable of doing ten proper pull-ups right now, then you are 
setting yourself up for disappointment. Perhaps a better goal would be to train toward a 
muscle-up four days a week, long term, without a perceived date of execution.
On the other hand, sometimes you do set a viable goal and it is still not met. I know this 
can be disappointing, but understand that this is not always a bad thing. Goals are organic; 
they change. The turnout may not be what was initially anticipated, but that doesn’t mean 
you should reject all possible outcomes. Let’s say you set out to lose twenty pounds. In 
the process, you change your lifestyle, 
start eating right and begin training 
consistently. After several weeks, 
you feel more alive than ever, you are 
stronger than before and your clothes 
fit better. But you only lost fifteen 
pounds. 
So what? You did good, kid. The 
destination you reached may not have 
been the target you set, but it was the 
pursuit that got you there.
To go back to the previous example 
of training for the muscle-up: perhaps 
it doesn’t happen in the timeframe 
you planned, but your pull-up count 
increases from ten to twenty. Even 
though you did not get the muscle-up, 
you still made great progress.
Setting a goal does not necessarily 
mean achieving it. It means embark-
ing on the struggle to attain it and 
seeing where that takes you. Progress 
means moving forward.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
337
3. DO BELIEVE  
    IN YOURSELF. 
Every person, institution or workout pro-
gram will, on a long enough timeline, let us 
down. In fact, I’m sorry if I’ve let you down over 
the years. But don’t look at me. Look at you. I 
can’t make you do anything. Only you have the 
power. Take action. Talk is cheap.
I have personally overcome obstacles that 
would have terrified me in my youth. I’ll bet you 
have too. Apply that same resolution to fitness. 
You have the power.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
338
4. DO PUT GOOD THINGS IN YOUR BODY.
We find ourselves telling our kids the same things our parents told us. Fruits and veg-
etables are good for you. They make you lean and strong, are packed with vital nutrients 
and are delicious. We all know that farm raised animal proteins are healthier and superior 
to sickly, factory farmed meat products. Fish is brain food. Fiber helps you absorb vitality. 
The closer to the source, the better. I advise eating out of fewer packages, cooking more 
meals, drinking more water and having less sugar. For many, this is easier said than done.
When it comes to health, our culture focuses more on treatment than prevention. In 
other words, by employing medical procedures, gastric surgeries and lots of drugs, modern 
medicine can keep our bloated, flaccid bodies above ground for longer than in the past. 
There are people out there who would rather take large quantities of prescription phar-
maceuticals than eat a salad every day. Others would choose to consume some strange 
“Frankenstein food” mechanically rendered to simulate meat, rather than enjoy a farm 
raised pig. If you are someone who prefers a handful of multivitamins and supplements to 
some fresh, cold-pressed juice, then you’ve missed the point.
By putting pure and unadulterated things in our bodies we can prevent disease, rather 
than have to treat it. By getting our nutrients directly from the source, there is no need to 
supplement.
By no means am I saying that we must adhere to strict dietary procedures every moment 
of every day for the rest of our lives. Far from it. But try to eat clean and naturally 80-90% of 
the time. You’ll see the difference.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
339
5. DO TREAT YOURSELF RIGHT.
You work hard. Don’t forget to reward yourself, too. Having said that, a reward does not 
have to be in the form of an ice cream cone or ten cocktails (at least not every time). It can 
be a fun excursion, a new life experience or even just a little downtime. Sure we gotta pay 
our dues, but it’s important to love life too. Enjoy the ride.
 
A reward does not have to be in 
the form of an ice cream cone 
(at least not every time).

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
340
6. DON’T BE AFRAID TO SEEK HELP  
WHEN NEEDED.
In 1967, underrated Beatle Ringo Starr sang the words “I get by with a little 
help from my friends.” As much as we are tempted to do everything on our own, 
there are times when the help of others is invaluable.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
341
In strength training, there are many coaches, instructors, trainers and teachers 
who are happy to share their experiences and wisdom with those who are eager to 
learn. Sometimes we see asking for help as a sign of weakness, but in fitness and 
life, acknowledging our shortcomings and working to better ourselves takes great 
strength. I myself am constantly learning from my friends and peers. I consider 
myself lucky to have their help, and I do the best I can. Even still, I’m never afraid to 
fail. The truth is, I’ve personally learned a lot more from my numerous failures than 
I have from my few successes. Success is a lousy teacher. All experiences are viable.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
342
7. DON’T MAKE PHYSICAL FITNESS 
YOUR WHOLE LIFE.
Diversity is key. Many people assume that all Al and I do is train, eat, sleep and talk about 
training. While there is no doubt that we choose to prioritize training, it is not the be-all 
and end-all. Far from it. I don’t have a train “all day, every day” mentality.
I cook. I write. I draw. I play music. I go to the beach.
Training is not the only thing that makes my life worth living: Gangster movies, rib-eye 
steaks, poetry and prose, tattooing, rock ‘n’ roll music, the Simpsons and summer barbe-
cues, among many other things, all give my life meaning. 
Some people think that if they acknowledge that anything besides the pull-up bar brings 
them joy, that they are somehow invalidating their passion for fitness. Gimme a break! Life 
is a broad, bold, beautiful trip. Unless you are a competitive athlete (something I am cer-
tainly not), then training should enhance your life, not take it over. Inspiration comes from 
different places. Sure it can be a workout video on YouTube, but it can also be a song on the 
radio or a piece of art. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
343
8. DON’T FOLLOW THE LATEST TRENDS.
In life and fitness, there are many paths to take. There will always be a new product, 
study or scientific experiment, each with the supposed “expert” testimony to back it up. 
Many of these products and systems were designed by people who do not even work out in 
the first place. 
The methods that are most effective were not just discovered last week. They have stood 
the test of time. Bodyweight strength training pre-dates any of the new “revolutionary” 
products on the market. For that matter, calisthenics even came ahead of other classic 
methods (that work) like barbells, sandbags and kettlebells.
The 
basic 
movement 
patterns, when progressed 
appropriately, will produce 
results. We don’t need an 
infomercial to tell us that.
 
In life and fitness, there are many signs 
leading you in different directions. 

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
344
9. DON’T EXPECT CHANGE TO  
HAPPEN OVERNIGHT.
If you’re forty years old and haven’t done a push-up since high school, then don’t expect 
to do fifty today. If it took you 20 years to put on superfluous body weight, then don’t expect 
it to come off right away. If you’ve never done an elbow lever before, it is unlikely you’ll 
get it your first time. Transformations do not happen instantly, despite the fact that we’re 
often told the opposite. It’s what we spoke about earlier in regards to consistency and effort 
toward the task at hand. Over time, with attention and hard work, results will come. Our 
jobs, lifestyle and other obligations consume time. This is not a bad thing. If anything, this 
adds value to the time that you do have. The busiest people are the ones who train. They 
find the time, as we all can.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
345
10. DON’T BELIEVE EVERYTHING  
YOU READ.
When we were kids, in order for information to be presented on a large level, someone 
would have to follow the scientific method, hypothesize, do the research, come up with find-
ings, compose it and find an investor to publish it. These days, anyone can come across as 
an authority if they know how to make a nice website and rack up a lot of views. A website’s 
attractiveness does not validate its content, nor does the forcefulness with which some 
forum poster or author phrases their point of view. No, when it comes to fitness, the only 
thing that makes something true is if it works for you. To succeed, you will have to experi-
ment for yourself, taking care to employ your own reason and common sense. Don’t believe 
everything you read—not even if I wrote it—unless it makes sense and works for you.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
346

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
347
C h a p t e r 17
Building A 
Backyard  
Pull-up Bar
here are many paths one can take when putting together a home gym. In our 
lives, we’ve owned barbells, dumbbells, benches, medicine balls and door-frame 
pull-up bars. Many things have come and gone. As we progress in this journey of fitness 
and life, our goals can change. So do our needs.
Obviously the main point of working out is to stimulate the body, but the mind and spirit 
need to be challenged as well. It behooves the soul to use your creative forces and make 
something from nothing. So when the itch to create a home gym struck again in 2010, it was a 
no-brainer: a backyard pull-up bar was the only way to go!
WHY A BACKYARD PULL-UP BAR?
Practicality. To be honest, a door-frame or stand up (power-tower) design simply would 
not have met our needs. We required something not only capable of withstanding hundreds of 
pounds of explosive pulling force, but also sturdy enough to bear the weight of multiple practi-
tioners at the same time.
For our training style, this was clearly the sensible solution. In terms of pure function, noth-
ing else would have come close.
T

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
348
PROGRAM DESIGN
The basic design of a backyard pull-up bar is a horizontal bar supported by two vertical 
posts dug deep in the ground. The main thing is that the unit needs to be SOLID. Our plan 
was to use 12’ posts, leaving 7 1/2’ of pole above ground and 4 1/2’ below. The idea was that 
this would give us plenty of height and stability. But even within that simple layout, there 
were many choices to make.
WOOD POSTS VS. METAL POSTS
If you are working with wood posts, a 2×4 is not going to cut it. Don’t go any smaller than 
6×6. Be sure to use “treated” wood (it’s the one at Home Depot with the green tint). It’s 
worth the extra money to have something that will stand up to the elements. When using 
wood posts, you’ll have to purchase circular metal flanges to affix the bar to the wood. These 
flanges range from $8-$25 depending on the style. The advantages to wood is that it’s cost 
efficient, solid and visually compelling, but we looked forward to practicing moves like the 
human flag and clutch lever on these bars. For that reason, our posts had to be metal.
Generally, plumbers’ galvanized 2” pipe is about $7 per foot at a commercial realtor. 
However, you can’t get anything larger than 8’ at most hardware stores, even giants like 
Home Depot or Lowes. To make 12’ posts, you’d have to buy two 20’ pipes directly from a 
supplier, pay for each one to be cut and then buy 90 degree fittings (also about $8-$25) to 
attach each of the posts to the pull-up bar. 
Instead, we took the path of 
least resistance and contacted 
a local gate manufacturer who 
fabricated the initial design 
for $180. It consisted of two 
12’ iron posts welded to a 4’ 
bar up top. There was also 
another 4’ bar welded 3 1/2’ 
from the bottom—this lower 
bar gets buried for stability.
Another factor influencing 
stability is the amount of con-
crete used in the foundations. In most of the articles and blogs we consulted prior to this 
endeavor, the authors expressed remorse about not using enough cement. We decided to 
avoid that problem by using 2,000 lbs. of cement. We were planning on getting downright 
aggressive on that bar!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
349
THE BAR ITSELF
A standard pull-up bar is usually  1/2”-1 1/2” in diameter and 2-3’ in length. To get the 
most out of ours, we did 2” diameters and 4’ across. The 2” grip makes for a much tougher 
workout and is excellent for building grip strength. We train hard in Brooklyn!
Be aware that raw metal bars are open on the ends. You’ll need to seal them so they don’t 
get rusty from the inside. We filled the ends of the exposed bars with cement and painted 
over them, but you can use nylon or rubber stoppers instead if you choose.
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
Aside from the posts and bars, you’ll need the following when constructing a backyard 
pull-up bar:
– Post Hole Diggers
– Shovel
– Cement (we used twenty-five  
80 lb. bags)
– Something to mix it in (You don’t 
need a wheel barrow. We got a huge 
planter for $15 and grew fresh herbs 
in it the next summer.)
– Leveler
– Six 2×4’s and some screws (for build-
ing a temporary support frame)
– Oil-based enamel for metal posts or 
lacquer for wood posts

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
350
BUILDING YOUR BAR
Make sure you have plenty of space. You’d be surprised at how much room the building 
process demands, so do it in a nice, open area. Our bar was 4’ in length so we set the holes 
4’ apart. We dug the holes about 12” in diameter at the bottom of the hole and 18” on top. 
Because our bar was fused at the metal shop with a low support bar close to the bottom of 
the posts, we also dug a trough about 18” deep from one post to the other. (When filled with 
cement, the low bar was covered.) Even with post-hole diggers, digging holes that are 4 1/2’ 
deep is extremely challenging. It made for a great workout!
Each post has to go in perfectly straight. If there is a bar connecting them (as was the 
case with our piece), it must be level. This needs to remain the case until the concrete sets. 
The best way to ensure this is to build a wooden frame out of 2×4’s around the structure 
before you put the concrete in. Take your time. This step is important and will require a lot 
of trial and error. You do not want an un-level bar.
Once the structure is level, straight and properly framed in wood, fill the holes with 
concrete. When the concrete dries, remove the frame and you’ve got the home gym of your 
dreams!
Almost…
A NEW LIFE
Even with four and a half feet in the ground and (literally) a ton of cement, explosive 
muscle-ups caused the backyard pull-up bar to vibrate more than we wanted. It was just a 
tiny bit, really, but that wasn’t part of the vision. Changes had to be made. The bars needed 
diagonal support. Vertical and horizontal were not enough.
We decided that in making it more stable, we’d change the whole shape and make it bet-
ter! We had a smaller post/bar combo fabricated and set it up 4’ behind the initial one. This 
one was 10’ high; we buried just shy of 4’ of it. The second unit had to be parallel to the first 
structure, as well as level with the ground. Once it was in the ground, we used four 7’ cross 
beams mounted diagonally to hold the two structures together using standard scaffold 
clamps. (We got them used for about $10 each.) We made sure it was level and filled the 
holes.
Finally, when the concrete dried and the smoke cleared…THIS BABY WASN’T 
GOING ANYWHERE!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
351
The best part of this new design was that it wasn’t limited to pull-ups, muscle-ups, and 
flags. With the second bar, it could accommodate Aussie pull-ups, dips and an unlimited 
variety of grips. At the end of the day, the backyard pull-up bar wound up different than we 
planned, yet exceeded even our most fantastic expectations!
In this world, things don’t always go as you planned. Sometimes you set a goal and the 
outcome turns out differently than you had imagined. But when we move forward and roll 
with the changes, we may find ourselves grateful for the unexpected. That’s part of what 
makes life beautiful. Now let’s do some pull-ups!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
352

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
353
C h a p t e r 18
Taking It  
To The Streets
hen you do Street Workout, the world becomes your gym. Don’t be afraid to 
get creative and try different things. What follows is a small sample of some 
of the many ways you can utilize whatever you may encounter in your surroundings to per-
form various exercises. The possibilities are endless!
W
 
Scaffold - Pull-up, Muscle-up, Front 
Lever, Back Lever, Elbow Lever, Hanging 
Leg Raise, Skin-the-Cat, etc.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
354
 
Street Sign - Human Flag, 
Clutch Flag, Clutch Lever, 
Shoulder Flag, etc.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
355
 
 
Rail - Elbow Lever, Rail Pistol, 
Iguana Push-up, etc. 
Taking it to the street…  
Literally!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
356
 
 
Bench - Bench Pistol,  
Elevated Pistol, Elbow 
Lever, L-sit, Feet  
Elevated Push-up, etc.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
357
 
Traffic Signal – Pull-Up, 
Front Lever, Back Lever, 
Hanging Knee Raise, 
Hanging Leg Raise, etc.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
358
 
One finger pull-up!

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
359
 
 
Tree - Pull-up,  
Hanging Leg Raise, 
Human Flag etc.
Bike Rack - Aussie Pull-up, 
Elbow Lever, L-sit, etc.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
360
 
REMEMBER WHERE YOU CAME FROM
Long before we were trainers, we worked at a little restaurant in NYC called 
Live Bait, shucking clams and delivering food on a bicycle. It was not the most 
exciting or pleasant job. We’ve been struck by taxis, berated by customers and 
we always came home smelling like shellfish. But because we worked so hard 
to get where we are now, we appreciate it that much more. We’ve been hustlin’ 
since way before anyone knew the name Kavadlo!
Here we are paying tribute—Street Workout style—to that early job which 
helped to instill the work ethic that allows us to continue to thrive. Remem-
ber, there is no such thing as overnight success. Nothing worthwhile will come 
without hard work.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
361
T R A I N

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
362
NAME: 	
	
AL KAVADLO
BIRTHDATE: 	 	
SEPTEMBER 1, 1979
HEIGHT: 	
	
5’11”
WEIGHT: 	
	
160 LBS.
SIGNATURE MOVE: 	 MUSCLE-UP
CATCH PHRASE: 	
“HEY, HEY, HEY! WE’RE WORKING OUT!”

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
363
NAME: 	
	
	
DANNY KAVADLO
BIRTHDATE: 	 	
	
AUGUST 9, 1974
HEIGHT: 	
	
	
6’ 0”
WEIGHT: 	
	
	
180 LBS.
SIGNATURE MOVE: 	 	
HUMAN FLAG
CATCH PHRASE: 	
	
“KEEP THE DREAM ALIVE!”

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
364
—Acknowledgments—
Al wishes to thank his wife Grace and their dogs,  
Weezer and Puffy.
Danny wishes to thank Wilson Cash Kavadlo,  
Mike Anderson and Annie Vo.
Additional special thanks to 
Rosalie & Carl Kavadlo, John Du Cane,  
Paul “Coach” Wade and Derek Brigham.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
365
—About The Authors—
Al and Danny Kavadlo are two of the world’s leading authorities on calisthenics and 
personal training. The Kavadlo brothers have authored several internationally-acclaimed, 
best-selling fitness books. They have appeared in numerous publications including The 
New York Times and Men’s Health, and are regular contributors to Bodybuilding.com 
and TRAIN magazine. As Master Instructors for Dragon Door’s Progressive Calisthenics 
Certification, Al and Danny travel the world teaching bodyweight strength training to ath-
letes, professional trainers and fitness enthusiasts from all walks of life.

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
366
—Index of Exercises—
Advanced One Arm Elbow Lever.....................................206
Advanced Pistol.......................................................................115
Advanced Shrimp...................................................................119
Archer Aussie.............................................................................66
Aussie Pull-up............................................................................60
Archer Pull-up...........................................................................83
Archer Push-up.........................................................................36
Archer Squat............................................................................ 104
Back Bridge.............................................................................. 160
Back Lever................................................................................228
Bar Hang.......................................................................................71
Behind The Neck Pull-up.......................................................81
Bench Assisted Pistol............................................................110
Bench Assisted Squat..............................................................92
Bench Dip.....................................................................................50
Bent Knee Aussie......................................................................61
Bent Knee Hold........................................................................131
Bicycle Flag..............................................................................264
Bridge Rotation....................................................................... 164
Bulgarian Split Squat.............................................................101
Calf Raise...................................................................................103
Candlestick Bridge.................................................................156
Candlestick Straight Bridge................................................157
Chamber Hold.........................................................................260
Chin-up.........................................................................................73
Claw Push-up.............................................................................33
Closed Umbrella......................................................................199
Clutch Flag................................................................................251
Clutch Flag Arm Setup.........................................................248
Clutch Lever............................................................................252
Commando Pull-up..................................................................78
Crane Pose.................................................................................174
Crow Hold..................................................................................173
Dragon Flag...............................................................................136
Dragon Pistol............................................................................116
Drinking Bird........................................................................... 108
Elbow Headstand....................................................................181
Elbow Lever............................................................................. 201
Elbow Lever Setup................................................................202
Elevated Pistol.........................................................................112
Exaggerated Bar Hang..........................................................233
Extended Range-of-Motion Pull-up................................216
False Grip..................................................................................218
Feet Elevated Aussie...............................................................65
Feet Elevated Pike Press........................................................47
Feet Elevated Push-up............................................................27
Flex Hang.....................................................................................71
Fingertip Push-up....................................................................32
Forearm Bridge........................................................................159
Forearm Stand.........................................................................187
Freestanding Handstand Press-up..................................195
Frog Stand.................................................................................172
Front Lever..............................................................................238
Front Lever Curl....................................................................240
Front Lever Pull-up..............................................................242
Gecko Bridge.............................................................................163
German Hang..........................................................................225
Grounded Windshield Wiper.............................................129
Hand Elevated One Arm Push-up.......................................39
Hands Elevated Pike Press....................................................46
Hands Elevated Push-up........................................................26
Handstand Facing the Wall.................................................186
Handstand, Gymnastic Style..............................................191
Handstand On Parallel Bars............................................... 194
Handstand, Strongman Style............................................. 190
Hanging Knee Raise...............................................................138
Hanging Leg Raise................................................................. 140
Hanging Windshield Wiper............................................... 144
Hawaiian Squat...................................................................... 120
Headbanger Pull-up.................................................................80
High Angled Flag ...................................................................263
High Support Press...............................................................266
Hindu Press................................................................................ 44
Hindu Squat............................................................................. 102
Hinge Push-up...........................................................................35
Hip Bridge..................................................................................150
Hollow Body................................................................................30
Hollowback Handstand........................................................192
Hook Hand/Flat Palm Flag................................................270
Hover Lunge.............................................................................117
Human Flag And Human Flag Pole.................................277
Human Flag Crucifix............................................................275
Iguana Push-up..........................................................................38
Jumbo Shrimp........................................................................ 122
Kip-up.........................................................................................167
Kneeling Push-up.....................................................................24
Knuckle Push-up.......................................................................31
Korean Dip..................................................................................56
L Pull-up.......................................................................................82
L-sit..............................................................................................132
Low Hanging Clutch Flag...................................................249
Low Hanging Press Flag......................................................262
Lying Knee Tuck.....................................................................126
Lying Bent Knee Raise..........................................................127
Meathook.................................................................................. 146
Mixed Grip Pull-up...................................................................76
Muscle-up..................................................................................219
Narrow Grip Aussie.................................................................63
Narrow Grip Pull-up ...............................................................75
Narrow Push-up........................................................................28
Neck Bridge...............................................................................158
Negative Muscle-up...............................................................217
Negative Pull-up........................................................................72
Narrow Squat.............................................................................96

S t r e e t  W o r k o u t
367
—Index of Exercises—
Neutral Grip Aussie.................................................................64
Neutral Grip Pull-up................................................................77
One Arm Aussie Pull-up.........................................................68
One Arm Back Bridge............................................................162
One Arm Back Lever..............................................................231
One Arm Elbow Lever..........................................................203
One Arm Flag...........................................................................276
One Arm Flex Hang..................................................................85
One Arm Handstand..............................................................196
One Arm Hang............................................................................84
One Arm Hanging Leg Raise...............................................145
One Arm In/One Arm Out Elbow Lever........................202
One Arm Negative....................................................................87
One Arm/One Leg Crow.......................................................177 
One Arm/One Leg Push-up...................................................41
One Arm Pull-up.......................................................................88
One Arm Push-up.....................................................................39
One Handed Pull-up................................................................86
One Leg Back Bridge..............................................................161
One Leg Back Lever...............................................................227
One Leg Crow...........................................................................176
One Leg Front Lever.............................................................236
One Leg Push-up.......................................................................34
Parallel Bar Dip..........................................................................52
Parallel Bar Flag.....................................................................267
Perpendicular Bar Dip............................................................54
Pike Press....................................................................................45
Pirouette....................................................................................193
Pistol Squat...............................................................................113
Planche.......................................................................................213
Planche Lean...........................................................................209
Plank..............................................................................................20
Plyometric Dip...........................................................................57
Plyometric Muscle-up.........................................................223
Plyometric Pull-up...................................................................89
Plyometric Push-up.................................................................42
Plyometric Squat.....................................................................123
Pole Assisted Pistol................................................................ 111
Pole Assisted Squat..................................................................93
Press Flag..................................................................................268
Press Flag Arm Setup...........................................................258
Prisoner Squat...........................................................................98
Pull-up..........................................................................................73
Push-up........................................................................................22
Rail Pistol...................................................................................116
Reverse Grip Back Lever.....................................................230
Reverse Grip Muscle-up......................................................222
Rollover......................................................................................143
Russian Dip.................................................................................55
Scorpion Planche................................................................... 212
Seated Knee Raise..................................................................130
Shoulder Bridge.......................................................................155
Shoulder Flag..........................................................................272
Shrimp Squat............................................................................118
Side Crow...................................................................................175
Side One Arm Elbow Lever................................................207
Side Plank.................................................................................247
Single Leg Stand..................................................................... 106
Skinning The Cat...................................................................224
Split Squat...................................................................................99
Squat..............................................................................................94
Stand-to-Stand Bridge..........................................................166
Step-up.......................................................................................107
Straddle Back Lever..............................................................227
Straddle Elbow Lever...........................................................200
Straddle Flag............................................................................265
Straddle Front Lever............................................................235
Straddle Handstand...............................................................188
Straddle Headstand...............................................................182
Straddle Planche.....................................................................211
Straddle Push-up......................................................................25
Straight Bar Dip.........................................................................53
Straight Bridge.........................................................................154
Straight Leg Raise...................................................................128
Strict Muscle-up.................................................................... 221
Switch Grip Flag.....................................................................274
Support Press..........................................................................257
Table Bridge..............................................................................152
Toes-to-Bar Hanging Leg Raise.........................................141
Tripod.........................................................................................179
Tripod Headstand.................................................................. 180
Tuck Back Lever.....................................................................226
Tuck Clutch Flag....................................................................250
Tuck Front Lever...................................................................234
Tuck Planche........................................................................... 210
Twisting Hanging Knee Raise............................................139
Ultimate Handstand Press....................................................49
Ultimate Headstand...............................................................183
V-sit.............................................................................................134
Vertical Flag..............................................................................261
Walking Lunge........................................................................ 100
Wall Crawl.................................................................................165
Wall Handstand Press.............................................................48
Wall Handstand...................................................................... 184
Wide Grip Aussie......................................................................62
Wide Grip Pull-up.....................................................................74
Wide Push-up.............................................................................29
Wide Squat..................................................................................97
Wrist L-sit.................................................................................135
Wrist Pull-up............................................................................135
Wrist Push-up..........................................................................135
Wushu Pistol............................................................................114
X Clutch Flag...........................................................................253

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Strength Rules online:
www.dragondoor.com/b84
How to Get Stronger 
Than Almost Anyone—
And The Proven Plan 
to Make It Real
How to Be  
Tough as Nails— 
Whatever You Do,  
Wherever You Go,  
Whenever You Need it…
Want to get classically 
strong—in every  
dimension of your life— 
gut, heart and mind…? 
In other words, do you want to be:
•  More than just gym-strong? 
•  More than just functionally strong? 
•  More than just sport-specifically strong? 
•  More than just butt-kicker strong? 
•  And—certainly—more than just look-pretty- 
in-a-bodybuilding-contest strong? 
Do you demand—instead—to be:
•  Tensile Strong? 
•  Versatile Strong? 
•  Pound-for-Pound Strong? 
•  The Ultimate Physical Dynamo? 
•  A Mental Powerhouse? 
•  A Spiritual Force? 
•  An Emotional Rock? 
“Strength Rules is one of the finest books on strength I’ve ever read. No ifs, ands or 
buts. Not just ‘bodyweight strength’—strength, period. There are a million and one 
strength books out there about hoisting heavy iron and screwing up your joints...usu-
ally written by coaches and athletes using steroids and other drugs. But if you want to 
learn how to unleash ferocious strength and power while also improving your health 
and ridding yourself of extra fat and joint pain, THIS is the book you need to own. 
If you are a bodyweight master, this is the bible you will want to go back to again and 
again, to keep you on the straight and narrow. If you are raw beginner—Jeez, then get 
this book right now, follow the rules, and save yourself years of wasted effort! Strength 
Rules is as good as it gets!” 
—PAUL WADE, author of Convict Conditioning
“I have been waiting for a book to be written on strength training that I 
can recommend to all of my patients, and Danny Kavadlo has delivered 
with Strength Rules. Danny has written a stripped down approach to 
strength that is accessible to everyone.  
He has distilled his wealth of knowledge and experience in coaching and 
bodyweight strength training into a program that is cohesive, scalable, 
and instantly applicable to all comers.  He has also added a rock solid 
approach to nutrition and ample doses of inspirational story telling and 
philosophy, resulting in the gem that is Strength Rules. 
I dare anyone to read this book and still give me an excuse why they can’t 
strengthen their body and improve their health.  No excuses. Get the book 
and get to work!” 
—DR. CHRISTOPHER HARDY, author of Strong Medicine   
Then welcome to Danny’s World… the world of Strength Rules— where you can stand tall 
on a rock-solid foundation of classic strength principles…Arm-in-arm with a world leader 
in the modern calisthenics movement…
Then… with Danny as your constant guide, grow taller and ever-stronger—in all aspects of 
your life and being—with a Master Blueprint of progressive calisthenic training where the 
sky’s the limit on your possible progress…
Do Danny’s classical Strength Rules—and, for sure, you can own the keys to the strength 
kingdom…
Ignore Danny’s classical Strength Rules—break them, twist them, lame-ass them, screw 
with them—then doom yourself to staying stuck in idle as a perpetual strength mediocrity…
The choice is yours!

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Strength Rules online:
www.dragondoor.com/b84
However brilliant most strength 
books might be, 99% of them 
have a fatal flaw…
Strength Rules 
How to Get Stronger 
Than Almost Anyone—
And The Proven Plan to 
Make It Real
By Danny Kavadlo
 
Book #B84 $39.99 
eBook #EB84  $9.99 
Paperback  8.5 x 11
264 pages, 305 photos 
“Strength Rules by Danny Kavadlo is so good you can’t ignore it. 
It’s minimalistic. It’s low tech. It’s simple. It’s right.
Kavadlo’s work always has me nodding along with a lot of ‘yeses’ 
and ‘good points.’ 
This book is about true strength. The old kind of strength where 
heroes were people, like Beowulf and Ulysses, who protected the 
community first. This book is about empowering yourself and 
others…without stepping on their heads to get to the top.
Kavadlo quotes one of my heroes, St. Francis of Assisi: ‘Start by 
doing what’s necessary; then do what’s possible and suddenly you 
are doing the impossible.’ True strength, becoming the best you 
can be, starts with what one needs to do rather than what one 
wants to do. 
We often ignore calisthenics because of one issue: they are really 
hard to do. Stop ignoring them. Stop ignoring common sense in 
nutrition and supplements. Stop ignoring Danny Kavadlo. Again, 
Strength Rules is so good, you can’t ignore it.” 
—DAN JOHN, author of Never Let Go
“I can’t say enough good things about Danny Kavadlo. I just love 
his entire approach, mindset and overall vibe. And Strength Rules 
has to be one of the coolest, most badass fitness books I have ever 
seen.”—JASON FERRUGGIA
99% of otherwise excellent strength books 
focus on only one aspect of strength: 
how to get physically stronger through 
physical exercise. Health and multi-di-
mensional well-being is given at best a 
cursory nod… Nutritional advice is most 
often a thinly disguised pitch for a supple-
ment line…
If you want a book that gives you the 
goods on full-body training, full-body 
health and full-body strength, then there’s 
precious little out there… So, thank God 
for the advent of Strength Rules!
Strength Rules embodies all elements of 
strength—even how they work into our 
day-to-day existence, the highs and lows 
of our being, for better or for worse…
Strength Rules is dedicated to those who 
are down with the cause. Those who want 
to work hard to get strong. Who insist 
they deserve to build their own muscle, 
release their own endorphins and synthe-
size their own hormones. 
Strength Rules has no interest in fly-
by-night fitness fads. Classic exercises 
have stood the test of time for a reason. 
Strength Rules shouts a loud “just say 
no!” to cumbersome, complicated work-
out equipment. Strength Rules walks a 
path free from trendy diets, gratuitous 
chemical concoctions and useless gear…
Almost every strength exercise comes 
down to the basics. Essentially, Squat, 
Push and Pull. These three broad, 
essential movements are the granddad-
dies of ‘em all. Throw in some Flexion, 
Transverse Bends and Extension, and 
you’ve got yourself the tools for a lifetime 
of full body strength training… That’s why 
the exercises contained in Strength Rules 
are divided into these few, broad catego-
ries. Everything else is a variation. There 
is no reason to overcomplicate it.
The Strength Rules mission is to help 
anybody and everybody get in the best 
shape of their lives Strength Rules lays 
out the truth clearly and succinctly, giving 
you the tools you need to grow stronger 
and persevere in this mad world—with 
your head held high and your body lean 
and powerful…
The exercise portion of Strength Rules 
(titled ACTIONS) is split into three lev-
els: Basic Training (Starting Out), Beast 
Mode (Classic Strength) and Like A Boss 
(Advanced Moves). Naturally, not every-
one will fall 100% into one of these groups 
for all exercises in all categories and that’s 
fine. In fact, it’s likely that even the same 
individual’s level will vary from move to 
move. That’s cool; we all progress at dif-
ferent rates. Respect and acknowledge it. 
Trust your instincts.
Speaking of instincts, we are wired with 
them for a reason. If our instincts are 
wrong then that’s millions of years of evo-
lution lying to us. A large part of Strength 
Rules embraces empowerment, faith in 
oneself and emotional awareness. Danny 
believes that being honest with yourself, 
physically, mentally and spiritually is a 
magnificent (and necessary) component 
of true, overall strength. Yes, sometimes 
the truth hurts, but it must be embraced if 
we are ever to be fit and free. We all have 
the power within ourselves. Use it.
Strength Rulescries out to all body types, 
age groups, backgrounds and disciplines. 
It talks to the beginning student. It calls 
on the advanced practitioner, looking for 
new challenges. It speaks to the calisthen-
ics enthusiast and all the hard-working 
personal trainers… Strength Rules is for 
everyone who wants to get strong—and 
then some… 

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Everybody Needs Training online:
www.dragondoor.com/b72
ost folk who embark on a career as a trainer, do so initially out of a personal passion for 
fitness and a strong desire to help other achieve results. Be it weight loss, conditioning, 
strength gains, flexibility or enhanced performance.
But a passion for working out and an earnest desire to help others—alone—does not a successful 
personal trainer make. The sad fact is that the turn over rate for personal trainers after one year is 
over 80%. Why? It’s almost always because the trainer didn’t have a proper understanding of the 
BUSINESS of being a fitness professional. 
The bottom line is that without the appropriate success 
blueprint, the most skilled and knowledgeable personal 
trainer is usually doomed to failure. Unfortunately, until 
now, there has been no such battle-tested blueprint avail-
able either to the novice trainer or the professional strug-
gling to stay alive. Now, however that’s all changed, 
thanks to Danny Kavadlo’s Everybody Needs 
“Everybody Needs Training is quite ‘something.’ I don’t 
think I have ever seen this kind of depth in the field. It’s both 
obvious and ‘wow’ as you read it. Amazing stuff. It fills a gap 
in the community that, frankly, surprises me no one has really 
filled.”—DAN JOHN, author, Never Let Go
“Danny Kavadlo has personally helped me become a more successful trainer 
and coach. I cannot recommend Everybody Needs Training enough. It’s 
the best book I’ve ever seen on the subject of being a professional trainer.” 
—ADEL GABER, World Class Trainer & 3-Time Olympic Wrestling Coach 
“Everybody Needs Training is a solid collection of tried-and-true best practices 
that can help personal trainers on any level reach their full potential in their chosen 
field.”—ROLANDO GARCIA, RKC II, CK-FMS
“Everybody Needs Training is a must-read for every personal trainer want-
ing to take it to the next level, and everyone who has ever dreamed of becoming a 
personal trainer. This book allows you to get inside the genius PT mind of Danny 
Kavadlo, a master of his craft, speaking off the cuff to you about training—price-
less!”—ERRICK MCADAMS, Personal Trainer, Model, Fitness Personality
 Good for any profession or business
 “I’m not a trainer, but took Danny and Al’s PCC Class. This is a great book for any-
one going into business as either an employee or owner, whether a fitness trainer or 
any other kind of business. I’m a lawyer, and I’m thinking about making it required 
reading for my newly hired lawyers. Good practical advice, with the focus on the cus-
tomer, which is a focus that seems to be lost these days. Easy reading, but pithy, with 
lots of great tips and ideas, with an excellent overriding theme. Oh yea -- well written 
too!”— Mark Walker, McAllen, Texas
Everybody Needs 
Training 
Proven Success Secrets  
for the Professional 
Fitness Trainer—How to 
Get More Clients, Make 
More Money, Change 
More Lives
By Danny Kavadlo
 
Book #B72  $34.95 
eBook #EB72  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11   
“Danny Kavadlo’s training helped me to discover strengths I never knew I had, and I can take those lessons 
with me wherever I go, for the rest of my life. The wisdom and insight contained in Everybody Needs  
Training not only relates to being a successful fitness trainer, but can be applied for peace and success in 
many of life’s ventures. Danny is the best!”—ELIZABETH GILBERT, #1 New York Times Best Selling Author, 
Eat, Pray, Love. One of TIME Magazine’s 100 Most Influential People in the World 
M
   “Christmas wishes DO come true….Danny Kavadlo has written a 
training book! Imagine if you could squeeze all the hard-earned 
wisdom, secrets and tactics of one of the world’s hottest personal 
trainers between the covers of a beautifully illustrated tell-all 
manual, and you have imagined Everybody Needs Training. 
   Like Danny himself, this groundbreaking book is incredibly 
smart, brutally honest, laugh-out-loud funny, and totally out of 
left field…if you train others (casually or professionally), want a 
career training others, or if you just love the now-famous “Kavadlo 
approach” to getting in shape, you owe it to yourself to grab a copy 
of this masterpiece. I cannot recommend it highly enough.” 
—PAUL WADE, author of Convict Conditioning

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order C-Mass online:
www.dragondoor.com/b75
s it really possible to add significant extra mus-
cle-bulk to your frame using bodyweight exer-
cise only? The answer, according to calisthen-
ics guru and bestselling Convict Conditioning 
author Paul Wade, is a resounding Yes. Legendary 
strongmen and savvy modern bodyweight bodybuild-
ers both, have added stacks of righteous beef to their 
physiques—using just the secrets Paul Wade reveals 
in this bible-like guide to getting as strong AND as big 
as you could possibly want, using nothing but your 
own body.
Paul Wade’s trenchant, visceral style blazes with hard-won body culture insight, tactics, 
strategies and tips for the ultimate blueprint for getting huge naturally without free weights, 
machine supplements or—God forbid—steroids.  With C-Mass, Paul Wade further cements 
his position as the preeminent modern authority on how to build extraordinary power and 
strength with bodyweight exercise only.
C-MASS 
How To Maximize Muscle Growth 
Using Bodyweight-Only 
C-MASS
Calisthenics Mass: How To  
Maximize Muscle Growth  
Using Bodyweight-Only  
Training
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B75  $24.95 
eBook #EB75  $9.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11 • 136 pages,  
130 photos 
I
m Get All of This When You Invest in Paul Wade’s C-Mass Today: m
2. The Ten Commandments  
of Calisthenics Mass
Truly effective muscular training boils down 
into THESE Ten Commandments. 
COMMANDMENT I: Embrace 
reps!
Why reps are key when you want to build mas-
sive stacks of jacked up muscle. 
Understanding the biochemistry of building 
bigger muscles through reps…
COMMANDMENT II: Work Hard!
Want to turn from a twig into an ok tree? Why 
working demonically hard and employing brutal 
physical effort is essential to getting nasty big…
1. Bodyweight Muscle? No Problem!
Build phenomenal amounts of natural muscle mass and discover how to:
• Add 20-30+ pounds of solid muscle—with perfect proportions
• Reshape your arms with 2-3 inches of gnarly beef
• Triple the size of your pecs and lats
• Thicken and harden your abdominal wall into a classic six-pack
• Throw a thick, healthy vein onto your biceps
• Generate hard, sculpted quads and hamstrin gs that would be the 
envy of an Olympic sprinter
• Build true “diamond” calves
• Stand head and shoulders above the next 99% of natural bodybuild-
ers in looks, strength and power
• Boost your testosterone naturally to bull-like levels
Understand the radically different advantages you’ll get from the two major types 
of resistance work, nervous system training and muscular system training.
If you really want to explode your muscle growth—if SIZE is your goal—you 
should train THIS way… 

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order C-Mass online:
www.dragondoor.com/b75
COMMANDMENT III:  
Use Simple, Compound  
Exercises!
Why—if you want to get swole—you need to 
toss out complex, high-skill exercises. 
Why dynamic exercises are generally far 
better than static holds for massive muscle 
building.
These are the very best dynamic exercises—
for bigger bang for your muscle buck. 
How to ratchet up the heat with THIS kick-
ass strategy and sprout new muscle at an 
eye-popping rate.
COMMANDMENT IV:  
Limit Sets!
What it takes to trigger explosive muscle 
growth—and why most folk foolishly and 
wastefully pull their “survival trigger” way 
too many futile times…
Why you need to void “volume creep” at all 
costs when size is what you’re all about.
COMMANDMENT V: Focus 
on Progress—and Utilize a 
Training Journal!
Why so few wannabe athletes ever achieve 
a good level of strength and muscle—let 
alone a great level—and what it really takes 
to succeed.
Golden tip: how to take advantage of the 
windows of opportunity your training 
presents you. 
How to transform miniscule, incremental 
gains into long-range massive outcomes.
Forgot those expensive supplements! Why 
keeping a training log can be the missing key 
to success or failure in the muscle-gain biz.
COMMANDMENT VI: You 
Grow When You Rest. So Rest!
If you really wanted to improve on your 
last workout—add that rep, tighten up your 
form—how would you want to approach that 
workout? The answer is right here…
Ignore THIS simple, ancient, muscle-build-
ing fact—and be prepared to go on spinning 
your muscle-building wheels for a VERY 
long time…
10 secrets to optimizing the magic rest-mus-
cle growth formula…
Why you may never even come close to your 
full physical potential—but how to change 
that…
COMMANDMENT VII: Quit Eat-
ing “Clean” the Whole Time!
Warning—Politically incorrect statement: 
Why, if you are trying to pack on more 
muscle, eating junk now and again is not only 
okay, it can be positively anabolic. 
COMMANDMENT VIII:  
Sleep More!
How is it that prison athletes seem to gain 
and maintain so much dense muscle, when 
guys on the outside—who are taking supple-
ments and working out in super-equipped 
gyms—can rarely gain muscle at all? 
Discover the 3 main reasons why, sleep, the 
natural alternative to steroids, helps prison 
athletes grow so big…
COMMANDMENT IX: Train the 
Mind Along With the Body!
Why your mind is your most powerful 
supplement…
How 6 major training demons can destroy 
your bodybuilding dreams—and where to 
find the antidote…
COMMANDMENT X:  
Get Strong!
Understanding the relationship between 
the nervous system and the muscular 
system—and how to take full advantage of 
that relationship. 
Why, if you wish to gain as much muscle as 
your genetic potential will allow, just training 
your muscles won’t cut it—and what more 
you need to do…
The secret to mixing and matching for both 
growth AND strength…
3. “Coach” Wade’s 
Bodypart Tactics
Get the best bodyweight bodybuilding 
techniques for 11 major body areas.
1. Quadzilla! (…and Quadzookie.)
Why the Gold Standard quad developer is 
squatting—and why you absolutely need to 
master the Big Daddy, the one-legged squat…
How to perform the Shrimp Squat, a 
wonderful quad and glute builder, which is 
comparable to the one-leg squat in terms of 
body-challenge. 
Why you should employ THESE 7 jumping 
methods to put your quad gains through 
the roof…
How to perform the hyper-tough, man-mak-
ing Sissy Squat—favorite of the Iron Guru, 
Vince Gironda—great bodybuilding ideolo-
gist of the Golden Era, and trainer of a young 
Mr. Schwarzenegger. He wouldn’t let anyone 
perform barbell squats in his gym!
2. Hamstrings:  
Stand Sideways With Pride
Enter Lombard’s Paradox: how and why you 
can successfully brutalize your hammies 
with calisthenics.
Why bridging is a perfect exercise for 
strengthening the hamstrings. 
How to correctly work your hamstrings and 
activate your entire posterior chain.
Why THIS workout of straight bridges and 
hill sprints could put muscle on a pencil.
How to employ the little-known secret of the 
bridge curl to develop awesome strength and 
power in the your hammies. 
Why explosive work is essential for fully de-
veloped hamstrings—and the best explosive 
exercise to make your own…
3. Softball Biceps
THIS is the best biceps exercise in the world 
bar none. But most bodybuilders never use it 
to build their biceps! Discover what you are 
missing out on and learn to do it right…
And then you can make dumbbell curls 
look like a redheaded stepchild with THIS 
superior bicep blower-upper…
Another great compound move for the biceps 
(and forearms) is rope climbing. As with all 
bodyweight, this can be performed progres-
sively. Get the details here on why and how…
Despite what some trainers may ignorantly 
tell you, you can also perform bodyweight 
biceps isolation exercises—such as the 
classic (but-rarely-seen-in-gyms) curl-up. 
Pure power! If you can build one, THIS 
old school piece of kit will give you biceps 
straight from Hades.
4. Titanic Triceps
Paul Wade has never met a gym-trained 
bodybuilder who understands how the 
triceps work. Not one. Learn how the triceps 
REALLY work. This stuff is gold—pay atten-
tion. And discover the drills that are going to 
CRUCIFY those tris!
4. Farmer Forearms
Paul Wade wrote the definitive mini-manual 
of calisthenics forearm and grip training 
in Convict Conditioning 2. But HERE’S a 
reminder on the take-home message that the 
forearms are best built through THESE exer-
cises, and you can build superhuman grip by 
utilizing intelligent THESE progressions. 
Why crush-style grippers are a mistake and 
the better, safer alternative for a hand-pulp-
ing grip…
5. It’s Not “Abs”,  
It’s “Midsection” 
As a bodybuilder, your method should be 
to pick a big, tough midsection movement 
and work at it hard and progressively to 
thicken your six-pack. This work should be 
a cornerstone of your training, no different 
from pullups or squats. It’s a requirement. 
Which movements to pick? Discover the best 
drills here…
And the single greatest exercise for 
scorching your abs in the most effec-
tive manner possible is THIS…
 

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order C-Mass online:
www.dragondoor.com/b75
How to best train your obliques and lateral 
chain…
The simplest and most effective way to train 
your transversus…
6. Maximum Chest
The roll call of classical bodyweight chest 
exercises is dynamic and impressive. It’s 
an ancient, effective, tactical buffet of 
super-moves. Get the list here…
THE best chest routine is THIS one…
If super-sturdy arms and shoulders mean 
your pecs barely get a look in when you 
press, then focus on THESE progressions 
instead—and your pecs will be burning with a 
welcome new pain… 
Why Al Kavadlo has a lean, athletic physique, 
but his pecs are as thick as a bodybuilder’s…
THIS could be the ultimate bodyweight drill 
to get thick, imposing pectoral muscles…
And here’s the single finest exercise for 
enlarging your pec minor—yet hardly anyone 
has figured it out… 
Why you need to master the art of deep 
breathing, strongman style, to truly develop a 
massive chest—and where to find unbeatable 
advice from proven champions…
7. Powerful, Healthy Shoulders
All die-hard bodybuilders need to know is 
that the deltoids have three heads. Here’s 
how they work…
If you want to give any of your shoulder 
heads an enhanced, specialist workout, a 
great tactic is THIS.
How to make your lateral deltoids scream for 
mercy—and thank you later when you ignore 
their pleas… 
If you really want to build your rear delts, 
THIS drill should be your number one 
exercise…
THESE kinds of drills can result in shoulder 
injury, rotator cuff tears, frozen shoulder and 
chronic pain—what to stick with instead…
THIS is a fantastic deltoid movement which 
will swell up those cannonballs fast…
Why old school hand balancing is so great 
for strength, size and coordination, while 
surprisingly easy on the shoulders, especially 
as you get a bit older…
The number one go-to guy in the whole world 
for hand-balancing is THIS calisthenics 
master…
8. Ah’ll be Back
THIS exercise is the finest lat-widener in 
the bodybuilding world and should be the 
absolute mainstay of your back training. 
This one’s a no-brainer—if adding maximum 
torso beef as fast and efficiently as possible 
appeals to you…
Are you an advanced bodyweight bodybuild-
er? Then you may wish to add THIS to your 
upper-back routine. Why? Well—THIS will 
blitz your rear delts, scapular muscles and 
the lower heads of the trapezius. These are 
the “detail” muscles of the back, so loved by 
bodybuilders when they grow and thicken, 
resembling serpents swirling around the 
shoulder-blades.
Paul Wade demands that all his students 
begin their personal training with a brutal 
regime of THIS punishing drill. Why? Find 
out here…
Real strength monsters can try THIS. But 
you gotta be real powerful to survive the 
attempt... 
Many bodybuilders think only in terms of 
“low back” when working the spinal muscles, 
but this is a mistake: find out why…
How bridging fully works all the deep tissues 
of the spine and bulletproofs the discs.
The single most effective bridge technique 
for building massive back muscle…
Why back levers performed THIS way are 
particularly effective in building huge spinal 
strength and thickness.
Why inverse hyperextensions are a superb 
lower-back and spine exercise which 
requires zero equipment. 
9. Calving Season
THIS squat method will make your calves 
larger, way more supple, more powerful, 
and your ankles/Achilles’ tendon will be 
bulletproofed like a steel cable… 
Whether you are an athlete, a strength train-
er or a pure bodyweight bodybuilder, your 
first mission should be to gradually build to 
THIS. Until you get there, you don’t need to 
waste time on any specialist calf exercises. 
If you DO want to add specific calf exercises 
to your program, then THESE are a good 
choice. 
The calves are naturally explosive muscles, 
and explosive bodyweight work is very good 
for calf-building. So add THESE six explosive 
drills into your mix…
Methods like THIS are so brutal (and effec-
tive) that they can put an inch or more on 
stubborn calves in just weeks. If you can train 
like this just once a week for a few months, 
you better get ready to outgrow your socks…
10. TNT: Total Neck and Traps
Do bodybuilders even need to do neck work? 
Here’s the answer…
The best neck exercises for beginners. 
HERE is an elite-level technique for develop-
ing the upper trapezius muscles between the 
neck and shoulders..
THIS is another wonderful exercise for the 
traps, developing them from all angles.
By the time you can perform two sets of 
twenty deep, slow reps of THIS move, your 
traps will look like hardcore cans of beans.
If you want more neck, and filling out your 
collar is something you want to explore, 
forget those decapitation machines in the 
gym, or those headache-inducing head 
straps. The safest, most natural and most 
productive techniques for building a bull-
nape are THESE. 
4. Okay.  
Now Gimme a Program
If you want to pack on muscle using body-
weight, it’s no good training like a gymnast or 
a martial artist or a dancer or a yoga expert, 
no matter how impressive those skill-based 
practitioners might be at performing 
advanced calisthenics. You need a different 
mindset. You need to train like a bodybuilder! 
Learn the essential C-Mass principles behind 
programming, so you can master your own 
programming… 
The most important thing to understand 
about bodybuilding routines…
Simple programs with minimum complexity 
have THESE features
By contrast, programs with maximum 
complexity have THESE features
Why Simple Beats Complex, For THESE 3 
Very Important Reasons…
When to Move up the Programming Line
If simpler, more basic routines are always 
the best, why do advanced bodybuilders tend 
to follow more complex routines? Programs 
with different sessions for different 
bodyparts, with dozens of exercises? Several 
points to consider…
The best reason is to move up the program-
ming line is THIS
Fundamental Program Templates
• Total Body 1, Total Body 2
• Upper/Lower-Body Split 1, Upper/
Lower-Body Split 2
• 3-Way Split 1, 3-Way Split 2
• 4-Way Split 1, 4-Way Split 1
5. Troubleshooting  
Muscle-Growth:  
The FAQ
Q.  Why bodyweight? Why can’t I use 
weights and machines to build muscle?
Q.  I understand that pull-ups and chin-ups 
are superior exercises for building mus-
cle in the lats and biceps. Unfortunately I 
cannot yet perform pull-ups. Should I use 
assistance bands instead?
Q.  Looking at gymnasts, I have no doubt 
that progressive calisthenics methods 
can build a huge upper body. But what 
about the legs? Won’t it leave me with 
stick legs?
Q.  Coach, can you name the exercises that 
belong into an abbreviated routine for a 
total beginner? Which are the most essen-
tial without leaving gaps in my ability?
Q.  Big” bodyweight exercises such as 
push-ups and pull-ups may target the 
larger muscles of the body (pecs, lats, 
biceps, etc.), but what about the smaller 
muscles which are still so important to 
the bodybuilder? Things like forearms, 
the calves, the neck?
Q.  I have been told I need to use a weighted 
vest on my push-ups and pull-ups if I 
want to get stronger and gain muscle. 
Is this true?
Q.  Is bodyweight training suitable for 
women? Do you know of any women who 
achieved the “Master Steps” laid out in 
Convict Conditioning?
Q.  I am very interested in gaining size—not 
just muscle mass, but also height. Is it 
possible that calisthenics can increase 
my height?
Q.  You have said that moving exercises are 
superior to isometrics when it comes 
to mass gain. I am interested in getting 
huge shoulders, but Convict Conditioning 
gives several static (isometric) exercises 
early on in the handstand pushup chain. 
Can you give me any moving exercis-
es I can use instead, to work up to 
handstand pushups?

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order C-Mass online:
www.dragondoor.com/b75
C-MASS
Calisthenics Mass: How To  
Maximize Muscle Growth  
Using Bodyweight-Only  
Training
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B75  $24.95 
eBook #EB75  $9.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11 • 136 pages, 130 photos 
Q.  I have heard that the teenage years are 
the ideal age for building muscle. Is there 
any point in trying to build muscle after 
the age of forty?
Q.  I have had some knee problems in the 
past; any tips for keeping my knee joints 
healthy so I can build more leg mass?
Q.  I‘m pretty skinny and I have always 
had a huge amount of trouble putting on 
weight—any weight, even fat. Building 
muscle is virtually impossible for me. 
What program should I be on?
Q.  I’ve read in several bodybuilding maga-
zines that I need to change my exercises 
frequently in order to “confuse” my mus-
cles into growth. Is that true?
Q.  I read in several bodybuilding magazines 
that I need to eat protein every 2-3 hours 
to have a hope in hell of growing. They 
also say that I need a huge amount of 
protein, like two grams per pound of 
bodyweight. Why don’t your Command-
ments mention the need for protein?
Q.  I have heard that whey is the “perfect” 
food for building muscle. Is this true?
6. The Democratic  
Alternative…how to get 
as powerful as possible 
without gaining a pound
There is a whole bunch of folks who either 
want (or need) massive strength and power, 
but without the attendant muscle bulk. 
Competitive athletes who compete in weight 
limits are one example; wrestlers, MMA 
athletes, boxers, etc. Females are another 
group who, as a rule, want to get stronger 
when they train, but without adding much (or 
any) size. Some men desire steely, whip-like 
power but see the sheer weight of mass as 
non-functional—many martial artists fall 
into this category; perhaps Bruce Lee was 
the archetype.
But bodybuilders should also fall under this 
banner. All athletes who want to become as 
huge as possible need to spend some portion 
of their time focusing on pure strength. With-
out a high (and increasing) level of strength, 
it’s impossible to use enough load to stress 
your muscles into getting bigger. This is even 
truer once you get past a certain basic point.
So: You want to build power like a Humvee, 
with the sleek lines of a classic Porsche? The 
following Ten Commandments have got you 
covered. Follow them, and we promise you 
cannot fail, even if you had trouble getting 
stronger in the past. Your days of weakness 
are done, my friend…
Enter the “Bullzelle”
There are guys who train for pure mass and 
want to look like bulls, and guys who only 
train for athleticism without mass, and 
are more like gazelles. Al Kavadlo has been 
described as a “bullzelle”—someone who 
trains mainly for strength, and has some 
muscle too, but without looking like a bulked-
up bodybuilder. And guess what? It seems 
like many of the new generation of athletes 
want to be bullzelles!  With Paul Wade’s 
C-Mass program, you’ll have what you need 
to achieve bullzelle looks and functionality 
should you want it…
COMMANDMENT I: Use low 
reps while keeping “fresh”!
If you want to generate huge strength 
without building muscle, here is the precise 
formula...
COMMANDMENT II: Utilize 
Hebb’s Law—drill movements 
as often as possible!
How pure strength training works, in a 
nutshell…
Why frequency—how often you train—is 
often so radically different for pure strength 
trainers and for bodybuilders…
Training recipe for the perfect bodybuilder—
and for the perfect strength trainer… 
Why training for pure strength and training 
to master a skill are virtually identical 
methods. 
COMMANDMENT III: Master 
muscle synergy!
If there is a “trick” to being supremely strong, 
THIS is it...
As a bodybuilder, are you making this huge 
mistake? If you want to get super-powerful, 
unlearn these ideas and employ THIS 
strategy instead…
Another great way to learn muscular coor-
dination and control is to explore THESE 
drills... 
COMMANDMENT IV: Brace 
Yourself!
If there is a single tactic that’s guaranteed to 
maximize your body-power in short order, 
it’s bracing. Bracing is both an art-form and 
a science. Here’s how to do it and why it 
works so well.
COMMANDMENT V:  Learn 
old-school breath control!
If there is an instant “trick” to increasing 
your strength, it’s learning the art of the 
breath. Learn the details here…
Why inhalation is so important for strength 
and how to make it work most efficiently 
while lifting…
How the correctly-employed, controlled, 
forceful exhalation activates the muscles of 
the trunk, core and ribcage…
COMMANDMENT VI:  
Train your tendons!
When the old-time strongmen talked about 
strength, they rarely talked about muscle 
power—they typically focused on the integri-
ty of the tendons. THIS is why…
The concept of “supple strength” and how to 
really train the tendons for optimal resilience 
and steely, real-life strength…
Why focusing on “peak contraction” can 
be devastating to your long-term strength-
health goals…
COMMANDMENT VII: Focus on 
weak links!
THIS is the essential difference between 
a mere bodybuilder and a truly powerful 
human being… 
Why focusing all your attention on the 
biggest, strongest muscle groups is counter-
productive for developing your true strength 
potential… 
Pay extra attention to your weakest areas 
by including THESE 4 sets of drills as a 
mandatory part of your monster strength 
program…
COMMANDMENT VIII: Exploit 
Neural Facilitation!
The nervous system—like most sophisticated 
biological systems—possesses different sets 
of gears. Learn how to safely and effectively 
shift to high gear in a hurry using THESE 
strategies…
COMMANDMENT IX: Apply 
Plyometric Patterns to Hack 
Neural Inhibition 
Why it is fatal for a bodyweight master to 
focus only on tension-generating techniques 
and what to do instead…
How very fast movements can hugely in-
crease your strength—the light bulb analogy. 
The difference between “voluntary” and 
“involuntary” strength—and how to work on 
both for greater gains…
COMMANDMENT X: Master 
the power of the mind!
How to train the mind to make the body 
achieve incredible levels of strength and 
ferocity—as if it was tweaking on PCP…
5 fundamental ways to harness mental 
power and optimize your strength…
BONUS CHAPTER:
7. Supercharging Your 
Hormonal Profile
Why you should never, ever, ever take 
steroids to enhance your strength…
Hormones and muscle growth
Your hormones are what build your muscle. 
All your training is pretty secondary. You 
can work out hard as possible as often as 
possible, but if your hormonal levels aren’t 
good, your gains will be close to nil. Learn 
what it takes to naturally optimize a cascade 
of powerful strength-generating hormones 
and to minimize the strength-sappers from 
sabotaging your gains…
Studies and simple experience have demon-
strated that, far from being some esoteric 
practice, some men have increased their 
diminished total testosterone levels by over 
a thousand percent! How? Just by following a 
few basic rules.
What rules? Listen up. THIS is the most 
important bodybuilding advice anyone will 
ever give you.
The 6 Rules of Testosterone Building
THESE rules are the most powerful and 
long-lasting, for massive testosterone gener-
ation. Follow them if you want to get diesel.
The iron-clad case against steroid use and 
exogenous testosterone in general.

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Explosive Calisthenics online:
www.dragondoor.com/b80
How to Lead, Survive and Dominate 
Physically—And Reengineer Yourself As 
“The Complete Athletic Package”…
Explosive 
Calisthenics 
Superhuman Power, 
Maximum Speed  
and Agility, Plus  
Combat-Ready  
Reflexes—Using 
Bodyweight-Only 
Methods
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B80  $39.95 
eBook #EB80  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11 
392 pages, 775 photos 
SUPERHUMAN POWER, MAXIMUM SPEED AND  
AGILITY, PLUS COMBAT-READY REFLEXES— 
USING BODYWEIGHT-ONLY METHODS
Explosive Calisthenics is for those who want to be winners 
and survivors in the game of life—for those who want to be the 
Complete Package: powerful, explosive, strong, agile, quick and 
resilient. Traditional martial arts have always understood this 
necessity of training the complete package—with explosive 
power at an absolute premium. And resilience is revered: the 
joints, tendons, muscles, organs and nervous system are ALL 
conditioned for maximum challenge.
Really great athletes are invariably that way too: agile as all 
get-go, blinding speed, ungodly bursts of power, superhuman 
displays of strength, seemingly at will…
The foundation and fundamentals center, first, around the 
building of power and speed. But Explosive Calisthenics does a 
masterful job of elucidating the skill-practices needed to safely 
prepare for and master the more ambitious moves.
But Explosive Calisthenics doesn’t just inspire you with the 
dream of being the Complete Package. It gives you the complete 
blueprint, every detail and every progression you could possibly 
want and need to nail your dream and make it a reality. You, the 
Complete Package—it’s all laid out for you, step by step
“The first physical attribute we lose as we age is our ability to 
generate power.  Close behind is the loss of skilled, coordinated 
movement. The fix is never to lose these abilities in the first 
place! Paul Wade’s “Explosive Calisthenics is the best program 
for developing power and skilled movement I have seen.  Just 
as with his previous two books, the progressions are masterful 
with no fancy equipment needed. Do yourself a favor and get 
this amazing work.  This book will be the gold standard for 
developing bodyweight power, skill, and agility.” 
—CHRIS HARDY, D.O. MPH, CSCS, author, Strong Medicine

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Explosive Calisthenics online:
www.dragondoor.com/b80
With Explosive Calisthenics, Paul Wade 
challenges you to separate yourself from 
the herd of also-ran followers—to become 
a leader, survivor and winner in the 
physical game of life. But he doesn’t just 
challenge and inspire you. He gives you 
the direct means, the secrets, the science, 
the wisdom, the blueprints, the proven 
methods and the progressions—that 
make success inevitable, when you supply 
your end in consistent, diligent, skillful 
application.
Now a legendary international bestseller, 
Convict Conditioning can lay claim to 
be the Great Instigator when it comes to 
the resurgence of interest in bodyweight 
exercise mastery.
And—while Convict Conditioning 2 ce-
mented Wade’s position as the preeminent 
authority on bodyweight exercise—there 
is no doubt that his magisterial new 
accomplishment, Explosive Calisthenics is 
going to blow the doors off, all over again.
What makes Explosive Calisthenics 
so exciting—and so profound in its 
implications?
See, it goes back to the laws of brute 
survival. It’s not “Only the strongest shall 
survive”. No, it’s more like: “Only the stron-
gest, quickest, most agile, most powerful 
and most explosive shall survive.” To be 
a leader and dominator and survivor in 
the pack, you need to be the complete 
package...
A vanishing percent of people who work-
out even attempt to unlock their body’s 
inherent power and speed—choose to be 
different: reclaim your pride and dignity 
as a fully-realized human being by fully 
unleashing your true athletic capacity…
Now—for those who have the balls 
and the will and the fortitude to take it 
on—comes the next stage: Explosive 
Calisthenics. The chance not only to be 
strong and healthy but to ascend to the 
Complete Package. If you want it, then 
here it is…
 PART I: POWER, SPEED, AGILITY 
1: POWER UP! THE NEED FOR 
SPEED 
Power defined—understanding the differ-
ence between strength and power…P 3
Functional speed—and the golden mean 
for power in athletics…P 6
Discover how to move your entire body 
with lightning speed… P 6
Agility defined…P 7
Discover how to efficiently alter your 
movement at high velocity…P 7
The difference between complex power 
and simple power—and what it means for 
athletic success…P 7
Discover how to enhance your reflexes to 
generate higher levels of power speed and 
agility…P 9
Why most gym-trained athletes lack 
THESE qualities—and will therefore 
NEVER attain true athleticism…P 10	
	
	
	
	
2: EXPLOSIVE TRAINING:  
FIVE KEY PRINCIPLES…P 11
How modern Americans have become 
the slowest, least agile members of our 
species in all history—and what we can do 
about it…P 11
How you CAN teach your body to be 
the lightning-fast, explosive, acrobatic 
super-hunter your DNA is coded to make 
you…P 12
The 5 key principles for developing speed, 
power and agility… P 12
How to be the COMPLETE explosive 
machine…P 13
Why traditional box work, core training and 
Olympic lifting simply won’t cut it—when 
your goal is high-level explosiveness…P 14
If you really want to build monstrous 
power, speed and agility in the shortest 
possible time—HERE is what you absolute-
ly MUST stick with…P 18
The 6 movements you must master—for the 
ultimate in hardcore explosiveness…P 19
The true essence of calisthenics mastery 
lies here—and only here…P 19	
 
	
3: HOW TO USE THIS BOOK: CORE  
CONCEPTS AND ANSWERS…P 23
Do you need to learn the Explosive 6 in any 
particular order?...P  26
Do you have to start with Step 1?...P 27
How to train short-distance speed…P 32
Mastery of progressive calisthenics is like 
building an arsenal-full of weapons for 
your physical transformation. The Power 
Jump and Power Pushup will set up your 
foundation by supercharging your nervous 
system, ramping up your reflexes and 
amping your speed and power. 
Expect to be remarkably and resiliently 
strengthened in your bones, joints, tissues 
and muscles—over the entire body.
In other words: hard, dedicated work 
on just the Power Jump and the Power 
Pushup alone can turn a slow, clumsy Joe 
Average into a lightning-powered cyborg…
PART II: THE EXPLOSIVE SIX
4: POWER JUMPS:  
ADVANCED LEG SPRING… P 37
If you really want to become explosive, 
then the legs are the source of it all—and 
the best way to train the legs is with 
progressive power jumps. Here is the 
10-step blueprint for achieving ultimate 
leg power…
Understanding the importance of develop-
ing springy legs…P 37
Deconstructing the power jumps…P 38
How to develop the crucial skills of launch-
ing, tucking and landing…P 38—40
How to take advantage of Myotatic 
Rebound—to correctly absorb and redirect 
force…
How to correctly block when you jump…P 41
Do you need Plyo boxes?...P 43
Step One: Straight Hop—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 44
Step Two: Squat Jump—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 46
Step Three: Vertical Leap—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 48
Step Four: Block Jump—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 50
How to develop the ability to transfer force 
in dramatic fashion…P 50
Step Five: Butt-Kick Jump—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 52
Step Six: Slap Tuck Jump—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 54
Step Seven: Tuck Jump—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 56
Confers some serious explosive power to 
the lower body—and is a perquisite for 
becoming really fast…P 56
Step Eight: Catch Tuck Jump—Perfor-
mance, X-Ray, Regressions, Progres-
sions…P 58
Step Nine: Thread Jump—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 60
Master Step: Suicide Jump—Perfor-
mance, X-Ray…P 62
The ultimate tucking drill—once you master 
this drill, kip ups, front flips and back flips 
will come much easier than you ever 
imagined…P 62
Going Beyond…P 64
Reverse Suicide Jump…P64
Small Space Drills—3 useful speed and 
power techniques…P 69
Cossacks—for great supple strength and 
balance…P 69
Wide-to-Close Pop-Ups…P 70
Teach your body to be the lightning-fast,  
explosive, acrobatic super-hunter 
your DNA is coded to make you…
“Explosive Calisthenics is an absolute Treasure Map for anybody 
looking to tear down their body’s athletic limitations. Who 
doesn’t want to be able to kip to their feet from their back like a 
Bruce Lee? Or make a backflip look easy? Paul makes you want 
to put down the barbells, learn and practice these step-by-step 
progressions to mastering the most explosive and impressive 
bodyweight movements. The best part is? You can become an 
absolute Beast in under an hour of practice a week. Way to go, 
Paul! AROO!” 
—Joe Distefano, Spartan Race, Director of Training & Creator of 
the Spartan SGX Certification

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Explosive Calisthenics online:
www.dragondoor.com/b80
 
5: POWER PUSHUPS: STRENGTH 
BECOMES POWER…P 73
To round out a basic power training 
regime, you need to pair jumps with a 
movement chain which performs a similar 
job for the upper-body and arms. The best 
drills for these are power push ups.  Here 
is the 10-step blueprint for becoming an 
upper-body cyborg…
How to get arms like freaking jackham-
mers…P 73
How to skyrocket pour power levels, maxi-
mize your speed and add slabs of righteous 
beef to you torso and guns…P 73
How to develop upper-body survival-pow-
er—for more effective punching, blocking, 
throwing and pushing…P 73
How speed-power training trains the 
nervous system and joints to handle greater 
loads…P 73
The more power you have in your arms, 
chest and shoulders, the stronger they 
become. And the stronger they become, 
the harder you can work them and the 
bigger they get…P 73
Gives you an extra edge in strength AND 
size…P 73
Why the best way is the natural way…P 74
Deconstructing Power Pushups…P 74
Correct elbow positioning and where to 
place your hands (crucial)—to spring back 
with optimal power…P 74 
Why cheating with the Earthworm will only 
rob you—if freakish strength gains are 
your goal…P 76
How to apply the Myotatic Rebound effect  
to maximal advantage in your power  
pushups…P 78
The Power Pushup Chain…P 79
Step One: Incline Pop-Up—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 80
A perfect way to gently condition the 
shoulders, elbows and wrists for the 
harder work to come
Step Two: Kneeling Push-Off—Perfor-
mance, X-Ray, Regressions, Progres-
sions…P 82
How to turn your strength into power—and 
an exceptional way to build your punching 
force…P 82
Step Three: Pop-Up—Performance, X-Ray, 
Regressions, Progressions…P 84
A nearly magical preliminary exercise to 
get better at clap pushups.
Step Four: Clap Pushup—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 86
How the clap pushup builds 
exceptional levels of torso power 
and quick hands, whilst toughen-
ing the arms and shoulders—in-
valuable for boxers, martial artists 
and football players.
Step Five: Chest-Strike Pushup—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 88
Step Six: Hip-Strike Pushup—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 90
A killer bridging exercise between 
clapping in front of the body and 
clapping behind.
Step Seven: Convict Pushup—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 92
Step Eight: Half-Super—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 94
Builds high levels of pure shoulder 
speed—excellent for all martial artists.
Step Nine: Full Body Pop-Up—Perfor-
mance, X-Ray, Regressions, Progres-
sions…P 96
Master Step: The Superman—Perfor-
mance, X-Ray…P 98
A wicked, wicked move that works the 
whole body—both anterior and posterior 
chains.
Get upper-body pushing muscles that 
are king-fu powerful and robust as a 
gorilla’s…P 98
If God had handed us a “perfect” explosive 
upper-body exercise, it might be this…P 98
Going Beyond…P 100
The Aztec Pushup…P 101
The Crossing Aztec Pushup… P 102
The One-Arm Clapping Pushup…P 103
Small Space Drills…P104
The Push Get-Up…P 104
Round-the-Clock Pushups…P 105
360 Jump…P 106
Fast feet and hands go together like 
biscuits and gravy—here’s how to make 
it happen. 
6: THE KIP-UP: KUNG FU BODY 
SPEED…P 109	
The mesmerizing Kip-Up is the most explo-
sive way of getting up off your back—and 
is a surprisingly useful skill to possess. 
Learn how here…P 109
Deconstructing Kip-Ups…P 
110	
The Roll-Up, Hand Positioning, the Kick and 
the Rotation…P 112
Step One: Rolling Sit-Up—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 114
A fantastic conditioning exercise, which 
strengthens the midsection, hips and 
back…P 114
Step Two: Rolling Squat—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 116
How to generate forward momentum.
Step Three: Shoulder Pop—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 118
Strengthens and conditions the wrists 
and shoulders for the task of explosively 
pushing the body up.
Step Four: Bridge Kip—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 120
Learn how to generate enough lower body 
power to throw the head, shoulders and 
upper back off the floor.
Step Five: Butt Kip—Performance, X-Ray, 
Regressions, Progressions…P 122
Step Six: Half Kip—Performance, X-Ray, 
Regressions, Progressions…P 124
Step Seven: Kip-Up—Performance, X-Ray, 
Regressions, Progressions…P 126
Impossible without an explosive waist, 
super-fast legs and the total-body ability of 
a panther—which you will OWN when you 
master step seven…
Step Eight: Straight Leg Kip-Up—Perfor-
mance, X-Ray, Regressions, Progres-
sions…P 128
Step Nine: Wushu Kip-Up—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progressions…P 130
Master Step: No-Hands Kip-Up—Perfor-
mance, X-Ray, Regressions, Progres-
sions…P 132
If there is a more impressive—or explo-
sive—way to power up off the floor, then 
humans haven’t invented it yet…
Master this advanced drill and your 
total-body speed and agility will start to 
bust off the charts…P 132
Going Beyond—Roll Kip, Head Kip and 
Ditang Breakfall…P 134—136
Small Space Drills…P 137
Bridge Push-Offs, Sitting Kips and prone 
Kips…P 137—139 
7: THE FRONT FLIP:  
LIGHTNING MOVEMENT 
SKILLS…P 141
The Front Flip is THE explosive exercise 
par excellence—it is the “super-drill” for 
any athlete wanting more speed, agility 
and power.
Discover how to attain this iconic test 
of power and agility—requiring your 
entire body, from toes to neck, to be 
whip-like explosive…P 141
“Martial arts supremacy is all about explosive power and speed, 
and you will possess both once you’ve mastered the hardcore 
exercises in Explosive Calisthenics. Take your solo training 
to a level you never even imagined with these teeth-gritting, 
heart-palpating exercises—from a master of the genre.”—Loren W. 
Christensen, author of over 50 books, including Fighting Power: 
How to Develop Explosive Punches, Kicks, Blocks, And Grappling 
and Speed Training: How to Develop Your Maximum Speed for 
Martial Arts
— EXPLOSIVE CALISTHENICS —

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Explosive Calisthenics online:
www.dragondoor.com/b80
 
Deconstructing Front Flips…P 142
Run-Up, Take-Off, Unfurl, landing…P 
142—143
The Front Flip Chain…P 144
Step One: Shoulder Roll—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 146
Step Two: Press Roll—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progres-
sions…P 148
Step Three: Jump Roll—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 150
Step Four: Handstand Roll—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 152
Step Five: Backdrop Handspring—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 154
Step Six: Front Handspring—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 156
A phenomenal explosive drill in its 
own right…
Step Seven: Flyspring—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 158
Step Eight: Back Drop Flip—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 160
Step Nine: Running Front Flip—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 162
Master Step: Front Flip—Perfor-
mance, X-Ray…P 164
Going Beyond…P 166 
The Round-Off and the Cart-
wheel…P 166—167
Small Space Drills…P 170
Kojaks, Thruster and Unilateral 
Jump…P 170—172 
8: THE BACK FLIP:  
ULTIMATE AGILITY…P 175
The Back Flip is the most archetypal 
acrobatic feat—displaying inte-
grated mastery of some of the most 
fundamental traits required for total 
explosive strength.
If you want to be a contender for 
the power crown, then you have to 
get to own the Back Flip—which 
defines true agility…
Discover how to develop a 
super-quick jump, a massive hip 
snap, a powerful, agile waist and 
spine—and an upper body that can 
generate higher levels of responsive 
force like lightning…
Simply put, this is the single greatest 
test of explosive power, true speed 
and agility found in nature. Here is 
how to pass the test…
Deconstructing the Back Flip…P 176
General tips for the many skills 
needed to master the Back Flip…P 
176
5 key exercises to strengthen you 
arms and shoulders…P 178
How to achieve a powerful Tuck…P 
179
How to use the Depth Jump to 
further condition your joints…P 179
The Back Flip Chain…P 180
THIS is the most important consid-
eration to have in place for finally 
achieving the Back Flip…P 180
Step One: Rear Shoulder Roll—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 182
Step Two: Rear Press Roll—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 184
Step Three: Bridge Kick Over—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 186
A great antidote to fear of the Back 
Handspring
Step Four: Side Macaco—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 188
Step Five: Back Macaco—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 190
Step Six: Monkey Flip—Per-
formance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 192
Step Seven: Back Handspring—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 194
Step Eight: One-Arm Back 
Handspring—Performance, X-Ray, 
Regressions, Progressions…P 196
Step Nine: Four Point Back Flip—
Performance, X-Ray, Regressions, 
Progressions…P 198
Master Step: Back Flip—Perfor-
mance, X-Ray…P 200
Going Beyond…P 202
Small Space Drills…P 205
One-Arm Wall Push-Aways (great 
exercise for powerful, bulletproof 
elbows)…P 205
Donkey Kick and Scissors Jump…P 
206 
9: THE MUSCLE-UP:  
OPTIMAL EXPLOSIVE 
STRENGTH…P 209	
If ever one popular strength 
exercise qualified as a “complete” 
feat, it would probably be the mighty 
Muscle-Up—one of the most 
jealously-admired skills in all of 
bodyweight training…
The Muscle-Up requires a very 
explosive pull, plus a push—so 
works almost the entire upper-body; 
the back and biceps pull, while the 
chest, triceps and shoulders push. 
Your grip needs to be insanely 
strong, your stomach crafted out 
of steel and you require a highly 
athletic posterior chain.
Discover the complete blueprint 
for achieving the planet’s hottest 
bodyweight move…
Learn how to achieve the elusive, 
total-body-sync, X factor the 
Muscle-Up requires—and build 
insane explosive power in a highly 
compressed time frame…
Deconstructing the Muscle-Up...P 
211—214
The Muscle-Up Chain…P 217
Step One: Swing Kip—Performance, 
X-Ray, Regressions, Progres-
— EXPLOSIVE CALISTHENICS —
“Explosive Calisthenics by Paul ‘Coach’ 
Wade is a masterfully constructed roadmap 
for the attainment of power, functional 
speed, and agility. The book is extreme in 
that only a small percentage of the popu-
lation would be able or willing to fully take 
the challenge, but at the same time, brilliant 
in that the path proceeds methodically and 
progressively from relatively simple to ex-
tremely advanced, allowing a discretionary 
endpoint for each individual.
The book is also refreshingly raw. The ex-
ercises are all done using only bodyweight 
and little in the way of equipment. There are 
only five moves to master and yet each is a 
proverbial double-edge sword—at the same 
time dangerous yet potentially transfor-
mative.
Take this on and I doubt you will ever again 
be satisfied with the mundane bench press 
or the other exercise machines found in the 
typical gym.”—Patrick Roth, M.D., author of 
The End of Back Pain: Access Your Hidden 
Core to Heal Your Body, Chairman of Neuro-
surgery at Hackensack University Medical 
Center and the director of its neurosurgical 
residency training program.
“Coach Wade saved the best for last! Explosive Calis-
thenics is the book all diehard Convict Conditioning 
fans have been waiting for. There has never been 
anything like it until now! 
With his trademark blend of old-school philosophy, 
hard-earned wisdom and in-your-face humor, Coach 
expands his infamous system of progressive body-
weight programming to break down the most coveted 
explosive moves, including the back flip, kip-up and 
muscle-up. If you want to know how far you can go 
training with just your own bodyweight, you owe it to 
yourself to get this book!”—Al Kavadlo, author, Stretch-
ing Your Boundaries
Explosive Calisthenics 
Superhuman Power, Maximum  
Speed and Agility, Plus  
Combat-Ready Reflexes— 
Using Bodyweight-Only Methods
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B80  $39.95 
eBook #EB80  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11 • 392 pages, 775 photos 

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Pushing The Limits online:
www.dragondoor.com/b69
 hat is more satisfying than owning a primally 
powerful, functionally forceful and brute-
strong body? A body that packs a punch. A 
body that commands attention with its etched phy-
sique, coiled muscle and proud confidence…A body that 
can PERFORM at the highest levels of physical accom-
plishment…
Well, both Al Kavadlo—the author of Pushing the 
Limits!—and his brother Danny, are supreme testa-
ments to the primal power of body culture done the old-
school, ancient way—bare-handed, with your body only. 
The brothers Kavadlo walk the bodyweight talk—and 
then some. The proof is evident on every page of Push-
ing the Limits!
Your body is your temple. Protect and strengthen your 
temple by modeling the methods of the exercise masters. 
Al Kavadlo has modeled the masters and has the “temple” 
to show for it. Follow Al’s progressive plan for primal body 
power within the pages of Pushing the Limits!—follow in 
the footsteps of the great bodyweight exercise masters—
and you too can build the explosive strength and possess 
the magnificent physique you deserve.
Al Kavadlo’s Progressive Plan 
for Primal Body Power
W
How to Build Explosive Strength and a Magnificent 
Physique—Using Bodyweight Exercise Only
“When people ask me about bodyweight strength 
training, I point them to Al Kavadlo. Pushing the 
Limits! is a must-have for bodyweight training 
enthusiasts or anyone looking to build strength 
without lifting weights. Al lays out dozens of 
effective exercises for every fitness level, while 
making the journey fun and encouraging.” 
—MARK SISSON, author of The Primal Blueprint
“Whether you are an advanced bodyweight 
conditioning athlete or a wet behind the ears 
newbie, Al’s Pushing the Limits! has something for 
you. Easy to follow progressions allow you to master 
advanced push up, squat and bridging variations. All 
you need is the will to do it! No gym required.” 
—ROBB WOLF, author of The Paleo Solution
Pushing the 
Limits! 
Total Body Strength 
With No Equipment
By Al Kavadlo
 
Book #B69  $39.95 
eBook # EB69  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11   
224 pages • 240 photos 

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Pushing The Limits online:
www.dragondoor.com/b69
Reader Reviews of Pushing the 
Limits submitted on DragonDoor.
“I LOVE this freaking Book!!! Every time you put out 
a new book it becomes my NEW favorite and my 
inspiration! I love the blend of strength, power, health 
and overall athleticism in this book! This book covers 
the BIG picture of training for ALL aspects of human 
performance.
I will use it with my athletes, with the adults I train, in 
my own training and absolutely these books will be 
the books I share with my kids. This stuff reminds me 
of the old school Strength & Health Magazine, I’m fired 
UP!”—ZACH EVEN-ESH, author of The Encyclopedia of 
Underground Strength and Conditioning
 “This is the book I wish I had when I first started 
working out. Knowing Al’s secrets and various 
progressions would have saved me years of wasted 
time, frustration and injuries. The variations of The Big 
Three and progressions Al lays out will keep you busy 
for years.”—JASON FERRUGGIA
Time to work smart hard!
 “I’m a physical therapist in orthopedics with all the frame wear and 
tear of a lifter. I use Al’s stuff for myself and for patients and always get 
good outcomes. On my field there are those that make it happen, those 
that watch it happen, and those that dash in afterwards and ask “Hey, 
what just happened?” Grab a copy of Al’s book. Make it happen.” 
—GARRETT MCELFRESH, PT, Milwaukee, WI
 
Al you did it again!
“I’m a doctor that uses functional rehab to get my patients better. 
This book has helped so much with all the great pics and showing and 
explaining what and why they are doing these exercises. Also when I 
get down and show them myself they can see that it is totally achiev-
able! If you are wavering on getting this book, get it! I promise you 
won’t regret it! 
From a functional stand point Al, Danny, and Paul are spot on! I’ve 
seen and experienced “miracles” from doing these workouts! I have 
had a bad shoulder, low back, and hyperextended both knees in college 
football and was told I needed multiple surgeries and was always going 
to have pain..... WRONG! I am completely pain free and thank these 
hard working guys for everything they do! I can’t wait to see what’s 
next!” —DR. ROB BALZA, Cincinnati, OH
 
One of the best fitness books  
I have purchased!
“I recommend this book to anyone who enjoys being active. No 
matter what sport or training regimen you are currently following, Al’s 
book has something for everyone. Novices and advanced practitioners 
alike, will find detailed movements that help increase their strength, 
mobility, and flexibility. Great read with beautiful pho-
tography.”  —LANCE PARVIN, Las Vegas, NV
Pushing the 
Limits! 
Total Body Strength 
With No Equipment
By Al Kavadlo
 
Book #B69  $39.95 
eBook # EB69  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11   
224 pages • 240 photos 

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Stretching Your Boundaries online:
www.dragondoor.com/b73
Sample Spreads From The Interior 
of Stretching Your Boundaries
—TABLE OF CONTENTS —
Foreword by Elliott Hulse
PART ONE- Stretch Manifesto
2 Stretching For Strength. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
2 Taking Your Medicine. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  9
2 Kid Stuff . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15
2 Mobility Matters. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21
2 Breath is Life . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  29
PART TWO - The Stretches
2 Preface. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  39
2 Dynamics. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  41
2 Standing Statics. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 49
2 Grounded Statics. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  95
PART THREE - Programming  
 and Sample Routines
2 Standards of Practice. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  153
2 On Mats. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 161
2 Symmetry . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  163
2 Hypothetical Training Splits. .  .  .  . 171
2 Sample Routines. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  177

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Stretching Your Boundaries online:
www.dragondoor.com/b73
“The ultimate bodyweight mobility manual is here! Al Kavadlo’s previous two Dragon 
Door books, Raising the Bar and Pushing the Limits, are the most valuable bodyweight 
strength training manuals in the world. But strength without mobility is meaningless. Al has 
used his many years of training and coaching to fuse bodyweight disciplines such as yoga, 
martial arts, rehabilitative therapy and bar athletics into the ultimate calisthenics stretch-
ing compendium. Stretching your Boundaries belongs on the shelf of any serious ath-
lete—it’s bodyweight mobility dynamite!“
—“COACH” PAUL WADE, author of Convict Conditioning
 
“In this book, Al invites you to take a deeper look at the often overlooked, and some-
times demonized, ancient practice of static stretching. He wrestles with many of the ques-
tions, dogmas and flat out lies about stretching that have plagued the fitness practitioner 
for at least the last decade. And finally he gives you a practical guide to static stretching 
that will improve your movement, performance, breathing and life. In Stretching Your 
Boundaries, you’ll sense Al’s deep understanding and love for the human body. Thank you 
Al, for helping to bring awareness to perhaps the most important aspect of physical educa-
tion and fitness.”
—ELLIOTT HULSE, creator of the Grow Stronger method
 
“An absolutely masterful follow up to Raising The Bar and Pushing The Limits, 
Stretching Your Boundaries really completes the picture. Both easy to understand and fully 
applicable, Al’s integration of traditional flexibility techniques with his own unique spin 
makes this a must have. The explanation of how each stretch will benefit your calisthenics 
practice is brilliant. Not only stunning in its color and design, this book also gives you the 
true feeling of New York City, both gritty and euphoric, much like Al’s personality.”
—MIKE FITCH, creator of Global Bodyweight Training
 
“Stretching Your Boundaries is a terrific resource that will unlock your 
joints so you can build more muscle, strength and athleticism. Al’s pas-
sion for human performance radiates in this beautifully constructed book. 
Whether you’re stiff as a board, or an elite gymnast, this book outlines the 
progressions to take your body and performance to a new level.”
—CHAD WATERBURY, M.S., author of Huge in a Hurry
 
“Al Kavadlo has done it again! He’s created yet another incredible 
resource that I wish I had twenty years ago. Finding great material on 
flexibility training that actually enhances your strength is like trying to 
find a needle in a haystack. But look no further, because Stretching Your 
Boundaries is exactly what you need.”
—JASON FERRUGGIA, Strength Coach
Stretching and Flexibility Secrets To Help  
Unlock Your Body—Be More Mobile, More  
Athletic, More Resilient And Far Stronger…
Stretching 
Your 
Boundaries 
Flexibility Training 
for Extreme 
Calisthenic 
Strength
By Al Kavadlo
 
Book #B73  $39.95 
eBook # EB73  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11    
214 pages • 235 photos 

hances are that whatever athletic level you have achieved, there are some 
serious gaps in your OVERALL strength program. Gaps that stop you short of 
being able to claim status as a truly accomplished strength athlete.
The good news is that—in Convict Condi-
tioning—Paul Wade has laid out a brilliant 
6-set system of 10 progressions which allows 
you to master these elite levels. 
And you could be starting at almost any age 
and in almost in any condition…
Paul Wade has given you the keys—ALL the 
keys you’ll ever need— that will open door, 
after door, after door for you in your quest for 
supreme physical excellence. Yes, it will be 
the hardest work you’ll ever have to do. And 
yes, 97% of those who pick up Convict Con-
ditioning, frankly, won’t have the guts and 
the fortitude to make it. But if you make it 
even half-way through Paul’s Progressions, 
you’ll be stronger than almost anyone you 
encounter. Ever.
 1.  AT LEAST one set of 5 one-arm pushups each side—
with the ELITE goal of 100 sets each side
2. AT LEAST one set of 5 one-leg squats each side— 
with the ELITE goal of 2 sets of 50 each side
3. AT LEAST a single one-arm pullup each side—  
with the ELITE goal of 2 sets of 6 each side
4. AT LEAST one set of 5 hanging straight leg raises—
with the ELITE goal of 2 sets of 30 
5. AT LEAST one stand-to-stand bridge—  
with the ELITE goal of 2 sets of 30
Well, how DO you stack up?
Can you meet these 5 bench-
marks of the truly powerful?... 
Page 1
The nature and the art of real 
strength… Page 2
Why mastery of progressive 
calisthenics is the ultimate se-
cret for building maximum raw 
strength… Page 2
A dozen one-arm handstand 
pushups without support—any-
one? Anyone?... Page 3
How to rank in a powerlifting 
championship—without ever 
training with weights… Page 4
____________
Calisthenics as a hardcore 
strength training technology… 
Page 9
Spartan “300” calisthenics at 
the Battle of Thermopolylae… 
Page 10 
How to cultivate the perfect 
body—the Greek and Roman 
way… Page 10
____________
The difference between “old 
school” and “new school” calis-
thenics… Page 15
The role of prisons in preserv-
ing the older systems… Page 16
Strength training as a primary 
survival strategy… Page 16
____________
The 6 basic benefits of body-
weight training… Pages 22—27
Why calisthenics are the ulti-
mate in functional training… 
Page 23
The value of cultivating 
self-movement—rather than ob-
ject-movement… Page 23
The real source of strength—it’s 
not your muscles... Page 24 
 
 
One crucial reason why a lot 
of convicts deliberately avoid 
weight-training… Page 24
How to progressively strengthen 
your joints over a lifetime—and 
even heal old joint injuries… 
Page 25 
Why “authentic” exercises 
like pullups are so perfect for 
strength and power develop-
ment… Page 25
Bodyweight training for quick 
physique perfection… Page 26
____________
How to normalize and regulate 
your body fat levels—with body-
weight training only…  
Page 27
Why weight-training and the 
psychology of overeating go hand 
in hand… Page 27
____________
The best approach for rapidly 
strengthening your whole body is 
this… Page 30
This is the most important and 
revolutionary feature of Convict 
Conditioning…. Page 33
A jealously-guarded system for 
going from puny to powerful—
when your life may depend on the 
speed of your results… Page 33 
____________
The 6 “Ultimate” Master 
Steps—only a handful of ath-
letes in the whole world can 
correctly perform them all. Can 
you?… Page 33
How to Forge Armor-Plated Pecs 
and Steel Triceps… Page 41
Why the pushup is the ultimate 
upper body exercise—and better 
than the bench press… Page 41 
How to effectively bulletproof the 
vulnerable rotator cuff muscles… 
Page 42 
How Do YOU Stack Up Against These 
6 Signs of a TRUE Physical Specimen?
According to Paul Wade’s Convict Conditioning you earn the right to call  
yourself a ‘true physical specimen’ if you can perform the following:
Here’s just a small taste of what you’ll 
get with Convict Conditioning:
C
www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Convict Conditioning online:
www.dragondoor.com/b41

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Convict Conditioning online:
www.dragondoor.com/b41
Observe these 6 important rules for 
power-packed pushups… Page 42
____________
How basketballs, baseballs and 
kissing-the-baby all translate into 
greater strength gains… Page 44
How to guarantee steel rod fingers… 
Page 45
Do you make this stupid mistake with 
your push ups? This is wrong, wrong, 
wrong!... Page 45
How to achieve 100 consecutive one-
arm pushups each side… Page 64
Going Beyond the One-Arm Pushup… 
Pages 68—74
____________
Going up!— how to build elevator-cable 
thighs… Page 75
Where the real strength of an athlete 
lies… Page 75 
Most athletic movements rely largely 
on this attribute… Page 76
The first thing to go as an athlete begins 
to age—and what you MUST protect... 
Page 76
THE best way to develop truly power-
ful, athletic legs… Page 77
____________
The phenomenon of Lombard’s 
Paradox—and it contributes to pow-
er-packed thighs… Page 78
Why bodyweight squats blow barbell 
squats away… Page 79
The enormous benefits of mastering the 
one-leg squat… Page 80
15 secrets to impeccable squatting—for 
greater power and strength… Pages 
81—82
____________
Transform skinny legs into pillars of 
power, complete with steel cord quads, 
rock-hard glutes and thick, shapely 
calves… Page 102
How to achieve one hundred perfect 
consecutive one-leg squats on each 
leg... Page 102	
Going Beyond the One-Leg Squat… 
Pages 106—112
How to add conditioning, speed, agility 
and endurance to legs that are already 
awesome…. Page 107
____________
How to construct a barn door back—
and walk with loaded guns… Page 113
Why our culture has failed to give the 
pullup the respect and attention it de-
serves… Page 113
Benefits of the pullup—king of back 
exercises… Page 114
The dormant superpower for muscle 
growth waiting to be released if you 
only do this… Page 114
Why pullups are the single best exer-
cise for building melon-sized biceps…  
Page 115
Why the pullup is THE safest upper 
back exercise… Page 115
The single most important factor to 
consider for your grip choice…  
Page 118 
____________
How to earn lats that look like wings 
and an upper back sprouting muscles 
like coiled pythons… Page 138
How to be strong enough to rip a body-
builder’s arm off in an arm wrestling 
match… Page 138
How to take a trip to hell—and steal a 
Satanic six-pack… Page 149
The 5 absolute truths that define a 
genuine six-pack from hell... Page 150
This is the REAL way to gain a six-pack 
from hell… Page 152
3 big reasons why—in prisons—leg 
raises have always been much more 
popular than sit-ups… Page 152
Why the hanging leg raise is the great-
est single abdominal exercise known to 
man... Page 153
10 waist training secrets to help you 
master the hanging leg raise… Pages 
154—155
How to correctly perform the greatest 
all-round midsection exercise in exis-
tence… Page 174
____________
Going beyond the hanging straight leg 
raise… Page 178
Setting your sights on the most power-
ful midsection exercise possible—the V 
raise…. Page 178
How to develop abdominal muscles 
with enormous contractile power—and 
iron hip strength… Page 178
____________
How to combat-proof your spine…  
Page 185
Why the bridge is the most important 
strength-building exercise in the 
world… Page 185
How to train your spine—as if your 
life depended on it… Page 185
Why you should sell your barbell set 
and buy a cushioned mat instead... 
Page 188
How to absorb punitive strikes against 
your spine—and bounce back smiling… 
Page 188
Why lower back pain is the foremost 
plague of athletes the world over…  
Page 189
____________
Why bridging is the ultimate exercise 
for the spinal muscles… Page 189
The 4 signs of the perfect bridge…  
Page 191
How to master the bridge… Page 192
How to own a spine that feels like a 
steel whip... Page 193
How the bridging series will grant you 
an incredible combination of strength 
paired with flexibility… Page 216 
Why bridging stands alone as a total 
training method that facilitates de-
velopment in practically every area of 
fitness and health… Page 216
____________
How to look exceptionally masculine—
with broad, etched, and powerful shoul-
ders… Page 219
Those vulnerable shoulders—why 
they ache and the best way to avoid 
or fix the pain… Page 220
How to choose authentic over artifi-
cial shoulder movements… Page 223
Why an understanding of instinctive 
human movement can help solve the 
shoulder pain problem… Page 224
Remove these two elements of press-
ing—and you will remove virtually all 
chronic shoulder problems…  
Page 225
The ultimate solution for safe, pain-
free, powerful shoulders… Page 225
____________
The mighty handstand pushup…  
Page 226
Using the handstand pushup to build 
incredibly powerful, muscularized 
shoulders in a short span of time… 
Page 225
How to strengthen the vestibular 
system—using handstand pushups… 
Page 225
8 secrets to help you perfect your 
all-important handstand pushup tech-
nique… Pages 228—229
____________
Discover the ultimate shoulder and arm 
exercise… Page 248
Going beyond the one-arm hand-
stand pushup… Page 252
The master of this old technique will 
have elbows strong as titanium axles… 
Page 255
____________
The cast iron principles of Convict 
Conditioning success… Page 259
The missing “x factor” of training suc-
cess… Page 259 
The best ways to warm up… Page 260
How to create training momentum… 
Page 262
____________
How to put strength in the bank… 
Page 263
This is the real way to get genuine, last-
ing strength and power gains… Page 265
Intensity—what it is and what it 
isn’t… Page 265
Why “cycling” or “periodization” is un-
necessary with bodyweight training… 
Page 266 
 
How to make consistent progress… 
Page 266
____________
5 powerful secrets for busting through 
your plateaus… Page 267
The nifty little secret of consolida-
tion training… Page 268
Living by the buzzer—and the impor-
tance of regime… Page 275
5 major Convict Conditioning train-
ing programs… Page 276
____________
The New Blood training program… 
Page 278
The Good Behavior training pro-
gram… Page 279
The Veterano training program…  
Page 280
The Solitary Confinement training 
program… Page 281
The Supermax training program…  
Page 282
Convict  
Conditioning 
How to Bust Free of  
All Weakness— 
Using the Lost Secrets  
of Supreme  
Survival Strength
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B41  $39.95 
eBook #EB41  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11    
320 pages • 191 photos

A must for all martial artists   
“As a dedicated martial artist for more than seven years, this 
book is exactly what I’ve been looking for. 
For a while now I have trained with machines at my local gym to 
improve my muscle strength and power and get to the next level in my 
training. I always felt that the modern health club, technology based 
exercise jarred with my martial art though, which only required body 
movement. 
Finally this book has come along. At last I can combine perfect body 
movement for martial skill with perfect body exercise for ultimate 
strength. 
All fighting arts are based on body movement. This book is a complete 
textbook on how to max out your musclepower using only body move-
ment, as different from dumbbells, machines or gadgets. For this rea-
son it belongs on the bookshelf of every serious martial artist, male 
and female, young and old.”—Gino Cartier - Washington DC 
I’ve packed all of my other training books away!  
“I read CC in one go. I couldn’t put it down. I have purchased a lot 
of bodyweight training books in the past, and have always been 
pretty disappointed. They all seem to just have pictures of different 
exercises, and no plan whatsoever on how to implement them and 
progress with them. But not with this one. The information in this 
book is AWESOME! I like to have a clear, logical plan of progression 
to follow, and that is what this book gives. I have put all of my other 
training books away. CC is the only system I am going to follow. This 
is now my favorite training book ever!”—Lyndan - Australia 
A Strength Training Guide That Will Never Be Duplicated!  
“I knew within the first chapter of reading this book that I was in for something special and 
unique. The last time I felt this same feeling was when reading Power to the People! To me this is 
the Body Weight equivalent to Pavel’s masterpiece. 
Books like this can never be duplicated. Paul Wade went through a unique set of circumstances 
of doing time in prison with an ‘old time’ master of calisthenics. Paul took these lessons from this 
70 year old strong man and mastered them over a period of 20 years while ‘doing time’. He then 
taught these methods to countless prisoners and honed his teaching to perfection. 
I believe that extreme circumstances like this are what it takes to create a true masterpiece. I 
know that ‘masterpiece’ is a strong word, but this is as close as it gets. No other body weight book 
I have read (and I have a huge fitness library)...comes close to this as far as gaining incredible 
strength from body weight exercise. 
Just like Power to the People, I am sure I will read this over and over again...mastering the princi-
ples that Paul Wade took 20 years to master. 
Outstanding Book!”—Rusty Moore - Fitness Black Book - Seattle, WA 
Brutal Elegance.   
“I have been training and reading about training since I first joined the US Navy 
in the 1960s. I thought I’d seen everything the fitness world had to offer. Some-
times twice. But I was wrong. This book is utterly iconoclastic. 
The author breaks down all conceivable body weight exercises into six basic 
movements, each designed to stimulate different vectors of the muscular system. 
These six are then elegantly and very intelligently broken into ten progressive 
techniques. You master one technique, and move on to the next. 
The simplicity of this method belies a very powerful and complex training par-
adigm, reduced into an abstraction that obviously took many years of sweat and 
toil to develop.  Trust me. Nobody else worked this out. This approach is completely 
unique and fresh. 
I have read virtually every calisthenics book printed in America over the last 
40 years, and instruction like this can’t be found anywhere, in any one of them. 
Convict Conditioning is head and shoulders above them all. In years to come, 
trainers and coaches will all be talking about ‘progressions’ and ‘progressive 
calisthenics’ and claim they’ve been doing it all along. But the truth is that Dragon 
Door bought it to you first. As with kettlebells, they were the trail blazers. 
Who should purchase this volume? Everyone who craves fitness and strength 
should. Even if you don’t plan to follow the routines, the book will make you 
think about your physical prowess, and will give even world class experts food 
for thought. At the very least if you find yourself on vacation or away on business 
without your barbells, this book will turn your hotel into a fully equipped gym.
I’d advise any athlete to obtain this work as soon as possible.” 
—Bill Oliver - Albany, NY, United States 
www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Convict Conditioning online:
www.dragondoor.com/b41
Dragon Door Customer Acclaim for  
Paul Wade’s Convict Conditioning

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Convict Conditioning online:
www.dragondoor.com/b41
A lifetime of lifting...and continued learning.    
“I have been working out diligently since 1988 and played sports in high 
school and college before that. My stint in the Army saw me doing calis-
thenics, running, conditioning courses, forced marches, etc. There are many 
levels of strength and fitness. I have been as big as 240 in my powerlifting/
strongman days and as low as 185-190 while in the Army. I think I have tried 
everything under the sun: the high intensity of Arthur Jones and Dr. Ken, 
the Super Slow of El Darden, and the brutality of Dinosaur Training Brooks 
Kubic made famous. 
This is one of the BEST books I’ve ever read on real strength training which 
also covers other just as important aspects of health; like staying injury free, 
feeling healthy and becoming flexible. It’s an excellent book. He tells you the 
why and the how with his progressive plan. This book is a GOLD MINE and 
worth 100 times what I paid for it!”  
—Horst - Woburn, MA 
Best bodyweight training book so far!    
“I’m a martial artist and I’ve been training for years with a combination 
of weights and bodyweight training and had good results from both (but 
had the usual injuries from weight training). I prefer the bodyweight stuff 
though as it trains me to use my whole body as a unit, much more than 
weights do, and I notice the difference on the mat and in the ring. Since 
reading this book I have given the weights a break and focused purely on 
the bodyweight exercise progressions as described by ‘Coach’ Wade and my 
strength had increased more than ever before. So far I’ve built up to 12 strict 
one-leg squats each leg and 5 uneven pull ups each arm.
I’ve never achieved this kind of strength before - and this stuff builds solid 
muscle mass as well. It’s very intense training. I am so confident in and 
happy with the results I’m getting that I’ve decided to train for a fitness/
bodybuilding comp just using his techniques, no weights, just to show for 
real what kind of a physique these exercises can build. In sum, I cannot rec-
ommend ‘Coach’ Wade’s book highly enough - it is by far the best of its kind 
ever!”—Mark Robinson - Australia, currently living in South Korea
This book sets the 
standard, ladies  
and gentlemen   
“It’s difficult to describe just how 
much this book means to me. I’ve 
been training hard since I was in 
the RAF nearly ten years ago, and 
to say this book is a breakthrough 
is an understatement. How often 
do you really read something so 
new, so fresh? This book contains a 
complete new system of calisthenics 
drawn from American prison train-
ing methods. When I say ‘system’ I 
mean it. It’s complete (rank begin-
ner to expert), it’s comprehensive 
(all the exercises and photos are 
here), it’s graded (progressions from 
exercise to exercise are smooth and 
pre-determined) and it’s totally 
original. Whether you love or hate 
the author, you have to listen to him. 
And you will learn something. This 
book just makes SENSE. In twenty 
years people will still be buying it.”—
Andy McMann - Ponty, Wales, GB 
Fascinating Reading and Real Strength   
“Coach Wade’s system is a real eye opener if you’ve been a lifetime iron junkie. 
Wanna find out how really strong (or weak) you are? Get this book and begin 
working through the 10 levels of the 6 power exercises. I was pleasantly surprised 
by my ability on a few of the exercises...but some are downright humbling. If I were 
on a desert island with only one book on strength and conditioning this would be 
it. (Could I staple Pavel’s “Naked Warrior” to the back and count them as one???!) 
Thanks Dragon Door for this innovative new author.”—Jon Schultheis, RKC 
(2005) - Keansburg, NJ 
More Dragon Door Customer Acclaim 
for Convict Conditioning
Single best strength training book ever!    
“I just turned 50 this year and I have tried a little bit of everything over the years: 
martial arts, swimming, soccer, cycling, free weights, weight machines, even 
yoga and Pilates. I started using Convict Conditioning right after it came out. I 
started from the beginning, like Coach Wade says, doing mostly step one or two 
for five out of the six exercises. I work out 3 to 5 times a week, usually for 30 to 
45 minutes. 
Long story short, my weight went up 14 pounds (I was not trying to gain weight) 
but my body fat percentage dropped two percent. That translates into ap-
proximately 19 pounds of lean muscle gained in two months! I’ve never gotten 
this kind of results with anything else I’ve ever done. Now I have pretty much 
stopped lifting weights for strength training. Instead, I lift once a week as a test 
to see how much stronger I’m getting without weight training. There are a lot of 
great strength training books in the world (most of them published by Dragon 
Door), but if I had to choose just one, this is the single best strength training 
book ever. BUY THIS BOOK. FOLLOW THE PLAN. GET AS STRONG AS YOU 
WANT. “—Wayne - Decatur, GA 
Convict  
Conditioning 
How to Bust Free of  
All Weakness— 
Using the Lost Secrets  
of Supreme  
Survival Strength
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B41  $39.95 
eBook #EB41  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11    
320 pages • 191 photos

“I’ve been lifting weights for over 50 years and 
have trained in the martial arts since 1965. I’ve 
read voraciously on both subjects, and written 
dozens of magazine articles and many books on 
the subjects. This book and Wade’s first, Convict 
Conditioning, are by far the most commonsense, 
information-packed, and result producing I’ve 
read. These books will truly change your life.
Paul Wade is a new and powerful voice in the 
strength and fitness arena, one that is common-
sense, inspiring, and in your face. His approach 
to maximizing your body’s potential is not 
the same old hackneyed material you find in 
every book and magazine piece that pictures 
steroid-bloated models screaming as they curl 
weights. Wade’s stuff has been proven effective 
by hard men who don’t tolerate fluff. It will work 
for you, too—guaranteed.
As an ex-cop, I’ve gone mano-y-mano with ex-
cons that had clearly trained as Paul Wade sug-
gests in his two Convict Conditioning books. 
While these guys didn’t look like steroid-fu-
eled bodybuilders (actually, there were a cou-
ple who did), all were incredibly lean, hard and 
powerful. Wade blows many commonly held 
beliefs about conditioning, strengthening, 
and eating out of the water and replaces them 
with result-producing information that won’t 
cost you a dime.”  —Loren W. Christensen, 
author of Fighting the Pain Resistant At-
tacker, and many other titles
“Coach Paul Wade has outdone himself. His first book Convict Conditioning is to my mind THE 
BEST book ever written on bodyweight conditioning. Hands down. Now, with the sequel Convict 
Conditioning 2, Coach Wade takes us even deeper into the subtle nuances of training with the ulti-
mate resistance tool: our bodies.
 In plain English, but with an amazing understanding of anatomy, physiology, kinesiology and, go fig-
ure, psychology, Coach Wade explains very simply how to work the smaller but just as important areas 
of the body such as the hands and forearms, neck and calves and obliques in serious functional ways.
 His minimalist approach to exercise belies the complexity of his system and the deep insight into ex-
actly how the body works and the best way to get from A to Z in the shortest time possible.
I got the best advice on how to strengthen the hard-to-reach extensors of the hand right away from this 
exercise Master I have ever seen. It’s so simple but so completely functional I can’t believe no one else 
has thought of it yet. Just glad he figured it out for me. 
Paul teaches us how to strengthen our bodies with the simplest of movements while at the same time 
balancing our structures in the same way: simple exercises that work the whole body.
And just as simply as he did with his first book. His novel approach to stretching and mobility training 
is brilliant and fresh as well as his take on recovery and healing from injury. Sprinkled throughout the 
entire book are too-many-to-count insights and advice from a man who has come to his knowledge the 
hard way and knows exactly of what he speaks.
This book is, as was his first, an amazing journey into the history of physical culture disguised as a 
book on calisthenics. But the thing that Coach Wade does better than any before him is his unbeliev-
able progressions on EVERY EXERCISE and stretch! He breaks things down and tells us EXACTLY 
how to proceed to get to whatever level of strength and development 
we want. AND gives us the exact metrics we need to know when to 
go to the next level.
 Adding in completely practical and immediately useful insights 
into nutrition and the mindset necessary to deal not only with 
training but with life, makes this book a classic that will stand the 
test of time. 
Bravo Coach Wade, Bravo.” —Mark Reifkind, Master RKC, author 
of Mastering the HardStyle Kettlebell Swing
“Convict Conditioning is one of the most in-
fluential books I ever got my hands on. Convict 
Conditioning 2 took my training and outlook 
on the power of bodyweight training to the 
10th degree—from strengthening the smallest 
muscles in a maximal manner, all the way to 
using bodyweight training as a means of heal-
ing injuries that pile up from over 22 years of 
aggressive lifting.
I’ve used both Convict Conditioning and 
Convict Conditioning 2 on myself and with 
my athletes. Without either of these books I 
can easily say that these boys would not be 
the BEASTS they are today. Without a doubt 
Convict Conditioning 2 will blow you away 
and inspire and educate you to take body-
weight training to a whole NEW level.”
—Zach Even-Esh, Underground Strength 
Coach  
Convict  
Conditioning 2 
Advanced Prison  
Training Tactics for 
Muscle Gain, Fat Loss  
and Bulletproof Joints
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B59  $39.95 
eBook #EB59  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11   
354 pages  •  261 photos
“The overriding principle of Convict Conditioning 2 is ‘little equip-
ment-big rewards’. For the athlete in the throwing and fighting arts, the 
section on Lateral Chain Training, Capturing the Flag, is a unique and 
perhaps singular approach to training the obliques and the whole family 
of side muscles. This section stood out to me as ground breaking and well 
worth the time and energy by anyone to review and attempt to complete. 
Literally, this is a new approach to lateral chain training that is well be-
yond sidebends and suitcase deadlifts. 
The author’s review of passive stretching reflects the experience of 
many of us in the field. But, his solution might be the reason I am going 
to recommend this work for everyone: The Trifecta. This section covers 
what the author calls The Functional Triad and gives a series of simple 
progressions to three holds that promise to oil your joints. It’s yoga for 
the strength athlete and supports the material one would find, for exam-
ple, in Pavel’s Loaded Stretching.
I didn’t expect to like this book, but I come away from it practically 
insisting that everyone read it. It is a strongman book mixed with yoga 
mixed with street smarts. I wanted to hate it, but I love it.”
—Dan John, author of Don’t Let Go and co-author of Easy Strength
www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Convict Conditioning 2 online:
www.dragondoor.com/b59
The Experts Give High Praise to   
Convict Conditioning 2

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Convict Conditioning 2 online:
www.dragondoor.com/b59
The progressions  
were again sublime   
 “Never have I heard such in depth and yet easy to un-
derstand description of training and physical culture. 
A perfect complement to the first book although it has 
its own style keeping the best attributes of style from 
the first but developing it to something unique. The pro-
gressions were again sublime and designed for people 
at all levels of ability. The two books together can forge 
what will closely resemble superhuman strength and an 
incredible physique and yet the steps to get there are so 
simple and easy to understand.” 
—Ryan O.,  Nottingham, United Kingdom
Best Sequel Since The Godfather 2!  
“Hands down the best addition to the material on Convict 
Conditioning that could possibly be put out. I already 
implemented the neck bridges, calf and hand training to 
my weekly schedule, and as soon as my handstand pushups 
and leg raises are fully loaded I’ll start the flags. Thank 
you, Coach!”
— Daniel Runkel, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Just as brilliant as its predecessor!   
“Just as brilliant as its predecessor! The new exercises 
add to the Big 6 in a keep-it-simple kind of way. Anyone 
who will put in the time with both of these masterpieces 
will be as strong as humanly possible. I especially liked 
the parts on grip work. To me, that alone was worth the 
price of the entire book.”
—Timothy Stovall / Evansville, Indiana
If you liked CC1, you’ll love CC2    
“CC2 picks up where CC1 left off with great information 
about the human flag (including a version called the clutch 
flag, that I can actually do now), neck and forearms. I 
couldn’t be happier with this book.”
—Justin B., Atlanta, Georgia
From the almost  
laughably-simple to 
realm-of-the-gods 
 “Convict Conditioning 2 is a great com-
panion piece to the original Convict Con-
ditioning. It helps to further build up the 
athlete and does deliver on phenomenal 
improvement with minimal equipment 
and space.
The grip work is probably the superstar of 
the book. Second, maybe, is the attention 
devoted to the lateral muscles with the de-
velopment of the clutch- and press-flag. 
Convict Conditioning 2 is more of the 
same - more of the systematic and method-
ical improvement in exercises that travel 
smoothly from the almost laughably-simple 
to realm-of-the-gods. It is a solid addition to 
any fitness library.” 
—Robert Aldrich, Chapel Hill, GA
Brilliant   
 “Convict Conditioning books are all the books you need in 
life. As Bruce Lee used to say, it’s not a daily increase but 
a daily decrease. Same with life. Too many things can lead 
you down many paths, but to have Simplicity is perfect.” 
—Brandon Lynch, London, England
“Paul Wade’s section on developing the sides of the body in Convict Conditioning 2  
is brilliant. Hardstyle!”  —Pavel Tsatsouline, author of The Naked Warrior
Well worth the wait  
“Another very interesting, and as before, opinionated book 
by Paul Wade. As I work through the CC1 progressions, I 
find it’s paying off at a steady if unspectacular rate, which 
suits me just fine. No training injuries worth the name, 
convincing gains in strength. I expect the same with CC2 
which rounds off CC1 with just the kind of material I was 
looking for. Wade and Dragon Door deserve to be highly 
commended for publishing these techniques. A  
tremendous way to train outside of the gym ecosystem.”  
—V. R., Bangalore, India 
Very Informative  
“Convict Conditioning 2 is more subversive 
training information in the same style as its 
original. It’s such a great complement to the 
original, but also solid enough on its own. 
The information in this book is fantastic-- a 
great buy! Follow this program, and you will 
get stronger.”  
—Chris B., Thunder Bay, Canada
Online Praise for Convict Conditioning 2
Convict  
Conditioning 2 
Advanced Prison  
Training Tactics for  
Muscle Gain, Fat Loss  
and Bulletproof Joints
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B59  $39.95 
eBook #EB59  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11   
354 pages  •  261 photos

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Convict Conditioning 2 online:
www.dragondoor.com/b59
Foreword  
The Many Roads to Strength 
by Brooks Kubik 
Opening Salvo: Chewing 
Bubblegum and Kicking Ass 
1. Introduction: Put Yourself 
Behind Bars 
PART I: SHOTGUN 
MUSCLE
Hands and Forearms
2: Iron Hands and Forearms: 
Ultimate Strength —with 
Just Two Techniques
3: The Hang Progressions: A 
Vice-Like Bodyweight Grip 
Course 
4: Advanced Grip Torture: 
Explosive Power + 
Titanium Fingers 
5: Fingertip Pushups: Keeping 
Hand Strength Balanced 
6: Forearms into Firearms: 
Hand Strength: A 
Summary and a Challenge 
Lateral Chain
7: Lateral Chain Training: 
Capturing the Flag 
8: The Clutch Flag: In Eight 
Easy Steps 
9: The Press Flag: In Eight 
Not-So-Easy Steps 
 
Neck and Calves
10. Bulldog Neck: Bulletproof 
Your Weakest Link 
11. Calf Training: Ultimate 
Lower Legs—No Machines 
Necessary
PART II: 
BULLETPROOF 
JOINTS
12. Tension-Flexibility: The 
Lost Art of Joint Training 
13: Stretching—the Prison 
Take: Flexibility, Mobility, 
Control 
14. The Trifecta: Your “Secret 
Weapon” for Mobilizing 
Stiff, Battle-Scarred 
Physiques—for Life
15: The Bridge Hold 
Progressions: The 
Ultimate Prehab/Rehab 
Technique
16: The L-Hold Progressions: 
Cure Bad Hips and Low 
Back—Inside-Out
 
17: Twist Progressions: 
Unleash Your Functional 
Triad 
PART III:  
WISDOM FROM 
CELLBLOCK G
18. Doing Time Right: Living 
the Straight Edge 
19. The Prison Diet: Nutrition 
and Fat Loss Behind Bars 
20. Mendin’ Up: The 8 Laws of 
Healing 
21. The Mind: Escaping the 
True Prison 
!BONUS 
CHAPTER!
—Table of Contents —
Convict  
Conditioning 2 
Advanced Prison Training Tac-
tics for Muscle Gain, Fat Loss 
and Bulletproof Joints
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B59  $39.95 
eBook #EB59  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11   
354 pages  •  261 photos

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Diamond-Cut Abs online:
www.dragondoor.com/b77 
 “Danny has done it again! Diamond-Cut Abs is a 
no-nonsense, results driven approach that deliv-
ers all the goods on abs. Nutrition, training and 
progression are all included, tattoos optional!”—
ROBB WOLF, author of The Paleo Solution
re you dissatisfied with your abs? Does it seem a distant dream 
for you to own a rock-solid center? Can you only hanker in vain 
for the chiseled magnificence of a Greek statue? Have you given 
up on owning the tensile functionality and explosive power of a 
cage-fighter’s core? 
According to Danny Kavadlo, training your abs is a whole-life endeavor. 
It’s about right eating, right drinking, right rest, right practice, right exercise 
at the right time, right motivation, right inspiration, right attitude and right 
lifestyle. If you don’t have that righteous set of abs in place, it’s because you 
have failed in one or more of these areas.
With his 25-plus years of rugged research and extreme physical dedica-
tion into every dimension of what it takes to earn world-class abs, Danny 
Kavadlo is a modern-day master of the art. It’s all here: over 50 of the best-
ever exercises to develop the abs—from 
beginner to superman level—inspira-
tional photos, no BS straight talk on 
nutrition and lifestyle factors and clear-
cut instructions on what to do, when. Supply the grit, follow the program and 
you simply cannot fail but to build a monstrous mid-section.
In our culture, Abs are the Measure of a Man. To quit on your abs is to quit 
on your masculinity—like it or not. Diamond-Cut Abs gives you the com-
plete, whole-life program you need to reassert yourself and reestablish your 
respect as a true physical specimen—with a thunderous six-pack to prove it.
Are You Dissatisfied With Your Abs?
In the Abs Gospel According to Danny, training your abs is a whole-life 
endeavor. It’s about right eating, right drinking, right rest, right practice, right 
exercise at the right time, right motivation, right inspiration, right attitude 
and right lifestyle. 
So, yes, all of this Rightness gets covered in Diamond-Cut Abs. But let’s 
not confuse Right with Rigid. Apprentice in the Danny School of Abs and 
it’s like apprenticing with a world-class Chef—a mix of incredible discipline, 
inspired creativity and a passionate love-affair with your art.
Are You Dissatisfied 
With Your Abs?
A
“Diamond-Cut Abs condenses decades of agonizing lessons and 
insight into the best book on ab-training ever written. Hands 
down.” —PAUL WADE, author of Convict Conditioning
 “There are a lot of abs books and products promising 
a six-pack. What sets Danny’s book apart is the 
realistic and reasonable first section of the book… His 
insights into nutrition are so simple and sound, there 
is a moment you wish this book was a stand alone 
dieting book.”—DAN JOHN, author of Never Let Go
Diamond-Cut Abs
How to Engineer the  
Ultimate Six-Pack— 
Minimalist Methods for  
Maximum Results
By Danny Kavadlo
 
Book #B77 $39.95 
eBook #EB77  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11
230 pages, 305 photos 

www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Diamond-Cut Abs online:
www.dragondoor.com/b77 
Part I An Abs Odyssey
Chapter 1 Cultural Obsession
•  Why there is no one-size-fits-all program 
for training your abs…3
•  Danny’s big promise: why you will get 
everything you need to know about 
sculpting and maintaining amazingly 
defined and beautiful abs…4
Chapter 2 Abs Defined
•  You cannot fake the funk—getting clear 
about what it’ll take to Man up and earn 
that six-pack of your dreams…11
•  The What of the What: basic anatomy 
and function: know your abs-tech details 
so you know what you are working 
on…12—15
•  What the core really consists of…it’s more 
than most people think…15
Chapter 3 Personal Obsession
•  The extreme value of push-ups and pull-
ups for Danny-like abs…18
•  Danny Obsessed: 300 reps, 5 days a week 
for 10 years = close on 8 million reps!—
yet Danny’s functionally stronger and 
aesthetically more appealing NOW with 
WAY less reps. Discover why…19
•  Danny’s personal mission for you: distin-
guish the fitness BS from the hype…21
•  Why protein supplements are a waste of 
money…21
 
Part II Nutritional Musings
Chapter 4 Primordial Soup
•  How to bring back the joy to your 
fitness-nutrition program…28
•  Why you need to develop and maintain 
a love affair with food—if you want that 
manly six-pack…
Chapter 5 Common Sense Ver-
sus Over-compartmentalization 
•  Why what we eat is single most 
important decision we can make about 
our abs…31
•  Why Danny’s Dietary Advice has proved 
100% effective for those who have 
followed it…33
•  The 3 golden keys you must consider 
when choosing the right foods to feed 
your abs…35
•  Why you should eat THESE fats every 
day for great abs…36
•  Why sugar is the #1 nutritional enemy of 
defined abs…37
•  Why Danny’s abs were at an all-time 
best after 90 days without THESE two 
nutrients…39
•  Why you should eat organ meat, for an 
extra edge in your abs training…42
•  Why you need FAR less protein in your 
diet…44
Chapter 6 Weighing in  
on Weight Loss
•  The 3 major keys to successful fat 
reduction…48
•  How to shed body fat now…48
•  Why a food’s fat content has no bearing 
on whether it will fatten you…49
•  Why you should ignore the BMI…50
•  The role of sacrifice in obtaining ripped 
abs…50
Chapter 7 What I Eat
•  The secret of “mostly”…54
•  For the love and care of food…54
•  Danny’s 3-Day sample food log…56—57
Chapter 8 The Fat  
and the Curious
•  The 4 Steps of the Beginner’s Cleanse…60
•  Fruit n Veggie Cleanse—optimal duration 
of…61
•  Juice Fast…62
•  The 7-Day Plan—Fruit n Veggie/Juice 
fast…62
•  Danny’s 4 favorite juices…63
•  The True Fast…63
•  The Absolute Fast…64
•  4 big tips for safe and successful 
fasting…64
Chapter 9 More Food for 
Thought
•  The perils of genetically and chemically 
compromised foods…67—69
•  How to avoid toxins in your food…69
•  Food’s most powerful secret ingredi-
ent…69
Chapter 10 Top Tips  
for Tip Top Abs
•  Why water is SO important for your 
abs…72
Part III Training Your Abs
Chapter 11  Make an  
Executive Decision
•  Why and how your abs training should be 
like a martial art …79
Chapter 12 Fundamentals of 
Abdominal Strength Training 
•  The 10 Principles you must follow for 
every rep of every exercise…83—89
•  THIS principle makes you stronger, 
more shredded and more anatomically 
aware…83
•  THE #1 Principle you’ll need to employ 
for spectacular abs…91
Chapter 13 On Cardio
•  The limitations of cardio for abs 
training—and what you should do 
instead…93—97
Part IV The Exercises
•  Each drill comes with explanatory text, 
recommended set/rep range plus a 
specialized Trainer Tip
Chapter 14  Danny,  
What Do You Do?
•  Danny’s 50+ best abs and abs-related 
training exercises…101
Chapter 15 Core Curriculum 
•  Crucial exercises for overall gains…105
•  How to perform the perfect squat—
the most functional exercise on the 
planet…105
•  How to perform the perfect push-up—the 
ultimate upper-body exercise…108
•  How to perform the perfect pull-
up…111—112
Chapter 16  Beginner Abs 
•  Full Body Tension Drill…116
•  How to have complete body awareness 
through progressive, isometric tens-
ing…116
•  The Plank…117
•  The Side Plank—to emphasize the 
obliques and lateral chain…119
•  Lying Bent Knee leg Raise…120
•  Lying Knee Tuck…121
•  Sit-Up…122
•  Modified Side Jackknife—to help begin-
ners target their obliques…123
•  Crossover…124
•  Bicycle…125
•  Straight Arm/Straight Leg Cross-
over…126
•  V-Leg Toe Touch…127
•  Why No Crunches?—And the #1 reason 
not to bother with them...127
Chapter 17 Intermediate Abs 
•  Unstable Plank—a fun way to add an  ex-
tra challenge to he traditional isometric 
standard… 130
•  Seated Knee Raise—the missing link 
between floor-based and bar-based abs 
training…131
 
“As soon as I received Diamond-Cut Abs, I flipped to the table of 
contents.  Amazingly I found what I have been fruitlessly looking for 
in ab books for decades: 66 pages dedicated to NUTRITION. Kavadlo 
passed his second Marty audition by not echoing all the bankrupt 
politically-correct, lock-step, mainstream nutritional command-
ments. When Dan starts riffing about eating like a horse, eating 
ample amounts of red meat, shellfish and the divine pig meat (along 
with all kinds any types of nutrient-dense food), I knew I had to give 
my first ever ab book endorsement.  When he noted that he drank 
whiskey while getting his abs into his all time best shape, it sealed 
the deal for me.  Oh, and the ab exercises are excellent.” 
—MARTY GALLAGHER, 3-Time Powerlifting Champion, Author of  
The Purposeful Primitive
m Here’s a Taste of What You’ll Get When You Invest in Diamond-Cut Abs m

Order Diamond-Cut Abs online:
www.dragondoor.com/b77 
www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
“Danny flexes his expert advice in 
a way that’s solid, applicable and 
often entertaining.  If you want the 
abs of your dreams, stop looking 
for the quick solution everyone 
claims to have and get ready to 
learn how to maximize your ef-
forts towards your very own set of 
Diamond-Cut Abs.”—MIKE FITCH, 
creator of Global Bodyweight 
Training
“Danny’s new book definitely hits 
the mark. Diamond-Cut Abs outlines 
pretty much everything you’d ever 
need to know about building the best 
midsection your genetic potential 
allows for and without the need for 
any equipment. Keep up the great 
work, Danny!”—BJ GADDOUR, 
CSCS, author of Men’s Health 
Your Body is Your Barbell, CEO 
of StreamFIT.com
•  The N-Sit—an iso that helps set you up for 
the L-Sit…132
•  Jackknife—a fighter’s favorite and a most 
excellent motha for firing up those deeper 
abs muscles, building better full body co-
ordination—and progressing to the Dragon 
Flag and Hanging Straight Leg Raise…133
•  Side Jackknife—masochists will welcome 
intensifying their abdominal agony when 
they flip the great classic on its side…134
•  Advanced Sit-Up—Bad Boy Danny’s 
tweaks will up the ante here in a pleasantly 
nasty way (curses optional)…135
•  Lying Straight Leg Raise—and how to make 
it even harder…136
•  Grounded Wiper…137
•  Danny adores the classic Windshield Wip-
er—but it’s a helluva challenge. The GW 
helps you rehearse the movement pattern 
before taking on the full-on manliness of 
the WW…137
•  Throwdown…138
•  Here’s another old school classic that 
should be part of any serious practitioner’s 
arsenal. The explosivity will have your 
whole body screaming in indignation—for-
tunately…138
•  Side Plank Hip Raise—notorious for being 
deceptively challenging, includes leverage 
tips to progress the hardness…139
•  How to Hang…140
•  How to grip the bar to really squeeze the 
most out of every rep…140
•  Why you should avoid Assistance Straps—
and the better alternatives…140
•  How to employ a flex hang to add a unique 
neurological twist and increase upper body 
muscle activation—Highly Recommended 
by da Abs Bossman!...140
•  Hanging Contest…141
•  A fun competitive spin on hanging—but 
here’s some important tips on how to keep 
it real…141
•  One Arm Hang…142
•  Did someone shout Man Maker? The 
OAH is a total body drill that will make the 
boys cry and the men grin with pain—plus 
bonus tips for optimal vengeance on that 
brutalized six-pack…142
•  Ab Wheel Roll Out (Bent Knee)…143
•  An old time classic—incorporates stabil-
ity, strength and focus in a truly unique 
way…143
•  Hanging Bicycle—last step before conquer-
ing the Hanging Knee Raise, plus common 
mistakes and how to fix them…144
•  Hanging Knee Raise—one of the most 
important of all abdominal exercises. 
Master it here…145
Chapter 18 Advanced Abs
•  SERIOUS training now! These moves are 
all full-on, full-body. Emphasis is on every 
cell in your bod. No mercy. Tremendous 
demand on the abs—requires heavy-duty 
injection of Will, complete harmony of 
mind and muscle, steely strength. Think 
you are a Man? Measure your Manliness 
here and report back…
•  The L-Sit—you will feel it everywhere. How 
to do it and how to extract the ultimate 
mechanical advantage…147—148
•  Gecko Hold—a “limited contact” plank 
that poses a unique strength challenge. A 
ripped six-pack is meaningless without the 
strength to back it up—get that strength 
with the GH…149
•  Ab Wheel Roll Out (Straight Leg)—in-
credibly challenging for all levels, full body 
tension is key, regressions included for 
ramping up to complete studliness…150
•  Hanging Leg Raise—one of Danny’s favor-
ites, for good reason, 6 controlled reps and 
you’re doin’ good…151
•  Washing Machine—this infamous move is 
a key step to mastering the mighty Wind-
shield Wiper, regressions and progressions 
to full MANitude provided…152
•  Windshield Wiper—brace yourself buddy, 
the going just got a whole lot harder. Builds 
and requires tremendous upper body 
strength…153
•  V-Leg Wiper—ho! This is a true brutalizer 
of the core plus a helluva glute-banger, to 
boot…154
•  Perfect Circle—an exaggerated WW for the 
MEN who can hack it …155
•  Skinning the Cat—a precursor to many 
extreme bar calisthenics moves and a phe-
nomenal abs exercise in its own right, with 
some optional grip strategies…156
•  One Arm Flex Hang—this just about 
breaks the mercury on the Achievometer, 
hyper-challenging, requires an incredibly 
strong upper body …157
•  Dragon Flag—one of the all-time sexiest 
moves on the planet and a Bruce Lee 
trademark, you gotta get this one down if 
you want to truly strut your Man Stuff. Bad 
Boy Danny likes to hold it for an iso. Can 
you?...158
•  Tuck Front Lever—this regressed version 
of the Front Lever still requires a brutal 
level of upper body power. Have at it!…159
•  V-Leg Front Lever—another extremely dif-
ficult move, with some favorable leverage 
variations to help progress it…160
•  Front Lever—this one tops the Manometer 
for sure. A masterful and utterly unforgiv-
ing move that will simultaneously torture 
your abs, lats, glutes, arms, shoulders and 
everything in between. No mercy here and 
hopefully, none asked for…161
Chapter 19  
Supplemental Stretches
•  Why stretching IS important—and the 
9 surefire benefits you’ll gain from right 
stretching…173
•  The Hands Up—the 4 main benefits to this, 
Danny’s first stretch before a workout…174
•  Forward, back and Side-to-Side Bend…175
•  Hands Down—another fantastic stretch for 
the entire front of the body…176
Chapter 20 Workouts
•  9 sample combinations for different lev-
els—a beginning guideline…181—185
•  On the importance of mixing it up and 
shocking the system…181
Part V Abs and Lifestyle
Chapter 21 Viva La Vida
•  Abs and the quality of your life…190
•  A life-oriented approach to training…191
Chapter 22 The Mud 
and the Blood and the Beer
•  Coffee, alcohol and other beverages—how 
to handle in regard to your train-
ing…193—195
Chapter 23 Seasons 
•  How to adopt and adapt your training to 
the changing seasons…198
“Danny Kavadlo’s book might be titled ‘Diamond-Cut Abs’ but the 
truth is that it goes way BEYOND just ab training. Danny has actu-
ally created a guide to Physical Culture & LIVING healthy. The tra-
ditional fitness industry has gone astray from what the body truly 
needs.  Since 1989, I’ve read a ton of abs-related books—and they 
don’t scratch the surface of what’s inside Danny’s masterpiece. 
From powerful nutrition methods to training the entire body with a 
holistic approach, Diamond-Cut Abs is a vital addition to anyone’s 
library. I LOVE it!”—ZACH EVEN-ESH, author of The Encyclopedia of 
Underground Strength and Conditioning
Diamond-Cut Abs
How to Engineer the  
Ultimate Six-Pack— 
Minimalist Methods for  
Maximum Results
By Danny Kavadlo
 
Book #B77 $39.95 
eBook #EB77  $19.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11
230 pages, 305 photos 

Convict  
Conditioning  
Ultimate  
Bodyweight 
Training Log  
By Paul “Coach” Wade
 
Book #B67  $29.95 
eBook #EB67 $19.95
Paperback (spiral bound) 6 x 9    
290 pages  • 175 photos 
www.dragondoor.com
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
ORDER NOW
Order Convict Conditioning Log online:
www.dragondoor.com/b67
Reader Praise for Convict 
Conditioning Ultimate 
Bodyweight Training Log 
Above and Beyond!
“Not JUST a log book. TONS of great and actually useful info. 
I really like to over complicate programming and data entries at 
times. And honestly, All one has to do is fill in the blanks... Well 
that and DO THE WORK. Great product.” 
—NOEL PRICE, Chicagoland, IL
A unique training log
“This log book is one of a kind in the world. It is the only pub-
lished body weight exclusive training log I have personally seen. 
It is well structured and provides everything for a log book in a 
primarily body weight oriented routine. The book is best inte-
grated with the other books in the convict conditioning series 
however has enough information to act as a stand alone unit. It 
is a must have for anyone who is a fan of the convict condition-
ing series or is entering into calisthenics.”  
—CARTER D., Cambridge, Canada
Excellent Companion to  
Convict Conditioning 1 & 2
“This is an amazing book! If you are a fan of Convict 
Conditioning (1 & 2) you need to get this training log. If you are 
preparing for the Progressive Calisthenics Certification then it’s 
a must-have!!! The spiral bound format is a huge improvement 
over the regular binding and it makes it that much more func-
tional for use in the gym. Great design, amazing pictures and 
additional content! Once again - Great job Dragon Door!”  
—MICHAEL KRIVKA, RKC Team Leader, Gaithersburg, MD
 
Excellent  
latest addition to  
the CC Program!
“A terrific book to keep you on track and beyond. Thank you 
again for this incredible series!”  
—JOSHUA HATCHER, Holyoke, MA
Calling this a Log Book  
is Selling it Short
“I thought, what is the big deal about a logbook! Seriously 
mistaken. It is a work of art and with tips on each page that 
would be a great book all by itself. Get it. It goes way beyond a 
log book...the logging part of this book is just a bonus. You must 
have this!”—JON ENGUM, Brainerd, MN
The Ultimate  
Bodyweight Conditioning
“I have started to incorporate bodyweight training into my 
strength building when I am not going to the gym. At the age of 
68, after 30 years in the gym the ‘Convict Conditioning Log’ is 
going to be a welcome new training challenge.”  
—WILLIAM HAYDEN, Winter Park, FL

Telephone Orders For faster service you may place 
your orders by calling Toll Free 24 hours a day, 7 
days a week, 365 days per year. When you call, 
please have your credit card ready.
Customer Service Questions? Please call us between 
9:00am– 11:00pm EST Monday to Friday at 1-800-
899-5111. Local and foreign customers call 513-346-
4160 for orders and customer service
100% One-Year Risk-Free Guarantee. If you are not  
completely satisfied with any product—we’ll be 
happy to give you a prompt exchange, credit, or 
refund, as you wish. Simply return your purchase to 
us, and please let us know why you were dissatis-
fied––it will help us to provide better products and 
services in the future. Shipping and handling fees are 
non-refundable. 
METHOD OF PAYMENT  ____Check   ____M.O.   ____Mastercard   ____Visa  ____Discover    ____Amex
Account No. (Please indicate all the numbers on your credit card)                                                EXPIRATION DATE 
WARNING TO  
FOREIGN CUSTOMERS: 
The Customs in your 
country may or may 
not tax or otherwise 
charge you an addi-
tional fee for goods you 
receive. Dragon Door 
Publications is charging 
you only for U.S. han-
dling and international 
shipping. Dragon Door 
Publications is in no way 
responsible for any ad-
ditional fees levied by 
Customs, the carrier or 
any other entity.
     Item #      Qty.                Item Description                   Item Price       A or B        Total
COMPLETE AND MAIL WITH FULL PAYMENT TO: DRAGON 
DOOR PUBLICATIONS, 5 COUNTY ROAD B EAST, SUITE 3, LITTLE CANADA, MN 55117
Sold To: 	
	
	
     A
Name__________________________________
Street _________________________________
City ___________________________
State ________________  Zip  ________
Sold To: (Street address for delivery)	      B
Name__________________________________
Street _________________________________
City ___________________________________
State _____________________  Zip  ________
Email__________________________________
HANDLING AND SHIPPING CHARGES • NO CODS
Total Amount of Order Add (Excludes kettlebells and kettlebell kits):
Total of Goods
Shipping Charges
Rush Charges
Kettlebell Shipping Charges
OH residents add 6.5% 
sales tax
MN residents add 6.5% sales 
Please print clearly
Please print clearly
NOTE: We ship best method available for your delivery address. Foreign orders are sent by air.   
Credit card or International M.O. only. For RUSH processing of your order, add an additional  
$10.00 per address. Available on money order & charge card orders only.
Errors and omissions excepted. Prices subject to change without notice.
$100.00 to 129.99	
Add $14.00
$130.00 to 169.99	
Add $16.00
$170.00 to 199.99	
Add $18.00
$200.00 to 299.99	 Add $20.00
$300.00 and up	
Add $24.00
1•800•899•5111 • 24HOURS
FAX YOUR ORDER (866) 280-7619
O R D E R I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N
Day Phone:   ______________________ 
Signature:  __________________________________________  Date:  _________________
Canada and Mexico add $6.00 to US charges. All other countries, flat rate, double US 
Charges. See Kettlebell section for Kettlebell Shipping and handling charges.
$00.00 to 29.99	 Add $7.00
$30.00 to 49.99	
Add $6.00
$50.00 to 69.99	
Add $8.00
$70.00 to 99.99	
Add $11.00

Telephone Orders For faster service you may place 
your orders by calling Toll Free 24 hours a day, 7 
days a week, 365 days per year. When you call, 
please have your credit card ready.
Customer Service Questions? Please call us between 
9:00am– 11:00pm EST Monday to Friday at 1-800-
899-5111. Local and foreign customers call 513-346-
4160 for orders and customer service
100% One-Year Risk-Free Guarantee. If you are not  
completely satisfied with any product—we’ll be 
happy to give you a prompt exchange, credit, or 
refund, as you wish. Simply return your purchase to 
us, and please let us know why you were dissatis-
fied––it will help us to provide better products and 
services in the future. Shipping and handling fees are 
non-refundable. 
METHOD OF PAYMENT  ____Check   ____M.O.   ____Mastercard   ____Visa  ____Discover    ____Amex
Account No. (Please indicate all the numbers on your credit card)                                                EXPIRATION DATE 
WARNING TO  
FOREIGN CUSTOMERS: 
The Customs in your 
country may or may 
not tax or otherwise 
charge you an addi-
tional fee for goods you 
receive. Dragon Door 
Publications is charging 
you only for U.S. han-
dling and international 
shipping. Dragon Door 
Publications is in no way 
responsible for any ad-
ditional fees levied by 
Customs, the carrier or 
any other entity.
     Item #      Qty.                Item Description                   Item Price       A or B        Total
COMPLETE AND MAIL WITH FULL PAYMENT TO: DRAGON 
DOOR PUBLICATIONS, 5 COUNTY ROAD B EAST, SUITE 3, LITTLE CANADA, MN 55117
Sold To: 	
	
	
     A
Name__________________________________
Street _________________________________
City ___________________________
State ________________  Zip  ________
Sold To: (Street address for delivery)	      B
Name__________________________________
Street _________________________________
City ___________________________________
State _____________________  Zip  ________
Email__________________________________
HANDLING AND SHIPPING CHARGES • NO CODS
Total Amount of Order Add (Excludes kettlebells and kettlebell kits):
Total of Goods
Shipping Charges
Rush Charges
Kettlebell Shipping Charges
OH residents add 6.5% 
sales tax
MN residents add 6.5% sales 
Please print clearly
Please print clearly
NOTE: We ship best method available for your delivery address. Foreign orders are sent by air.   
Credit card or International M.O. only. For RUSH processing of your order, add an additional  
$10.00 per address. Available on money order & charge card orders only.
Errors and omissions excepted. Prices subject to change without notice.
$100.00 to 129.99	
Add $14.00
$130.00 to 169.99	
Add $16.00
$170.00 to 199.99	
Add $18.00
$200.00 to 299.99	 Add $20.00
$300.00 and up	
Add $24.00
1•800•899•5111 • 24HOURS
FAX YOUR ORDER (866) 280-7619
O R D E R I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N
Day Phone:   ______________________ 
Signature:  __________________________________________  Date:  _________________
Canada and Mexico add $6.00 to US charges. All other countries, flat rate, double US 
Charges. See Kettlebell section for Kettlebell Shipping and handling charges.
$00.00 to 29.99	 Add $7.00
$30.00 to 49.99	
Add $6.00
$50.00 to 69.99	
Add $8.00
$70.00 to 99.99	
Add $11.00


