© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
“Street Hypnosis Exposed” 
 
 
 
Published By  
Clifford Mee & Igor Ledochowski 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER AND LEGAL NOTICES   
 
The information presented herein represents the views of the publisher and his contributors as of the date of publication. 
Because of the rate with which conditions change, the publisher and his contributors reserve the rights to alter and 
update their opinions based on the new conditions.    
 
This ebook is for informational and entertainment purposes only and the publisher and his contributors do not accept any 
responsibilities for any liabilities resulting from the use of this information. While every attempt has been made to verify 
the information provided here, neither the publisher nor his contributors and partners assume any responsibility for 
errors, inaccuracies or omissions. Any slights of people or organizations are unintentional. 
 

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Table Of Contents 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1 
CD 1 – HYPNOSIS UNCOVERED 
5 
INTRODUCTION TO CD1 
5 
DISCOVER THE POWER OF HYPNOSIS 
5 
TWO CASE HISTORIES 
6 
STRANGE HYPNOTIC POWERS 
7 
HYPNOSIS IS A FORCE FOR GOOD 
7 
UNMASKING THE MYTHS OF HYPNOSIS 
8 
MYTH 1: HYPNOTIC MIND CONTROL 
8 
MYTH 2: HYPNOTIC SLEEP 
9 
MYTH 3: HYPNOTIC MEMORY LOSS 
9 
MYTH 4: GETTING STUCK IN HYPNOSIS 
10 
HYPNOTIC FACT: YOU MUST CANCEL OLD SUGGESTIONS 
10 
TROUBLESHOOTING TIP: WHAT IF THEY WON’T WAKE UP? 
10 
MYTH 5: REVEALING DARK SECRETS 
11 
SO WHAT IS HYPNOSIS REALLY? 
11 
DEFINITION OF HYPNOSIS 
11 
EVERYDAY HYPNOSIS 
12 
FOCUS THEIR ATTENTION 
12 
MONOIDEISM 
13 
BIPASS THE CRITICAL FACTOR 
13 
THEY 4 KEYS TO HYPNOSIS 
14 
IMPORTANT: THE HYPNOTIC SAFETY PROTOCOLS 
14 
SAFETY PROTOCOL 1: USE COMMON SENSE! 
14 
SAFETY PROTOCOL 2: DON’T HYPNOTISE THESE PEOPLE! 
15 
SAFETY PROTOCOL 3: STAY CLEAR OF REGRESSIONS 
15 
IMPORTANT TROUBLESHOOTING TIP: HOW TO HANDLE A SPONTANEOUS ABREACTION 
16 
THE MASTER KEYS TO HYPNOSIS 
17 
THE GOLDEN RULE FOR HYPNOSIS MASTERS: THE ABS FORMULA 
17 
HYPNOSIS MASTER KEY 1: RELAXATION 
18 
HYPNOSIS MASTER KEY 2: IMAGINATION 
18 
HYPNOSIS MASTER KEY 3: REPETITION 
19 
HYPNOSIS MASTER KEY 4: POSITIVE FOCUS 
20 
YOUR STEP BY STEP GUIDE TO HYPNOTISING YOUR FIRST PERSON 
21 
THE 4 STEPS OF EVERY HYPNOTIC PROCESS 
21 
THE TEN SECOND HYPNOTIST 
21 
STEP 1: CLOSE YOUR EYES 
22 
STEP 2: GO DEEPER 
22 
STEP 3: STIMULATE THE UNCONSCIOUS 
22 
STEP 4: END THE SESSION 
22 
SET YOURSELF UP FOR SUCCESS WITH THE HYPNOTIC PREFRAME 
22 
STEP 1 IN DETAIL: CLOSE YOUR EYES 
23 
STEP 2 IN DETAIL: GO DEEPER 
23 
1

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
STEP 3 IN DETAIL: STIMULATE THE UNCONSCIOUS 
24 
EXAMPLE OF STEPS 1-3 
24 
STEP 4 IN DETAIL: END THE SESSION 
24 
DEMONSTRATION OF THE RELAXATION INDUCTION 
25 
TEN QUIRKY, QUICK, QUALITY INDUCTIONS 
27 
INDUCTION 1: BLANK MIND 
27 
INDUCTION 2: THE CRYSTAL BALL INDUCTION 
27 
INDUCTION 3: THE HYPNO DISK 
28 
INDUCTION 4: THE FLASHLIGHT INDUCTION 
28 
INDUCTION 5: THE TWO FINGER FOCUS 
29 
INDUCTION 6: THE SPOT INDUCTION 
29 
INDUCTION 7: THE POCKET WATCH INDUCTION 
29 
INDUCTION 8: THE HYPNOTIC GAZE INDUCTION 
30 
INDUCTIONS 9 & 10: THE PENDULUM & OTHER HYPNOTIC TEST INDUCTION 
30 
END OF CD 
31 
CD 2 – COVERT HYPNOSIS 
32 
INTRODUCTION TO CD2 
32 
WHAT IS COVERT HYPNOSIS? 
32 
OVERT – V – COVERT HYPNOSIS 
32 
THE KEY TO USING COVERT HYPNOSIS 
33 
COVERT HYPNOSIS IS A FORCE FOR GOOD 
33 
THE SECRET LANGUAGE OF HYPNOSIS 
33 
COVERT HYPNOSIS MASTER KEY 1: A SMOOTH FLOW 
34 
SPECIAL COVERT HYPNOSIS PRINCIPLE 1: PSEUDO LOGIC 
34 
COVERT HYPNOSIS MASTER KEY 2: THE ASSOCIATION PRINCIPLE 
35 
THE POWER OF HIDDEN MESSAGES 
35 
SPECIAL COVERT HYPNOSIS PRINCIPLE 2: HYPNOTIC THEMES 
36 
PUTTING THE MASTER KEYS OF COVERT HYPNOSIS INTO ACTION 
36 
THE FOUR WORDS OF POWER 
36 
THE FOUR WORDS OF POWER IN ACTION 
37 
LINGUISTIC BRIDGES 
37 
YOUR FIRST COVERT HYPNOSIS INDUCTION 
38 
MORE WORDS OF POWER 
38 
HOW TO LISTEN TO THE DEMONSTRATION 
38 
HOW TO STRUCTURE A COVERT HYPNOSIS INDUCTION 
39 
COVERT HYPNOSIS DEMONSTRATION 
39 
HOW TO TELL WHEN SOMEONE IS HYPNOTISED! 
41 
SPECIAL HINT: OBSERVE ALL CHANGES 
41 
1
ST SIGN OF TRANCE: RELAXATION 
41 
2
ND SIGN OF TRANCE: LACK OF MOVEMENT 
41 
3
RD SIGN OF TRANCE: EYES FIXATE ON A POINT 
41 
4
TH SIGN OF TRANCE: CHANGES IN BREATHING 
42 
5
TH SIGN OF TRANCE: CHANGES IN SKIN COLOUR 
42 
SUMMARY OF THE 5 KEY SIGNS OF TRANCE 
42 
THE SECRET TO HAVING A HYPNOTIC VOICE 
42 
BE EXPRESSIVE 
43 
STIMULATE EMOTIONS 
43 
THE 2 KEY HYPNOTIC TONALITIES 
43 
2

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
CHANGE YOUR TONE TO MATCH YOUR SUGGESTION 
43 
DEVELOP YOUR “HYPNOTIC VOICE” 
44 
THE MYTHS & THE TRUTH ABOUT A HYPNOTIC VOICE 
44 
HOW TO CONDITION PEOPLE TO RESPOND TO YOUR HYPNOTIC VOICE 
45 
HOW TO SECRETLY USE THE HYPNOTIC IMAGINATION 
46 
COVERT HYPNOTIC IMAGINATION TECHNIQUE 1: MY FRIEND JOHN… 
46 
COVERT HYPNOTIC IMAGINATION TECHNIQUE 2: ITS JUST LIKE… 
47 
COVERT HYPNOTIC IMAGINATION TECHNIQUE 3: SWITCH REFERENTIAL INDEX 
47 
HOW TO USE THE HYPNOTIC GAZE INDUCTION 
48 
THE POWER OF YOUR HYPNOTIC GAZE 
49 
KEY SECRET: MAKE IT FRIENDLY! 
49 
USING YOUR HYPNOTIC GAZE IN A NORMAL CONVERSATION 
49 
HYPNOTIC CYCLES 
50 
THE HYPNOTIC BLITZ TECHNIQUE 
50 
CURSES & BENEDICTIONS 
50 
THE HYPNOTIC BLITZ AS A BENEDICTION 
51 
A STEP BY STEP GUIDE TO THE HYPNOTIC BLITZ 
51 
THE THREE THEMES 
51 
HYPNOTIC BLITZ STEP 1: GO FIRST 
52 
HYPNOTIC BLITZ STEP 2: THE HYPNOTIC GAZE 
52 
HYPNOTIC BLITZ STEP 3: UNLEASH YOUR THEME 
52 
BREAKDOWN OF A BENEDICTION 
53 
HYPNOTIC INFLUENCE 
53 
INFLUENCE SECRET 1: CHANGE MOODS TO CHANGE MINDS 
54 
INFLUENCE SECRET 2: NOTICE EMOTIONS 
54 
INFLUENCE SECRET 3: EMPHASISE EMOTIONS OVER LOGIC 
54 
TROUBLESHOOTING TIP: CHECK THE EMOTIONAL CLIMATE 
55 
INFLUENCE SECRET 4: EMOTIONS DRIVE BEHAVIOURS 
55 
END OF CD 
55 
CD 3 – SELF HYPNOSIS 
56 
INTRODUCTION TO CD3 
56 
ALL HYPNOSIS IS SELF HYPNOSIS 
56 
THE CRUCIAL DIFFERENCE IN SELF HYPNOSIS 
57 
THE RECEPTIVE MIND 
57 
HOW TO SET A COMPELLING GOAL 
58 
HEALTH, WEALTH OR RELATIONSHIPS? 
58 
THE MAGIC QUESTION 
59 
SMART GOALS 
59 
SPECIFIC 
59 
MEASURABLE 
60 
AFFECT 
61 
REALISTIC 
61 
TIMED 
61 
HOW TO CREATE A COMPELLING SELF-SUGGESTION 
62 
THE THREE TYPES OF SUGGESTIONS 
62 
THE PROBLEM WITH SELF-SUGGESTIONS 
63 
VISUALISATIONS 
63 
INSIDER SECRETS FOR IMPROVED VISUALISATIONS 
63 
3

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
HOW TO USE VISUALISATIONS IN SELF HYPNOSIS 
64 
HOW TO TURN A SMART GOAL INTO A VERBAL SUGGESTION 
64 
DON’T ENGAGE THE CRITICAL FACTOR 
65 
A STEP BY STEP GUIDE TO THIS EASY SELF HYPNOSIS METHOD 
66 
STEP 1: PREPARE YOURSELF 
66 
STEP 2: PREHYPNOTIC SUGGESTIONS 
67 
STEP 3: INDUCE TRANCE 
68 
STEP 4: DRIFT 
68 
STEP 5: RETURN 
68 
PRIMING YOUR INNER CLOCK 
68 
SUMMARY OF THE 5 STEPS 
69 
HOW TO GO INTO SELF HYPNOSIS 
70 
THE STEP BY STEP SELF HYPNOSIS METHOD 
70 
SELF HYPNOSIS INSTALLATION 
72 
SELF HYPNOSIS DEBRIEF 
76 
HOW TO DO SELF HYPNOSIS BY YOURSELF 
77 
THE SELF HYPNOSIS LIVE PRACTICE ASSISTANT 
77 
HOW TO PRACTICE SELF HYPNOSIS 
78 
WHEN & WHERE TO PRACTICE 
78 
HOW LONG SHOULD THE SESSION BE? 
78 
STAY ALERT 
78 
PRACTICE REGULARLY 
79 
 
 
4

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Exposed 
CD 1 – Hypnosis Uncovered 
 
 
Introduction To CD1 
Track 1 1:28 
 
Welcome to “Street Hypnosis Exposed.” In this first CD, entitled “Hypnosis Uncovered, 
Your No BS Insider’s Guide to Hypnosis,” I want to uncover the secrets of making 
hypnosis work for you.  
 
Over our next hour together, you will discover what hypnosis is and the tremendous 
power that you have at your fingertips. You'll discover what people have used hypnosis 
for through the ages. We’ll look at the myths that surround hypnosis so that you can tell 
the difference between hypnotic myth and hypnotic fact. 
 
Next we’re going to look at the psychological principles that make hypnosis work, so that 
after a brief safety statement we can launch straight into your very first hypnotic 
induction. I'm going to show you step-by-step what to do, why you should do it, and how 
you should be doing it. Then I will give you a demonstration of a complete hypnotic 
induction in action. 
 
Finally, we’ll finish this CD off with a discussion of ten different, novel, quirky, and 
interesting hypnotic inductions that you can try out for yourself. As soon as you’re ready 
to do that simply sit back, relax, and enjoy “Street Hypnosis Exposed.” 
 
Discover The Power Of Hypnosis 
Track 2 7:03 
 
Hypnosis is ancient. It's about as ancient as human beings are ancient. Ever since human 
beings started dancing around fires—or in caves or in woods—in order to change their 
state of mind to alter their reality so that they could access special abilities, so people 
have been using hypnosis.  
 
We have records of hypnotic techniques being used in Egyptian temples, by the Greeks in 
their oracle temples, by the Romans, and further on. In our own history in the West we’ve 
had people who have the healing touch, who use magnets and all kinds of other strange 
and wonderful cures which worked, even though medically speaking they shouldn’t have 
worked. All this comes down to the power of hypnosis.  
 
So what can you use hypnosis for?  
5

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
After all, you’re about to dive into the world of hypnosis and becoming a hypnotist. What 
can you do with it?  
 
In my opinion, hypnosis is a tremendous force for good. In one respect, you can think of 
hypnosis as a way of augmenting other experiences: it makes them more and more 
powerful. At the same time, it opens doors inside your unconscious to places that you 
don’t normally have access over. For example you have the ability to change your heart 
beat, your blood sugar levels, your body temperature, and your metabolism, all under 
hypnosis.  
 
Two Case Histories 
Here are some examples from my own personal, private hypnotherapy practice. One 
client, let's call her Mary, was a chain smoker. She used to smoke a pack—sometimes 
even two packs—of cigarettes every single day. She was stressed at work.  
 
She was busy, and she was afraid of quitting smoking because she thought she would 
gain weight. She tried in the past by just using her will power, and failed every single 
time. Not only did she fail, she failed and she put on weight as well, leaving her feeling 
worse than she felt before she even started trying to quit. 
 
The amazing thing is that after a one-hour session using hypnosis, she walked out being a 
nonsmoker. In fact, she wrote me a card not long afterwards telling me how much better 
she felt. She could breathe more easily. She is getting fitter. She can walk up and down 
the stairs. She is feeling calmer.  
 
Best of all she managed to quit smoking with no withdrawal symptoms. She didn’t miss 
the cigarettes and she never gained an ounce of weight. In fact, she ended up losing some 
weight.  
 
Another client, let's call him Peter, had a totally different problem. He was frustrated and 
upset with himself because he thought he was weak-willed. You see, he had all kinds of 
habits like nail biting that he wanted to stop, but he couldn’t.  
 
He had other habits which he knew were good for him—like eating fresh fruits and going 
to the gym—that he wanted to start, but he never quite got ‘round to doing it. He would 
always lose momentum just after he started.  
 
Again, after a short course of hypnosis sessions with Peter, not only did he take every 
single one of the bad habits he had identified and quit them, he also started doing all 
kinds of healthy activities instead. He stayed doing these activities. They became a 
natural part of his everyday world. 
 
6

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Hypnosis has the power to change people from the inside out and, therefore, make 
changes really easy. All learning, all behavior, and all change happen inside first, on the 
unconscious level.  
 
Strange Hypnotic Powers 
Hypnosis is renowned for having all kinds of strange phenomenon; for example, the 
ability to control pain. There's a hypnotic technique called glove anesthesia with which 
you can completely numb an arm, a part of the body, any part of yourself. Thousands of 
people have used this technique or something similar very, very usefully; for example, 
when they’ve had an accident and couldn’t get immediate medical assistance.  
 
It's been used for countless births without drugs or any other paraphernalia, and no pain.  
 
It's also been used for full blown surgery when, otherwise, people have been knocked out 
with all these dangerous chemical gases. They can use hypnosis and completely numb the 
body to the point where people have actually had open heart surgery and carried on a 
conversation with the doctor in the middle of it.  
 
These are some of the strange, bizarre things that hypnosis is capable of. Some other 
things, for example, include things like hallucinations. You can see things that don’t exist 
in the real world, or not see things that are right in front of your face. In hypnosis you can 
take things away from your experience and put things in its place.  
 
This becomes tremendously useful; for example, when you want to learn a new skill. You 
can hallucinate an instrument that doesn’t exist and carry it around everywhere you go. 
You can change your perception of time. People have used hypnotic time distortion in 
order to learn new skills more quickly. You can spend a few minutes in hypnosis and feel 
like you’ve been practicing the guitar or the piano for several hours. 
 
In hypnosis you also have access to memories that you otherwise have no access towards. 
For example, in forensic hypnosis a police or police-authorized hypnotist can help 
someone who has been involved in some kind of a crime scene to go back to the event 
and remember minute details that otherwise escape them. Under hypnosis people have 
recalled the number plate of a car that was speeding by. They have recalled small, little 
facts about a room that were different, which allow the police then to solve the crime.  
 
Hypnosis Is A Force For Good 
Hypnosis is a tremendous force for good. All kinds of different things respond really 
powerfully to hypnosis. For example, skin conditions like warts or psoriasis have been 
cleared up, sometimes within minutes, by just using hypnosis. Problems swallowing, or 
with bowel movements, changing your blood sugar level, healing, for example. Hypnosis 
is used in many different cancer programs as an adjunct to the chemotherapy processes. 
Your immune system actually gets stronger when you're hypnotized. You can control 
bleeding and pain, which is of immense use to dentists.  
7

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
Beyond the physical realm, there are all kinds of other doors hypnosis opens up to you.  
 
For example, people under hypnosis are much better at problem solving, which is of 
tremendous value in businesses as well as in academic institutions. Your creativity gets 
better, so you can remove writer’s block, or you can help artists to create better and more 
creative works of art.  
 
Of course, there are the staple things like smoking and weight control, overcoming fears 
and phobias, increasing your confidence, and even your concentration and memory. All 
of these things can be improved with hypnosis. The skills that you're about to learn are 
not only fascinating, but they are highly practical tools for improving everybody’s life.  
 
Unmasking The Myths Of Hypnosis 
Track 3 7:27 
 
Now that you know a little bit about what hypnosis is capable of, we need to address 
some of the limitations built into hypnosis, some of the myths that people have around 
hypnosis. People do think that hypnosis is an all-powerful force that controls people’s 
minds, is capable of leaping tall buildings, and doing all kinds of crazy things. As a 
hypnotist you really need to understand what you can achieve, and what the limits are to 
what is possible with hypnosis. 
 
Myth 1: Hypnotic Mind Control 
One of the first limits is this idea of mind control. Mind control hypnosis does not exist. 
When someone is hypnotized, they are not your slave. They are not someone who has to 
do everything you tell them to. In hypnosis they merely want to do more of the things you 
suggest to them.  
 
However, there are limits. For example, you cannot get someone to break their moral 
code under hypnosis. You can’t force someone to commit a crime like murder or theft if 
they wouldn’t be willing to do that crime under normal circumstances anyway.  
 
The reverse is also true. You can't treat criminal behavior with just hypnosis. You need to 
have the person’s will included in the process. If someone is, for example, a 
kleptomaniac—that is to say, someone who has to keep stealing things, but they want to 
stop stealing—then hypnosis can be used tremendously well.  
 
If someone is a thief and doesn’t care about being a thief, then hypnosis will do nothing 
to change that person. If it worked differently then we wouldn’t need prisons. We would 
just send hypnotists in and we’d solve all those problems that are currently faced by the 
prison population.  
 
8

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
In hypnosis, your mind is still under your control. The difference is that in hypnosis you 
get to experience things that you otherwise would not allow yourself to experience. As a 
result, you get to enjoy a different kind of life. You get to test out what life would be like 
if the world was different. If you like it, you get to keep it.  
 
Myth 2: Hypnotic Sleep 
Hypnosis is not mind control, and just like hypnosis isn’t mind control, another thing that 
hypnosis isn’t—and this is a big myth—hypnosis is not sleep. You may even use sleep as 
a suggestion in order to put someone into hypnosis, but it's not the kind of sleep that 
people normally think about.  
 
At nighttime you go to sleep and you dream, and for the most part of the night we are 
unaware. We are totally unconscious. Our mind just sort of disappears somewhere and 
then returns back to use again in the morning. Some of us, of course, have a bit more 
awareness of our dream time, as well. For the most part there is a clear distinction 
between being awake and being asleep.  
 
Hypnosis is a blurring of that distinction. You're not quite the same way you are when 
you walk around everyday wide awake, but you're not quite the same as you are when 
you're fully asleep, either. In hypnosis, you are totally aware of almost everything around 
you.  
 
In fact, in hypnosis you tend to be more aware of things going on around you. You’re 
more aware of sounds. You're more aware of where the sound of someone’s voice is; for 
example, the hypnotist’s. You're more aware of feelings and sensations.  
 
In hypnosis you tend to be more aware rather than less aware. Whilst yes, it is possible to 
have a type of hypnosis where people’s minds disappear and come back after a while, 
that is the exception rather than the norm.  
 
Myth 3: Hypnotic Memory Loss 
Tied to this idea is the idea of amnesia. People think that when they wake up from 
hypnosis, come out of hypnosis, that they’ll have forgotten everything that’s happened. 
They’ll know what happened before and they’ll know what happened after, but nothing 
of what happened in between.  
 
Again, whilst this can be suggested—in other words, you can take people’s memory of 
hypnosis away by suggesting the idea, suggesting that they forget something—the 
general rule is that unless you do that, people will tend to remember everything. Hypnosis 
is not sleep, and hypnosis will not cause you to forget things unless it’s specifically 
suggested to you. 
 
9

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Myth 4: Getting Stuck In Hypnosis 
Another concern that people have is related to this idea of sleep. What if you never wake 
up? What if you hypnotize someone and you can't get them back out?  
 
This is a very simple myth to bust through right now. It’s impossible to happen. The very 
worst thing that will ever happen if you hypnotize someone is that—even if you leave the 
room, if you die, or move into another state—that person will merely fall asleep. Then 
they will wake up after half an hour, an hour, maybe a couple of hours, having had the 
world’s best sleep ever.  
 
Hypnotic Fact: You Must Cancel Old Suggestions 
It is important when you bring someone out of hypnosis that you make sure you cancel 
all the suggestions. You don’t want to have them being active. For example, if you 
suggest to someone that their hands are stuck, or their eyes are stuck and they can't open 
them, you want to make sure you remove those suggestions before they come out of 
hypnosis. You do this to make sure that those suggestions don’t carry on for the rest of 
their life. That is something that you have to pay attention to.  
 
Troubleshooting Tip: What If They Won’t Wake Up? 
As to whether or not someone will come out of hypnosis, that will always happen. 
Sometimes you'll have to work a little bit harder. You see, sometimes people enjoy the 
hypnotic trance so much that they don’t want to come back. They're enjoying it so much 
that when you say, “Come back,” they’ll say, “Well, I want to stay here a little bit 
longer.”  
 
As a hypnotist, if you know that, it's not a big deal. You can either leave them there to 
enjoy the trance for a little bit longer, or you can become more insistent that they come 
back. Either way, there is really no danger that people get stuck in hypnosis. 
 
To recap, hypnosis is not mind control. You cannot force people to do things against their 
will, or their ethics. You can, however, help them to do things that they do want to do or 
have difficulty getting through; for example, changing a habit, et cetera.  
 
Hypnosis is not sleep. People will remember everything that’s happened and they will be 
fully aware during the hypnotic process. Hypnosis is also not for forgetting. In other 
words, when they come out of hypnosis people will tend to remember everything that’s 
happened inside. Hypnosis is not sleep, and people will not forget what's happened there.  
 
There is no danger that people will get stuck in hypnosis, either. People will just fall 
asleep naturally and then emerge from a normal, natural sleep, feeling refreshed. If you're 
more insistent and insist they come back, generally then, they will do this. 
 
10

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Myth 5: Revealing Dark Secrets 
The final myth that I want to address is the idea about people telling you their secrets. 
People have a feeling that when they get hypnotized they're vulnerable, that they’ll start 
opening themselves up and exposing things that they're not ready to expose.  
 
Whilst hypnosis can be used in order to open doors that are normally kept locked, it is 
usually done in a way to help people overcome difficulties and problems about 
themselves. In other words, it's done with their consent. It's done with their desire.  
 
Whilst they will not be revealing their deepest darkest secrets to you in hypnosis, what 
you can use hypnosis for is this idea of hypnotic rapport. You can create such an intense 
connection with another person under hypnosis that they’ll feel like they want to share 
ideas with you which they wouldn’t share with other people. That is absolutely possible.  
 
Remember again, at this point it's a choice. They feel like they're connected. They feel 
like telling you, so they'll tell you. In hypnosis, people can still keep their secrets; unless, 
of course, they really decide that they want to tell you. 
 
So What is Hypnosis Really? 
Track 4 7:56 
 
Let's turn our attention now to the psychological principles behind hypnosis. I'd like for 
you to really understand what hypnosis is, that it's not a magical state. It's not a magical 
power that comes out of your eyes that you're born with.  
 
Hypnosis is a psychological process. That means if you go through the right steps, if the 
mind goes through the right set of experiences, then every single human being will go 
into hypnosis.  
 
Some people will be easier to hypnotize than others. It has nothing to do with willpower, 
or anything like that. It has only got to do with their ability to go through the very 
processes, the very steps, and recreate the conditions that we’re about to look at. 
 
Definition Of Hypnosis 
Let's look at what hypnosis is, first of all, in a definition. I would define hypnosis as a 
naturally and highly focused state, in which the conscious mind does not interfere with an 
unconscious process.  
 
Let me repeat that: 
 
It’s a natural and highly focused state, in which the conscious mind, or one part of the 
mind, does not interfere with another part of the mind. 
 
11

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
Everyday Hypnosis 
The reason that I define it in this way is because hypnosis is actually a very natural 
phenomenon. People go into trances every single day without knowing about it. In fact, 
it's a very healthy thing to do. That’s because in these natural mini-trances you will 
naturally allow your mind to absorb information, or process stuff, that’s been going 
through your mind at that point.  
 
Maybe you have had the experience of kind of staring off into space, thinking of nothing 
in particular. When someone asks you, “What are you thinking about?” you literally have 
to say, “Nothing.” You have no recollection of what you're thinking about. That was a 
kind of mini-trance experience.  
 
At other times you can be so deeply aware of, or absorbed in, your thoughts. Perhaps 
you're thinking about a future project or working on problem. Perhaps you're just 
engaged in a daydream, and you're so fixated on the ideas that are running through your 
mind that you completely neglect the environment around you. Someone might walk into 
the room, or out of the room, and perhaps start talking to you. You simply don’t notice 
because you're so absorbed in your own thoughts. That is another example of a hypnotic 
event. 
 
Perhaps you’ve read a book and been so absorbed by the character that you're reading 
that time, maybe hours, fly by; and it feels like minutes. The same is true of films that 
you’ve watched. Certainly you’ve had the experience of watching a film—or reading a 
book or hearing a story—that has moved you so much that you begin to have an 
emotional experience.  
 
Just think about this. How can you have an emotional experience when just reading lines 
of text in a book, or watching a flittering light on a screen? Your mind has to suspend 
normal reality, enter the reality of the story in the book or the film, and then have an 
emotional reaction to that as though it were real on some level. Otherwise it would be 
meaningless to you. These are natural examples of hypnosis happening on every single 
day.  
 
Hypnosis is a very natural phenomenon. I want you to understand this because inducing 
trance is a lot easier when you understand that people will slip in and out of these things 
totally naturally, every single day.  
 
Also, on the next CD on “Covert Transfers” I will show you how to use this natural 
phenomenon, in order to induce hypnosis in people in a way that they will never even 
know hypnosis has occurred. Hypnosis is a totally natural state. It happens all the time. 
 
12

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Focus Their Attention 
The next thing you have to look out for is focus, concentration, awareness, attention. 
These are the tools that a hypnotist works with. If you don’t have someone’s attention, if 
you don’t have their focus or their awareness, it's very difficult to induce a trance in 
someone. It can be done, but it's a highly sophisticated technique and there are a lot of 
problems with it. In 99.99% of the time, if you want to induce a trance you need their 
attention. You need their attention focused on something, an idea or a thought.  
 
Monoideism 
One of the first hypnotists was a man called James Braid, who elevated hypnosis outside 
of the esoteric, or the occult or the field of magic, and brought it into the field of science. 
He called it monoideism. Monoideism stands for a single thought or idea dominating the 
thinking process. That tends to create hypnosis.  
 
Think about it. All the examples I gave you tend to be examples where your attention was 
focused completely on one thought or an idea. Even when hypnosis isn’t specifically 
focused, for example when you're blankly staring off into space, the attention is still 
gathered in one point. You're not jumping around from one topic to the other, et cetera. 
 
When you want to induce a trance with someone, the key first step you're always trying 
to achieve is to collect all of their attention and focus it as closely as possible on either an 
idea, or a point, or something. You need to collect all their attention. 
 
Bipass The Critical Factor 
The next thing is the idea of interference. Think of parts of the conscious mind running 
interference, like listening to a radio with static. Every day we have all these random 
thoughts firing across from left, right, and center, which can kind of distract us a little bit.  
 
In an everyday sense of the word, we can still carry on. Life, internally speaking, is fine. 
In hypnosis, that mental static can interfere with the process. When you create a 
suggestion, you can have static shooting across which will negate the effect of that 
suggestion.  
 
One of the key things we need to do is to shut down a specific part of the mind called the 
critical factor, the critical mind. It's that part of the mind that rejects information, that 
says, “That’s not right. That’s not true. That’s impossible.” All these ideas have to be put 
on hold for a moment. 
 
Let's use the example again of watching a film. When you watch a film, you know 
somewhere in the back of your mind that it's not real. Whilst you’re watching the film 
you get absorbed into it. You suspend your judgment.  
 
You're not constantly sitting there going, “That’s not possible. That’s not possible. That 
will never happen.” If you do that, that’s the kind of film you don’t enjoy. That’s because 
13

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
in the very act of saying, “That’s impossible. I don’t like that. That doesn’t ring true. That 
would never happen,” if you're doing that during a film, then you’ve broken the hypnotic 
element of it and you don’t enjoy the film.  
 
Every single film that you’ve enjoyed is a film where you’ve just let yourself run away 
with the experience of it, where you haven’t analyzed whether or not it's possible. If it's a 
big fantasy film, or a science fiction film, you don’t think to yourself, “That’s not 
possible. It would never happen.” You just enjoy the experience of it, because that critical 
factor part of your mind has been put on hold for a brief moment in time, which allows 
you to experience a different reality for a while. That is the key for hypnosis. 
 
They 4 Keys To Hypnosis 
The keys to hypnosis are very simple.  
 
1. We want to evoke a natural stage.  
2. We're going to use their focus or their concentration to begin to do this.  
3. We need to put to sleep, we need to quiet down things that inhibit things, in other 
words the critical factor.  
4. We want to somehow stimulate the unconscious mind to take part in the hypnotic 
process, to actually make things come true as you suggest them. 
 
I want you to remember these keys in the back of your mind as we are going through this 
program. That’s because I'm going to teach you how to use those keys in a very specific 
way, in order to induce a trance in almost any person, any time, anywhere. Before we do 
that, however, let's take a quick look at safety in hypnosis, so that you use your hypnotic 
skills in a safe way and as a force for good with people. 
 
Important: The Hypnotic Safety Protocols 
Track 5 6:58 
 
Let’s turn to safety in hypnosis. The good news is that hypnosis is, generally speaking, a 
very safe state. In other words, you can't really do things wrong in hypnosis. Unless, of 
course, you would be doing it wrong out of hypnosis, as well.  
 
Safety Protocol 1: Use Common Sense! 
The first thing I want to say is, “Use your common sense.” The kind of things that you 
say to people in a normal, everyday world; if they're going to be positive in that 
environment, they’ll be positive in hypnosis as well. If you say to someone, “You're 
looking great. You’re a fantastic person. I like you as a human being,” as a suggestion, 
the impact of that is even better than when you say it in a normal conversational context.  
 
However, the reverse is also true. If you tell someone that they're no good, that they are a 
bad person, that you dislike them, that they smell or are stupid or incapable of anything, 
14

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
just as much as this kind of curse can do damage to someone in a normal conversation, in 
hypnosis the kind of negative hypnosis that comes out of that can be even worse. 
 
As a rule of thumb, use your common sense. Make sure that the experiences that you give 
people are pleasant experiences. Make them imagine pleasant scenes, not an unpleasant 
one. Tell them pleasant things, not unpleasant things. Remind them about the positive 
side of themselves, not the negative side of themselves.  
 
In doing so, you're orienting their mind and making it focus on positive things. In that 
way hypnosis becomes a force for good, not a force for something bad. As long as you're 
keeping your wits about you and you're keeping things relatively positive, there is really 
not much that can go wrong. 
 
There are a couple of important things or situations to avoid in hypnosis, to make sure 
that it remains a force for good and is a safe, pleasant experience for everyone involved.  
 
Safety Protocol 2: Don’t Hypnotise These People! 
The first thing to avoid is a certain type of person, and by that I mean someone who has 
got a mental illness, who is clinically depressed, or someone that suffers from epilepsy. 
You see, all of these conditions, whilst you can use hypnosis to work with them, require 
specialist knowledge. You can accidentally trigger off things in hypnosis that you do not 
want to trigger off.  
 
If you are with someone who has got a mental illness, is clinically depressed, in other 
words is seeing a psychiatrist over this, or has epilepsy, do not use hypnosis with that 
person, just to remain on the safe side. If you do want to use hypnosis with people like 
this, then I recommend that you go and get better training. Give yourself full training as a 
hypnotherapist and find out how to work with those people. Otherwise, just stay clear of 
them and you'll make sure that you avoid all kinds of problems. 
 
Safety Protocol 3: Stay Clear Of Regressions 
The second thing to stay clear of is something that actually fascinates a lot of people. 
This is known as a hypnotic regression. In hypnosis you have the ability to move 
someone back in time and make them mentally younger, so that they are the same as they 
were when they were five years old. Their experiences are the same that they had when 
they were that age. 
 
If you regress someone back to their fifth birthday, sixth birthday, tenth birthday party 
and they have that experience all over again as though they were there right now and it's 
all happening around them, they have the mental age of that person. That can be a 
charming experience for a lot of people, but what about those people who had a very 
unpleasant experience? What about those people who were traumatized at that age? 
Perhaps a parent died during the birthday party. Perhaps they were abused and their 
abuser was at that party as well?  
15

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
For those people you might trigger off what's called an abreaction; in other words, an 
intense, emotional experience which has a traumatic impact. You want to avoid doing 
this. The thing is, you're not going to know ahead of time who is safe to work with 
regression and who isn’t. As a rule of thumb, just stay clear of them. Again, if you want 
to work with regressions, it's not that you can't do it. Just get more training in order to 
avoid the possible negative consequences that you can release on doing so. 
 
Important Troubleshooting Tip: How To Handle A Spontaneous 
Abreaction 
One important thing concerning an abreaction: this intense, negative emotional 
experience usually has some kind of trauma attached to it. It’s something that can 
sometimes happen, on a very rare occasion, spontaneously in someone as they go into 
hypnosis. Just to give you some perspective, in over 15 years of practice it has never 
happened to me, not once. I have sought out those experiences on purpose. Yes, that is 
part of hypnotherapy, but I have never had it happen to me spontaneously. 
 
Should it ever happen spontaneously, the solution is very simple. Number one you must 
keep your cool. Stay calm and in control, because the person is looking to you for 
guidance. If you begin to get nervous, if you begin to freak out, that’s going to make 
them feel worse. The very first thing you do is you stay calm and in control.  
 
The next thing you do is you make sure you do not touch the person. You do not want to 
touch that person because when they're in hypnosis, especially when they're having a 
strong emotional experience, if you touch them you might create what's called a 
“hypnotic trigger.” If that touch becomes a trigger and then someone else touches them in 
the same place later on, it might trigger off the same abreaction again. You do not want 
that. You do not want them associating those negative experiences to your touch or to 
anything else that’s possible. 
 
Number three is to get them out of that experience as quickly and safely as possible. To 
do that is actually quite straightforward. You just tell them, “That experience is fading 
right now. Let it recede into the past. It's fading, fading, fading. You're safe here in the 
present, right now.”  
 
You’re creating a distinction between the experience that they’ve just triggered by 
accident, and being safe in the present moment. You're making one experience, the 
negative experience, fade away totally calmly, like nothing has happened and you're 
bringing back the present. So those words again, “That experience is fading and you're 
coming back to the present moment, right here in this room with me, feeling safe and 
secure.”  
 
Sometimes it will take me a little bit of time to make that distinction, at which point just 
emphasize, “That experience is fading, fading, fading. It’s moving away, and you're safe 
16

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
and secure right now, in the present. Safe and secure right now, in the present, in the 
room with me, here and now.”  
 
Do you notice how I'm just using my language to create that distinction, and to 
emphasize it until they can follow through my suggestion and allow that experience to 
fade away, and they come back safe and secure into the present?  
 
At that point bring them out of hypnosis. No matter what happens, bring them out of 
hypnosis. Give them a few moments to reorient, and then if they decide they want to have 
an experience again of hypnosis, feel free to rehypnotize them. Chances are that 
everything will be fine. If they decide they don’t want to be rehypnotized, then just leave 
them.  
 
If you follow these simple guidelines, then all the hypnotic experiences you will have 
will be completely safe, and will be experienced as a tremendous force for good by all the 
people that you work with. 
 
The Master Keys To Hypnosis 
Track 6 9:38 
 
Now you're ready to begin hypnotizing people. We looked in the previous tracks as to 
what hypnosis was and how it works and the psychological principles that drive it. I'd 
like to give you a simple formula, which will allow you to encapsulate everything you’ve 
learned so far, and understand pretty much every single hypnotic process that you'll ever 
go through. 
 
The Golden Rule For Hypnosis Masters: The ABS Formula 
This is one of the so-called master keys to hypnosis. If you understand this formula, 
which I will call ABS, you will understand all the hypnotic techniques you'll ever come 
across. ABS is an acronym.  
 
A stands for Attention,  
B stands for Bypass the critical factor, and  
S stands for Stimulate the unconscious mind.  
 
If you think back to our definition of hypnosis being a natural and highly focused state of 
awareness, where the conscious mind does not interfere with an unconscious process, you 
begin to understand how ABS kind of condenses all that knowledge into a very simple 
formula.  
 
The very first thing you must always do in hypnosis is you must get someone’s attention. 
The first step is you always want to get their attention riveted onto something. Get their 
concentration. The next step is to bypass the critical factor, to bypass the conscious mind, 
17

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
or at least that part of the conscious mind that analyzes, criticizes, and rejects 
information. We’ll look again at techniques using that in a moment. 
 
Finally, once they are in a kind of trance, there is no point having them there unless you 
can do something with it. This is where you want to stimulate the unconscious mind. I'm 
going to show you some simple tools for stimulating the unconscious mind so that you 
can actually have a hypnotic effect on people very, very quickly. 
 
ABS is the formula that every single hypnotic process must go through. You need to have 
their attention. You need to bypass the critical factor, this interference mechanism, and 
you will stimulate their unconscious mind using the various techniques that we will look 
at.  
 
Hypnosis Master Key 1: Relaxation 
Another master key for hypnosis is the concept of relaxation. Relaxation is really a 
doorway into hypnosis, into trance. It doesn’t mean to say that you can't do hypnosis 
without relaxation, because you can. You can absolutely get someone to go into hypnotic 
trance without ever mentioning the word relaxation. 
 
However, when you use relaxation as a doorway into hypnosis, it's a lot easier on the 
person and actually a lot easier on yourself as the hypnotist, as well. It makes for a very 
pleasant experience. You want to use relaxation as one of the primary tools for getting 
people into hypnosis. 
 
Hypnosis Master Key 2: Imagination 
The next master key is the imagination. We are usually brought up thinking about the 
imagination as something silly, something to pay no attention to. If a child has a 
nightmare and comes to their parents what do they say? “Oh, it was just your 
imagination, honey. Don’t worry about it. There are no monsters under your bed.”  
 
With these kinds of ideas, we develop at least intellectual understanding of the 
imagination as it isn’t powerful, that the imagination isn’t real, and we should pay no 
attention to it.  
 
However, there is a general rule that where the imagination and the will conflict, the 
imagination always will win. 
 
Here's an example. Let's imagine that you have some lovely chocolate cake in the fridge. 
All day you're thinking about that cake. You're thinking, “I shouldn’t eat that cake. I 
shouldn’t have that cake.” You're making pictures inside of your mind of wanting to eat 
that cake, of how delicious it looks, of the way it smells, the way it’s glistening. You're 
imagining eating it and the pleasure you'll get from it.  
 
18

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
All the time you're telling yourself you mustn’t do it. You must wait, or you’ll just have a 
little bit, or whatever. At some point you might even go to the fridge and open the door 
and check out what it looks like. Then you close the fridge and come back and do it all 
over and over again, until eventually you know you're going to be eating that cake.  
 
The reason the imagination wins is because it kind of wormed its way into the 
unconscious mind; as part of a language of how the unconscious mind thinks and 
communicates and perceives the world. In fact, there is an old saying in hypnosis that the 
unconscious mind cannot distinguish between something that’s imagined and something 
that’s real. As a very rough rule that is quite accurate. There are, of course, limits—like in 
every other rule—that make it less accurate in total scientific rarity.  
 
Think of it in that way, that where the will and the imagination conflict, the imagination 
will tend to win. Think that if you imagine something, your unconscious mind cannot tell 
the difference between what you're imagining and what is real, unless you do a couple of 
other steps to tell it what's real and what's imagined. We’re going to use that power 
within the hypnosis session in order to make your suggestions more real to people. You 
may have actually heard this being done when you’ve watched a hypnotist maybe doing a 
stage show, or you listened to hypnosis tape. 
 
For example, let's say you want to have someone’s arm become stiff and rigid. Not very 
practical in terms of medicine or improving someone’s life, but it's an interesting 
demonstration. To do that you might want to suggest that “the arm is getting stiffer, 
harder and harder, stiffer and stiffer.”  
 
That’s great, using normal language.  
 
Then to make things even more compelling, more real to the unconscious, you can say 
something like, “Imagine that arm is a steel bar. It's an iron bar, an iron bar that won't 
bend. It's steel and strong like an iron bar. Feel it becoming stronger like an iron bar.” 
 
At that point the mental image of an iron bar and all the associations that we have to do 
with that iron bar get triggered off in your mind and your unconscious mind thinks, “Oh, 
I'll make that arm like an iron bar.” It begins to understand the metaphorical and 
symbolic understandings.  
 
If you imagine another context, for example walking down a dark alley, it begins to speed 
up your heart rate. Your unconscious mind thinks at some level that you're actually doing 
it and you might be in danger. You're going to use these things in order to augment the 
power of the suggestion that you're going to give to people. 
 
Hypnosis Master Key 3: Repetition 
The next master key in hypnosis is repetition. The unconscious mind sometimes needs 
time to absorb an idea, or to activate it. You need to give it a little bit of time to do what it 
19

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
does. In the meantime, you may want to repeat the suggestions several times to begin to 
enforce it.  
 
There are all kinds of reasons why you're going to do this which we won't get into at the 
moment. Just think of it in terms of creating little layers. Each suggestion is like taking 
out a pencil, or a little stick of wood, and adding one on top of the other.  
 
The first stick of wood may or may not be strong enough to take the weight of what you 
wanted to do. The second stick of wood again may or may not be able to do it. When you 
have three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten little sticks of wood all tied together, it 
starts getting stronger and stronger and stronger.  
 
It's a very rough rule of thumb, but by the time you’ve suggested something about 12 or 
15 times it really begins to worm its way inside their mind, click the right button to 
activate something. Use repetition. Use repetition to repeat ideas. Use repetition in these 
sessions.  
 
You can formulate the suggestions in slightly different ways each time, or in exactly the 
same way. It doesn’t really matter so much, but you want to throw it back over and over 
and over again to really begin to dominate someone’s thinking, so that the unconscious 
mind latches on to that idea and makes that idea real. 
 
Hypnosis Master Key 4: Positive Focus 
The last master key in hypnosis that I want to talk about right now is positive focus. As a 
rule, you want your suggestions to be about positive things. Not just about personal life 
experiences, but also to be focused on what you want to have happen, rather than not.  
 
For example you don’t want to be saying to people, “Don’t get stressed.” If they’re 
stressed, move away. It's better to focus them on the positive.  
 
For example, “Feel the relaxation. As the stress releases, feel the relaxation, the comfort, 
the warmth, and the good feelings.”  
 
Why?  
 
Because at some level, the unconscious mind will tend to activate the whole phrase, and 
rather than having to make the extra step of reversing a negative, you can just take the 
whole phrase and run with it.  
 
If I tell you, for example, to “not think of a red cat, don’t think of a red cat sitting in a red 
tree, don’t think of the red cat sitting in the red tree speaking to you right now.”  
 
Of course, in order to not think of the red cat, you’ve got to think of the red cat first in 
order to negate it. There is a double step, two sequences you go through before you can 
actually come up with the outcome.  
20

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
With hypnosis, to make life easy on the subject just tell them exactly what you want them 
to do, rather than what you don’t want them to do. Whilst it is possible to give a negative 
suggestion and have it work, sticking to this general rule of thumb will make your life 
much easier and will make sure you get much better successes, whilst avoiding some of 
the problems that might happen if you choose a different style of suggestion.  
 
With these four master keys—the relaxation key, the imagination key, the repetition key, 
and the positive focus—you have the makings of your first induction. It's going to be 
some very elegant stuff that you’ve built into this. On the next track I'm going to run you 
through the whole process that will allow you to start inducing trances in your friends, 
your colleagues, your family, and random strangers. 
 
Your Step By Step Guide To Hypnotising Your First Person 
Track 7 10:19 
 
Now that you have all the tools, how do you use them? You have the ingredients, but 
what's the recipe for hypnosis?  
 
I'm going to boil down pretty much every single hypnotic induction that can possibly 
exist into four simple steps.  
 
These four simple steps are things that you can actually use as an induction by 
themselves, and I'll show you how in a moment. We can work that into the quick 
inductions at the end of this program, and you'll understand that they all follow the exact 
same four steps in the exact same sequence.  
 
The 4 Steps Of Every Hypnotic Process 
The four steps are very simple.  
 
1. Number one is induce trance.  
2. Number two is deepen the trance.  
3. Number three, stimulate the unconscious mind and make your suggestions.  
4. Number four, bring them back out.  
 
It's as simple as that. 
 
The Ten Second Hypnotist 
If you're going to take that idea, we can actually turn that into a very simple induction 
which I call “The Ten Second Hypnotist.” I call it “The Ten Second Hypnotist” because, 
technically speaking, you can induce a trance in someone in about ten to fifteen seconds 
when you do this well.  
 
21

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Here is “The Ten Second Hypnotist” in action.  
 
Step 1: Close Your Eyes 
First of all, you just ask them to close their eyes and go into a trance.  
 
Step 2: Go Deeper 
The next thing you do is you get them to associate something that you do, for example a 
touch on the shoulder, to go in deeper. “Every time I touch you on the shoulder, you'll go 
deeper and deeper and deeper.” 
 
Step 3: Stimulate The Unconscious 
The third thing that you do is begin to talk directly to the unconscious mind. At this point 
in your training as a hypnotist, you can just say things directly which are positive like, 
“You can enjoy this trance. You can enjoy this relaxation. You become a better and 
healthier person as a result of being in hypnosis.”  
 
Use some very simple, direct suggestions. 
 
Step 4: End The Session 
The fourth part is to bring them back out of hypnosis. Give them the process to do this. 
For example, “In a moment I'm going to count from one to three. At the count of three 
you'll open your eyes feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert; simply fantastic.”  
 
That’s it. That’s the whole induction in a nutshell. Now don’t worry. I'm going to take 
you through those steps step-by-step in a moment’s time, so you can understand each one 
of them and actually use it.  
 
Set Yourself Up For success With The Hypnotic Preframe 
Before going through it step-by-step though, I want to talk about something very 
important on how to use this as an actual induction. This is called a preframe. This is how 
you set up the induction to give it its best chances of succeeding.  
 
The preframe for this induction is to ask someone, or to tell someone, to just pretend to 
go into hypnosis. Just make do, just make believe as though they go into hypnosis and 
just how to activate the characteristics. Stand how they think a hypnotized person would 
stand or sit, breathe the way they think a hypnotized person would breathe, think the way 
they think a hypnotized person would think, those sorts of things. In other words, allow 
them to just get carried away with the process.  
 
22

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Now the secret reason for getting this pretend frame around this whole thing is because 
the unconscious mind actually doesn’t know how to pretend. If you pretend something 
for long enough, you will end up forgetting that you're pretending and just tend to 
activate it, make it real.  
 
This is particularly true of hypnosis. People will start off pretending it, but unless they 
keep reminding themselves that they're just pretending it—in other words, they are just 
going along with your instructions—then they're actually going to go into hypnosis. 
That’s because they’ll forget that they're pretending and end up having the experience 
instead, particularly when it's as novel as the experience of hypnosis is. So it's a very 
powerful frame to set around things, and can get you very quick results.  
 
Looking at those steps again, we’re going to look at them step-by-step and introduce 
them. You may just want to practice this out loud in the air, maybe with a pillow out in 
front of you that pretends that it is a person. You may just want to grab someone, if 
you're adventurous, and do it right along with me as you go through this following 
process. 
 
Step 1 In Detail: Close Your Eyes 
Step one is very simple. Just look at them and say, “Close your eyes and go into 
hypnosis.” It's as simple as that. “Close your eyes and go into hypnosis.”  
 
It's important that you tie all this together, the closing of the eyes and going into 
hypnosis, because if they get tied together inside the mind then they’ll do it. You don’t 
need to add any frills. Just say, “Close your eyes and go into hypnosis.” That is really 
easy. 
 
Step 2 In Detail: Go Deeper 
As soon as you’ve done that, go on to step two. Step two is very simple.  
 
“Every time I…” Then here mention something that you can do that they can experience.  
 
You can mention something that they can hear or something that they can feel. Don’t 
mention something that they can see, because with their eyes closed they probably won't 
be seeing it.  
 
You get an activity that they can perceive, something that they can feel or hear, and you 
attach to that the idea that they go deeper into hypnosis. “Every time that I pick up your 
hand and drop it like so, you'll go deeper and deeper and deeper.” Every time you say 
the word deeper you just do the activity.  
 
A simple way for me to demonstrate this here is to say something like, “Every time you 
hear me say the word ‘deeper’ you're going to go deeper and deeper and deeper!”  
 
23

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
You see, now I'm actually using the word that you're hearing as a deepening mechanism 
at the same time. It’s kind of like combining both activities into one thing, at the same 
time.  
 
Step 3 In Detail: Stimulate The Unconscious 
Step three is the general suggestion phase. At this point just let your imagination run wild 
with the positive things you can say to people. In fact, if anyone has ever said anything 
positive to you, something that has a positive impact on you, “You're smart. You're 
clever. You can go for it,” these are the kinds of things you can say at this point.  
 
Another thing that you can say at this point, for example, is just to stimulate their 
imagination by describing a beautiful scene. The typical way to do this is just to grab a 
scene from nature, a lakeside scene, or a walk through the forest, a mountain top, that 
kind of thing. Give people the experience of doing that just by describing the scene, so 
that they can mentally take a relaxation break with you.  
 
The important thing is if you're going to do that, check with the person before you begin 
the hypnosis. Ask whether or not the scene that you have in mind, for example the 
woodland scene, is actually something that they might enjoy, something that they find 
interesting. The reason for that is because very occasionally, someone has a negative 
reaction to it. For example, if you got lost as a child in the woods, you might have had 
built up experiences of fear which are around forests. Then a relaxing forest walk will be 
anything but relaxing for you.  
 
Remember, up to this point you're still going to be using your four master keys as much 
as you can during the induction. In other words, you're going to focus on the idea of 
relaxation. You're going to stimulate the imagination by describing vivid imagination 
pictures. You're going to repeat the suggestions over and over again, and you're going to 
keep them positive, both in the sense that they are pleasant experiences and in a sense 
that your language is telling them what is, and not what is not. 
 
Example of Steps 1-3 
For example, take the whole first three steps of the sequence.  
 
“Close your eyes and go into hypnosis, and as you feel my touch on your shoulder you 
can go deeper, and relax deeper, and feel the comfort of relaxation going deeper, and 
deeper, and deeper still. Of course as you are relaxing so comfortably I would like you to 
imagine a beautiful scene out in the woods.  
 
“The trees are around you and make you feel so relaxed. You can sense that beautiful 
scent that comes off those trees. As you smell that you can relax even more fully. When 
you relax and look at those trees, you might find a particularly comfortable spot in that 
woodland where you can just relax even more.  
 
24

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Step 4 In Detail: End The Session 
 “Take a few moments and bring yourself back. Count from one to three. You'll open your 
eyes refreshed, relaxed, alert; simply fantastic. One, coming out slowly. Two, three. Open 
your eyes feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert; simply fantastic.”  
 
So here is a quick demonstration of “The Ten Second Hypnotist” in action. Notice that 
I've already added the final steps that follow, which are to bring them back out of trance. 
It's called emergence; bringing them out of hypnosis.  
 
To do that, just add a simple process. “I'm going to count from one to three or one to 
five,” or whatever. Then something is going to happen at the end of that process. “At a 
count of three you'll open your eyes. You'll feel refreshed, relaxed, alert; simply 
fantastic.”  
 
Remember, if you’ve made a particular suggestion—for example, that they can't open 
their eyes or that they can't lift an arm—make sure that you specifically cancel each and 
every one of the suggestions that you’ve given that you don’t want carried on outside of 
hypnosis, as well. “You can open your eyes. Your arm feels normal. Every part of your 
awareness is back to normal again.”  
 
That’s just kind of a general way, or safety statement, of cancelling the suggestions that 
you don’t want to remain active.  
 
That’s “The Ten Second Hypnotist.” By itself it's a great induction. If you want to add 
even more power to it, just really focus on the relaxation element. Then at the point 
where you would normally do the deepener—in other words, “Every time you feel this 
you go deeper, deeper, and deeper”—at that point insert the point where you talk about 
different parts of the body; the head, the breathing the shoulders, the arms, the trunk, the 
legs, et cetera. Bring their awareness to it and tell them that it's going to relax it more and 
more and more—“So that every time you feel a touch on your shoulder, your arm is 
going to relax deeper, and deeper; relaxing, relaxing deeper, and deeper,”—that kind of 
language.  
 
On the next track you'll hear a whole version of this induction all the way through, from 
start to finish. I'm going to emphasize this particular theme of relaxation. You'll notice 
I'm doing two things. On the one side I'll be doing just a “Ten Second Hypnotist,” which 
could just take ten seconds as you just heard a moment ago.  
 
On the other side, I'm going to really emphasize the idea of relaxation. By focusing on 
different body parts and relaxing them, I take people into a very relaxed state of hypnosis. 
This way you get both types of inductions mixed together into one single one, to have a 
nice template that you can follow. 
 
Demonstration Of The Relaxation Induction 
Part 8 8:26 
25

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
Go ahead and close your eyes and go into hypnosis. Every time you hear me say the word 
“deeper” I want you to go deeper and deeper and deeper; relaxed into a most 
comfortable state of hypnotic awareness.  
 
Now pay attention to the top of your head and go deeper and deeper; relaxed. Allow your 
head to relax and you'll go deeper into hypnosis, because as you pay attention to the 
muscles around the eyes you can go deeper, and relax those muscles. You feel more and 
more comfortable, more and more relaxed, more and more at ease. Go deeper and 
deeper into hypnosis as you continue to listen to my voice and relax.  
 
Now pay attention to your shoulders and allow your shoulders to relax. Your shoulders 
can relax comfortably as you go deeper and deeper into hypnosis. The deeper you go into 
hypnosis, the more your shoulders relax. The more your shoulders relax, the deeper you 
go into hypnosis. You can continue listening to the sound of my voice as you relax and go 
deeper all the time. 
 
Pay attention to your left arm, and relax the muscles of your left arm. As the muscles of 
your left arm relax, just go deeper and deeper into hypnosis. Allow yourself to drift 
deeply and comfortably into hypnosis.  
 
Now pay attention to your right arm. Allow your right arm to relax you more and more 
deeply into hypnosis; your right arm relaxing, relaxing, relaxing, warm and comfortable. 
Pay attention to your breathing, and notice how your breathing is slowing down. It can 
take you deeper into hypnosis, as you just slow down and relax more and more deeply 
into hypnosis.  
 
Now pay attention to your chest and your stomach area. Allow your chest and your 
stomach area to just relax more and more comfortably, more and more deeply, more and 
more completely. As you go deeper and deeper and deeper into hypnosis, the sound of my 
voice will take you deeper and deeper into hypnosis.  
 
Now pay attention to your left leg. Allow your left leg to relax, comfortably taking you 
deeper and deeper still into a deep, hypnotic stage. Pay attention to all the sensations of 
relaxation and going deeper. Now pay attention to your right leg, and let your right leg 
relax deeply and completely, taking your mind deeper and deeper into the most 
comfortable, wonderful sense of hypnotic relaxation.  
 
Whilst you're relaxing this deeply, perhaps your unconscious mind can remind you of a 
pleasant scene, some pleasant place you’ve been to where you feel safe and comfortable, 
because as you remember that safe and comfortable place, your unconscious mind is 
learning to make you feel safe and comfortable more and more, throughout your life in 
more situations. As the days and the weeks and the months go by, you feel more 
comfortable as a person, more safe in your life, more secure in yourself, and you get to 
enjoy life, really enjoy life, more and more fully.  
 
26

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Now, in a moment it will be time for you to come back outside into your regular everyday 
state of awareness. In a moment I'm going to count from one to three. At the count of 
three you'll open your eyes feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert, simply fantastic; feeling as 
though you’ve had a refreshing, healthy night’s sleep; feeling as though all the good 
things in your life have suddenly activated all in one go.  
 
As I count to three you'll come up, and at the count of three you'll open your eyes, feeling 
refreshed, relaxed, alert; simply fantastic.  
 
So, ready to do that now. One, coming up slowly. Two, ready to come back. Three, open 
your eyes feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert; simply fantastic.  
 
Congratulations on completing your first, fully-fledged, hypnotic experience. 
 
Ten Quirky, Quick, Quality Inductions  
Track 9 10:22 
 
Welcome back again. Before we finish up on this CD I would like to run you through ten 
quick and easy inductions that basically follow the same kind of principles you've been 
learning about. Remember the key, the heart of all hypnosis is the formula ABS: 
Attention, Bypass the critical factor, Stimulate the unconscious mind. How can you use 
this to create further inductions that really expand into infinity?  
 
Induction 1: Blank Mind 
The first induction is very simple. The instructions are, “Close your eyes. Blank out your 
mind.”  
 
Then you're going to wait for a little while and you're going to come back and you're 
going to test whether or not they're in hypnosis by saying something like, “Your eyes are 
locked tightly shut. You cannot open your eyes. Try. Try and open your eyes, and notice 
how you’ll fail.”  
 
If at that point you see their eyebrows going up and they're trying, don’t let them try for 
too long. Just give them a few seconds to test it and then tell them to relax again and just 
carry on with your normal hypnotic procedure as before.  
 
That’s using the ABS formula very quickly, because closing your eyes and blanking their 
mind, that’s the bit where you get their attention with the closing of their eyes. Blanking 
their mind is the bit where you're basically saying, “Allow the critical factor to go away.” 
With a blank mind you're not thinking about analyzing stuff. You’re not thinking about 
the stuff that’s going on. It's one of the little secrets, or little twists, behind that induction. 
 
27

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Induction 2: The Crystal Ball Induction 
Another induction is very nice, particularly for the esoteric or the new age hippies, those 
kinds of people. I call it the Crystal Ball Induction. For this, just get a little crystal ball or 
a shiny marble. You're going to hold it up a little bit above eye level so they have to look 
up in order to see the shiny marble. It helps if there is a reflecting light that shines off of 
it, so that they can really focus their attention on that reflection.  
 
Get them to focus their attention on the marble and tell them that their eye is going to get 
sleepy, heavy and tired, more and more sleepy, more and more heavy. This is like the 
classic hypnotic induction that everyone thinks about. When their eyes start getting really 
tired, just tell them to close their eyes and go into trance.  
 
At that point just carry on exactly the same way as “The Ten Second Hypnotist.” If you 
like, you can even suggest that their eyes are getting heavy or locking down tight. They 
can't open their eyes. Then test that. It’s up to you which way you go.  
 
Remember, if you are going to test their eyes—in other words, you suggest that their eyes 
are locked tight, glued shut tightly, they can't open their eyes, try to open them up, et 
cetera—make sure that you remove the suggestion again afterwards. You can remove it 
again immediately when it's over, and before you awaken them make sure that you say 
that everything is back to normal. Specifically mention the eyes being back to normal and 
that they’ll be able to open them. They’ll be back to normal in every way.  
 
The next set of inductions is basically variations on the Crystal Ball Induction. There are 
five of these that I want to talk you through. They may look different, but the structure is 
exactly the same way. They're always going to be following the ABS formula. A, Absorb 
their attention; B, Bypass their critical mind by doing this; and S, Stimulate the 
unconscious mind. Together with the four steps of “The Ten Second Hypnotist,” you can 
really turn this into marvelous and very entertaining inductions. 
 
Induction 3: The Hypno Disk 
The first induction is the Hypno Disk Induction. Instead of using a crystal ball, you use a 
device called a hypno disk, which one of those hypnotic spirals you’ve seen. The way 
disks can be used is just by looking at the disk itself. It can help people to kind of lose 
themselves in the tunnel-like qualities.  
 
You may even choose to inter-rotate it gently, and that rotation effect has a slight sort of 
mind-bending effect as the optical illusion takes hold. Either way, you're again going to 
suggest that their eyes are getting sleepy, heavy and tired; that they're going into trance, 
and carry on as before. 
 
Induction 4: The Flashlight Induction 
Instead of using the hypno disk, you can use a more modern method by using something 
like a flashlight or a torch and using that light to shine into the eyes. Remember that if 
28

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
you do this, don’t shine the light directly into the eyes because it would be quite 
uncomfortable.  
 
At least if you're going to shine it directly into the eyes, make sure that the light bulb 
wattage is very low so it doesn’t hurt the eyes. The best thing to do, though, is to maybe 
shine the light just above the eyes. That way, when they look into it they're not looking 
directly into the glare of the torch or the flashlight, they're just looking at the light itself.  
 
Induction 5: The Two Finger Focus 
Another method that you can use for focusing their attention is simply your fingers. The 
good thing about your fingers is you'll be carrying them around wherever you go. You 
can do this induction wherever you go.  
 
The key again here is to keep your fingers about three or four inches away from their face 
and about an inch or two above the eye level. They have to really look up to see your 
fingers, causing a little bit of eye strain. Then you proceed as before. “Your eyes are 
getting heavy, sleepy, and tired,” and then, “Close your eyes,” and carry on as with “The 
Ten Second Hypnotist.” 
 
Induction 6: The Spot Induction 
One more variation which can be very useful, particularly if you have a specific place 
you like to do hypnosis, is to put a little spot on the wall and get them to focus on that. 
That saves you from having to hold your fingers up and creating fatigue in your own arm 
from holding those up and waiting for them to respond. Remember that all these 
inductions are basically the same induction, but you are using different focal points to 
kind of pull out different elements of the experience.  
 
Induction 7: The Pocket Watch Induction 
The final version is the Pocket Watch Induction. This is the classic only because 
everyone expects you to whip out the pocket watch and start swinging it from left to right 
and going into trance. Here is an interesting thing. If you are going to use the pocket 
watch, do not swing it from left to right. That’s actually more distracting and although 
you can induce trance that way, it tends to take away. It makes it a little bit harder to do.  
 
The best way to use a pocket watch is to hold the pocket watch up so that it's hanging 
about three or four inches away from the face and about an inch or two above eye level, 
so that they're really straining. They have to turn their eyes up to look at it.  
 
Then maybe you want to slightly twirl the pocket watch in the same place. The twirling 
effect will allow it to kind of catch the light and glint a little bit. That glint is going to 
attract your attention and that is going to help them to focus their attention.  
 
29

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Then you make the sleepy eyes suggestion, “Your eyes are getting sleepy, heavy and 
tired, sleepy, heavy and tired. That’s right. More and more sleepy, more and more heavy, 
more and more tired. Close your eyes.” 
 
From the point of the, “Close your eyes,” you just go right back into “The Ten Second 
Hypnotist” and it will work like a charm. 
 
So far we’ve covered about seven inductions. I want to have a few more inductions that 
you can run through in order to get the kind of hypnotic effects. The next one is called the 
Hypnotic Gaze. This is a wonderful induction. It feeds right into people’s expectation of a 
hypnotist, and is a lot of fun to do.  
 
Induction 8: The Hypnotic Gaze Induction 
For the Hypnotic Gaze, just as with the Crystal Ball Induction using a little crystal ball to 
fixate their attention, now you're going to use your eyes, your hypnotic eyes. There are a 
couple of secrets to make this work.  
 
Number one, if you find yourself going into hypnosis rather than them, you may want to 
look through their eyes. Or better still, look at the root of their nose, the space between 
where their eyes meet. As far as they're concerned, as you look at that spot it still looks as 
though you're looking at them, but for you it's a little bit less fatiguing to look there than 
directly into someone else’s eyes.  
 
Whilst you're looking directly inside their eyes you're doing the same thing as before. 
“Your eyes are getting sleepy, heavy and tired. Close your eyes.” For some reason, the 
Hypnotic Gaze actually is more powerful than many of the other focal points because 
when people look at us, we feel under emotional pressure as well.  
 
Be careful with this induction. Some people will start getting so nervous that they can't 
go into trance. If you see that happening, just switch to a different point of focus. 
 
Inductions 9 & 10: The Pendulum & Other Hypnotic Test Induction 
The final induction is actually a whole new type of induction. I call it the Pendulum Test 
or the Hypnotic Test Induction. You’ve seen all these suggestibility tests—people locking 
their hands together and swaying like a tree, et cetera. You can get a whole bunch of 
these for free off the Internet.  
 
The Pendulum Test is particularly good because I'm going to show you how to convert 
that test into a genuine hypnotic induction. Basically, the Pendulum Test is you hold it in 
the thumb and forefinger and you can swing it around like a pendulum does. Instead of 
you holding it as a hypnotist, you get them to hold it as a subject. You tell them to hold it 
and look at the pendulum.  
 
30

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Then you suggest to them that the pendulum will start moving forwards and backwards, 
forwards and backwards, or round and round and round and round. Paint a visual image 
of that pendulum going round and round and round, or forwards and backwards, 
whichever direction you choose. Choose one direction and stick to it.  
 
Then when the pendulum starts moving you might suggest something like, “Now you'll 
notice something interesting happens. No matter how hard you try and stop the pendulum 
going around and around, it's going to keep going round and round and round. You can't 
stop it.”  
 
At this point, if they activate on that suggestion, that’s it. Over. The trance is there. Just 
tell them to close their eyes, and just carry right on as if they're in deep hypnosis, which 
they probably are.  
 
If they can stop it, if you notice that it's slowing down or something like that, then stop 
suggesting that they try, and get them to close their eyes and go deeper into hypnosis. 
That way you carry on with the hypnosis before they get a chance to fail. Either way, 
they succeed.  
 
These are all wonderful inductions. They're exciting. They're interesting. They're 
different. They all use the principles you’ve already learned. ABS: Attention, Bypass the 
critical factor, Stimulate the unconscious mind.  
 
Together with “The Ten Second Hypnotist,” the four steps of any hypnotic induction, this 
gives you a really rich and rounded repertoire of hypnotic techniques in order to put 
people into hypnosis and make them feel good. Go ahead and use these and enjoy the 
results of your training. 
 
End Of CD 
Track 10 1:21 
 
This is the end of CD One. If you like the things you’ve discovered here and would like 
to explore the power of hypnosis more deeply, then come and have a look at my home 
study course called “The Secrets of Hypnosis Revealed.” You'll find all the details on my 
Web site:  
 
www.SecretsOfHypnosisRevealed.com 
 
It's all one word. 
 
On the next CD, you'll discover how to take the foundation you’ve just acquired and 
adapt it for covert hypnosis; how to use the power of hypnosis in your everyday 
conversation without anyone detecting what you're doing. I look forward to seeing you 
on that CD, where you'll find even more “Street Hypnosis Exposed.” 
 
31

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
Street Hypnosis Exposed 
CD 2 – Covert Hypnosis 
 
 
Introduction to CD2 
Track 1 1:49 
 
Welcome to “Street Hypnosis Exposed.” In this second CD, entitled “Covert Hypnosis, 
How to Use the Power of Hypnosis in Your Everyday Conversations,” I want to reveal 
my little-known method of covert hypnosis; hypnosis that sounds so natural that nobody 
will know you're doing it. 
 
During the course of the next hour you're going to learn the difference between covert 
and overt hypnosis; the secret language of covert hypnosis where I’ll teach you some 
master keys to use language so subtly that no one will know that you're doing it. You’re 
going to discover the hypnotic tonalities that will swoon people into trances and how to 
adapt the principles like imagination, so that you can fit it into everyday conversations.  
 
Then we’ll go into the actual hypnotic content. The Hypnotic Gaze induction is going to 
be adapted in a way that you can use it in any conversation, any time, any place, 
anywhere. Then I'll show you the Hypnotic Blitz, a way of overloading people’s minds 
with so much positive hypnotic force that their lives will just improve every time they're 
around you.  
 
Finally, we’re going to round off the session by looking at how to use hypnotic influence 
in everyday conversations. As soon as you're ready to do that just sit back, relax and 
enjoy “Street Hypnosis Exposed.” 
 
What Is Covert Hypnosis? 
Track 2 2:34 
 
Welcome back again. In this CD we’re going to focus on converting your skills from 
regular hypnosis into what is called covert hypnosis. There are basically two branches of 
the hypnotic family. There is the overt and the covert.  
 
Overt – v – Covert Hypnosis 
Overt basically means that people know that you're doing hypnosis. It's when you do an 
obvious induction. You go, “Relax, go deeper, close your eyes, sleepy, heavy,” that sort 
of stuff. 
32

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
A covert induction is one where people don’t really know that it's happening. The beauty 
about covert induction is, because they don’t know what's happening, it helps you 
overcome some problems that sometimes arrive in hypnosis; like people resisting you, for 
example.  
 
Covert hypnosis is a special branch of hypnosis which is, at its highest level, completely 
undetectable. You still have all the benefits of regular hypnosis in that people become 
more suggestible and more responsive to your ideas. Hence it's a great tool for motivating 
people and dissolving problems with people, before they even get stuck in them. 
 
The Key To Using Covert Hypnosis 
Even though this is a separate branch of hypnosis, it's different from regular hypnosis. 
Everything you’ve learned in the regular hypnosis in the “Hypnosis Uncovered” CD still 
counts, because hypnosis is still the foundation of covert hypnosis. Think of covert 
hypnosis as a very advanced form of hypnosis, which is more subtle and therefore more 
elegant. 
 
Of course, the key to covert hypnosis is how you use your language. In this way you can 
slip in and out of covert hypnosis during the course of an everyday normal conversation. 
That way you get to slip in your suggestions and increase your influence, your 
motivation, and all the other reasons for which you want to use hypnosis in normal 
everyday settings. 
 
Covert Hypnosis Is A Force For Good 
Please remember that when you're using these techniques, always use hypnosis as a force 
for good. The more you do this, the more the world opens up to you wonderful things.  
 
Never abuse your powers because let's face it, there is no real reason to. You can get 
everything you want in life, and more, by helping other people get everything they want 
out of life and more, too.  
 
This is one of the beauties about the power of hypnosis. It honestly and genuinely helps 
people to create a win-win, where everybody is better off than they would have been had 
they never interacted. With these thoughts, let us dive into the power of covert hypnosis. 
 
The Secret Language Of Hypnosis 
Track 3 7:44 
 
I would like to start things off by looking at the secret language of hypnosis. As 
hypnotists, language is our tool. We’re using words and language in order to do all the 
things that we need to, in order to make sure the mind enters the hypnotic state.  
 
33

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
We’re using language and words to get someone’s attention. We’re using language and 
words in order to bypass their critical factor. We're going to use language and words in 
order to stimulate their unconscious mind. 
 
There is a great power to language and it's something that you can use in a specific way 
in order to induce trances, but outside of their awareness. Everything that you learn here 
will, of course, help you and make your regular hypnosis even better. Used on their own, 
you can use the secret language of hypnosis in regular conversations and come across as 
more charismatic, more interesting, more compelling, and your ideas will be more 
influential.  
 
There are two master keys to mastering the secret language of hypnosis. The two master 
keys are flow and association. Let's take these two concepts and examine them for a little 
bit. The idea of flow is basically that you want ideas to run smoothly through the mind.  
 
Covert Hypnosis Master Key 1: A Smooth Flow 
Imagine a stream that’s running down a mountainside and just smoothly glides. As long 
as it's gliding smoothly it just creates this beautiful, seamless experience. Of course, if at 
any point there is a break—there's a dam, or something is in its way—the stream is going 
to start splashing. It's going to start making noise and it’s going to draw your attention.  
 
The part of your mind where attention is drawn is going to include that critical factor. 
When ideas are running smoothly and seamlessly it kind of lulls the critical factor to 
sleep. If there is a break, if there is something which breaks the idea or flow of ideas, 
breaks that kind of state of mind that is being created, at that point the critical factor 
snaps back in and starts analyzing all the things that happened immediately before it 
came back, just to be sure it hasn’t missed anything. Of course, that is exactly what you 
don’t want to have happen.  
 
Special Covert Hypnosis Principle 1: Pseudo Logic 
The interesting thing is that as long as you keep your ideas running smoothly, the longer 
you do it, the less you need to be logical. We’re going to talk about something called 
pseudo logic. A pseudo logic is something that basically sounds logical but isn’t 
necessarily logical. The beauty about pseudo logic is that it becomes a nice little stepping 
stone between being ready and aware and critically analyzing information; at which point 
you need to be more logical to prevent them from deleting their information.  
 
As you become more and more used to this flowing process, you throw in things which 
sound like they should be logical, sound reasonable, but if they were to investigate them 
might not necessarily be so. Eventually you’ll get to a point where anything you say 
sounds reasonable and fair and right, even though there is no necessary, logical 
connection. This is very useful in the whole influencing process.  
 
34

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
The general rule of thumb as far as hypnotic flow is concerned is that the more the person 
is in trance, the less logical you need to be. I'm going to give you the whole vocabulary of 
pseudo logic in order to be able to make these connections. Then you can flow from one 
idea to the other and lead people into a hypnotic state, and make your ideas seem more 
compelling and bring them to life more inside people’s minds. 
 
Covert Hypnosis Master Key 2: The Association Principle 
Before we do this though, let's look at the second principle. The principle of association 
is the second master key that we’ve been talking about. Association is the language of the 
unconscious mind.  
 
The thing about dreams is that many times dreams are symbolic references to 
associations that you’ve had in the past. That is why in a dream an item, an event, or a 
person can mean so many different things. It sparks off a whole train of associations that 
are connected to it.  
 
The power of association is immense. There is an interesting set of psychological studies 
called unconscious priming, where basically just by reading random words you can 
prepare people to think in certain ways without them knowing it. To give you an 
example, a bunch of students walked down a long corridor. At the end of the corridor is 
an exam room where they sit down and they read through a bunch of questions, answer 
some information about them, and then they leave.  
 
What they don’t know is that when they walk down the corridor and they leave, they get 
measured for how long it takes them to walk down the corridor and come back again. 
Interestingly, depending on what is written on that test, people will end up walking out 
much slower than they walked in, or else they will walk out at pretty much the same 
pace. Amazingly, the thing that determined whether they would walk out at a normal 
pace or would walk out much slower had everything to do with something that they read.  
 
The Power Of Hidden Messages 
The people who walked out slower were influenced through unconscious priming. They 
were reading sentences that were loaded through their associations to make them think of 
old age. The key is that this was done so subtly that nobody knew what was going on.  
 
For example they would read a bunch of sentences like, “This is my old hat. I prefer to go 
to Florida for my weekends. A wrinkled puppy is looking for some food. The gray coat is 
hanging on the hanger.”  
 
These sentences don’t sound unusual until you realize that there is a theme that runs 
through each and every one of them. All of them have words embedded inside them that 
are connected, or in other words are associated, with old age. They're talking about old, 
gray, wrinkled, and for Americans, Florida, which is a destination for old age pensioners.  
 
35

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
When the mind hears these themes running through it begins to activate these themes. 
The more it activates these themes, the stronger they become. The strongest theme going 
throughout all those sentences that they’ve read is old age.  
 
All of this is happening at the unconscious level. The interesting thing is when they walk 
out. They’ve activated all their associations to old age and their behavior conforms with 
old age; and they end up walking more slowly.  
 
Special Covert Hypnosis Principle 2: Hypnotic Themes 
It's the power of association, and the way you're going to use this is through something I 
call hypnotic themes. There are certain themes, ideas, concepts that you can talk about 
which have imbedded in them in their very idea. There are many associations that are 
relevant for hypnosis which just by talking about these themes, you begin to activate 
small hypnotic experiences. When you do enough of these and put them together, you 
end up having a powerful hypnotic induction done purely on the level of language and 
the level of associations, or the level of ideas.  
 
The main theme that we’re going to be focusing on here is the hypnotic theme of 
relaxation. As we’ve discovered in CD One, relaxation is a great doorway into hypnosis. 
It's not the only one, but it's a very powerful one. Other themes that you can use are 
themes like focus or attention. You can talk about concentration and about dreams, or 
things that have more to do with unconscious activity.  
 
There are many different themes, but for the moment let’s concentrate on the one, the 
relaxation; or maybe two, relaxation and focus. By talking about these themes and using 
the flow of ideas, you then create an environment of intellectual context as well as an 
experience that puts people into very powerful trances very naturally. 
 
Putting The Master Keys Of Covert Hypnosis Into Action 
Track 4 7:45 
 
Let's turn our attention to combining the two master keys, flow and association, in a 
practical method for using covert trances. The first step in this practical method of 
combining the two is to do something called the Four Words of Power.  
 
The Four Words Of Power 
The Four Words of Power are perfect for conversational hypnosis or covert hypnosis, 
because they don’t sound like much. When you hear them you don’t think much of them. 
In fact, you’ve used the Four Words of Power hundreds of thousands of times in your life 
without paying any special attention to them whatsoever. That is why they're so powerful, 
because they can slip by unnoticed and open the doors into hypnosis; open the doors into 
trance without anyone realizing what's happening.  
 
36

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Remember, the secret language of hypnosis is all about being subtle, so that the critical 
factor isn’t alerted to start paying attention. The Four Words of Power are particularly 
powerful because they do the two things that we want to have. In other words, they 
activate the two master keys of flow and association inherently in the way that they work.  
 
The Four Words of Power are the words “As,” “Because,” “And,” and “Means.”  
 
With those four words you can create an unbroken, seamless chain of ideas. You can 
flow from one idea to the other so smoothly that people don’t realize you're making 
transitions. With those four words you can also link things together; in other words, speak 
the language of the unconscious, associating one idea to another.  
 
The Four Words Of Power In Action 
Now let's have a look at how you can use the Four Words of Power. Actually you’ve 
already done so. When you learned “The Ten Second Hypnotist,” you had imbedded 
within that the principles of the Four Words of Power.  
 
Go back and think about this. How do you begin “The Ten Second Hypnotist”? Close 
your eyes “and” go into hypnosis. Let me ask you this: Is there really a logical 
connection between eyes being closed and being in hypnosis?  
 
The answer is “No!”  
 
You can be in hypnosis as easily with your eyes wide open as with them completely shut. 
Shutting their eyes will certainly help people because it cuts out distractions and therefore 
helps them to focus. However it's absolutely possible to create hypnosis with eyes wide 
open.  
 
When you say, “Close your eyes and go into hypnosis,” it's not logically true but the 
connection builds a connection in the mind. So the unconscious mind thinks, “Well, my 
eyes are closing. They're now shut. Therefore I must now be in hypnosis.” That is how 
the unconscious mind reasons through the language of association.  
 
Later on we deepen the associations in the same way. “Every time you feel X you'll go 
deeper.” Again, we’re creating a link, an association between a touch on the shoulder or 
the arm dropping or a head rotation or whatever technique you used and the experience of 
relaxation, or going deeper into hypnosis. Again, the word every time is a variation on the 
Four Words of Power. It does the same thing.  
 
Linguistic Bridges 
Essentially what the Four Words of Power are doing is they are what are called a 
linguistic bridge. They are a language bridge that goes from one concept to the other and 
links them together. What linguistic bridges do are allow you to flow smoothly so every 
37

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
time you come to a little river, rather than just stop and swim across you just walk across 
the bridge. There is a smoothness of ideas that flow. 
 
The second thing that linguistic bridges do is they connect things so that you associate 
things with other things. This is particularly useful because you can start connecting 
things that you know are going to happen or that people will agree with, with things that 
won't necessarily happen until you suggest them or people won't necessarily agree with 
until you present it in this particular way.  
 
When you say, “Close your eyes and go into hypnosis,” or when you say, “Every time 
you feel this you will go deeper into hypnosis,” these are all creating a natural flow of 
language and connecting ideas which have hypnotic power. 
 
Your First Covert Hypnosis Induction 
We have the scene set for our very first conversation or covert induction. How do you do 
this?  
 
Very simply. We use the Four Words of Power and we combine it with a hypnotic theme. 
I'm going to give you an illustration of this in a moment’s time, in the next track.  
 
Before I do that I want to make a couple of points.  
 
More Words Of Power 
First of all, the Four Words of Power that I'm going to teach you aren’t limited to four 
words. It's just that we’re using those four words because they're easy to remember and 
they're easy to use. Anything that works in a similar way with a similar kind of 
conjunction can be useful, although we are going to focus on the words “as” “because” 
“and” and “means.” You can use other words that have a similar impact every time; the 
more the better. These are all parts of your hypnotic language that you can start to work 
out. 
 
The keys are, “Does it help you create linguistic bridges? Does it help you to flow with 
language to move from one idea to another and does it help you combine them, to link 
one idea with another idea?” Those are the keys for expanding your Four Words of 
Power into more words of power. 
 
How To Listen To The Demonstration 
The second thing I want you to realize is that the demonstration I'm about to give you is 
going to be semi-overt. In other words, because this is a demonstration for you to learn, 
I'm not going to use it in terms of the way I would use it in normal, regular conversation, 
although you can use this in regular conversation as well.  
 
38

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
I'm going to focus on using the Four Words of Power together with a hypnotic theme—
let's choose relaxation—in such a way that it makes it obvious for you how you can use it 
yourself. I really encourage you to take this example and start using it. Use it with your 
family, with your friends, and colleagues. For them, it will be great because they’ll feel 
really relaxed at the end of it, or focused, or whatever hypnotic theme you choose to use.  
 
For you, it will be great because you'll start sounding like a hypnotist. You'll start having 
a natural ability to speak in these ways. When you can do that, you can start slipping little 
hypnotic themes, together with your Four Words of Power, into any conversation. The 
key starting point is becoming familiar with them, being able to use them, and being able 
to flow with them.  
 
How To Structure A Covert Hypnosis Induction 
The way I'm going to use them is very simple. I'm going to take the hypnotic theme of 
relaxation and I'm going to find any way at all of talking about relaxation that allows me 
to flow smoothly using my words of power, and keep talking about the theme of 
relaxation. I don’t know in advance what I'm going to be saying because I'm going to 
make it up as I go along.  
 
The Four Words of Power are going to help me be creative and make up something that 
sounds interesting and sounds persuasive, but if you go back and analyze it, really it 
doesn’t mean very much at all. It's the experience that it evokes from your unconscious 
mind. That’s the important thing. If it sounds like what I'm saying makes sense and it's 
totally reasonable, that’s more because your unconscious mind is responding than 
because it's a logical statement that I'm making.  
 
Finally, do remember the demonstration I'm about to give you is hypnotic. If you're 
driving a car or operating any kind of machine, just stop what you're doing until you can 
pay full attention to the demonstration. 
 
Covert Hypnosis Demonstration 
Track 5 4:59 
 
I find relaxation an interesting thing, because as you relax it means that relaxation is a 
natural part of the way you think and behave, as everyone knows how to relax physically. 
It's interesting that people don’t think about how they relax mentally, because when you 
relax physically you also will find yourself relaxing mentally.  
 
The opposite is also true. When you relax mentally, many people find their body relaxing 
more and more completely without even thinking about it. Just because you think about 
relaxation it means you can relax more and more fully.  
 
As you enjoy that relaxation you will continue to relax even more deeply. As you find 
relaxation somewhere inside your body, it means that you're beginning to activate a 
39

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
natural phenomenon. Because it's a natural phenomenon, it's easy to build on the 
relaxation you're experiencing by just allowing it to continue. As it continues to relax by 
itself, it isn’t just to think about how much more comfortable your mind can feel as your 
body relaxes.  
 
Is it your mind that’s relaxing your body, or is it your body that’s relaxing your mind? It 
really doesn’t matter that the body can relax the mind more than the mind can relax the 
body, because relaxation means that both mind and body are becoming more deeply and 
comfortably relaxed.  
 
As you experience any kind of relaxation, just focus your attention on how that relaxation 
grows. Where does it move towards? When relaxation begins moving it begins to 
intensify. It begins to feel more comfortable and because you can feel more comfortable, 
so you can relax. It means that relaxation is a comfortable experience for you.  
 
You don’t have to experience relaxation in a comfortable way because you can 
experience relaxation in so many different situations. You can experience it during a peak 
moment like in sports, where you don’t necessarily think about comfort and feel that 
comfort. You can feel relaxation when you're resting in an arm chair, so then relaxation 
is a deeply comforting experience.  
 
Just as you can imagine sitting in an arm chair, so you can imagine a body that’s more 
comfortable. Because you can imagine a relaxed body you might find yourself relaxing 
automatically, and finding that relaxation occurring automatically means that inside you 
the natural relaxation mechanism has been activated.  
 
You don’t have to think about how to activate that natural relaxation mechanism. You 
just get to enjoy the relaxation mechanism because it happens automatically. You don’t 
have to think about it. You just enjoy the relaxation, and the more you relax the more you 
will relax.  
 
As you begin to develop that experience more and more completely, so relaxation can 
continue to deepen. You might find yourself being more relaxed as a person in your 
general life because as your body really learn. That means things which used to stress 
you out in the past become things that are totally trivial in the future.  
 
You can look forward to a future filled with more relaxation because as you relax 
physically now, so your personality, your whole identity becomes more relaxed. The 
things around you become more relaxed, too. So you get to enjoy that as you continue to 
think about how you can find relaxation in more and more ways inside your life.  
 
Now with those happy thoughts I'm going to leave you to come back to the here and now 
in your own way, in your own rate, and in your own pace. Then when you're ready just 
join me in the next track. We’ll be talking more about the secrets of covert hypnosis. 
 
40

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
How To Tell When Someone Is Hypnotised! 
Track 6 3:24 
 
Welcome back again. Now that you can use the secret language of hypnosis I would like 
to address an important point which is, “How can you tell when someone is going into 
hypnosis?”  
 
It was all well and good in the first CD when we were talking about more obvious 
hypnosis because just by doing the ritual, running through the process, it's pretty likely 
that you'll get the results, especially if you're suggesting things like their eyes will close, 
and so on. If you see it happening, it’s working. If it isn’t happening, it's not working. It’s 
very easy to tell with regular hypnosis. 
 
With covert hypnosis, because you're not officially telling them to close their eyes, you're 
not officially telling them to have certain experiences, it's a little bit harder to tell when 
they're going into hypnosis. Here are some simple little things you can look out for in 
order to tell that their state is changing. The general rule of thumb is basically talk to 
them for a little while and then notice however their mannerisms are, how they are 
breathing, and how they are looking; skin color and that sort of thing.  
 
Special Hint: Observe All Changes 
As you begin to shift into your covert hypnosis, simply notice if there are any changes in 
the things that you’ve observed from the beginning. If there are changes it means you’ve 
affected them in some way. That’s going to usually be a good thing. Of course, you want 
to make sure that you're affecting them in a pleasant way.  
 
1st Sign Of Trance: Relaxation 
The kinds of things that tend to happen when people go into trance, especially when they 
are relaxation-based hypnosis, are things you might notice like their muscles start to 
relax. Their facial features start smoothing out and it becomes plainer.  
 
2nd Sign Of Trance: Lack Of Movement 
You will also probably notice that they move around less. There is less motion involved. 
People tend to inhibit their motions or their movements when they go into hypnosis. It is 
as true of big movements, like hands moving around and pointing and bouncing and that 
sort of stuff, as it is of little movements.  
 
3rd Sign Of Trance: Eyes Fixate On A Point 
Typically the eyes, for example, will begin to fix in a point in space and look at it. They 
might look at you fixedly and not look away. They might look at the floor or the ceiling 
41

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
or some other person. Their eyes will tend to glaze over slightly and get a sort of fixed 
look or expression.  
 
4th Sign Of Trance: Changes In Breathing 
Another good giveaway is their breathing. Typically their breathing becomes more deep 
and more even for people under hypnosis. Sometimes, of course, it becomes shallower 
and faster. The key thing is, “Is their breathing shifting significantly?”  
 
5th Sign Of Trance: Changes In Skin Colour 
The final trance signal to look out for is the changing of skin color. Typically, when 
people go into hypnosis their coloration will change because blood flows differently. 
Sometimes they will begin to blush more. They will get a more red tone to their skin. 
Sometimes it will be the opposite. They’ll get a bit more pale or waxy as blood flows 
away from the skin, particularly as it's diverted away from the face.  
 
Summary Of The 5 Key Signs Of Trance 
The key signals, not the whole list but the key ones to look out for, are: 
 
1. Are they getting physically more relaxed?  
2. Are their movements becoming more inhibited, smaller, slower and lesser, 
especially the eyes?  
3. Are their eyes getting a little bit glassy?  
4. Is their breath shifting, typically lower and deeper but sometimes faster and 
shallower?  
5. Do you find their skin color changing? Is it changing and becoming deeper, 
darker, maybe redder; or is it turning paler and more waxy? 
 
 All of these are great signs that they're going into hypnosis. 
 
The Secret To Having A Hypnotic Voice 
Track 7 8:42 
 
I would like to address another key feature of hypnosis in general, but that is particularly 
important in covert hypnosis, and that’s the idea of hypnotic tonality. The words that you 
speak are very powerful, but they're not the only part of your influence.  
 
Your tonality creates this wonderful, rich environment which gives the words more 
meaning. You can say, “I love you,” in a sarcastic way, which means people understand 
you don’t mean it; and you can say it in a way that you genuinely mean it. There is a 
whole range between. The entire range is based on your tonality; how you're saying it, 
what pitch, what voice, what rhythm, what speed, at what point you say things.  
42

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
Be Expressive 
The same is true for all of your suggestions. Tonality is one of the true secrets of 
hypnosis masters and it's surprising how many people don’t use it well, particularly in the 
old school of hypnosis. Many people talk about having a monotone, where you just 
hypnotize people by speaking like this.  
 
Really, to be honest with you, that’s kind of like a boredom trance. It can work, but you 
get so much more out of using your tonality with elegance and with deep expression. 
Using expressive suggestions is a very powerful way of getting directly to the 
unconscious mind because your tonality, the way you express yourself, gives it a whole 
coloration, an emotional undertone.  
 
Stimulate Emotions 
Emotions are the seat of the unconscious mind.  When you squeeze the meaning out of 
your words, when you really make them mean the things you want them to mean just by 
making them sound more important, by stretching them out or shortening them down, at 
that point it reaches an emotional undertone which the unconscious mind responds to 
really powerfully.  
 
Think of it this way. When you have a small child that’s frightened, you don’t just use 
logical words to reason with them. You use a certain tone. Sometimes you take all the 
words away and you just go, “Shush now. It’s all okay now. Shush. It's fine. Just relax. 
It's fine.”  
 
The kind of tone you would use to calm down a frightened animal or a frightened child is 
perfect for hypnosis because it creates the perfect atmosphere, the ambience in which 
hypnosis can take place. It kind of seduces people into it, because people want that 
experience to become stronger inside them.  
 
The 2 Key Hypnotic Tonalities 
We all love the idea of safety and security, of comfort and relaxation. These are 
wonderful things throughout our life, so we are going to use these tonalities in order to 
kind of wash all of our suggestions and make them that much more appealing because of 
it.  
 
Change Your Tone To Match Your Suggestion 
Of course, you'll want your tonality to match whatever you're saying. If you want to get 
someone excited, there is no point talking about excitement…like…this… 
 
Why?  
 
43

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Because it's not very exciting. Excitement is a different tonality. You get animated and 
you allow it to happen inside you, and of course your language changes.  
 
Similarly, if you want someone to relax you don’t help someone start relaxing in this kind 
of tonality, because it's not a very relaxing tonality. You need to change your tonality and 
allow yourself to just create a seductive and a wonderful tonality in which people just 
want to relax. It's like an armchair that people can rest in. Your voice creates that 
experience.  
 
The secret of hypnotic voices is to make your tonality match the experience that you're 
talking about. When it's exciting and motivating you pick up the pace. When it's calm and 
relaxing you slow down the pace.  
 
Develop Your “Hypnotic Voice” 
As a general rule, you want to create a hypnotic voice which you can use for different 
kinds of trances. The best kind of hypnotic voice to use, just because it's most useful for 
most situations, is one which is slower, lower, and with more power. By more power I 
don’t mean commanding in a sense of telling people what to do, but more power in a 
sense of there is meaning attached. It seems like it's important.  
 
So we need to be able to speak in this way. Just notice that even though I'm not doing 
anything else that’s particularly hypnotic, just by changing the tonality it begins to draw 
you in and you want to listen to things that I am saying.  
 
This is a perfect example of conversational hypnosis. I'm asking you to listen to what I'm 
saying and you want to listen to what I'm saying. Is that because I'm suggesting the 
experience, or is that because I'm mind reading the experience that you're having? The 
truth lies somewhere in between the two.  
 
Having a slower, lower, and a more power-filled tonality is a great general tonality to 
practice and get used to, so that you can drop into it in the middle of conversations. The 
way other people experience this tonality is it will just seem to them that you just hit an 
important point, so you're slowing down to emphasize something, or to really point 
something out.  
 
It's a bit like when you have an intimate conversation with a friend. You kind of shut the 
rest of the world out. That’s kind of how it will be perceived. Of course, you'll know that 
you're making it into a more hypnotic interaction, where the things that you're saying 
have a much more powerful impact on the other person.  
 
The Myths & The Truth About A Hypnotic Voice 
Now whilst we’re talking about tonality, I want to introduce you to one more really 
important concept that is totally misunderstood by very many people. It's the secret of the 
hypnotic voice.  
44

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
There is a kind of myth going around, a kind of urban legend that there is a special kind 
of voice tone that you use which will send everyone into a trance. In a way it's sort of 
true, in the sense that a slower, lower, more powerful or meaningful tonality will kind of 
pull people in, because they want to listen to you more. Likewise a more energetic, 
excited, et cetera, tonality draws people in more into the excitement, the emotion of what 
you're doing.  
 
Having said that, they are not by themselves hypnotic.  
 
How To Condition People to respond To Your Hypnotic Voice 
The way you create a hypnotic voice is actually through training. You're going to 
condition a certain tone of voice so that when they hear that tone of voice, people 
automatically go into hypnosis. This is particularly important in covert hypnosis because 
otherwise, if you don’t do this, then your normal voice will become conditioned to 
hypnosis and every time you speak to that person they will go into a trance.  
 
Now that might sound like fun right now, but wait until you start talking to your friend 
whilst they're driving a car and they get distracted and end up having an accident. That’s 
not good. To be ethical, as well as to have control of when you do it and when you don’t, 
it's important to switch your tonality and have a specific kind of tone and rhythm that you 
only use for hypnosis and nothing else.  
 
It's a clever switch inside your own mind, which kind of opens up your hypnotic abilities 
at that point. It's really important for the other person, because then you’ve trained them 
to respond to your hypnotic voice.  
 
The beauty of this is that once you’ve been talking to someone and you’ve switched in 
and out of your hypnotic voice and you’ve trained them to respond more hypnotically, at 
that point just by switching tonality they will automatically drop into hypnosis. It's the 
world’s easiest hypnotic induction. 
 
How do you do this? How do you condition your hypnotic voice? The simple way to do 
this is you talk in your normal regular voice. You talk about normal regular things, and as 
soon as you do anything that’s even vaguely hypnotic, in other words you're using the 
imagination or you're using your Four Words of Power together with your hypnotic 
themes, you switch into your hypnotic voice.  
 
Then when you finished doing that, you switch back to your regular voice. Everything 
which is a regular conversation is done in your regular voice. Everything which is 
hypnotic is done in your hypnotic voice.  
 
Over time that just conditions it in, so that by just switching tonality people go into 
hypnosis. It's a wonderful thing. Experiment with it and enjoy it. 
 
45

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
How To Secretly Use The Hypnotic Imagination 
Track 8 5:48 
 
Let's go back to an idea that we covered in the first CD, the power of the imagination. 
Remember, the imagination is one of the master keys to hypnosis and powerful 
suggestion. You will really be able to paint a picture in someone’s mind or better still, 
create a mental movie in all the five senses to really bring it to life. In doing so, you bring 
the experience to life, and of course that has the hypnotic effect.  
 
The question is: How can you do this when you're doing it conversationally, when you're 
doing it covertly? 
 
It's easy enough to say to someone, “Imagine this and imagine that,” but if you're doing it 
conversationally, how can you do this without being caught, without people realizing that 
you're doing something hypnotic?  
 
Sometimes you can get away with it by simply saying, “Imagine this. Do that. Put this 
picture in your mind,” being quite direct about it, and it will fit the conversational context 
that you're using. That’s fine.  
 
At other times though, you need to get a little bit more sneaky, a little bit more covert. 
Just be able to come in around the side without people’s attention being drawn to the fact 
that you're beginning to draw pictures inside their minds and control the movies that they 
make inside their heads.  
 
I'd like to introduce you to three very simple techniques to do this. They're all related to 
each other in a slightly different way.  
 
Covert Hypnotic imagination Technique 1: My Friend John… 
The first technique is called the “My Friend John” technique. It's a very famous hypnotic 
induction. Basically it rests on the principle that when you talk to someone about 
someone else’s experience they have to, in their mind at some level, take on that other 
person’s experience in order to understand what you're talking about.  
 
The classic way this was done is when talking to someone who wants to go into hypnosis 
and is a little bit scared of doing so, the hypnotist might just say, “Well, I have a friend 
called John who wanted to go into hypnosis, as well. I told John, “Just close your eyes 
and go into hypnosis.” ”  
 
Whilst you're talking about everything that happened with John, of course they're having 
the same experience. You can just talk about your friend John, your friend Jane, or 
Mary—it doesn’t matter who it is—and how they had some pictures inside of their mind, 
how they thought some things, how they had a certain mental movie going through them, 
how they talked themselves in a certain tone of voice.  
 
46

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Whilst you're describing what happened to your friend, the person right in front of you 
will have the exact same experience. It's a beautiful little way of putting thoughts and 
pictures inside someone else’s mind without telling them that that’s what you're doing. 
 
Covert Hypnotic imagination Technique 2: Its Just Like… 
Another very simple and very effective method is the simile. It's basically just words like, 
“It's like this,” or, “It's like that.” How often have you turned to a simile in the middle of 
a conversation in order to explain yourself? “The problem is like I'm doing this and I'm 
doing that. It’s like that.”  
 
A simile is great because it allows you to draw a mental picture for someone whilst 
talking or referring to whatever situation you're talking about. Of course, once the mental 
picture is inside of their mind you’ve got the power of imagination working for you.  
 
For example, let's say you want someone to excel at using a computer system. You can 
say, “Using a computer is just like going swimming. At first you just dip your little toe in 
and it feels cold. You'll know whether or not you can get into the water, but soon you 
become so used to having your foot or your toe in the water that you just begin to wonder 
what it’s going to be like to just throw your whole body in and enjoy the splash and that 
wonderful light sensation of being in the water. Learning to use a new computer is 
exactly the same.”  
 
What has computer and swimming got anything to do with it?  
 
Not much, but by using the simile principle and the words “just like this,” you can draw a 
wonderful picture of something which is pleasant inside their mind, and link it to 
whatever idea you're presenting. Of course, they did get the idea that perhaps learning a 
computer is just a step-by-step process, but instead of telling them logically you're telling 
them through the power of the imagination, which is much more effective.  
 
Covert Hypnotic imagination Technique 3: Switch Referential Index 
The final technique is related to the “My Friend John” technique. This is called a  
“Switching of Referential Index.” It has a very complex label to it, but don’t worry about 
the label too much.  
 
Essentially you're going to introduce it with a little phrase, “You know when XY Zed 
happens.” Basically what happens here is you're going to talk about your own experience, 
but halfway through the experience you switch from saying I to you. People do this all 
the time.  
 
“You know when you're walking down the street and you see an old friend and you wave 
to them but suddenly you realize that they're not really the person you thought they were? 
Notice what I just did there. I'm talking about my experience or I'm actually talking about 
universal experience, but I switched to talking about, “You know when you do this.”  
47

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
Some people only speak in the second person, even when they talk about themselves. 
“What's the problem?”  
 
“Well, you know when you get these headaches?”  
 
I don’t get headaches – but they're talking about this as though you did. It's kind of a 
hypnotic suggestion.  
 
They switch their referential index. When they say, “You know when?” or, “You know 
what it's like?” then you switch from saying, “I do this. I do that,” to, “You do this,” and 
“You do that.” It’s a very natural switch to take and it ends up being a very simple way of 
giving people very direct suggestions without them ever knowing it's happening.  
 
With these three methods you can use the power of imagination, and use it covertly. 
 
How To Use The Hypnotic Gaze Induction 
Track 9 4:54 
 
How can you pull everything you’ve learned together in order to use covert hypnosis in a 
more official kind of capacity?  
 
You have a kind of template inside your mind of what to do. Just like you had “The Ten 
Second Hypnotist” for regular hypnosis, there is something called the Hypnotic Gaze 
Induction, which you can use to fit in all the things you know about covert hypnosis.  
 
Remember, so far you’ve learned some very powerful strategies. You’ve got the idea of 
hypnotic themes and the Four Words of Power, in other words the secret language of 
hypnosis. You have the ability of switching through your tonality in order to influence 
them at an emotional level, and you have the ability to use the imagination in order to 
augment your suggestions.  
 
You can use it individually or you can use all of these together for an added impact. You 
can start casually dropping them in conversation every now and again, and you can use 
them in little chunks in order to actually achieve this specific outcome.  
 
If you want structure, remember you're still using the ABS formula.  
 
A stands for Attract Attention or Absorb Attention,  
B stands for Bypass the critical factor, and  
S stands for Stimulate the unconscious mind.  
 
Most of the things you're doing will already have some of their attention. I'm going to 
teach you a little thing that’s going to do all the AB part of the formula almost 
automatically, while it’s doing the other things. Also remember, of course, that your 
48

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
language and your imagination exercises, all these things, are going to have the effect of 
bypassing the critical factor and absorbing their attention as you're talking to them.  
 
The Power Of Your Hypnotic Gaze 
These are just ways of augmenting what you already have. The Hypnotic Gaze induction 
is basically like the Hypnotic Gaze induction we talked about at the end of the first CD. 
You're going to look at someone’s eyes and hold that gaze.  
 
This is a very unusual thing to do. In our society it is considered “impolite” to stare, so 
when we talk about holding someone’s eye contact I don’t mean staring in a weird or 
scary way. I don’t mean staring in a confrontational sort of way. The difference between 
them has everything to do with what's going on inside you.  
 
Key Secret: Make It Friendly! 
When you feel good and friendly and have a crinkle in the side of your eyes, that attitude 
projects out of you through something called sub-communication. It kind of leaps out of 
your body language, out of your tonality, and people feel safe around you.  
 
At the same time, the eye contact makes them feel a little bit edgy or nervous. You want 
that because it kind of throws off-kilter the normal way of thinking, which means that 
their critical factor, their critical mind, has nothing to attach to. It’s the first thing to go 
when things become uncertain.  
 
Through the power of eye contact and holding a little bit of silence, people start getting a 
little bit uncomfortable. At that point you can start talking emphatically with purpose and, 
of course, using the master keys like the secret language of hypnosis, flow, association, 
and the imagination in order to instill the hypnotic attitude that you want another person 
to adopt.  
 
Using Your Hypnotic Gaze In A Normal Conversation 
The approach is very simple. You look at their eyes. You fall silent for a little while just 
to see what happens. Typically what happens is they’ll start rapid talking for a while, and 
start asking questions trying to get your feedback. At that point, basically, they are a little 
bit nervous, and that’s what you want.  
 
When that happens, you start going into a kind of a monologue. In other words, you start 
talking and you keep right on talking. You keep right on talking emphatically, 
purposefully, like what you're saying is the most important thing in the world. Believe it 
or not I am doing it right now. It’s kind of almost like a lecturing tonality.  
 
You can also switch the tonality to a more relaxing tonality. You can still talk 
emphatically and switch your tonality into a different kind of hypnotic experience, but 
you still keeping talking and you're still in control of that part of the interaction. When 
49

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
they start contributing things, when they start talking again, it will break the hypnotic 
spell for awhile.  
 
Hypnotic Cycles 
To solve the problem you just go right back again. You go through these cycles, a little 
bit of hypnosis, a little bit of regular conversation, a little bit of hypnosis, a little bit of 
regular conversation. These cycles are very useful and very powerful.  
 
What this does, of course, is allow you dispense with a regular induction. With a 
Hypnotic Gaze together with the master keys, the principles that we’ve been talking 
about, you now have the makings of a perfect, undetectable, covert induction. 
 
The Hypnotic Blitz Technique 
Track 10 8:18 
 
Let's see if we can up the ante even further. I want to teach you a technique called the 
Hypnotic Blitz. This technique is technically a semi-overt technique. In other words, 
there is a reasonable likelihood that people will know that you're doing something 
unusual, maybe even hypnotic.  
 
However most people, unless they know you're a hypnotist, won't realize that you're 
trying to hypnotize them because it just sounds like you're being very enthusiastic about 
something or very engaged in something. In fact the Hypnotic Blitz has been used on you 
several times throughout your life without you really recognizing that that’s what's going 
on.  
 
Curses & Benedictions 
Before we go into the ins and outs of the Hypnotic Blitz, I would like to talk a little bit 
about curses and benediction. Hypnosis is a natural phenomenon, as you know, and 
people fall into trances all the time. The problem is that sometimes people get negative 
messages whilst they're in one of these trances.  
 
For example, let's say you come home from school. You have a bad report card and your 
mother or your father or your guardian is upset with you and they give you a stern talking 
to. If they don’t watch their language, they can actually induce a trance and at the same 
time give you negative suggestions like, “You're no good. You're lazy. Why are you so 
lazy?”  
 
These aren’t useful things to be carrying in the back of your mind. It's the kind of mental 
baggage that you don’t need and you don’t want. It's a mental curse, and the curse is 
ironically not usually given by someone who doesn’t like you.  
 
50

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
It’s usually given in an attempt at being in your best interest. It's given by someone who 
is a very poor hypnotist, typically, because they don’t know they're doing it. However we 
still have these curses.  
 
The benediction is, of course, the opposite. We’ve all had the experience when a friend, a 
parent, or a loved one speaks to us in a particular tone of voice, in a particular way, about 
all the qualities that they like about us. In doing so it's giving a kind of hypnotic blessing.  
 
They talk about it in such a way that we’ve been empowered. We feel more confident. 
We feel better about ourselves. This is the opposite of hypnotic curse. It's a hypnotic 
benediction. It talks well of someone.  
 
The Hypnotic Blitz As A Benediction 
The Hypnotic Blitz is going to use a kind of overload technique of hypnosis in order to 
create a hypnotic benediction, to make people feel like a million dollars, and then attach 
that onto a motivator. In other words to get them to do something, maybe to get a dry 
cleaner to give you better dry cleaning, to get better service from a restaurant, to create a 
more intimate relationship with a loved one.  
 
It doesn’t matter what it is. Benedictions are wonderful tools which will allow you to 
create a wonderful experience with someone else, whilst at the same time getting 
something more beneficial for yourself as well. 
 
A Step By Step Guide To The Hypnotic Blitz 
For hypnotic benedictions you basically want to pull out a theme. Remember we talked 
about hypnotic themes before in terms of relaxation and focus, et cetera? Now you're 
going to switch to a benediction theme. These are things like the ability to learn more 
easily, the ability to have more self esteem, to feel confident, and also the goal in the 
future.  
 
The Three Themes 
There are many different benediction themes that you can pull out. These are the three 
that I want you to focus on: 
 
1. The ability to learn because life is about learning new things;  
2. The ability to feel confidence and like yourself and be liked by other people; and 
3. The goal in the future, to expect good things to happen to you in the future.  
 
When you take this theme and you use all the things that you learned about so far, you 
can start basically having a positive rant about something. The key thing, of course, is 
that you have to have them engaged with it and you have to have their critical factor, their 
critical mind, disengaged.  
 
51

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Here is the method for doing this.  
 
Hypnotic Blitz Step 1: Go First 
Step number one is to go first. In hypnosis, when we talk about going first that means 
having the emotional experience inside you, so you're totally convinced.  
 
If you want someone to be excited and motivated and enthused about a product that 
you're selling, there is no point even starting until you're motivated and excited and 
infused yourself.  
 
Why?  
 
Because that carries through and they get kind of charged up by it. They get infected by 
your enthusiasm.  
 
The same is true of relaxation. If you want people to be relaxed, you have to be at least 
more relaxed than they are when you start off because, again, it gives them a subtle 
communication in which direction to move as they follow you.  
 
Begin by going first. If you're going to give someone self esteem suggestions for more 
confidence for example, go first and remind yourself of all the good things you think 
about them, why you think they should be confident, why they should feel great about 
themselves. At that point, once you’ve stuck that inside your own mind, that’s something 
you do without really telling people you're doing it.  
 
Hypnotic Blitz Step 2: The Hypnotic Gaze 
Then you begin with the whole Hypnotic Gaze procedure we just talked about. You hold 
their eye contact to the point where it's a little bit uncomfortable. Just at the point where 
they start getting nervous and they want to break the tension, you'll break the tension by 
speaking. You will not break the eye contact.  
 
Hypnotic Blitz Step 3: Unleash Your Theme 
As you make eye contact, as you have these wonderful ideas and feelings inside yourself 
and you start getting animated about it, you begin to go into your themes, your hypnotic 
themes, your benediction themes; let's say your ability to learn things, to learn things 
quickly and easily. At that point you just get animated and enthused about that theme, 
because you can learn about hypnosis in so many different ways.  
 
It's so easy to learn hypnosis because you have the capacity. Think about it. You have 
learned hypnosis so many times in your life without even knowing about it. You’ve talked 
to a friend and cheered them up and you didn’t even know what you were saying. All you 
had was the genuine desire to help that person and so you learned to do it.  
 
52

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
As you learned those things and as you learned a whole bunch of other things in your life, 
you can learn to master this thing. Think about how easily you learn to do things like 
mastering to drive a car and mastering writing and reading. Even though that may not 
have been easy at the time, they're easy for you right now because you have the benefit of 
experience and practice.  
 
Every single time you learn something it becomes easier to learn something new and 
something different, because you have more experiences inside you that allow you to 
learn new things. That is why you're going to master hypnosis and learn it quickly, easily 
and without any problems whatsoever. 
 
Breakdown Of A Benediction 
Notice what I did there. I went into one of these so-called positive rants. I went into a 
benediction. The Hypnotic Blitz is all about overloading people. You can use the 
Hypnotic Gaze with a more slow and comfortable pace, and that’s fine.  
 
The Hypnotic Blitz, though, requires you to keep talking in such an animated way that it 
kind of blows through any resistance. It blows through any negativity the person might 
have. It blows through any objections.  
 
Basically it uses overpowering, but in a positive, overpowering mood; to kind of blow 
through anything that is in its way. You're using enthusiasm. You're using animation. 
You're using the principle of going first to blow right through any resistance, any 
problems a person may have. All that’s left at that point is the positive message that you 
have for people.  
 
Think of it a bit like a rabbit being caught in the headlights of a car, but this time instead 
of being hit by a car, which is going to be a negative experience, they're going to be hit 
by a really positive experience. Then keep right on hitting them with positive experiences 
until they're imbedded deeply in their subconscious mind, and the person just feels better. 
They feel more optimistic about their future. They feel better about themselves.  
 
They feel better about their ability to learn and they think, “Yeah. This kind of makes 
sense.” This is the best way to help people in a conversational setting and be known as a 
thoroughly enthusiastic, motivating, and wonderful person to be around.  
 
This is the power of the Hypnotic Blitz. Use it well and use it often. 
 
Hypnotic Influence 
Track 11 4:00 
 
Before we finish up on this CD, I would like to talk a little bit about influence. Influence 
is really one of the main reasons why people don’t get interested in hypnosis. Of course, 
53

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
it's the ability to help other people and create positive life changes, but even that requires 
you to influence someone at some level. 
 
Influence Secret 1: Change Moods to Change Minds 
The main key to influence, and this is one of the most important things you could ever 
remember, is that you want to change people’s moods in order to change their minds. The 
problem is most people who try to influence others begin with their minds. They try using 
logic and reason.  
 
Logic and reason have their place in the influencing scheme of things, but more 
important than logic and reason is the mood, the emotional state. We make decisions 
based on emotions. If you can affect someone else's emotions you will affect the 
decisions they make, the conclusions they come to. If you can attach a strong emotion to 
an idea they’ll become attracted to it, or also repelled towards it.  
 
The key to all influence is to change people’s moods in order to change their minds.  
 
Influence Secret 2: Notice Emotions 
In order to do this, become very sensitive to how people are feeling at one moment in 
time. Become observant of people. When you become observant you'll notice what mood 
they're in right now, and you can start shifting them to one emotion or another emotion in 
order to attach whatever ideas you want to have to that. 
 
Influence Secret 3: Emphasise Emotions Over Logic 
The stronger the emotion is the more convincing your arguments will be, as a rule of 
thumb. You absolutely need to have emotion in order to have someone engaged in what 
you're saying. If they're not engaged, no matter how logical you are they will reject the 
idea.  
 
You may have come across this before. You give someone all these logical reasons for 
why they're wrong, but they're still adamant about why they're right. They can't see their 
logic.  
 
Why?  
 
Because the negative emotions they feel when you talk about them in their logical sense 
creates a defense mechanism which automatically rejects all information.  
 
When you get the right mood, a mood where they're more positive or they're more 
motivated, or they feel good, they're more willing to accept information because it's safe.  
 
54

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Troubleshooting Tip: Check The Emotional Climate 
Make sure that whenever you have a problem with influence, the first point you get 
towards is to begin to influence their mood. Then you can start adding in the ideas of 
reason and logic and even pseudo logic, in order to move them forward in the interaction.  
 
Influence Secret 4: Emotions Drive Behaviours 
Start with the emotion. Include some kind of behavior at that point. When you have an 
emotion, if you want to have a behavioral outcome, for example to ask someone to give 
you a cup of coffee, include the behavior in it and then create a call to action at the end. 
You need to be able to release whatever you’ve created in order for them to put 
themselves into action. 
 
If you're just influencing their ideas, in that case you don’t need behaviors and a call to 
action because the idea already sits there attached to the emotion. If you do want a 
behavior—for example, if you're a sales person you want someone to buy something, or 
if you're a teacher and you want your kids to do their homework, or you're a parent and 
you want your kids to tidy up their rooms—you need to attach a behavior to the feeling 
and finally create a call to action.  
 
Make them feel great. Describe the behavior maybe using the “My Friend John” 
technique and then give a call to action and let them just go off and do their thing. The 
way I have it visualized inside my mind is to think of it like one of those windup bunny 
toys. When you build up the emotion you're winding up and winding up and winding up 
the bunny.  
 
When you describe the behavior you're kind of turning it in the direction you want it to 
walk. The call to action is when you just release it and let the bunny walk in a straight 
line from A all the way to B. That is the key to influence. 
 
End Of CD 
Track 12 1:27 
 
This is the end of CD Two. If you like the things that you discovered here and would like 
to explore the power of covert hypnosis more deeply, then come and have a look at my 
home study course called “The Power of Conversational Hypnosis.” You'll find all the 
details on my Web site: 
 
www.Conversational-Hypnosis.com 
 
On the next CD, you'll discover how to unleash your potential today through the power of 
self-hypnosis. I look forward to seeing you on that CD, where you'll find even more 
“Street Hypnosis Exposed.” 
 
55

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Street Hypnosis Exposed 
CD 3 – Self Hypnosis 
 
Introduction to CD3 
Track 1 1:23 
 
Welcome to “Street Hypnosis Exposed.” In this the third and final CD, entitled “Self 
Hypnosis, Unleash Your Potential Today,” I want to share a quick and easy method for 
using the power of hypnosis for yourself. Overcoming difficulties, programming in 
exciting goals, and creating a future that glows brightly with promise is easy with this 
method.  
 
I'm going to show you the difference between hypnosis and self-hypnosis, and how to 
create goals and turn those into powerful suggestions. Then I'll take you through the 
unique method and show you how to install that at a subconscious level, so it's there 
whenever you want or need it.  
 
As soon as you're ready to experience that, just sit back, relax, and enjoy “Street 
Hypnosis Exposed.”   
 
 
Self Hypnosis – v – Regular Hypnosis 
Track 2 3:21 
 
Let's start off by talking about the distinction between self-hypnosis and hypnosis. By 
now you should have a reasonable grasp of what hypnosis is and how to induce it, in 
particular remembering the all-important ABS formula.  
 
All Hypnosis Is Self Hypnosis 
The thing about self-hypnosis is it is pretty much the same as regular forms of hypnosis. 
You can use self-hypnosis on yourself, to gain all the benefits that otherwise people 
would get from the power of hypnosis when you're the hypnotist, hypnotizing them. 
 
You can overcome fears and personal phobias. You can improve your health and 
overcome health problems. You can increase your happiness, your confidence, and other 
emotions; and you can improve upon your wealth and success in life.  
 
These are all the kinds of things that you can program your mind to do for you. All in all, 
you could say that pretty much all hypnosis is a form of self-hypnosis, because of course 
the state and the condition takes place inside the mind of the other person. Your skill as a 
hypnotist is in allowing someone else, or guiding someone else through a process, to take 
them to their own personal state of hypnosis. 
56

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The Crucial Difference In Self Hypnosis 
In self-hypnosis we cut out the middle man, and you do it all directly on yourself. 
However, there are important distinctions between regular hypnosis, or even covert 
hypnosis and self-hypnosis.  
 
The main distinction is this. Because you're guiding someone else during regular or 
covert hypnosis, it means that to a certain extent they can release responsibility. They just 
follow along and don’t have to have a sort of guiding and planning part of their mind 
active to direct them somewhere.  
 
Of course, when you start doing self-hypnosis there is no one to guide you through it, 
unless you're using a tape of some sort. The only problem that can occur is that when you 
activate the planning or the guiding part of your mind too much, you could accidentally 
trigger the critical factor, the critical mind, which is of course the deadly enemy of 
hypnosis.  
 
The Receptive Mind 
You want to create a condition in which you can guide yourself through the process—or 
go through the process of self-hypnosis—without triggering the critical factor. This is 
what we call, in self-hypnosis, the receptive mind; creating a mind which is open and 
receptive to your own suggestions and at the same time has a block on the critical factor, 
so that you don’t undo all the good work you’ve just done.  
 
All your experiences in regular hypnosis and in covert hypnosis still count. In particular, 
the ABS formula is going to be crucial in creating a self-hypnosis method that will work 
for you. You will still have to absorb your attention. You will still have to bypass your 
critical factor and you will still have to stimulate your unconscious mind. In this program 
we’re going to show you how to do this.  
 
The beauty of this course is the things that you learn here during self-hypnosis will feed 
back into your ability to do regular hypnosis and covert hypnosis, so everything supports 
itself. Whatever you learn here will help you in regular hypnosis, will help your covert 
hypnosis, and will help you become even better at self-hypnosis. They are all in a 
continuous feedback loop.  
 
So enjoy the processes and the ideas that you're going to be exposed to here. Remember 
to apply them in the other fields, as well. 
 
 
 
 
57

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
How To Set A Compelling Goal 
Track 3 9:18 
 
Your first step to using self-hypnosis is, of course, to set some kind of goal up. If you 
have no goal, how are you going to create suggestions to achieve it? The whole purpose 
of hypnosis is a goal-seeking mechanism.  
 
Hypnosis achieves things. Without it, it's just meditation. We need to begin with a goal in 
order to be able to convert that goal into something which is hypnotic, which you can 
achieve.  
 
Not all goals are created equally, which is to say there are some goals which are formed 
in a bad way, which makes them difficult to achieve. There are many subtleties that go 
into the art of understanding goals properly. The easiest mechanism that we’re going to 
look at today is something called the SMART goal formula. This is something you may 
be familiar with already.  
 
It's a very simple and straightforward mechanism. There are sophistications that you can 
put around it to make it better, but for the purposes of creating a simple, easy to use, and 
quickly accessed hypnosis program, this is going to be the easiest thing that you can get 
your hands on. 
 
Health, Wealth or Relationships? 
Before we look at the SMART goals let's have a look at the kind of categories that you 
can look at, in terms of improving yourself and using self-hypnosis to help you. The three 
goals and categories are self-improvement—basically relationships; your wealth or 
career; and your health, in which I include the physical as well as mental health.  
 
Basically, anything that you want to achieve will fit in there somewhere. Either you want 
to become more creative to help boost your career and become more successful, make 
more money; or perhaps you have a fear or a phobia that’s a psychological disease. 
Perhaps you have a physical disease. Perhaps you have psoriasis. Perhaps you have 
stress.  
 
Alternatively, it could be about relationships. Relationships include more than just 
personal relationships in the sense of romantic relationships, although that is of course at 
the top of very many people’s lists. You can have relationships with your spouse, your 
children, your coworkers, your clients.  
 
Sales people wanting to increase sales may not have a career problem. It may be a 
relationship problem. They may want to improve the relationships with their clients to 
make them trust them more, and want to buy more.  
 
Think in terms of these three categories and ask yourself, “What kind of things would 
you like to change? What kind of things would you like to improve upon?”  
58

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
The Magic Question 
The magic question which I like to ask people is,  
 
If there were no restrictions—in other words, if you knew you could succeed—what 
would you do?  
 
If I had a magic wand in my hand right now and I could wave it three times and at the 
end of the third wave you would be whatever way you wanted to be, and everything 
would be the way you would want to have it, how would the world be?  
 
What would you be capable of doing and what would you just experiment with, just to 
find out how much fun it could be?  
 
Think about this and choose one topic that you would like to work on. It could be stress 
relief. It could be accelerated learning. It could be to improve a relationship, or it could 
be a financial goal. Just choose one so that we can use that as an example to work 
through the SMART goals formula.  
 
I'm going to assume that you’ve chosen a topic that you want to work through and create 
a goal around, which you'll then turn into a hypnotic, compelling item.  
 
SMART Goals 
Let's use the SMART formula now. SMART is an acronym that stands for five things.  
 
S stands for Specific,  
M stands for Measurable,  
A stands for Affect,  
R for Realistic and  
T for Timed.  
 
That’s Specific, Measurable, Affect, Realistic, and Timed. These are the five things that 
you must include inside a goal, in order to make sure that it works well.  
 
Specific 
By Specific, we mean we don’t want to have a vague goal. For example, if your goal is a 
financial one—you want to have more money—what is more money? If you get a regular 
paycheck, guess what? The minute your next paycheck comes home, you have more 
money. If you find five cents in the street, or a dollar bill, you’ve got more money. It may 
not be as much as you wanted, but that’s your fault for not asking for it.  
 
59

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
When you want to be specific, I mean be specific. Be exact. Put a number on it. Say you 
want to have another $50,000. You want to have another $374.24. The more specific you 
are, the easier it is to achieve it.  
 
Specific also means you're going to also make sure you have a positive goal, not a 
negative one. By negative I don’t mean you have a goal that’s bad for you. By negative I 
mean to have a goal that’s formulated in a positive frame.  
 
Remember what we said during suggestions? That you can't say to “not think of a red 
cat” without thinking of a red cat first?  
 
A poor goal, an unspecific goal is to say, “I don’t want to feel afraid. I don’t want to be 
coughing all the time. I don’t want to be in debt,” because that doesn’t tell you what you 
should be doing. It’s not very specific. It's only specific about what you don’t want.  
 
What is it that you do want?  
 
Stay clear of the negative and make sure that what you want is stated in some specific 
way.  
 
To help this is the next step: M for Measurable.  
 
Measurable 
In order to make something specific it really helps to have it measurable. You’ve got to 
figure out a way of knowing when you’ve achieved it.  
 
You see, sometimes people achieve a goal that they’ll never be able to test whether or not 
it's working. If they can't test whether it's working, how will they ever know that they’ve 
achieved it? They might spend the rest of their lives trying to achieve something that 
they’ve already achieved 50 years ago, and feel frustrated that they can't do it.  
 
The fact is, they can do it and they have done it. It’s just that they never stopped to figure 
out how they would know that they’ve achieved it, so that they would know when it was 
time to celebrate and pat themselves on the back and say, “Now I've got it.” 
 
The simplest way of doing something which is measurable is to ask yourself a question,: 
 
What will you be seeing, hearing, and feeling when you’ve achieved your goal?   
 
You’re going to create a scene. Think of a movie director trying to create a movie that 
will let you know you’ve achieved it now.  
 
Some examples might be picturing a fat wallet of cash that you pull out of your pocket. It 
could be that if you have a skin condition, you can see your skin being clear of it and 
60

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
feeling healthy. Whatever it is, make sure it's measurable so I will know when I have 
achieved what I want.  
 
Affect 
The third step is Affect. Affect stands for emotion. It's got to affect you in some way. In 
other words, your goals need to have an emotional content because your emotions are the 
fuel, the motivation that drives goals. Emotions are the fuel of the unconscious mind. 
 
If your goal hasn’t got a positive emotion, why should your unconscious mind do it?  
 
If your goal has a negative emotion, it may actually pull you away from it. You might 
imagine a goal that you think you want, but as you are imagining it or visualizing it or 
creating it, if you feel bad or frustrated or angry that’s just going to pull you away from 
the experience. Make sure the goals are specific, measurable, and have a positive affect; 
an emotional intensity. 
 
Realistic 
The next thing is to make sure it's Realistic. By realistic we don’t mean it in a sort of 
negative sense like, “That’s not realistic. That can't happen,” but realistic is in a sense of 
having control over it.  
 
Winning the lottery is not a realistic goal because you have no control over it. You might 
win it or you might not, but you don’t have any control over it.  
 
Writing a particularly good report or learning a language or increasing your vocabulary, 
these are all things that are in your control. They are realistic because they are things that 
you can influence by doing other things. Make sure it's realistic. It's something that’s 
within your power to achieve and not something which would require magic to achieve.  
 
Timed 
Finally, make sure you have a Time frame by which to achieve it. Just like being specific, 
wanting more money isn’t good enough. Just having a vague time in the future might 
mean that you never actually achieve it. Set a date on the experience. Set a date on the 
time you want to get the goal achieved.  
 
Sometimes there are occasions when you can't set a date, because the nature of the goal is 
one where time doesn’t really fit into it. For those kinds of goals, particularly continuing 
goals like improving your golf game, et cetera, just make sure you include the time 
element by saying when you're going to begin. “Begin right now. Begin on Tuesday. 
Begin next week, et cetera.” Timing can be a question of the end goal, when you actually 
achieve it. It can also be a question of when you begin it.  
 
61

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
That’s the SMART goal formula in action. I'm going to encourage you to just take a few 
moments before we move on to the next track and actually work through whatever goal 
that you have chosen for yourself. Work through it in the SMART goal formula.  
 
Make sure it's Specific. Make sure you Measure it. Make sure it has lots of emotion, that 
it's got an Affect for you. Make sure it's Realistic, and that it has some kind of Timing 
inside it. 
 
Once you have that, go on to the next recording and I'll show you how to turn those goals 
into golden suggestions.  
 
How To Create A Compelling Self-Suggestion 
Track 4 9:16 
 
I'm going to assume that you’ve taken a goal and you’ve put it through the SMART goal 
formula to make sure that it's as streamlined as possible for your success. The next thing 
to do is to take this goal and turn it into suggestions that you can use to program your 
unconscious mind, in order to get you what you want.  
 
You can think of your unconscious mind in some respects as a bit like a computer. If you 
program it to do certain things, it will do them. If you program it to reach certain 
outcomes, it will find ways of achieving that also. 
 
The Three Types Of Suggestions 
Essentially, there are three types of suggestions that you'll be able to use with any self-
hypnosis program. The first type is called a prehypnotic suggestion. Then you will have 
your regular hypnotic suggestions, and finally we have visualizations.  
 
Each one works in a slightly different way and has its own unique characteristics.  
 
A prehypnotic suggestion is a suggestion that you give yourself before you actually begin 
the hypnotic process. It's kind of like preparing your mind so when you go into hypnosis 
you don’t have to think about it anymore. Your mind just kind of refers back to them and 
does it automatically.  
 
A regular hypnotic suggestion is the closest thing to a regular hypnosis session that you'll 
come across. Basically, once you're in self-hypnosis you just talk to yourself as though 
you were talking to someone else. You give yourself the suggestions that you want.  
 
Finally, a visualization is basically using the principle of imagination in order to reach the 
unconscious mind.  
 
62

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
The Problem With Self-Suggestions 
Of all these types of suggestions, the regular hypnotic suggestion, believe it or not, is the 
most difficult to use during self-hypnosis. The reason for that is because it usually takes 
your intellect to kind of work out what to say. The minute you start using your intellect, 
there's a huge danger that your critical factor will come online and start ruining things for 
you.  
 
There is a real skill to be developed in order to be able to use regular hypnotic suggestion 
during self-hypnosis, without interfering. That’s basically when you really develop this 
idea of a receptive mind to its fullness. 
 
For the purposes of this program, because of the time that we have, I'm going to 
recommend that you ignore regular hypnotic suggestions for the purposes of self-
hypnosis at this point. Just go with prehypnotic suggestions and visualizations. 
 
Visualisations 
Let's turn to visualizations first of all, because they're the easiest ones to convert SMART 
goals into. If you think about it, in order to create a SMART goal you have at some level 
probably already created a mental movie of things you'll hear, things you'll feel, things 
you'll see as a result of achieving whatever your goal is. Believe it or not, that is your 
visualization.  
 
Going to the end point—when you’ve achieved everything and everything has turned out 
perfectly well for you—is something that you can mentally rehearse inside your mind. In 
other words, you're rehearsing the outcome inside your mind during self-hypnosis. At 
that point, you're done. 
 
Insider Secrets For Improved Visualisations 
There are a couple of refinements you can put onto this. One refinement is that you could 
actually go to the point after you’ve achieved something, when it's all over and it's no 
longer a big deal. At that point, you go to a point in the future where you have a history 
of having achieved it already.  
 
That’s a nice little trick to use when the goal that you are up against is something you 
really, really want to have. You almost want it too much, so you can't get some distance 
from it. By going to the future after you’ve already achieved it and it's no longer a big 
deal for you, it's an easy psychological trick for getting some distance. 
 
The other thing you can do is, instead of going to the future, you can go into a smaller 
step. You can actually begin to do things like rehearsing behavior. This is particularly 
good if you want to improve a skill; for example, a sport or playing the piano. At that 
point, when you go into hypnosis and begin to visualize things, you actually choose a 
skill set. For example, you choose swinging the golf club or perhaps playing a particular 
63

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
song, and you rehearse doing that as though it were the real thing, as though you were 
right there doing it.  
 
Remember of course ABS. You're using the visualization to stimulate your mind, but you 
still want “A.” You want your attention 110% focused on the activity that you are doing.  
 
How To Use Visualisations In Self Hypnosis 
To use visualization is very simple.  
 
1. You prepare yourself.  
2. You enter into a hypnotic trance in the method I'm going to show you.  
3. And then whilst you're in hypnosis you just imagine it.  
 
You picture it. You feel it. You go through whatever it is you decided to rehearse or to 
imagine, and at the end of it just come right on back and you just let it go, forget about it, 
and get on with your day. 
 
How To Turn A SMART Goal Into A Verbal Suggestion 
Next, let's turn our attention to how to change a goal and collapse it into a phrase or a 
hypnotic suggestion.  
 
First of all, there are certain rules that you want to apply when using suggestions on 
yourself.  
 
The Three Golden Rules 
The three basic rules are  
 
1. Keep it in the first person. Don’t say, “You're doing this,” or, “He's doing that.” 
Say, “I'm doing this. I'm doing that.” 
 
2. Keep it in the present tense. The unconscious mind doesn’t understand times. 
Time is a relative concept. If you think about it, time does not exist for you. All 
that exists is right now. When you think about the future, you're doing it now. 
When you think about the past, you're doing it now.  
 
Now is really the moment of power. It's where you get to change things, and it's really the 
moment that your unconscious mind understands the best. Keep it in the present tense so 
that you're not suggesting something that will always be in the future. Ultimately, you'll 
want the result to be one of the future “nows” that you'll experience. 
 
3. Finally, the third rule is keep it positive. Again, if you’ve created your SMART 
goals properly you will have no problem with this. By positive I mean don’t 
create negative goals. Don’t say things like, “I don’t have a headache. I don’t feel 
64

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
bad. I don’t feel uncomfortable.” Use positive suggestions like, “My head feels 
light and clear,” like “I feel confident,” like, “I have a million dollars.”  
 
The Law Of Parsimony 
Notice that all of these examples were actually quite short. You want to be able to 
encapsulate your hypnotic suggestion in 15 words or less. Don’t write long, complicated 
sentences. If you're going to have more than one sentence, make them two or three short 
sentences of just three or four words each.  
 
Keep it short. Keep it simple. Make it easy to remember. The very act of changing your 
goal into a short, simple, focused statement or suggestion is actually going to help you to 
prepare the mind really well, in order to create the effect of the hypnotic suggestion. 
 
The collapsed phrase, the “I'm feeling healthy. I’m confident,” et cetera, these kinds of 
phrases, if you put them into a SMART formula, might sound something like this.  
 
“On February 27th I'm feeling confident in my new job.”  
 
Maybe you can picture the new job or you can give it a job title, for example.  
 
That kind of puts everything you’ve learned together in one neat little package. That little 
package is something that you'll be able to use as a prehypnotic suggestion as well as a 
regular suggestion during hypnosis. It's easier to use as a prehypnotic suggestion because 
you can write it down and read it.  
 
Don’t Engage The Critical Factor 
If you want to do it during regular hypnosis you had better practice it a lot beforehand, 
because the last thing you want to do is be in hypnosis and trying to remember what it is 
that you wrote down or you decided to say. That, of course, is going to just trigger the 
critical factor again. It will be thinking, “Is this right? Is this good enough? Was a word 
missing?”  
 
That’s the last thing you want to do. Either rememorize the phrase thoroughly so you can 
remember it easily during your hypnotic session if you're going to use it for regular 
hypnosis, or just write it down and use it as a prehypnotic suggestion. 
 
If you do want to use regular hypnotic suggestions in self-hypnosis, here's a little trick for 
you that will make it much easier and keep the critical factor at bay.  
 
Basically, you're going to pull out of your suggestions or your SMART goal a whole 
bunch of hypnotic themes that help that goal. Then you're going to combine with power 
words. Then, just as the way you did during the hypnotic blitz that I showed you on the 
previous CD, you're going to basically run through a monologue inside your mind that’s 
going to motivate you and excite you and basically give a pep talk to your unconscious 
mind, using the power words and these hypnotic themes about your goal.  
65

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
It might sound something like this,  
 
“Every day and everywhere I'm feeling healthier and healthier. My lungs are fresh. My 
arms are strong. I have so much energy and vitality that I'm feeling more and more alive 
each day, more and more alive. The more alive I feel the clearer my lungs become, the 
more my energy rises up and the more I feel like doing exercise. I love doing exercise 
because the more I exercise the more amazing I feel inside.”  
 
Notice how that little example was just using the power words, the hypnotic themes 
around exercise or healthy living, and building that into a little mini-blitz that I can make 
up as I go along whilst I'm in self-hypnosis.  
 
 
A Step By Step Guide To This Easy Self Hypnosis Method 
Track 5 9:12 
 
I would like to describe to you the whole method, so that you understand how you're 
going to use self-hypnosis and how it works and all fits together before we actually install 
the method into you during a self-hypnosis procedure. The method itself is very 
straightforward.  
 
1. It starts off with a preparation phase.  
2. Then it goes to a prehypnotic suggestion phase.  
3. Then you induce the trance.  
4. You'll drift around in there for a while. 
5. And then you'll return. 
 
Step 1: Prepare Yourself 
To prepare, you're basically going to be looking at creating the right conditions in order 
for you to be able to get the most out of the hypnosis.  
 
Set Time Aside 
First of all, just choose a time and a place where you'll be doing this. It's ideal to do this 
in a quiet place where you won't be disturbed. Give yourself 15 minutes at least, maybe 
half an hour. Really, once you get used to it, you'll only need five or ten minutes.  
 
Minimise Distractions 
Try to make sure that there will be no outside distractions. That means you turn off your 
mobile phone. That means you lock up the dog. That means you ask someone else to take 
care of the children for a while and you take the phone off the hook. Just make sure 
nothing will intrude on you.  
 
 
66

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
The Safety Statements 
Then, as part of your preparation you're going to create certain statements, or safety 
statements; statements of intent to basically set up a session for you. These safety 
statements are actually prehypnotic suggestions that you give yourself, to make sure that 
everything turns out well.  
 
The safety statements basically are:  
 
1. whilst you're in hypnosis you want to give yourself a time limit so that you come 
back out of it spontaneously. If you don’t give yourself a time limit, you may 
have to keep opening your eyes to look at your clock and find out whether or not 
you’ve taken enough time up or something else has happened. When you go in, 
start getting used to saying, “I'm going into self-hypnosis for ten minutes,” for 
example. 
 
2. The next thing you want to do is to create the basic safety statement which says, 
“If anything should happen that requires my attention whilst I'm in hypnosis, I 
will wake up instantly, feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert, and ready to deal with 
the situation.”    
 
Basically, what this deals with is a situation where perhaps you're in a nice, deep, self-
hypnosis trance. You're drifting away. You're ignoring the outside world for awhile and 
your house catches fire. At that point, it would probably be a very good thing for you to 
come out of self-hypnosis and deal with the situation, rather than spending the next ten 
minutes in trance whilst the house burns around you.  
 
Time & Place 
You choose a time and a place. You create a safety statement where you choose a time. 
“For the next ten minutes I'm going to go into hypnosis, and should at any point during 
this self-hypnosis procedure something require my attention, an emergency or otherwise, 
I'll come back out feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert, instantly, so that I can deal with the 
situation quickly and efficiently.” That’s the preparation phase of it.  
 
Step 2: Prehypnotic Suggestions 
Now you're going to go into the official prehypnotic phase, in which you take out the 
suggestion that you’ve prepared previously. You’ve written it out on a little piece of 
paper and you're going to read it to yourself between five and ten times. Sometimes you'll 
get the feeling that just once is enough. Sometimes you may want to do it a few more 
times, but basically what you're doing at this point is filling your mind up with that 
suggestion.  
 
Don’t just fill up with the words. The words aren’t the really important part. The really 
important part is the meaning behind the words. Treat your prehypnotic suggestion slip as 
a kind of exercise in philosophy and ask yourself, “What do you mean?”  
 
67

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Make sure that those words represent the entire SMART goal, the things that you thought 
about going in, the things that you want to avoid, everything that goes around, that gets 
activated every time you read the prehypnotic suggestion. It becomes like a little red 
light, a little button that lights up all the associations you have to that. You want to get 
your mind really around it. You want to fill your mind completely with that idea before 
you begin with hypnosis, so that this is like the dominant idea that is inside your mind as 
you go into hypnosis.  
 
Of course, just like when you’ve had a really busy day or a day with a really dominant 
theme and you end up going to sleep at night and dreaming about that, so the same is true 
in hypnosis. When you fill your mind up with some dominant ideas or dominant theme 
and you go into self-hypnosis, that dominant idea will be the guiding theme throughout 
your self-hypnosis session.  
 
Step 3: Induce Trance 
Then you induce a trance. I'll describe to you in a moment how you do this. Then once 
you're in a trance, you just allow yourself to drift. Don’t do anything in particular.  
 
Step 4: Drift 
You may have a kind of hypnotic dream, a kind of a daydream about the things that you 
thought about. That’s fine. You may think about different things. That’s fine. You may 
not think that you're thinking about anything at all, and that is also fine.  
 
The key idea is to allow your unconscious mind freedom to express itself and do with the 
suggestions whatever it wants to. It needs to absorb them in its own way. Just drift 
around. Enjoy the experience. It will be very pleasant.  
 
Step 5: Return 
Then at the end of the time, return. How do you know it's time to return? You'll kind of 
get a feeling. You'll get a sense that it's time for your eyes to open. Maybe a little voice 
will tell you that your ten minutes are up, or your fifteen minutes are up. You may get 
some other version of this.  
 
Importantly, when you get a sense that it's time to return, just bring yourself back. Just 
allow yourself to kind of notice where your legs are, your feet are, your hands; bring 
yourself back into your body. Open your eyes. Take a few deep breaths, and you'll 
probably want to stand up and have a nice big stretch to make sure that everything is back 
in its normal place.  
 
Priming Your Inner Clock 
At this point, you will want to have a quick look at your watch to check how long you 
were in hypnosis. Some of you will go into self-hypnosis and you'll hit it right on the 
68

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
button. In other words, every time that you do this—and let's say you're going to spend 
15 minutes in trance—you’ll come back out and exactly 15 minutes will have passed. 
That will be a certain amount of you as you try that.  
 
Some of you will miss on the time. In other words, you'll do it a little bit too short or a 
little bit too long. Really don’t concern yourself about this just now. Just note the time. 
Just go, “Uh huh. That was the time. That’s how long it really took.” Next time when you 
do your preparation phase again, tell yourself, “Ten minutes, twelve minutes,” whatever, 
and really focus on the time.  
 
What will happen over repetition is that your unconscious mind will begin to hook up 
clock time with internal time. When you hook up clock time with internal time, you'll be 
able to basically tell the time any time of day, wherever you are, just by listening to your 
unconscious mind. It can be very, very accurate. 
 
I'll give you an example of how this works. I have not used an alarm clock since I think it 
was 1995, when I first learned this method. Since that day I have not used an alarm clock, 
ever. I just use my unconscious mind and tell it when to wake me up in the mornings. 
This is how good you can get.  
 
Summary Of The 5 Steps 
The stages again:  
 
1. Prepare: get a time and place where you'll be left undisturbed, create a safety 
statement and a time statement, “I'm going to go into hypnosis for the next 12 
minutes. If at any point in time during this 12 minutes an emergency should arise 
or some other reason comes that needs my attention on the outside, I will 
instantly wake up feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert, and ready to deal with 
whatever requires my attention.” 
 
2. Then you'll go to your prehypnotic statement. You will read your card aloud, 
along the lines of, “It is the 12th of February 2050. I have a bank account with 50 
million dollars in it and I'm very happy.” You read that through, and you read 
through and get the full emotion of that. You read through over and over again. 
You fill your mind with that experience.  
 
3. Once you’ve got that experience dominating inside your mind, you'll go through 
the trance process.  
 
4. You'll drift, allowing your unconscious mind to do whatever it wants. Then you 
return. You stretch. You check the time. You’re done. 
 
There is a slight alternative to this version. The alternative is, instead of drifting during 
the trance phase allowing your unconscious mind to do whatever it wants to do, you can 
instead use your visualization at this point to really rehearse the outcome or the skill that 
69

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
you want to have. This is particularly useful, by the way, if you want to improve a certain 
skill.  
 
Use your prehypnotic suggestion, for example. “My golf swing is improving more and 
more. I have a perfect golf swing.”  
 
At that point when you go into the trance, instead of drifting you just imagine all the 
movements of that golf swing. You may only imagine it first in slow motion, so you'll 
have everything being in perfect alignment. You might get the feel, the angle of your 
hips, everything put in place.  
 
You repeat it over and over and over again for as long as your time allows.  
 
5. When you get a sense that your time has run out, you come back out. Like 
before, have a quick stretch and check the time on your watch. Just make sure 
that your unconscious mind can hook up clock time with internal time. 
 
How To Go Into Self Hypnosis 
Track 6 4:38 
 
Now that you understand the procedure, how are you going to actually induce a trance in 
yourself?  
 
The good news is that everything you’ve learned so far still counts. That means all the 
inductions that you’ve learned about so far can still be used to induce a trance in yourself 
right now. It will work really well.  
 
To make things easier for you I'm going to show you one more method, a method which 
is going to make it much easier and simpler to go into self-hypnosis. It has a whole bunch 
of interesting things built into it, as well.  
 
This method is based on the iMethod, which is a kind of mind training program that you 
can put yourself through in order to basically achieve all the other things you want out of 
life. It’s a much more involved method.  
 
The basic element of the iMethod can be used really easily in order to induce a trance in 
yourself. How do you do this?  
 
The Step by Step Self Hypnosis Method 
1. Very simply, you begin with eye fixation, as with many of the other methods 
you’ve learned. You'll choose a spot on the wall out in front of you which is 
slightly above eye level, so that your eyes lift up a little bit above the horizontal.  
 
70

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
2. The next step is to focus on that spot with utter intensity. You'll find that you'll 
begin to strain a little bit; especially the muscles around the eyes will strain to try 
to get a microscopic focus on that particular spot.  
 
3. When you feel that strain, just allow the muscles to relax. As you allow the 
muscles around your eyes to relax, typically what will happen is that your vision 
will soften. You'll begin to see more and more of the room. Whereas before, 
when you're concentrating hard you focus down onto that spot, when you soften 
your eyes you begin to see more and more of the things around you. You’re 
activating your peripheral vision.  
 
This is important, because your peripheral vision is tied directly to something known as 
the relaxation response. You have the stress response and the relaxation response for 
flight or fight, and relaxation. Those are two different parts of neurology, the sympathetic 
and the parasympathetic nervous system, so by going to peripheral vision you're actually 
stimulating the relaxation response in you. As you know, the relaxation is a great 
doorway into hypnosis.  
 
You're going to fix your attention on a spot on the wall. Focus so intently that you begin 
to screw up your eyes a little bit and get a little bit of tension in your eyes. Then you're 
going to relax all the muscles in your eyes to the point where your vision softens and 
begins to spread out. Allow it to spread out like a pond, so that you have ripples on a 
pond spreading out more and more widely.  
 
4. Once it’s beginning to spread out enough, you'll notice that your breathing will 
shift. It will change gears. As your vision expands, enjoy the sensation. At the 
right time I will point your attention down to your breathing and you'll notice that 
your breathing has changed. This is a great sign that the relaxation response has 
been triggered.  
 
5. At that point you can just simply close your eyes and you’re pretty much in a 
nice, comfortable trance state. Now you can drift, or if you prefer you can create 
some lovely visualizations.  
 
If you find drifting not such a pleasant experience you can use your visualizations, and 
rather than visualizing the goal you can just visualize a really pleasant scene like we 
talked about before, the forest or seaside scene, something that you find very relaxing.  
 
When you visualize that relaxing scene, of course in the back of your mind your 
unconscious mind is working through those prehypnotic suggestions that you’ve created.  
 
6. Like before, as soon as you feel that the moment has come to return, just bring 
yourself back refreshed, relaxed, and alert. Stretch. Check the time out and you're 
pretty much done.  
 
71

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
That’s the method that I'm going to take you through. In the next track, I'm going to 
install that method in you by going through a little hypnotic procedure which is going to 
start with this method, and then is going to go into a deeper hypnotic process inside. That 
prehypnotic process will basically condition you to the self-hypnosis process and make it 
easier for you.  
 
I'm going to use suggestions along the lines that it's going to help you have fun, make it 
more enjoyable, that you can use it every day. It's going to help you rest, and achieve 
your goals, and make you more happy and confident as a person. These are the kinds of 
suggestions I’m going to use, just so you know up front what's going to happen.  
 
Of course the next track is hypnotic. If you're operating any kind of machinery or driving 
a car, just stop whatever you're doing before you go on to listen. Really focus your 
attention on the installation of this self-hypnosis method. 
 
Self Hypnosis Installation 
Track 7 20:31 
 
We’re going to begin the installation of the self-hypnosis method using the iMethod. Just 
make yourself comfortable and select a point on the wall out in front of you, a little bit 
above eye level.  
 
Select that point and fix all your attention on that point. Begin to make out the minutest 
details that you are capable of at this point in time. Focus all your attention on that point 
and notice how that brings a little bit of strain into your eyes.  
 
Just relax your eyes. Relax the muscles around your eyes. As you feel the muscles around 
your eyes relaxing you'll notice that your vision tends to expand, like ripples on a pond. 
Allow your vision to expand easily and naturally, as you begin to go into hypnotic 
experience to master the art of self-hypnosis.  
 
As that vision continues to expand, you can see more and more of the room; perhaps the 
ceiling, the walls and the different colors and textures. There is no need to make any 
distinction anymore between one spot or another, and other things. Just notice how, as 
your vision expands, there is a tendency for your breathing to shift, to calm down, to 
become deeper, more even, easy, and more comfortable. 
 
As soon as you notice your breathing has shifted just close your eyes. Close your eyes 
and allow that sense of peace and comfort to drift throughout your mind and your body. 
With your eyes closed, I'm going to invite your attention to different parts of your 
experience in order to help you to relax even more deeply into hypnosis, and really 
establish a solid foundation for your ability to use self-hypnosis to achieve any goal that 
you want.  
 
72

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Pay attention to the top of your head; the skin around your scalp and the top of your 
head. As you pay attention to this part of your head you'll notice that it's easy to relax the 
top of your head. As you relax the top of your head you can realize that hypnosis and 
self-hypnosis is easy. It's fun. Self-hypnosis is an enjoyable and comforting experience.  
 
As you continue to drift ever deeper into a more comfortable state of hypnosis, I would 
like for you to realize the sounds around you really aren’t important. You can hear and 
notice all kinds of things and that just helps you to focus inside. In your eyes for example, 
focus your attention on your eyes, the muscles around your eyelids and feel them relax. 
As the muscles around your eye relax, you can relax all the way down into hypnosis.  
 
The deeper you go, the more you relax. The sound of my voice will be with you and help 
you to relax even more comfortably, and open your mind to the power of self-hypnosis. 
Self-hypnosis is not just easy but thoroughly enjoyable.  
 
It's a powerful experience that will allow you to rest and recuperate through all the 
things that have happened in your day, so that in a few minutes of hypnosis you'll have 
the experience of having rested as well and comfortably as an entire nighttime of sleep. 
Your goals can be achieved more easily when you use self-hypnosis to focus your 
attention.  
 
Just focus your attention now on your shoulders. As you focus, your shoulders begin to 
relax more and more comfortably, more and more deeply, more and more enjoyably, 
letting go of all the stress and tension, and feeling a warm blanket of relaxation, of 
comfort and ease descending upon you. As you feel more and more comfortable, you 
realize how restful and peaceful self-hypnosis is.  
 
Self-hypnosis is easy, fun, and totally enjoyable. It gives you a tremendous amount of rest 
and ability to recuperate. Because your body knows it's good for you, because your mind 
knows it's good for you and because your unconscious mind knows that self-hypnosis is 
good for you, you'll begin to find yourself practicing self-hypnosis on a daily basis.  
 
Self-hypnosis is healthy. Self-hypnosis is fun. Self-hypnosis is good for you. You can enjoy 
looking forward to your daily practice of self-hypnosis, a time to recharge your batteries, 
a time to prepare the future, a time to let good things come to you, attracting them like a 
magnet attracts iron filings.  
 
I would like you to focus on your ribcage and your breathing. Notice how your chest, 
your ribs, and your breathing can relax, even feel the comfort of relaxation; relaxing 
your breathing, relaxing your ribs, your entire chest area.  
 
As you feel that relaxation, a good, calm, confident feeling can grow inside you because 
in self-hypnosis you're talking directly to your unconscious mind, and that is 
tremendously powerful. It will help you become more confident as a person, healthier, 
and happier. Anything that can be improved in your life can be improved quicker, more 
73

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
easily, and with greater fun and amazing results using the power of self-hypnosis. So you 
can use self-hypnosis to achieve all the things that you want.  
 
Now you're going deeper and deeper, more and more comfortable, more and more 
relaxed. Pay attention to your arms. Feel your arms relaxing, sinking down, loose and 
relaxed, limp, heavy, a wonderful feeling. Because you're feeling so wonderful right now, 
because your body is so relaxed, you're recovering your vitality, you're revitalizing, 
becoming full of energy, happier and more confident.  
 
Through hypnosis you can become happier and more confident and become happier as a 
person, which means that your confidence grows on a day by day basis. Because self-
hypnosis is so easy, because self-hypnosis is so much fun, you might find yourself doing it 
every day, and looking forward to your next opportunity to experience self-hypnosis once 
again.  
 
Pay attention to your lower abdomen, your hips, and your lower back. The whole lower 
portion of your body can relax just as completely, just as easily, just as comfortably as 
everywhere else. As you're relaxing so comfortably, your unconscious mind is learning 
that in self-hypnosis you learn to relax and become more comfortable as a person, which 
means you become more resilient to life. Resilient people achieve their goals more easily. 
Self-hypnosis helps you achieve your goals more quickly and more easily. 
 
Already you’ve achieved one important goal. Right now you’re feeling deeply relaxed, 
comfortable, and at ease. You can take that ease and memorize it thoroughly. Find your 
way back to it any time you want or need to.  
 
You'll find this inner peace and tranquility every single time that you go into self-
hypnosis. Your unconscious mind will take your prehypnotic suggestions, your regular 
hypnotic suggestions, your visualizations, and respond to them. In self-hypnosis you can 
program your unconscious mind to do what you want, achieve what you want, overcome 
any problem; lead a happy, rewarding, and successful life. 
 
Now pay attention to your thighs and the upper portion of your legs. Feel your thighs 
relaxing as I take you deeper and deeper into a very pleasant, very tranquil, very 
peaceful hypnotic trance, in which your unconscious mind begins to acquire mastery over 
this self-hypnosis process.  
 
Self-hypnosis is easy. Self-hypnosis is fun. Self-hypnosis is deeply enjoyable, which is why 
you can practice self-hypnosis daily, enjoy it daily, and look forward to your next 
opportunity to practice self-hypnosis again. 
 
Pay attention to your lower legs, your calves, and your feet, and allow these to relax 
thoroughly. As your calves and your feet relax thoroughly, you can enjoy a tremendous 
sense of excitement, of looking forward to using self-hypnosis in your own life, using self-
hypnosis as a force for good in your own life. Achieve any goal, overcome any problem, 
74

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
become more creative, learn things more quickly. This is all possible through the power 
of self-hypnosis.  
 
I'm going to count from five down to one, and with each number between five and one 
you're going to go ten times more deeply relaxed, ten times deeper into hypnosis, so that 
by the time I come to the count of one you'll be at the perfect level of hypnosis, the perfect 
level of relaxation in order for your unconscious mind to program in and permanently 
acquire the skill of self-hypnosis for you to use in your whole life.  
 
Ready now: five, feel going deeper. Four, deeper, deeper, and deeper. Three, all the way 
down into a comfortable, relaxed, amazing hypnotic experience. Two, your unconscious 
mind preparing to absorb the self-hypnosis process. One, deeply relaxed, deep hypnosis. 
Ready to master the self-hypnosis process because from this day forward, anytime that 
you want to go into hypnosis for the purposes of self-hypnosis, you're going to begin by 
preparing yourself.  
 
You're going to choose a time and a place where they are free from distractions. You'll 
decide on how long you want to go into self-hypnosis and then you'll tell yourself, “I'm 
going to go into self-hypnosis,” and you insert the amount of time.  
 
“If at any point during this time something should happen on the outside that requires my 
attention, I will awaken instantly feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert; ready to deal with the 
situation.” If there is an emergency or some other reason for you to come out of 
hypnosis, you will do so instantly after preparing yourself, making the time and safety 
statement.  
 
You're going to break out your prehypnotic suggestions and read through them five, ten, 
twelve times, however often seems right to fill your mind with the idea of the prehypnotic 
suggestion. Then you're going to go into trance, but by looking at the spot on the wall 
slightly above eye level, focusing all your attention until you feel some tension in your 
eyes.  
 
Then as you relax your eyes, allowing your vision to expand into peripheral vision, allow 
that to continue and your breathing will shift; and you'll feel your breathing shifting. Just 
close your eyes and go deep, deep into hypnosis, as deep as you are now, or deeper still.  
 
Then you can allow yourself to drift through a pleasant, hypnotic, and tranquil 
experience, or visualize a scene before returning at the right time, the time that you 
determined during the preparation stage. When you return you'll stand up, stretch, and 
look at your watch, so that your unconscious mind can connect your clock time with your 
inner time. It’s as simple as that.  
 
You prepare yourself by setting a time and making a safety statement. You read through 
your prehypnotic suggestions to fill your mind up and you fix your attention on a point 
just slightly above eye level until you feel a slight tension.  
 
75

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Then you relax your eyes. Let them soften, your vision expanding like ripples on a pond 
until you feel your breathing shifting. When your breathing shifts, simply close your eyes 
and allow yourself to drift through the hypnotic experience, or visualize a calming scene, 
or visualize a goal or a skill.  
 
When it's time for you to return you'll know, and you'll bring yourself back by 
reanimating your body, reinvigorating yourself. Your breathing will come back to 
normal. Your eyes will open up. You'll open your eyes feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert; 
simply fantastic.  
 
You'll get up and stretch. Look at the clock so that you can check and coordinate clock 
time with inner time. Now self-hypnosis has been installed in the unconscious level. It's 
easy to do. It's easy to remember, and it's fun to go through life using self-hypnosis.  
 
Now, in a moment I'm going to count from one to five. At the count of five you'll come 
back out of trance feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert, simply fantastic; knowing that self-
hypnosis has been induced at the deepest unconscious level.  
 
Every time you go into self-hypnosis it will be easier to use self-hypnosis. It will be more 
fun and more enjoyable, and you can look forward to using self-hypnosis on a daily basis 
to improve yourself and enjoy all the benefits that self-hypnosis has to offer.  
 
So as I count from one to five you will become more and more alert. At the count of five 
your eyes will open up. You'll feel refreshed, relaxed, alert, simply fantastic; knowing 
that you have self-hypnosis and you can find your way back to it any time you want.  
 
Ready now: one, coming up slowly. Two, feeling more alert. Three, your breathing is 
beginning to shift. Four, allow your sensations to come back to your hands, your feet, all 
the normal sensations; and five, open your eyes feeling refreshed, relaxed, alert, simply 
fantastic.  
 
Take a few moments to orient yourself, and congratulate yourself for having installed 
self-hypnosis successfully at the unconscious level.   
 
Self Hypnosis Debrief 
Track 8 1:41 
 
Congratulations and welcome back. That induction allowed you to install the self-
hypnosis process inside of yourself, so that your unconscious mind gets used to the habit 
and the way of doing it.  
 
The way you can basically condition yourself to be able to use self-hypnosis constantly is 
very simple. Go back to the previous track and listen to it several times, maybe once a 
day. If you have time, maybe twice a day. Each time just allow your mind to go to that 
special calm, relaxed, and tranquil state.  
76

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
As you do this, the actual experience of hypnosis will be conditioned inside of you and 
make it easier for you to find again. Then when you think you’ve found it, in other words 
when you have been guided through it a few times and you're kind of familiar with the 
territory, I would like for you to go on to the next track.  
 
How To Do Self Hypnosis By Yourself 
On the next track I'm going to basically give you the beginning part of that process again, 
without the ending. This time, instead of guiding you all the way through I'm just going 
to point out the steps of the process, roughly in time with when they will happen. You, of 
course, end up doing the steps in the process this way.  
 
This way you kind of wean yourself off the main induction and you begin to slowly go 
under hypnosis under your own steam. Eventually you can even let go of the following 
track, the one that I've got for you, and you'll still be able to go into hypnosis any time 
you want or need to. As soon as you have a little bit of experience with the installation 
induction, just go on to the next track and see how far you can go under your own steam. 
 
The Self Hypnosis Live Practice Assistant 
Track 9 2:48 
 
This is the live assistant to help you on your steps to using self-hypnosis by yourself, 
whenever you want to. Just make yourself comfortable and begin the preparation phase 
for self-hypnosis. In other words, tell yourself how long you want this hypnotic session to 
last. “This hypnotic session is going to last five minutes,” let's say.  
 
Then remind yourself of the safety statement. ”If at anytime during the course of this 
hypnosis session you should need to come back and be fully alert for an emergency, or if 
someone else needs your attention, you'll come back instantly feeling refreshed, relaxed, 
alert; ready to deal with the situation in hand.” Very good.  
 
Now pick up your prehypnotic suggestions on a piece of paper and read through them a 
few times. I'll be silent for a few minutes to give you a chance to read through them a few 
times. 
 
[silence] 
 
Very good. Now if you should need more time to read through your prehypnotic 
suggestions, just pause this recording for a while and start it up again as soon as you're 
ready to begin with the induction. 
 
To begin the induction, make yourself comfortable. Choose a spot above eye level and 
focus your attention on it until you feel sudden tension. That’s right. Now relax your eyes 
until you can begin to see more and more of the room. Very good.  
77

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
 
Continue to relax your eyes until you begin to sense your breathing shifted. Pay attention 
to that breathing, and then just simply close your eyes and continue the rest of the 
hypnotic process by yourself, until you're ready to bring yourself back out. 
 
How To Practice Self Hypnosis 
Track 10 3:17 
 
If you have followed this program step by step up to this point, then by now you will 
have installed self-hypnosis at an unconscious level and even practiced going into self-
hypnosis, following the rough guide in the previous track. Now you have everything you 
need in order to be able to achieve all the different goals and use the power of self-
hypnosis in your own life.  
 
The only question that remains is, how do you practice? How often do you do it and 
when and where do you do it?  
 
When & Where To Practice 
The simple answer to this is you can practice as often as you like, really. However, once 
you hit three sessions per day you kind of hit diminishing returns. I would say try to 
practice at least once a day, and go up to no more than three sessions a day. If you decide 
you want to do that, maybe do some in the morning, maybe at lunchtime, and in the 
evening.  
 
How long should the session be?  
I would say spend at least five minutes, and go into as long as fifteen minutes if you 
want. You can spend longer if you want, half an hour or an hour, but really five to fifteen 
minutes is an ideal time. Always choose the time ahead of time, and remind yourself in 
the preparation how long you wish to take.  
 
Stay Alert 
Remember the key thing is that you remain kind of alert as you drift through this trance. 
You do not want to be falling asleep and waking up an hour or so later. If that happens, 
don’t concern yourself with it. Just remember to be more aware. You're looking for a 
receptive mind, not a mind that’s asleep.  
 
When your mind is receptive you're kind of aware of things, but it's sort of a detached 
state where nothing really matters, where nothing is really important. It feels good and it's 
very comfortable. When you're asleep, of course—well, you should know what it's like to 
be asleep.  
 
78

 
© 2008 Street Hypnosis – http://www.StreetHypnosis.com 
 
Practice Regularly 
The final idea that I want to leave you with is the idea of practicing regularly. It's better to 
do five minutes a day every day than that you save it all up into maybe half an hour over 
the weekend or an hour once a month. So five minutes a day of regular practice is the 
best. One way to achieve this is to choose a time of day that you do it.  
 
Perhaps you're at your freshest in the morning when you get up. That’s the perfect time to 
do it. Perhaps you're at your freshest in the evening. If you're an evening person, do it 
then.  
 
Perhaps it doesn’t really matter what time of day you do it, and then it doesn’t matter; in 
which case I would strongly suggest that you still pick a time and do it at the same time 
every day. You see, the unconscious mind is a creature of habit and the more you can 
create a habit—the same place, the same time, the same environment—the more the 
unconscious mind kind of gets used to the ritual, when we just do it.  
 
If you’ve got a crazy schedule where you sometimes come in late, sometimes come in 
early, and you really can't say what time you'll have spare to do self-hypnosis, the two 
times which are ideal to choose will be just after you wake up and just before you go to 
bed. These are two times that will always be set in your life, no matter how crazy your 
schedule is. You'll always be going to bed at some point and you'll always be getting up 
at some point.  
 
With these thoughts, all I have left to do is to wish you all the best success in using the 
power of hypnosis in your own life. 
 
End Of CD 
Track 11 2:22 
 
This is the end of CD Three and with it is the end of this program. If you liked the things 
you discovered here and would like to explore the power of self-hypnosis more deeply, 
then come and have a look at my home study course called “The Power of Self-Hypnosis 
for Guaranteed Results.” You'll find all the details on my Web site:  
 
www.PowerSelfHypnosis.com 
 
It's all one word. 
 
I would like to thank you for accompanying me on this journey through “The Secrets of 
Street Hypnosis,” and I hope that you enjoyed learning these fascinating skills as much as 
I did. Perhaps we'll have the chance to meet again on another audio seminar, or live and 
in person. Until then, I want to wish you great success in your use of Street Hypnosis.  
 
79

