Ventus; Ventus Publishing ApS
Study in Scandinavia
Download free books at

2 
 
 
 
  
Ventus Publishing ApS
 
Study in Scandinavia
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

3 
 
 
 
Study in Scandinavia 
© 2009 Ventus Publishing ApS 
ISBN 978-87-7681-502-8
 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
4 
Contents
Contents
Study in Denmark – and create an excellent platform 
for your future career
Overview of Universities in Denmark
Copenhagen Business School (CBS)
Interview with exchange students
The University of Copenhagen (KU)
Interview with exchange students
Roskilde University (RUC)
Interview with exchange students
Aarhus School of Business (ASB)
Interview with exchange students
Aarhus University (Institute of Business and Technology)
Interview with exchange students
Aalborg University (AAU)
Interview with exchange students
Overview of Universities in Norway
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration (NHH)
Interview with exchange students
 
5
9
10
11
13
14
16
17
19
20
22
22
24
24
26
28
29
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
5 
Study in Denmark
Study in Denmark – and create an excellent platform 
for your future career
CIRIUS is the national agency for internationalisation of education and training within the Ministry of 
Science, Technology and Innovation. 
Danish higher education institutions have a lot to offer international students. Whether you are 
coming to Denmark as part of your study programme at your home institution (as an exchange 
student) or to study for a full degree programme, our highly international institutions offer a range 
of excellent study opportunities. More than 200 degree programmes (most of them at Master’s level) 
and over 1,000 individual modules taught entirely in English are avail-able at Danish institutions.  
Danish higher education is well-known for its unique teaching approach. The institutions offer a 
dynamic study environment, emphasising independent study, initiative and project-oriented learning. 
As a student at a Danish higher education institution you are encouraged to play an active role in 
your learning process and take responsibility for planning and carrying out your projects, either 
independently or together with other students. In addition to attending lec-tures, you will be expected 
to participate in discussions and continuously develop your critical thinking and analytical skills. 
For international students, the Danish approach to teaching and learning can introduce a whole new 
way of studying and thinking, which will challenge you and provide you with an excellent platform for 
your future career. 
All Danish higher education institutions have established co-operation with business, industry 
as well as research & development institutes, which creates an enriching and dynamic learning 
environment for the students. Some courses have integrated placements, which provide students 
with an opportu-nity to apply their theoretical knowledge and gain practical experience.
A Danish education provides you with 
• 
Strong analytical and communicative skills
• 
The ability to work independently and in groups
• 
An international profile
• 
A good foundation for your future career
What do our students say? 
A recent survey conducted amongst more than 3,500 international students studying in Denmark 
showed that: 
• 
78% would recommend Denmark as a study destination
• 
93% consider Denmark to be a safe country to live in
• 
85% are satisfied with their overall institution experience
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
6 
Study in Denmark
PRACTICAL INFORMATION 
Accreditation and quality assurance
Higher education in Denmark is regulated by the state and all public institutions are subject to 
continuous approval and evaluation processes. The institutions have a high degree of autonomy, 
but they are required to follow the national regulations. This ensures that all students obtain an 
education of the highest quality. A national, fully independent accreditation agency assures the 
quality and relevance of the higher education programmes. Furthermore, many Danish institutions 
have obtained – where relevant - international accreditation for their programmes. 
Tuition fees
Higher education is usually provided free of charge for all EU/EEA citizens. 
About Denmark – a knowledge-based society
Denmark is a small Scandinavian country, located in Northern Europe. The total population is 
approximately 5.3 million. Denmark is an internationally ori-ented country and has been a member 
of the EU since 1973. The country has had a significant influence on both environmental and social 
issues in the EU as well as the enlargement process. 
Denmark is a modern, democratic, knowledge-based society known for its extensive welfare system. 
The distribution of wealth is relatively even, and Danes enjoy free education, free medical treatment, 
etc. The country is recognised for its high-quality research in areas such as biotechnology, food sci-
ence and environmental protection.
Living in Denmark
Thanks to the country’s international outlook, visitors find it easy to live and study in Denmark. Most 
Danes speak English fluently as their second language, and you will find easy access to international 
television channels, for-eign newspapers etc. 
The Danes are generally informal, helpful and tolerant. They value individual freedom, equality 
and their social life. They have a love for small cafés, pubs, and social gatherings, which form an 
important part of the Danish culture. Denmark is known as a country with a high personal safety – 
even the Queen can go shopping with a minimum of security personnel.
Working in Denmark
The work culture in Denmark is characterised by a non-hierarchical structure and open dialogue 
between management and employees. It is team-oriented, and the working environment is open and 
informal. Danish companies offer flexible working conditions and modern facilities. The enhancement 
of qualifications is a high priority and most workplaces offer continuing education to their employees.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
7 
Study in Denmark
Social life 
An active social life is an essential part of student life and a great way to meet other students in 
Denmark. Major cities have a students house with cultural activities. 
  
Introductory programmes for international students 
As a service to international students, many Danish institutions have established a “buddy-
programme” aimed at helping international students to get settled more easily. On arrival, a “buddy” 
(a current student) will help the students to get settled, meet other students and assist them with 
practical matters in their first weeks at the institution. 
The welcome programmes and the courses in Danish language and culture provide international 
students with another opportunity to familiarise themselves with their host country and meet other 
international and Danish students. 
Campus life 
Only a few Danish higher education institutions are campus-based, so the campus environment that 
you may know from your home country or other countries, does not exist to the same extent in 
Denmark. However, this does not mean that there is a lack of social life or facilities at the Danish 
higher education institutions. The social life at most institutions is vibrant and varied. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

Study in Scandinavia
 
8 
Study in Denmark
Most institutions have several committees or societies that organise activities, such as excursions, 
student politics, parties and cafés. A special feature is the Fredagsbar , which is held on Friday 
afternoons. This is an event you should not miss, if you want to experience the typical Danish student 
life. 
There are numerous ways of socialising as a student in Denmark. Most studies involve team work and 
in many cases these groups facilitate the close con-tact between students. The groups are formed by 
students with the same interests or taking the same exams, or by students who simply enjoy working 
together and supporting each other in their studies. Group work therefore gives you an excellent 
opportunity to get to know Danish students.
Would you like more information? 
Further information about our institutions, programmes, student life, etc. is available at 
www.studyindenmark.dk. 
You are also welcome to send an email to studyindenmark@ciriusmail.dk 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
9 
Overview of Universities
Overview over Universities in Denmark
ZEALAND
CBS – Copenhagen Business School
www.cbs.dk
DTU – Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
www.dtu.dk
IHK – Ingeniørhøjskolen i København
www.ihk.dk
ITU – IT Universitetet
www.itu.dk
KU – Københavns Universitet
www.ku.dk
RUC – Roskilde Universitet
www.ruc.dk
SOUTH DENMARK REGION
SDU – Syddansk Universitet
www.sdu.dk
CENTRAL JUTLAND
ASB – Aarhus School of Business
www.asb.dk
AU – Aarhus Universitet
www.au.dk
AU-HIH – Handels- og Ingeniørhøjskolen i Herning
hih.au.dk
IHA – Ingeniørhøjskolen i Århus
www.iha.dk
NORTHERN JUTLAND
AAU – Aalborg Universitet
www.aau.dk
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
10 
Copenhagen Business School
Diversity creating knowledge at CBS
An international business school
Copenhagen Business School is an internationally 
reputable business school known for its diverse and 
multicultural atmosphere. CBS offers a broad range of both 
undergraduate and graduate programmes that provide 
students with a number of advantages and opportunities.
One of the largest business schools in Europe
Currently, CBS has 16,101 students and an annual intake 
of approx. 1,400 exchange students. With this number of 
students as well as 530 full-time researchers and 1,000 
administrative staff members, CBS is one of the largest 
business schools in Europe.
Where university means business
The atmosphere at CBS is intellectual, but always in a way 
that keeps the reality of corporate life firmly in focus. At the 
same time, by offering a wide range of cultural activities 
and social events, CBS makes an effort to contribute to a 
fun and dynamic study environment.
Join us!	 	
	
	
         Visit us at cbs.dk
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
11 
Copenhagen Business School
Experiences of an exchange student
 Andrea Goeres, age 21, Canada
“I had a really positive overall impression from the very beginning of my exchange until the end. 
Everything in the first few weeks ran so smoothly. I was so impressed about how there were activities 
planned every day and every night so that we could all get to know each other. Denmark, in general, 
was so beautiful and it was great that in the first few weeks we were able to go on a tour of Copenhagen 
with the Introduction leaders. As the semester went on I was able to explore so many different parts 
of Copenhagen and began to really make it my home.”
On my first day in Denmark, I was a little apprehensive about settling in to my new place. Luckily, 
CBS has a buddy system and my Danish buddy had already friend-ed me on Facebook and offered 
to pick me up from the airport. She had already been to the International Office and picked up my 
Welcome Package as well as my key and all of the paperwork that needed to be filled out. She 
actually even brought her boyfriend along so that he could drive us (and my huge suitcases) to my 
dorm rather than having to lug everything on the Metro. After about 20 hours of travelling I was SO 
glad she thought of that!
How the Danish look at a “balanced lifestyle” is so appealing to me. I was surprised to find that not 
only are there bars in a few of the school buildings, it’s also possible to buy beer in the cafeteria. Even 
though CBS has beautiful facilities for studying, the 3 floor library at Solberg Plads, for example, 
which is equipped with computer rooms, lockers, group study rooms and lamps and power points in 
each cubicle, the school puts on a great party every Thursday at Nexus.
In Copenhagen everyone owns a bike and rides it everywhere – I love this idea!  At first it was totally 
weird to see women in fur coats and heels riding their bikes to work, but it was really refreshing to 
see that the Danes cared about the environment enough that people really tried to make a difference 
by riding bikes instead of taking cars. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
12 
Copenhagen Business School
Travelling around Copenhagen was so easy because of the Metro. It was so great how everything 
was so easily accessible by public transport. YES - No more cabs!
When it comes to the Danish way of “hygge” I was confused at first about what it meant. After being 
invited to have hygge a couple of times with my Danish friends I figured it out: We do the same thing 
in Canada, although not as often, but here we call it “chillin”. The Danish way of life is just so much 
more relaxed than the Canadian way. In Canada, people are always working late or going somewhere 
or have a million things to do. I was really inspired by how the Danish lifestyle was “work to live” 
rather than “live to work”.
The other exchange students were so awesome as well. I think it’s a certain type of person that 
goes on exchange: Someone who is curious, friendly, confident and dying to try something new. I 
met some of the best friends I have ever had on exchange and even though we will visit each other this 
year, it’s so hard to go from living with someone and seeing them every day to never seeing them at all.
My best experience was the Oslo Cruise organized by CBS. The boat was so nice and it had 
restaurants, a pool, a club and much more. It was nice to be on a trip with everyone and since it was 
close to the beginning of the exchange, all of the students really bonded over the weekend. Just the 
fact that CBS organized this trip for us was really impressive, and I couldn’t have asked for a better 
way to discover Oslo.
Copenhagen is definitely one of the most beautiful cities I have lived in. It was so full of life and 
there was always something new and interesting to do. I guess I kind of sound like a cheerleader for 
Copenhagen, but I really can’t emphasize enough how much I love it. It’s bittersweet to be back in 
Canada now, but I know I will be back to Denmark some day. 
Visit us at cbs.dk
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
13 
The University of Copenhagen
The University of Copenhagen
The University of Copenhagen was founded in 1479 and is the oldest and largest university in Denmark. 
It has produced no less than 8 Nobel Prize winners (in Medicine and Physics). Along with nine other of the 
world’s leading research universities, the University has formed the International Alliance of Research 
Universities (IARU). At the University of Copenhagen, research and teaching interact to create the most 
challenging and exciting learning processes. We value the exchange of knowledge, and our international 
students add a very important dimension to the continuing development of the University. The University 
has a student body of 37,000 and welcomes more than 2,500 international students annually.
   
Visit us at ku.dk
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

Study in Scandinavia
 
14 
The University of Copenhagen
Testimonial 1
Andrea Stolarchuk, exchange student, University of Queensland, Australia
I’m doing a dual degree of Business Management and Law and decided to 
do four of my law electives through exchange. I studied at the University 
of Copenhagen in Denmark and it was truly a wonderful way to spend a 
semester. All the classes were in English and the lecturers I had were all 
top of their field, many of them sitting on international tribunals. The class 
sizes were typically about 30 students and the emphasis seemed to be on 
learning and knowledge rather than what was going to be on the exam! All 
the Danes can speak English and will willingly switch from Danish to English, 
however I did manage to pick up a little Danish whilst over there. The people 
that I met through exchange were great and living in the beautiful old city of Copenhagen, with its 
bicycles, fantastic public transport, old university buildings, Tuborg and Carlsberg beer, delicious 
polsers (hotdogs) was an experience that I am so glad I was able to have. I was in Copenhagen from 
January-June and got to see the change in seasons, from very cold to everything blossoming in 
spring, to the Danes lying out on every available part of grass in summer, enjoying the sunshine until 
10:30pm at night! Living in Denmark was also a great base for exploring the rest of Europe. If you 
even have the slightest inclination to do an exchange I would follow it through, you won’t regret it.  
Testimonial 2
Brian Della Valle, degree student from Canada, is in the first year of his MSc degree. 
I have a BSc degree in Biomedical Sciences from the University of Ottawa, Canada. I chose to apply 
to the Human Biology programme at the University of Copenhagen in part because I had had heard 
about it whilst on exchange in Denmark the year before. The degree has a very good reputation 
among Danish students and is also well-regarded within Danish academic circles. I also wanted 
to do a broad science degree, which could help develop me in the direction of a career and give me 
an understanding of the potential fields that a human biologist could work in. As well as this, I was 
eager to embark upon an international degree abroad, where I could expand my horizons and learn 
more about Danish language and culture. 
I have been introduced to a range of subjects within health science, with a good mix of in-class 
teaching and hands on, practical instruction. There is access to cadavers on the human anatomy 
courses, on-site teaching at the Faculty in medical imaging techniques, frontline researchers 
teaching students about their particular area of expertise and a receptive administration, which does 
its best to accommodate the students. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
15 
The University of Copenhagen
In my second year, I will be joining a research team at Rigshospital in Copenhagen and will write 
my thesis on a new method that could be used in the treatment of cerebral malaria. Apart from the 
academics, the friends that I have made on the course have proven to be a clear highlight of my 
experience in Denmark so far. Integrating into Denmark and Danish culture has been made possible 
through them, their enthusiasm and willingness to involve the foreign students. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
We will turn your CV into 
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Send us your CV on
www.employerforlife.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
16 
Roskilde University
Roskilde University
Roskilde University (RUC) is a state university founded in 1972 for the purpose of performing 
research and supplying education at the highest level. These activities are structured into six multi-
disciplinary departments: 
• 
Department of Environmental, Social and Spatial Change
• 
Department of Culture and Identity
• 
Department of Society and Globalisation
• 
Department of Psychology and Educational Studies
• 
Department of Science, Systems and Models
• 
Department of Communication, Business and Information Technologies 
These departments offer a large number of educational programmes at the undergraduate, graduate 
and doctoral level.
Educational principles
In its short history, Roskilde University has in many ways represented a break with traditional 
thinking and practice in university education in Denmark. Underlying the educational programmes 
offered at the University are the following principles: interdisciplinarity, problem orientation, project 
work, group work and a close connection between research and education.
Project work. Students are trained to plan, organise and prepare extensive written project reports 
on the results they obtain through their studies and analysis.
Group work. Group work is the basic form of study throughout all educational programmes at the 
University. Students learn the importance of collaboration and accountability.
Visit us at ruc.dk
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
17 
Roskilde University
How is it to study in Denmark?
Name: Malgorzata Kulinska
Nationality: Polish
Field of study and educational institution: Business Studies and 
Administration at Roskilde University (RUC)
Living and studying abroad can be compared to an unforgettable adventure 
that provides you with a lifetime experience. It fosters your curiosity on the 
world, extends your knowledge, and also gives you a better knowledge of 
yourself not to mention the numerous native and international friends that 
you meet along the way. Those are the first thoughts that come to my mind after studying more than 
half a year in such an amazing Scandinavian country as Denmark. 
I was provided with an opportunity to study here thanks to the European student exchange programme 
– ERASMUS. From the range of universities that I could have chosen for an exchange abroad, the 
most tempting seemed to be Roskilde University, and I was not mistaken.
Studying in Denmark is totally different when I compare it with my home university in Poland. An 
example is problem-oriented project work. Students are given the opportunity to choose subjects of 
their interest from the interdisciplinary field and investigate it through creative and logical thinking, 
negotiations, decision making, engagement and collaboration. This socially challenging process not 
only develops your problem solving skills, ability to work with diverse people but also gives you a 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
AXA Global 
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply

Study in Scandinavia
 
18 
Roskilde University
How is it to study in Denmark?
Name: Kristel
When I came to Roskilde University for the first time, I remember thinking 
‘Is this really a university?’ The campus buildings of RUC are not exactly 
impressive and my home university, the University of Tartu has a famous 
classicist main building, so I expected something considerably more 
impressive. Studying at Copenhagen University would have probably been 
rather similar to studying in Tartu, however, the degree of independence 
that was expected from the students at Roskilde was new for me. Now looking back, having this 
independence and responsibility made me much more mature than a ‘normal’ university education 
would have done.
 
I remember being baffled about the show and games of the Roskilde University introduction period 
when I started here – it seemed so totally unnecessary. I just wanted to get started; listen to lectures, 
learn things. It turned out not to be the exact place for that. In fact, there were very few lectures and 
instead of exciting titles like ‘English pirates during the Renaissance’, we had ‘Fundamental Course 
in Philosophy’ and ‘Fundamental Course in Text and Sign’. 
The Danish students seemed much more orderly compared to Estonian ones – the bohemian lifestyle 
that for me defined and still defines a university student was nowhere to be seen. If the Estonian 
students managed to get some money somewhere, they bought beer and talked about philosophy – 
the Danish students got their SU, made a budget for the coming month and paid their insurance. And 
despite the steady income each month, most Danish students also worked and took student loans. 
Studying here seemed not so much of a lifestyle for people as just an occupation among others.  
              
	
 
sense of freedom, independence and practical knowledge about the global issues. Furthermore, 
there is a great emphasize on students´ proactive participation. 
Another issue that made me even more enthusiastic about continuing my studies at RUC is the 
international environment. In other words an atmosphere that allows students to interact with other 
people from various countries with different cultures and habits. Not to mention the interaction with 
academic teachers who are both demanding, and extremely helpful and friendly; motivating and 
encouraging students to develop their interests and think outside the box. Moreover, you can easily 
feel the balance that is maintained between private and business life in a society that is modern, 
innovative and entrepreneurial. 
Denmark is a place which seems to offer endless opportunities for international students, where every 
single day sets new challenges for you. It’s a great internationally oriented place to live, study, work, 
and have great fun. Come to Denmark, feel the atmosphere and you will never regret your decision.  
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
19 
Aarhus School of Business
Aarhus School of Business, Aarhus University – your 
quality destination in selecting your future university
Sustainable Growth through Innovation
We offer internationally accredited degree programmes at bachelor and master levels within the 
fields of business and communication. 18 full-degree programmes are taught in English. In addition 
we offer the ASB Summer University,  ASB Winter School , ASB Exchange Programme , a one-year 
full-time sustainable MBA, Career Service and Alumni Network.
ASB has been awarded the distinguished EQUIS accreditation by EFMD and is part of a top100 
university. 
We have close to 8,000 students and are one of the largest business schools in Europe. We have 
app. 1,200 international students from 80+ countries enrolled in full degree programmes and as 
exchange students, and we cooperate with app. 200 partner universities around the world. Our 
international cooperation gives you unique opportunities to take part of your study programme 
abroad. 500 researchers are ready to share the latest knowledge on the creation and development of 
companies and organisations. 
Choosing a degree from Aarhus School of Business is choosing a university with world class research 
and education, growing a strong partnership with corporate business during your studies and an 
excellent investment in your future career goals.
The choice is yours – we look forward to welcoming you here
Find out more at www.asb.dk
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
20 
Aarhus School of Business
Who are you?
Aleksander Rutkowski, MSc in EU Business & Law (2000-2003), PhD from 
the ASB (2006, “Impact of trade policy and FDI on competition in Europe”).
 
Why did you choose ASB? 
It had a good cooperation with my first university (Warsaw School of 
Economics, Poland). I came to Aarhus as a Socrates-Erasmus student. The 
ASB was very positively presented by the first vintage of MSc FIB students 
who made a presentation in Warsaw. I was attracted by a modern teaching 
approach (group assignments, many foreign students, open book exams 
etc). The MSc EU programme matched my interests. I applied then for a PhD scholarship after I got 
involved into research done by the ASB professors.
 
What do you do today? 
Since October 2005, I am employed as an economist (desk officer for Poland) in European Commission, 
DG ECFIN. 
How did ASB help you get there? 
Studies in the MSc EU programme upgraded my knowledge in EU law and institutions as well as 
economics of integration. The PhD programme helped me to develop my research skills in economics. 
What is the most important thing you got from ASB? 
The studies at the ASB strengthened my abilities and readiness to solve problems by using scientific 
tools (rather than just absorb some theory). It also helped me to start working in an international 
environment i.e. solve problems together with people from different countries. 
Who are you?
Julie Goodall, MA Corporate Communication
Why did you choose this study programme at ASB? 
I chose the Master of Arts in Corporate Communication because of its 
international applicability and its relevance for the current market situation. 
English is fast becoming the corporate language worldwide, and as such, 
in many large Danish organisations. The fluency and skill of the language 
that is acquired by daily usage cannot be attained through any number 
of courses and books. Furthermore, corporate communication is gaining 
acceptance as an integrated part of any management tool kit, and I would like to be a part of the 
leading edge in this fast developing field. 
What do you really like about this study programme?
The best part of my study is the coming together of many nationalities. Now on a master’s level, 
the international students on the MACC bring not only foreign culture, but alternative principles 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
21 
Aarhus School of Business
of learning and communicating. It is in the international discussions and debates of approaches, 
theories, values, and ethics, that this study attains its differentiation. I also value the managerial 
and strategic aspects of the study, as I believe general knowledge on strategy and leadership will 
strengthen our value on the job market. 
What do you really like about ASB?
ASB is exactly what you make of it. The school allows you to involve yourself with as many projects, 
people, and areas of knowledge as you wish, you only have to show interest and motivation. Everything is 
yours for the taking. I believe that the many opportunities for academic development, social networking 
and professional challenge are what make ASB students such valued entrants in the job market. 
How are you going to use your degree professionally?
I want to use my degree to go into management, but always with the philosophy in mind that “that 
which is not communicated does not exist”. Denmark is a small country, and we will need to adapt 
to the outside world to survive. I believe multilingual managers with a background in communication 
are better equipped to overcome the demands, and take full advantage of globalisation. 
Why should potential students choose ASB - any advice?
Potential students should choose ASB for the opportunity and challenge it offers. I would advise 
them to take advantage of as much of ASB as possible while they are here/there, because it is a 
once in a lifetime opportunity. Academically, ASB’s resources are renowned yet not pretentious, and 
personally, you will find no match to ASB’s social life. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
ibili
because 
e Graduate Programme  
for Engineers and Geoscientists
Month 16
I was a construction
supervisor in 
the North Sea 
advising and 
helping foremen 
solve problems
I was a
he
s
Real work 
International opportunities 

ree work placements
al 
Internationa
or

ree wo
I wanted real responsibili 
 I joined MITAS because 
www.discovermitas.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
22 
Aarhus University
Aarhus University, Institute of Business and Technology 
Aarhus University, Institute of Business and Technology (AU-IBT) is situated in Herning in the 
western part of Denmark and offers undergraduate and graduate study programmes. AU-IBT has 
approximately 1,600 students and is the only Danish university offering courses in engineering, 
business economics and business communications under the same roof.
The study programmes are based on interaction across professional boundaries and close interaction 
with students and the surrounding business community. Furthermore, all the study programmes 
have an innovative and international perspective.
Being a student is much more than tutorials, lectures and examinations. Herning offers a wide range 
of activities – there are many cafés, a busy night life and many sport clubs, etc. At AU-IBT, we will 
help you become accustomed to the new surroundings. You will experience that it is easy to get in 
contact with the teaching staff and there will be a number of activities where you can get to know the 
other students.
Visit us at hih.au.dk
“The Global Management and Manufacturing (GMM) study is the first step 
towards my dream job as a leader in a large, international manufacturing 
company. The close cooperation with the business life prepares for my 
further career by giving me the opportunity of working in a mentor company. 
Starting at 3rd semester, I will spend part of the semester working in a 
company specifically chosen for me. For me personally, the biggest 
advantage of the GMM study programme is the close cooperation and 
interaction with the mentor company and the university. Throughout the 
programme, support will be provided from supervisors from the company 
and the university. Since AU-IBT is not a very large campus, I do not feel I am just one of a crowd. This 
enables me to get the most out of lectures since the classes and working groups are relatively small. 
I think this study programme will provide me with the knowledge and practical experience I need to 
achieve my goal and work in a large production company and be successful.”
Ole Niklas Steffen, student, Global Management and Manufacturing
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
23 
Aarhus University
“When I started the master programme in Innovation Management at AU-
IBT in 2007, I had not thought that I would be the co-owner of my mentor 
company one and a half years later. As part of the master programme 
at AU-IBT, I was assigned a mentor company. In fact, I chose to study at 
AU-IBT because of the mentor solution, which is unique to the master 
programmes in Herning. I wanted a mentor company interested in the 
Polish market, since I am from Poland myself. Thus, I chose Auluna – a 
company that wanted to expand the sale to the Polish market. In this way, I 
could offer inside knowledge about Poland and at the same time learn a lot 
about running a business.
The company has been very open, and there is a mutual trust between us. I help them create brand 
awareness in the Polish market. The products are different from the typical Polish design, so my 
knowledge about Poland is certainly an advantage.
Being in Denmark has given me an inner drive, and I like working with real projects for companies 
instead of just studying theory all the time. It motivates me to see the projects become reality – see 
theory turn into practice”.
Aleksandra Kieczek, student, MSc in Innovation Management
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
mim.admissions@ie.edu
Follow us on IE MIM Experience
www.ie.edu/master-management
#10 WORLDWIDE
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT 
FINANCIAL TIMES
55 Nationalities
in class
5 Specializations
Personalize your program 
Length: 1O MONTHS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
Format: FULL-TIME
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
  THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
  PROFESSIONAL GOALS
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
  EXPERIENCE
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION

Study in Scandinavia
 
24 
Aalborg University
Aalborg University
A modern approach to learning
Established in 1974, Aalborg University is a young and modern institution, where state-of-the-art 
facilities and laboratories are a matter of course. The unique approach to learning is an aspect that 
makes the University stand out significantly from the rest as an innovate and creative institution. The 
University employs problem-based project work. This pedagogical approach ensures that students 
develop very particular competences within problem solving, both in theory and in practice.
Project work is often conducted in groups and in close collaboration with external enterprises and 
organisations. The group  work means that students acquire essential experiences in teamwork and 
via the close collaboration with the outside world, they actually obtain their initial work experiences 
while still at University.
Aalborg University offers more than 60 English thought study programmes within Science, Medicine, 
Humanities, Social Science and Engineering.  
Visit us at aau.dk
Study form and Social Life
The great thing about studying in Aalborg is that you can have a full package: 
Great social life and an academic education that has a very specific and 
practically oriented angle. At Aalborg University teaching and studying 
follow the project oriented work method. This means that each semester 
the students work together in small groups on a project. The principle is 
simple: Students with the same research/scientific interest form a group 
and decide on a topic. The speciality is that the projects usually focus on 
an aspect from real life. Each project has a supervisor and gets help from the academic staff. It is 
also normal that companies, organisations or institutions are involved in the projects. This is a good 
chance to establish contacts and to get a foot down for the future job.
In lectures and courses the students learn the theoretical and methodological backgrounds and 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
25 
Aalborg University
apply them later in their project work. For me the project work has always been a very rewarding 
experience, that I did not want to miss. I came to understand that theory follows the idea to solve 
practical problems and that there is always room for discussions, revision and criticism. The project 
work is also a great chance to socialize and get to know better the students that are in the same 
group. I could see that many project group works ended in friendships. When it comes to social life: 
Aalborg is a perfect student city. As a middle sized city Aalborg offers students great possibilities 
to have an active and life! A central meeting point for the students is the student house. For me it 
has always been a pleasure to go there because you can find such a huge variety. Every Wednesday 
is international evening in the student house and international students from all over the world get 
together. It is a cosmopolitan atmosphere: open and inviting for new students.
Julia Schulte-Goebel, Germany
Culture, Globalization and Communication
I started at Aalborg University in 2004 as an Erasmus student in the 
field of mobile communication.  The academic experience as well as the 
international environment made me very quickly decide to continue my full 
education at Aalborg University.  
The project oriented method gave me the chance to work on projects that 
are very relevant not only for the university but for companies as well. 
Moreover, working together with other students on the same projects was 
very helpful for developing some organizational and management skills.
Talking to other students and teachers after the graduation, I decided to apply for a PhD position. 
During my doctoral studies I worked on very innovative projects in close cooperation with companies 
and this allowed me to build up a network of contacts that helped me in my job searching.
I consider the five years I have spent at Aalborg University as an amazing experience for both my 
academic and personal path. 
GianPaolo Perrucci, Italy
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
Defining Corporate Social Responsibility
26 
Overview over Universities in Norway
Agder Universitet
www.uia.no
Agder, høgskolen
Ås Universitet for miljø- og biovitenskap
www.umb.no
Bergen Universitet
www.uib.no
Bergen, høgskolen
www.hib.no
Bodø, Handelshøgskolen
www.hhb.no
Bodø, høgskolen
www.hibo.no
Handelshøyskolen BI
www.bi.no
Hedmark, høgskolen
www.hihm.no
Lillehammer, høgskolen
www.hil.no
NITH - Norges Informasjonsteknologiske Høgskole
www.nith.no
Norges Handelshøyskole
www.nhh.no
Oslo Universitetet
www.uio.no
Oslo, høgskolen
www.hio.no
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
Defining Corporate Social Responsibility
27 
Stavanger Universitet
www.uis.no
Stavanger, høgskolen
Telemark, høgskolen
www.hit.no
Tromsø Universitet
www.uit.no
Trondheim, NTNU
www.ntnu.no
Vestfold, høgskolen
www.hive.no
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

Study in Scandinavia
 
28 
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration
Welcome to NHH - Norway´s leading business school
NHH is the most prestigious centre for research and education within the fields of economics and 
business administration in Norway. The two years programme MSc in Economics and Business 
Administration is a key element in the portfolio of programmes, and consists of two distinctive profiles 
for international students; Energy, Natural Resources and the Environment (ENE) and International 
Business (MIB).
ENE is aimed to prepare students and educate the next generation of interdisciplinary managers for 
one of the biggest challenges to business and society; balancing the needs for energy and natural 
resources with those of the environment. 
MIB is aimed to equip students with the right mix of analytical and practical skills, together with a 
cultural understanding, for a career within companies whose activities involve a substantial degree 
of international business. 
World class standards in research and teaching
NHH is recognised internationally for its ground-breaking research in a number of fields. Faculty 
members have been intimately associated with some of the most significant developments in the fields 
of finance, such as Karl Borch, co-founder of modern risk theory, Jan Mossin, one of the fathers of the 
Capital Asset Pricing Model and Finn Kydland, winner of the Nobel Prize for Economics in 2004. 
Visit us at nhh.no
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Study in Scandinavia
 
29 
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration
Agnieszka Lyniewska (25) is from Poland and graduated from NHH June 
2009. She is now employed by The Cluster Competitiveness Group, Inc , Spain.
I chose to study Master in International Business at NHH, because I wanted 
to receive education of high quality in an intercultural setting. To study at 
the highest-ranked business school in Norway, with great international 
professors was a good decision. NHH more than fulfilled my expectations. 
Not only had I the chance to become familiar with Norwegian culture, but 
I also met and studied with people from all over the world. NHH is a great 
institution both in terms of academic programme and student life. I enjoyed many student activities 
such as concerts, music festivals, conferences, trips and parties. Norway is a very friendly country 
and the high level of English among Norwegians makes it easy to communicate in everyday life. 
Moreover, the possibility to experience the beautiful Norwegian nature made my stay here even better. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
“The perfect start 
of a successful, 
international career.”
CLICK HERE 
to discover why both socially 
and academically the University 
of Groningen is one of the best 
places for a student to be 
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:

Study in Scandinavia
 
30 
Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration
Master in International Business opened a wide range of possibilities to me. The global outlook of NHH 
allows its graduates to pursue truly international, professional careers, be it in Norway, Scandinavia, 
Europe or other continent. Therefore I was confident I would be well-prepared to start working wherever 
I chose.  
Agnieszka Lyniewska
Emma Micklem (24) is from South Africa, and started her studies at NHH in 
August 2008, based on a bachelor degree from the University of Cape Town.
My interest is in the fields of energy and natural resources, and what better 
place to study such topics than a country that is known for its management 
thereof! 
NHH was a clear choice for me with its reputation as a leading business 
school with its highly regarded academic staff and intimate class sizes. 
A collaborative student atmosphere and the intercultural nature of the student body made the 
environment all the more appealing. NHH is funded by the state; hence there are no admission or 
tuition fees.
On arrival at NHH I was in awe of the beautiful surroundings by the sea, fjords and mountains. In 
addition, the proximity to both the city centre and mountains makes the living incomparable. 
The Master in Energy, Natural Resources and the Environment (ENE) is a programme that tackles 
the primary issues we are faced with today. The booming energy industry represents a great deal 
of opportunity and innovation, which makes this a very exciting environment to study in. To me, this 
shows that NHH is ahead with its knowledge and understands the job market that its students are 
currently faced with.
In short, if you have an affinity for both business and nature, NHH in Bergen is the right place to be! 
Emma Micklem
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

