
Study Guide
for
Technical 
Analysis 
Explained
Fifth Edition
Martin J. Pring
New York  Chicago  San Francisco  Athens  London 
Madrid  Mexico City  Milan  New Delhi  Singapore   
Sydney  Toronto

Copyright © 2014 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United 
States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by 
any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
ISBN: 978-0-07-182405-7
MHID: 0-07-182405-7
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-182398-2,    
MHID: 0-07-182398-0.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every oc-
currence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark 
owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they 
have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales 
promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us 
page at www.mhprofessional.com.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter 
covered. It is sold with the understanding that neither the author nor the publisher is engaged in rendering 
legal, accounting, securities trading, or other professional services. If legal advice or other expert assistance 
is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
—From a Declaration of Principles Jointly Adopted by a Committee of the
American Bar Association and a Committee of Publishers and Associations
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. 
Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right 
to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, 
modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the 
work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own 
noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work 
may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE 
NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS 
OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY  INFORMA-
TION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND  
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT  
LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained 
in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither 
McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or 
omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education 
has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances 
shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive,  
consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them 
has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or 
cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

iii
Contents
How to Use This Study Guide
1
  1  The Definition and Interaction of Trends
3
  2  Financial Markets and the Business Cycle
9
  3  Dow Theory
15
  4  Typical Parameters for Intermediate Trends
21
  5  How to Identify Support and Resistance Zones
27
  6  Trendlines
33
  7  Basic Characteristics of Volume
41
  8  Classic Price Patterns
49
  9  Smaller Price Patterns and Gaps
59
10  One- and Two-Bar Price Patterns
65
11  Moving Averages
71
12  Envelopes and Bollinger Bands
77
13  Momentum I: Basic Principles
83
14  Momentum II: Individual Indicators
91
15  Momentum III: Individual Indicators
97
16  Candlestick Charting
107
17  Point and Figure Charting
115
18  Miscellaneous Techniques for Determining Trends
119
19  The Concept of Relative Strength
127
21  Price: The Major Averages
133
22  Price: Sector Rotation
139
23  Time: Analyzing Secular Trends for Stocks, 
Bonds, and Commodities
145
24  Time: Cycles and Seasonal Patterns
151
25  Practical Identification of Cycles
157

iv  •   Contents
26  Volume II: Volume Indicators
161
27  Market Breadth
169
28  Indicators and Relationships That Measure Confidence
175
29  The Importance of Sentiment
181
30  Integrating Contrary Opinion and Technical Analysis
187
31  Why Interest Rates Affect the Stock Market
193
32  Using Technical Analysis to Select Individual Stocks
197
33  Technical Analysis of International Stock Markets
203
34  Automated Trading Systems
209
Index
214

1
HoW to Use ThIs  
StuDY GuIDe
This study guide has been designed as an adjunct to the fifth edition 
of Technical Analysis Explained. The questions are presented in several 
forms: multiple choice, matching answers, and fill-in-the-blanks. Since 
technical analysis is a visual art, concerned with chart interpretation, 
questions featuring charts have been included as much as possible. 
Where necessary, the answers contain a narrative by way of explana- 
tion, which readers are encouraged to review closely to better understand 
the material. In cases where charts require interactive action by the reader, 
the answer is visual and cannot be clearly defined, as with a letter for a 
multiple-choice question or a word required in fill-in-the-blank questions. 
Please refer to the charts printed in the answer chapters for explanation. 
Some questions ask for blanks to be filled in. In most cases, the first letter 
of the answer is provided in order to give you some guidance.
Each chapter of Technical Analysis Explained, with the exceptions 
of Chapter 20, “Putting the Indicators Together,” and Chapter 35, 
“Checkpoints for Identifying Primary Stock Market Peaks and 
Troughs,” has been allocated a quiz. Their sizes vary, depending upon 
the length of material contained in the book.
Readers are advised to first study the relevant chapters in 
Technical Analysis Explained and then proceed to the testing phase. A 
brief summary of the subject matter contained in each individual 
quiz is included at the beginning of each Study Guide chapter, under 
the heading “Subjects to Be Covered.” This is a partial list of the more 
important subjects covered by the quiz and is included as a guide.  

2  •   How to Use This Study Guide
By making a more careful study of these topics, the reader will be in a 
better position to answer the various questions more accurately.
If less than 70 percent of the questions are answered correctly, it is 
suggested that further study take place. This should not be done right away. 
A better approach is to read through more chapters and come back at a 
later date to the problem ones. In this way there will be less of a tendency 
to cram or force the learning process, but to let it evolve in a more leisurely 
and thoughtful way.

3
1
tHe DeFInItIon  
And InteRACtIon  
oF tRends
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
The most common types of trends
The basics of peak-and-trough analysis
How peaks and troughs are recognized.
1.  Name the three most important and widely used trends. 
A. 
B. 
C. 
2.  Match the answers for the duration of these trends.
A.  Short	
	
A.  10 to 25 years
B.  Intermediate	
	
B.  2 to 6 weeks
C.  Primary	
	
C.  6 weeks to 9 months
D.  Secular	
	
D.  9 months to 2 years
3.  Who needs to have an understanding of the direction and maturity of 
the main trend?
A.  Investors
B.  Traders
C.  A and B
D.  None of the above

4  •   Chapter 1
4.  Peak-and-trough analysis:
A.  Is far too simplistic an approach for technicians to deal with
B.  Was very useful in Dow’s day, but is now outdated by more sophis-
ticated approaches and tools
C.  Should be used in conjunction with other tools in the weight of the 
evidence approach
D.  Only works with short-term and intermediate trends
E.  C and D
5.  In this chart, which letter marks the reversal in the upward progression 
of troughs?
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
Caterpillar 
6.  Can the principles of peak-and-trough progression be applied to a 
5-minute bar chart?
A.  Yes
B.  No

Questions   •  5
7.  In a general sense, why are longer-term trends easier to spot?
A.  Because the bigger they are, the easier it is to see them.
B.  Because there is less random noise as the trend gets longer. Also, 
the expectations of market participants tend to unfold in a more 
gradual way as the fundamentals evolve.
C.  Because there are always five intermediate movements in every pri-
mary trend, so all you have to do is count to five.
D.  None of the above
8.  Please look at the chart featuring Citigroup. If you knew that the high 
and low preceding the rally at A were 6 and 4 and the close at A was 4.25, 
would this represent a legitimate peak in peak-and-trough analysis?
A.  Yes
B.  No
9.  If C qualifies as a legitimate trough, where is the reversal signal: at D or 
at the end of the arrow indicated at E?
10.  True or false: At B, the series of rising peaks and troughs was reversed.
A.  True
B.  False
Citigroup 

6  •   Chapter 1
11.  What is the most dominant or influential trend?
A.  Intermediate
B.  Short-term
C.  Primary
D.  Secular
E.  Socular
12.  True or false: It’s a good idea to go for consistency, but even better to 
go for perfection. 
A.  True
B.  False

7
1 
The Definition  
and Interaction  
of Trends
Answers
1.  Short, intermediate, and primary. Any order qualifies as a correct 
answer. The secular trend is an important trend, but is not widely fol-
lowed.
2.  A-B; B-C; C-D; and D-A
3.  C. Investors need to know the direction of the long-term trend to cor-
rectly position themselves for the long-term. Since a short-term con-
tratrend moves often result in weak price movements and numerous 
whipsaws, short-term traders also need to form an opinion on the 
direction of the primary trend. A well-known trading rule is always 
trade in the direction of the trend.
4.  C. Peak-and-trough analysis is a basic tool of technical analysis and 
should never be underrated.
5.  C.
6.  A. The principles of technical analysis can be applied to any security 
in any time frame.
7.  B. Not only are they easier to spot, but generally speaking, the longer 
the time span, the more accurate the indicator.

8  •   Chapter 1
8.  B. No, the rally at A did not retrace between one-third and two-thirds 
of the previous decline.
9.  E. Because the series of declining troughs was still intact at D.
10.  B. Only the series of rising troughs was reversed at B. The rising peaks 
were still intact.
11.  D. The secular trend determines the characteristics of the primary 
trend, which determines the characteristic of the intermediate, etc. 
There is no such thing as the “socular” trend.
12.  B. Because perfection can never be achieved in financial markets whose 
prices are determined by psychology.

9
2
FInAnCIAL MARKets AnD 
tHe BUsIness CYCLe
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
The chronological relationship between the financial markets and the 
business cycle
When they peak and trough in the cycle
Understanding the significance of the leads and lags
The six stages
Double cycles
The role of technical analysis
1.  Trends in financial markets are: 
A.  Determined by investors’ expectations of movements in the economy
B.  The effect those changes are likely to have on the price of the asset 
in which a specific financial market deals
C.  The psychological attitude of investors to these fundamental factors
D.  All of the above
2.  Which is the correct chronological sequence for peaks and troughs in 
the financial markets over the course of the business cycle?
A.  Bonds, stocks, commodities
B.  Stocks, commodities, bonds
C.  Bonds, gold, stocks, commodities
D.  None of the above

10  •   Chapter 2
3.  When are commodities most likely to bottom during a recession?
A.  When it is particularly severe
B.  When the preceding commodity rally has been particularly speculative
C.  When stocks bottom earlier than usual
D.  Never
4.  Why does the nature of price moves in bonds, stocks, and commodi-
ties differ between different business cycles?
A.  Because they discount different things
B.  Because each business cycle has different characteristics
C.  Because the leads and lags differ
D.  None of the above
5.  True or false: If there is no recession there, is no financial market cycle. 
A.  True 
B.  False
6.  If the lead between bonds and stocks at a market bottom is particularly 
long, you should expect to see:
A.  A weaker bull market in stocks
B.  A stronger-than-average bull market in stocks
C.  Nothing out of the ordinary
D.  A weak commodity bull market
7.  When a recovery extends beyond the normal 4 years without a reces-
sion but the growth rate slows down noticeably in the middle:
A.  This is known as a double cycle.
B.  The financial markets do not experience the normal chronological 
sequence.
C.  The financial markets do experience the usual chronological 
sequence.
D.  A and C.
8.  Knowing that there is usually a chronological sequence of financial 
markets is very interesting, but how can technical analysis be used to 
identify these points?
A.  By trial and error
B.  By using long-term moving averages and other techniques for indi-
vidual markets
C.  By identifying the position of individual markets with several techni-
cal indicators and relating them to each other as a cross-check
D.  None of the above

Questions   •  11
9.  Fill in the blank: When stocks and bonds are bullish and commodities 
are bearish, this is Stage 
10.  Which industry groups or sectors have a tendency to do well in Stages 
IV and V?
A.  Earnings driven
B.  Liquidity driven
C.  All sectors
D.  Sectors sensitive to interest-rate movements

This page intentionally left blank 

13
2 
Financial Markets and 
the Business Cycle
Answers
1.  D.
2.  A.
3.  B. Because the speculative positions are being unwound very quickly 
due to margin calls. However, a sustainable commodity rally does not 
develop until the economy tightens sufficiently to result in a funda-
mental increase on the demand side.
4.  B. Each cycle has its own characteristics, in that distortions develop 
in different sectors. For example, in 1970, it was housing; 1973 in the 
commodity arena; in the mid-1980s in the S&Ls; in 2000, the tech 
boom; in 2007 housing; and so forth.
5.  B. Growth recessions (double cycles) still experience the financial 
market rotation.
6.  B. This is because the long lead time indicates a weak economy in 
which substantial cost reductions result in lower breakeven points. 
When the economy expands, the increase in revenues goes straight to 
the bottom line. When profits rise, so normally do stock prices.

14  •   Chapter 2
7.  D.
8.  C. B is correct as far as it goes, but C is a more complete answer because 
it uses the weight-of-the-evidence approach.
9.  Stage II
10.  A.

15
3 
DoW tHeoRY
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
The concept
The tenets of the theory
Who developed the Dow theory
How turning points are recognized
The theory’s limitations
1.  Which of the following statements are correct?
A.  Dow theory is not concerned with the direction of a move, only its 
duration.
B.  Dow theory is not concerned with the duration of a move, only its 
direction.
C.  Dow theory is concerned with both the direction and duration of 
a move.
D.  None of the above
2.  Which of these statements is incorrect?
A.  Dow was concerned with forecasting stock prices.
B.  Dow developed and called the Dow theory after himself.
C.  Dow was concerned with forecasting business conditions through 
the use of stock prices.
D.  A and B

16  •   Chapter 3
3.  What is the signal that triggers a primary bull trend?
A.  A series of rising intermediate peaks and troughs by either average
B.  A dividend yield in the Dow Jones Industrial Average in excess of 
6 percent 
C.  Both averages confirming a series of rising intermediate peaks and 
troughs
D.  A and B
4.  Which of the following are basic tenets of Dow theory?
A.  The averages discount everything.
B.  The Dow Jones Industrial Average must yield less than 3 percent 
before a top can be signaled.
C.  Price action determines the trend.
D.  Lines form market tops, but only after the Dow Jones Industrial 
Average yields less than 3 percent.
E.  The averages must confirm.
F.  Volume must expand on declines.
G.  A, B, E, and F
H.  A, C, and E
5.  Who developed Dow’s principles and organized them into something 
approaching the theory as we know it today? 
A.  Dow himself
B.  Robert Rhea
C.  William Peter Hamilton 
D.  Gartley
6.  True or false: When compared to the buy-hold approach, Dow the-
ory works just as well in secular bull markets as in multiyear trading 
ranges.
A.  True
B.  False

Questions   •  17
7.  Looking at the following chart featuring intermediate rallies and reac-
tions, what is happening at point A?
A.  A Dow theory buy signal
B.  A Dow theory sell signal
C.  A sell signal by the Industrials that is unconfirmed by the Transports
D.  A sell signal by the Transports that is unconfirmed by the Industrials
8.  Which of these statements is correct?
A.  Dow theory is easy to interpret if you follow the rules exactly.
B.  Dow theory often leaves the analyst in doubt because it is some-
times difficult to identify intermediate price movements.
C.  Because Dow theory has beaten the buy-hold approach for most of 
the twentieth century, it will continue to do so in the twenty-first.
D. None of the above
9.  Which of the following are not tenets of Dow theory?
A.  The averages discount everything.
B.  The averages must confirm.
C.  Volume is an integral part of the theory.
D.  Price action determines the trend.
E.  A, B, and C
F.  A and B

18  •   Chapter 3
10.  If Dow theory unequivocally signals a primary trend reversal, this:
A.  Guarantees that the primary trend has reversed
B.  Is one piece of evidence, and a very important one, that the primary 
trend has reversed
C.  Is unlikely to result in a bear market because the theory is outdated
D.  Means that the size of the previous primary trend can be used as 
a basis for forecasting the duration and magnitude of the next 
primary trend
E.  B and D

19
3 
Dow Theory
Answers
1.  B.
2.  D.
3.  C.
4.  H.
5.  C.
6.  B. Dow theory tends to give whipsaws in strong secular bull markets.
7.  C. The Industrials trigger a sell signal, but the Transports continue to trace 
out a line formation. When the price breaks below the lower level of the 
line, a confirmation is given and a Dow theory bear market is confirmed.
8.  B.
9.  C. Volume is a background factor used to help interpret market turn-
ing points; it is not an integral part of the theory. 
10.  B. Dow theory offers just one piece of evidence that the trend has 
reversed. It certainly does not guarantee that a new primary trend is 
unfolding, and definitely does not forecast the magnitude and dura-
tion of the next one. This is because there is no known method of 
accurately and consistently forecasting the magnitude and duration of 
a forthcoming price trend.

This page intentionally left blank 

21
4 
tYPICAL PARAMeteRs FoR 
InteRMeDIAte tRenDs 
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
The relationship between intermediate and primary trends
The importance of intermediate trends
Differentiating between pro- and countertrends
Reasons for intermediate trends
The nature of intermediate trends
1.  Why is it helpful to have an understanding of the character and dura-
tion of a typical intermediate trend?
A.  To help asses when the next short-term trend will begin
B.  To help assess when the next primary trend is likely to begin
C.  To improve success rates in trading
D.  B and C
2.  Recognizing that there are numerous exceptions to this rule, in classic 
technical theory, how many intermediate trends does a primary trend 
comprise?
A.  7
B.  3
C.  5
D.  None of the above

22  •   Chapter 4
3.  A bear market intermediate rally:
A.  Typically lasts for 2 weeks
B.  Is a countercyclical trend
C.  Sometimes develops at the end of a bull market
D.  None of the above applies
4.  Which of the following apply to intermediate corrections in a bull 
market?
A.  They can be extremely treacherous.
B.  They are usually easy to short and can therefore be extremely 
profitable.
C.  They last longer than an intermediate price movement.
D.  A and C
5.  Which of the following are legitimate causes for an intermediate 
correction in a bull market?
A.  Deteriorating political climate
B.  Falling interest rates
C.  Rising interest rates
D.  Reduced expectations for corporate profits
E.  Traders covering short positions
F.  A, B, and E
G.  A, B, C, and D
H.  A, C, and D
6.  Based on Gartley’s observation for the stock market between 1895 and 
1935, how many phases of liquidation is the norm for an intermediate 
correction in a bull market?
A.  1
B.  2
C.  3
D.  None of the above
7.  True or false: A secondary correction must be an upward or downward 
price movement. 
A.  True 
B.  False

Questions   •  23
8.  Which statement best describes the difference between a primary 
intermediate price movement and a secondary reaction?
A.  A secondary reaction develops in a bull market, and a primary 
intermediate price movement develops in a bear market.
B.  A primary intermediate price movement develops in a bull market, 
and a secondary reaction develops in a bear market.
C.  A primary intermediate price movement develops in the direction 
of the main trend, and a secondary reaction is a countercyclical 
price movement.
D.  None of these answers is correct.
9.  Intermediate trends in security prices are determined by: 
A.  The attitude of market participants to the emerging fundamentals
B.  The level of interest rates
C.  Corporate profits and other fundamentals
D.  None of the above
10.  As a general tendency, which statement is correct?
A.  The bigger the preceding intermediate rally, the larger the retracement.
B.  The smaller the preceding intermediate decline in a bear market, 
the smaller the bear market rally.
C.  The larger the intermediate rally in a bull market, the smaller the 
retracement move.
D.  None of the above

This page intentionally left blank 

25
4 
Typical Parameters for 
Intermediate Trends 
Answers
1.  D. Correctly identifying intermediate trends has a dual function. First, 
it serves as evidence that the prevailing primary trend is about to or 
has just reversed. Since intermediate price movements last for many 
weeks or even months, they also provide useful trading opportunities.
2.  C. Three is the established norm, but there are numerous exceptions 
to this rule.
3.  B. Typically, an intermediate bear market rally will last for a much 
shorter period than an intermediate rally in a bull market. The average 
for the former between 1932 and 1982 was 7 weeks, and that of the 
latter was 24 weeks.
4.  A. Contratrend moves are more liable to end up as whipsaws than pro-
trend price movements.
5.  G. At any one time there are four major influences on prices: psycho-
logical, technical, monetary, and economic. All represent legitimate 
reasons that justify a correction. Three were included in the answer.
6.  B. This is not true in every case, but the second wave of liquidation 
often heralds in the “give up” phase when participants are so disgusted 
with the security in question that they are willing to throw in the towel 
at any cost.
7.  B. Secondaries can also take the form of a sideways price movement.

26  •   Chapter 4
8.  C. Primary intermediate price movements tend to last much longer 
and experience greater magnitude than secondary corrections.
9.  A. Although the level of interest rates and other fundamental factors 
are important, it is the attitude of market participants that is crucial. 
Often, they will ignore factors that would previously have been the 
cause for an intermediate price movement and vice versa.
10.  C. This is not always the case, but generally speaking, the stronger the 
rally, the weaker the retracement. Often, toward the end of a secondary 
reaction in a bull market, commentators reflect the view of many that 
prices are expected to correct much further—after all, they have only 
retraced a fraction of the previous advance. If this view is widespread, 
you can rest assured that the correction is probably over and that a 
new upleg is about to begin.

27
5 
HoW to IDentiFY sUPPoRt 
AnD ResistAnCe Zones
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Support and resistance defined
Determining likely support and resistance points
Establishing the significance of potential support/resistance areas
1.  True or false: Support is a concentration of supply sufficient to halt a 
rally temporarily.
A.  True
B.  False
2.  True or false: The price is likely to find resistance at the black line in the 
following chart if it falls any further.
A.  True  
B.  False

28  •   Chapter 5
3.  Name technical characteristics described in the text that could result in 
a support or resistance point. 
i.  Round numbers
 ii.  Emotional points
iii.  Significant trendlines 
iv.  Moderate overbought levels
v.  Proportionate retracement and projection levels
A.  i, ii, and v
B.  i, ii, iii, and v
C.  i, ii, iii, iv, and v
D.  iv and v
4.  A support/resistance area gains its significance from:
A.  The amount of activity at a specific point
B.  The speed of the previous move
C.  The number of people who were previously stopped out at that 
level
D.  A and B
5.  Fill in the blanks: Support is a concentration of d_____ sufficient 
to t_____ halt a decline.

Questions   •  29
6.  When the copper price declines, where would the next support level 
likely reside?
A.  A
B.  B
C.  C
D.  D 
E.  A and B
7.  Which statement is correct?
A.  Support reverses its role to resistance when the price bounces from 
that support level.
B.  Resistance reverses its role to support on the way up.
C.  Neither is correct.
8.  True or false: Up trendlines and rising moving averages represent 
dynamic levels of support when the price falls to their vicinity. 
A.  True
B.  False

30  •   Chapter 5
9.  If the price rallies and then experiences a 61.8 percent Fibonacci 
retracement, you should:
A.  Sell because a new downtrend is under way
B.  Buy without question because such retracements guarantee a sup-
port level and therefore a rally
C.  Expect the probability of a rally because it could be a support level, 
but always consider what the other indicators are doing as well
D.  None of the above
10.  True or false: The significance of a support or resistance zone depends 
upon the amount of an asset that previously changed hands in that 
area, the speed and extent of the previous price move, and the period 
of time that has elapsed since the zone was last encountered. 
A.  True
B.  False

31
5 
How to Identify Support 
and Resistance Zones
Answers
1.  B. The question defines resistance.
2.  B. It will find support. Support develops on the way down, resistance 
on the way up.
3.  B. Moderate overbought levels do not hold a great amount of signifi-
cance. Besides, the question asked for descriptions in the text and there 
were no references to “moderately overbought conditions.”
4.  D.
5.  demand,  temporarily
6.  D. That’s because D represents two previous minor lows and previous 
highs and lows represent potential support levels.
7.  C. Support reverses its role to resistance when penetrated on the down-
side. Resistance reverses its role to support when penetrated on the 
upside.
8.  A.
9.  C. Retracements are only intelligent places to expect a reversal, and 
certainly not a guarantee. Always adopt a “weight of the evidence” 
approach for superior results.
10.  A.

This page intentionally left blank 

33
6
tRenDLInes
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Trendlines
Types of trendline breaks
Determining their significance
Ratio versus arithmetic scaling
Extended and exhaustion trendlines
1.  How many times must a line be touched to qualify as a trendline?
A. Once
B. Three times
C. Twice
D. None of the above
2.  Which trendline has the greatest significance?
A. A 10-minute trendline
B. A 5-year trendline
C. A 2-year trendline
D. A 10-year trendline
3.  What are the two types of trendline breaks? Please write in the answer.
A. R_____
B. C_____
4.  Construct a trendline on the following chart that best reflects the 
underlying downtrend.

34  •   Chapter 6
5.  If a trendline is violated and a reversal price pattern is completed at 
roughly the same time, what can you conclude?
A.  That prices will consolidate around the prevailing trend
B.  That the prevailing trend will extend
C.  That the trend will reverse
D.  That the trend will initially reverse and then continue in its previ-
ous direction
6.  Which is the most significant trendline on this chart based on the 
principles outlined in the text? Tip: The correct line is not necessarily 
the one followed by the biggest move.
A. 
B. 
C.
Cisco Systems 10-minute close
A
B
C

Questions   •  35
7.  Which statement is correct?
A.  Up trendlines are violated quicker on a ratio scale, and down trend-
lines are violated quicker on an arithmetic scale.
B.  Down trendlines are violated quicker on a ratio scale, and up trend-
lines are violated quicker on an arithmetic scale.
C.  Up trendlines are violated quicker on a ratio scale and on an arith-
metic scale.
D.  Down trendlines are violated quicker on a ratio scale and on an 
arithmetic scale.
8.  In this chart, is the measuring objective drawn correctly?
A.  Yes
B.  No
9.  Fill in the missing blanks: When two down trendlines can be drawn in 
parallel fashion, this is known as a trend c_____. In a rising market, the 
upper line is known as a r_____ line.

36  •   Chapter 6
10.  What is the characteristic being represented in this chart of the S&P 
Composite?
E_____
11.  What is the principle being reflected in this diagram?
12.  Once a trendline has been violated:
A.  You can forget about it
B.  Draw another line
C.  Extend it to look for future support/resistance levels
D.  None of the above

Questions   •  37
13.  A trendline that touches only one point is:
A.  A good trendline
B.  A poor trendline
C.  Likely to be penetrated soon
D.  Not a trendline
14.  Trendlines obtain their significance from three things. What are they?
A.  The l_____ of the line
B.  The number of times it has been t_____ or approached
C.  The a_____ of ascent or descent
15.  Fill in the blanks: A trendline is a dynamic area of s_____ and r_____.
16.  True or false: A trendline violation with an extremely sharp angle of 
ascent is more likely to be followed by a reversal than a consolidation. 
A.  True
B.  False

This page intentionally left blank 

39
6 
Trendlines
Answers
1.  C. A trendline that has only been touched once is not a real trendline 
because it could be drawn at virtually any angle and would not reflect 
the underlying trend.
2.  D. The longer the line, the greater its significance.
3.  Reversal and continuation or consolidation
4.  This line is touched or approached on numerous occasions. The one 
false break, flagged by the right-pointing arrow at the 1987 peak, adds 
to its significance because the price was unable to hold above the line, 
thereby demonstrating its importance as a resistance area. Too many 
breaks of this nature would reduce the significance of the line.

40  •   Chapter 6
5.  C. The completion of the price pattern indicates that a reversal is likely.
6.  C. Because it is longer, has been touched or approached on several 
occasions, and is not too steep.
7.  A.
8.  B. The measuring objective is calculated by taking the maximum 
distance between the price and the trendline. In this case, the bull 
market peak in March 2000 would have been the place to take the 
measurement.
9.  channel, return
10.  An exhaustion move (score correct if you used the word “exhaustion”)
11.  The corrective fan principle (score correct even if you missed “corrective”)
12.  C. An extended line can often be of great significance. If the price ever 
returns to it, the trendline’s former role is then reversed. What was 
support now becomes resistance and vice versa.
13.  D. A trendline that touches one point is a line drawn in space and is 
unlikely to reflect the underlying trend.
14.  The length of the line
The number of times it has been touched or approached
The angle of ascent or descent
15.  support, resistance
16.  A. Because an extremely sharp uptrend or downtrend is unsustainable, 
a trendline violation is likely to be followed by an extension of the 
trend, but at a slower rate.

41
7 
BAsIC CHARACteRIstICs 
oF VoLUMe
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Volume characteristics in rising trends
Volume characteristics in falling trends
Volume characteristics at turning points
1.  Based on current trends of volume and price, what is likely to happen 
next in the following diagram in terms of the next major move?
A.  The price will rise.
B.  The price will consolidate.
C.  The price will soon fall.
D.  The price is guaranteed to fall.

42 
●   Chapter 7
2.  True or false: In all situations when the price rises and volume falls, 
this is bearish.
A.  True
B.  False
3.  Which is generally the strongest and more reliable signal?
A.  A selling climax
B.  Record volume
C.  Declining volume
D.  Rising volume
4.  What is likely to happen next in the following diagram?
A.  The price will rally.
B.  The price will decline.
C.  A trading range
D.  None of the above

Questions   ●  43
5.  What best describes the volume price relationship in the following chart?
A.  A Selling climax
B.  Exhaustion
C.  Rising price and falling volume
D.  Rising volume and falling price
E.  Nothing unusual

44 
●   Chapter 7
6.  Using the right part of each chart that follows, i.e., the most recent 
data, please match the chart with the description by filling in the blank 
with the appropriate chart letter.
A.  Selling climax  _____
B.  Buying climax  _____
C.  Negative volume divergence _____
A
B
C
7.  Which is the normal situation?
A.  Volume goes with the trend.
B.  Volume leads price.
C.  Volume contracts when prices decline.
D.  All of the above
8.  If price rises and volume contracts and then price falls and volume 
expands:
A.  This is bearish.
B.  This is bullish.
C.  This is normal action.
D.  There is no indication of whether this is bullish or bearish.

Questions   ●  45
9.  When a rally culminates in a parabolic blow-off of volume, it is:
A.  A certain sign of a top
B.  A sign of exhaustion and therefore the odds favor a top
C.  A sign that one more rally to a new high on low volume should be 
expected
D.  None of the above
10.  Which of the following statements is true?
A.  Volume usually goes with the trend.
B.  Volume often leads price.
C.  Volume is a totally independent variable from price, and this helps 
our ability to interpret charts.
D.  Volume does not “speak” to us all the time.
E.  All of the above
F.  A and B

This page intentionally left blank 

47
7 
Basic Characteristics 
of Volume
Answers
1.  C. When volume falls and the price rises, the trend is suspect and usu-
ally results in a decline. While the odds favor such an outcome, there is 
certainly no guarantee that this will happen.
2.  B. When the price rises from a selling climax on falling volume, this is 
normal. Since selling climaxes are normally bullish, this represents an 
exception. Also, we find situations in the charts when the rising price/
falling volume rule does not work, even though this is the norm.
3.  B. While not a perfect indicator, record volume is usually a strong and 
reliable signal.
4.  B. Because rising volume and falling prices is a bearish characteristic.
5.  C. This is usually a bearish characteristic.
6.  C, A, and B.
7.  D.

48 
●   Chapter 7
8.  A. A rising price and falling volume is abnormal and bearish. So, too, 
is declining price and rising volume.
9.  B. A parabolic blow-off is normally associated with a top. Since it is an 
exhaustion characteristic, it is highly unlikely that a new high would be 
seen immediately after the blow-off. A is wrong because there are no 
certainties in technical analysis.
10.  E.

49
8 
CLAssIc PRIce PAtteRns 
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Transitional phases in markets
Identification of price patterns
Ratio and arithmetic scaling
Significance of price patterns
Measuring implications
Determining the validity of a breakout
1.  To the market technician, the transitional phase has great signifi­cance 
because:
A.  It is easy to spot.
B.  It always takes the form of a V formation.
C.  It marks the turning point between a rising and a falling market.
D.  A and B
2.  How are transition phases signaled in the markets?
A.  By monitoring stories in the media
B.  By adopting the Dow theory
C.  By quiet market action
D.  By clearly defin­able price patterns or formations
3.  The “line” formation developed from Dow theory is similar to:
A.  A triangle
B.  A flat head-and-shoulders top
C.  A rectangle 
D.  None of the above

50 
●   Chapter 8
4.  Please circle a head-and-shoulders top in this chart.
Consol Stores CP
5.  Please circle a double bottom in this chart.
Consol Stores CP

Questions   ●  51
6.  Please circle a failed reverse head and shoulders in this chart.
Consol Stores CP
7.  Why do you think the inverse head and shoulders in the chart failed?
A.  Because volume shrank a bit on the breakout
B.  Because it was a countercyclical move
C.  The pattern was too small
D.  A and B
8.  Match the opposites. For example, A = D, B = F, etc.
A.  Distribution	
A.  Accumulation
B.  Head-and-shoulders top	
B.  Descending right-angled triangle
C.  Resistance	
C.  Inverse head and shoulders
D.  Valid breakout	
D.  Contratrend move
E.  Pro-trend move	
E.  Whipsaw 
F.  Ascending right-angled triangle	 F.  Support
9.  True or false: With a ratio scale, each vertical inch represents a ­doubling 
in the price.
A.  True
B.  False

52 
●   Chapter 8
10.  What advantage does the ratio scale have over arithmetic scaling?
A.  All moves are measured proportionately and prices tend to move in 
proportion because they reflect human psychology.
B.  On long-term charts, price swings at lower levels are visible.
C.  Measuring objectives from downside pattern completions are more 
accurate.
D.  All of the above
11.  During the formation of a price pattern, the direction of the breakout 
is not known. 
Therefore, you should assume:
A.  That the price will break in the direction of the prevailing trend
B.  That toppy-looking formations will break to the downside
C.  That formations that look like bases will break to the upside
D.  B and C
12.  Which are the two most important determinants of the significance of 
a price pattern?
A.  The strength of the rally or reaction preceding it
B.  Its size and depth
C.  The amount of volume on the breakout
D.  A and B
13.  Draw the trendlines for the patterns in the ellipses and name these 
formations starting with the one on the left.
A.  _____
B.  _____
C.  _____

Questions   ●  53
14.  What is the difference in the measuring implication for a consolida-
tion rectangle and a reversal rectangle? Both are drawn on a ratio scale 
and have the same depth.
A.  The consolidation rectangle will have a greater price objective.
B.  The reversal rectangle will have the larger price objective.
C.  There is no difference.
D.  The rectangle that took the longest to form will have the greater 
price objective.
15.  Some of the factors that you should consider in determining the valid-
ity of a breakout are:
A.  The volatility of a security
B.  Whether the breakout holds for more than two sessions
C.  The time frame of the chart (daily, intraday, weekly, etc.)
D.  A and B
E.  B and C
F.  A, B, and C
16.  True or false: The level of volume on an upside breakout is important.
A.  True
B.  False
17.  True or false: The level of volume on a downside breakout is critical.
A.  True
B.  False
18.  A head-and-shoulders top consists of:
A.  A final rally and two smaller rallies
B.  A final rally and at least three smaller rallies
C.  A final rally separated by two smaller rallies
D.  Two small rallies that precede a large rally
19.  What are the distinguishing characteristics of an H&S top?
A.  Heavy volume on the right shoulder and head
B.  Light volume on the right shoulder and heavy volume on the 
downside breakout
C.  Heavy volume on the left shoulder and/or head, light volume on 
the right shoulder
D.  Heavy volume on the left shoulder and heavy volume on the breakout

54 
●   Chapter 8
20.  What are the distinguishing characteristics of an H&S bottom?
A.  A final decline separated by two smaller declines
B.  A noticeable expansion of volume during the formation of the 
right shoulder
C.  A noticeable expansion of volume during the breakout
D.  A and C
21.  Ideally, the volume level during the formation of the second top and 
second bottom in a double top and double bottom formation should be:
A.  More volume for the second top and less volume for the second 
bottom
B.  Less volume for the second top and more volume for the second 
bottom
C.  Significantly less volume in both instances than the initial top or 
bottom
D.  None of the above
22.  True or false: Triangles are generally more reliable than H&S tops.
A.  True
B.  False
23.  From which direction is the breakout likely to come?
A.  Up
B.  Down
Costco

55
8 
Classic Price Patterns 
Answers
1.  C. These transitional periods typically show up on the charts as price 
formations or price patterns.
2.  D. This is not always so, but it is usually the case. 
3.  C.
4.  
Consol Stores CP
H&S Top
Double bottom
Failed reverse head and shoulders

56 
●   Chapter 8
5. 
Consol Stores CP
H&S Top
Double bottom
Failed reverse head and shoulders
6.  
Consol Stores CP
H&S Top
Double bottom
Failed reverse head and shoulders

Answers   ●  57
7.  D.
8.  A = A
B = C
C = F
D = E
E = D
F = B
9.  B. With a ratio scale, each vertical distance represents the same pro-
portionate move. It would depend on the scaling how much an inch 
represented. It could be anything—a doubling, a 10 percent move, a  
25 percent move, etc.
10.  D.
11.  A. It should always be assumed that the prevailing trend is intact until 
the weight of the evidence proves otherwise.
12.  B. The longer a pattern takes to form, the greater the battle between 
buyers and sellers and, therefore, the more significant the outcome. 
The depth also reflects the degree of psychological swing taking place 
between buyers and sellers.
13.  
14.  C. The measuring objective comes from the depth, not the size, of the 
pattern. Since both have the same depth, their measuring objectives 
will be identical.

58 
●   Chapter 8
15.  D. The time frame has no influence on the validity of a breakout, 
only its significance. A breakout on a daily chart is not as important 
as one on a monthly chart, etc.
16.  A. If volume is decreasing on the breakout, it is suspect. If it is increas-
ing substantially, this expanded volume gives credence to the breakout.
17.  B. Price can fall on contracting or expanding activity, and the breakout 
is valid in either case. However, if it is expanding, this gives greater 
weight to the signal.
18.  C.
19.  C. The level of volume on a downside breakout is not important, but 
relatively light volume on the formation of the right shoulder is.
20.  D.
21.  C. 
22.  B. An H&S is usually more reliable than triangles. The reliability of 
triangles will increase the more times the boundary lines have been 
touched or approached.
23.  A. Up because it is always assumed that the prevailing trend is in force 
until proven otherwise. The answer is on the chart. 
Costco

59
9 
sMALLeR PRICe PAtteRns 
AnD GAps 
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Differentiation between patterns
Pattern recognition
Types of gaps and their significance
1.  How long does a typical flag take to form on a daily chart?
A.  1 week
B.  10 weeks
C.  3 weeks
D.  3 months
2.  A pennant is formed with: 
A.  Two converging trendlines
B.  Two diverging trendlines
C.  Two parallel lines
D.  Two parallel lines that slope down in a downtrend and up in 
an uptrend

60 
●   Chapter 9
3.  None of the patterns shown in this chart are perfect. Based on the 
description in Chapter 9, which does pattern B most closely resemble?
A.  A pennant
B.  A flag
C.  A wedge
D.  None described
ADC Telecom
A
C
B
4.  None of the patterns shown in the preceding chart are perfect. Based 
on the description in Chapter 9, which does pattern A most closely 
resemble?
A.  A pennant
B.  A flag
C.  A wedge
D.  None described

Questions   ●  61
5.  None of the patterns shown in the preceding chart are perfect. Based 
on the description in Chapter 9, which does pattern C most closely 
resemble?
A.  A pennant
B.  A flag
C.  A wedge
D.  None described
6.  If a wedge develops in a bear market, what should you expect to see on 
the breakout in order to see a sharp price move?
A.  A noticeable expansion of volume and a decisive price break 
B.  No expansion of volume and an indecisive break
C.  No noticeable pick up in volume, but a decisive price break
D.  None of the above
7.  What pattern has the characteristics in which the price action is 
bounded by two rising converging lines that meet some way after the 
apex? The pattern develops over a 3-week period on shrinking volume.
A.  A bearish flag
B.  A bullish wedge
C.  A bearish pennant
D.  None of the above
E.  A bearish wedge
8.  True or false: The volume action of a rounded top and a saucer bottom 
are vastly different.
A.  True
B.  False
9.  Which of the following statements are correct?
i.  Gaps on intraday charts are always filled.
ii.  Gaps on all charts are usually filled.
iii.  Gaps are more common on weekly than daily charts.
iv.  Gaps are more common on intraday than daily charts.
A.  i and iv
B.  ii and iv
C.  i and iv
D.  i and iii

62 
●   Chapter 9
10.  Please match the following, e.g., A = C; B = A, etc.
A.  Breakaway gaps      A.  develop at the end of a trend
B.  Area gaps	
B.  develop during a trend
C.  Exhaustion gaps	
C.  develop during a trading range
D.  Continuation gaps	
D.  develop as a price is breaking out from  
a trading range
11.  Please fill in the blanks: A gap is an e_____ point on a chart. The upper 
and lower points of a gap often become future s_____ and r_____ 
points.
12.  Gaps are most common on:
A.  Daily charts
B.  Weekly charts
C.  Intraday charts
D.  They are equally common on all charts

63
9   
Smaller Price Patterns 
and Gaps
Answers
1.  C. This is because it is a period of controlled profit- or loss-taking. 
­Anything longer than 3 to 4 weeks is usually indicative of something else.
2.  A. One line slopes up, the other down.
3.  B. Ideally, a flag should be formed when the trend of volume is notice-
ably declining and shrinks to almost nothing, thereby indicating a fine 
balance between buyers and sellers. That’s not true in this case, though 
volume certainly expands on the downside break.
4.  D. These trendlines are diverging and do not correspond with any of 
the patterns described in Chapter 9. If anything, this is a small broad-
ening formation.
5.  D. C is very close to a pennant, but a pennant consists of two converg-
ing lines that slope in the same direction. This is a small triangle where 
the lines slope in different directions.
6.  A. An expansion of volume on a downside break is not mandatory, but 
if it does take place, it emphasizes the strength of the violation because 
it indicates selling pressure as opposed to a lack of buyers.
7.  E. The description is of a bearish wedge, not a bullish wedge where the 
two converging lines are declining.

64 
●   Chapter 9
8.  B. The volume patterns are more or less identical. It is the price action 
that is totally different.
9.  B. Gaps are usually, but not always, filled. Since opening and classic 
gaps both appear on intraday charts, and only classic gaps appear on 
daily charts, intraday charts experience more gaps.
10.  A = D
B = C
C = A
D = B
11.  emotional, support, resistance
12.  C.

65
10  
one- AnD tWo-BAR 
PRICE PAtteRns
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Preconditions for one- and two-bar price patterns
Differentiating between the various patterns
How they should be interpreted
1.  True or false: To qualify as an outside bar, it must contain all of the 
following elements: 
i.  It should be preceded by a strong price trend.
ii.  It should totally encompass the previous bar’s trading range.
iii.  It should gap up or down on the previous bar.
A.  True
B.  False

66 
●   Chapter 10
2.  Which of the following is not true?
A.  One- and two-bar patterns have only short-term significance.
B.  They must be preceded by a strong price trend.
C.  When all of the characteristics are present, they can always be relied 
upon to signal strong trend reversals.
D.  One- and two-bar patterns should be interpreted in terms of 
shades of gray rather than black or white.
3.  Is this chart correctly labeled? 
A.  Yes
B.  No
4.  What is the difference between a one-bar island reversal and an 
­exhaustion bar?
A.  The one-bar island reversal has a wider trading range.
B.  The exhaustion bar has a gap to the right of the bar.
C.  The one-bar island reversal only develops at tops.
D.  The one-bar island reversal leaves a gap on both sides; the exhaus-
tion bar leaves a gap to the left.

Questions   ●  67
5.  What is the correct name for the two bars in the rectangle?
A.  An outside bar
B.  An inside bar
C.  A key bar reversal
D.  A two-bar reversal
6.  Other things being equal, which pattern is likely to be followed by the 
largest price move?
A.  A key reversal on a 10-minute bar chart
B.  A two-bar reversal with all the correct characteristics on a 5-minute 
bar chart
C.  An inside bar on a daily chart
D.  An exhaustion bar with all the correct characteristics on a 30-minute 
bar chart
7.  Name the pattern with the following characteristics: (1) The first bar 
is long following a sustained uptrend or downtrend. (2) It closes at, or 
extremely close to, its low in a downtrend or at, or extremely close to, 
its high in an uptrend. (3)The second bar is much shorter. Its trading 
range is totally within that of the first bar.
A.  Outside bar
B.  Inside bar
C.  Love reversal
D.  Key reversal

68 
●   Chapter 10
8.  Please identify the 1-day reversal bar patterns in this chart.
A.  _____
B.  _____
9.  Two-bar reversals differ from inside bars in which of the following ways?
A.  There is no essential difference.
B.  An inside bar is generally larger than the bars in two-bar reversals.
C.  The two bars in two-bar reversals form at approximately the same 
level; inside bars form with a gap.
D.  None of the above
10.  True or false: Since one- and two-bar price patterns are only of short-term 
significance, they never form at bull market peaks or bear ­market lows.
A.  True
B.  False

69
10 
one- AnD tWo-BAR 
PRICE PAtteRns
Answers
1.  B. III is not a requirement.
2.  C. This is a false statement because technical analysis deals in prob-
abilities, never certainties.
3.  A.
4.  D.
5.  D.

70 
●   Chapter 10
6.  C. Because a pattern derives its significance from the amount of time 
taken to complete it.
7.  B.
8.  A. 1-day island reversal
  B. Key reversal bar
9.  D.
10.  B. They may have short-term significance, but there is no reason why 
they cannot appear at major peaks and troughs. In fact, they often do.

71
11    
MoVInG AVeRaGes
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Types of moving averages
Centering averages
Determining the significance of a crossover
Establishing the validity of a crossover
The importance of time spans
Advancing averages
Comparing more than one average
1.  Fill in the blanks: A weighted moving average f_____ loads the 
data. A s_____ moving average treats all the data equally. And  
an e_____ moving average front-loads the data.
2.  Which of the following statements is true?
A.  A centered moving average is more accurate in reflecting trend 
changes, but less timely in triggering signals.
B.  A noncentered moving average triggers buy and sell signals when it 
experiences a price crossover.
C.  The shorter the time span, the greater the sensitivity of a moving 
average.
D.  All of the above
E.  B and C

72 
●   Chapter 11
3.  Other things being equal, which is likely to result in the most reliable 
signal?
A.  A crossover that takes place when the MA is rising sharply
B.  A crossover that develops when the average is relatively flat
C.  A crossover that develops when the MA is falling sharply
D.  A and C
4.  Which of the following statements is true?
A.  The shorter the time span, the more significant the signal.
B.  The longer the time span, the more significant the signal.
C.  Changes in direction of a moving average are more significant than 
crossovers, but less timely.
D.  None of the above
E.  B and C
5.  The 3 percent crossover rule is more suited to an MA with a time span of:
A.  10 days
B.  10 weeks
C.  40 weeks
D.  120 hours
6.  If you were going to plot two averages on a chart, which combination 
would make sense?
A.  A 10- and 11-day SMA
B.  A 3- and 65-week EMA
C.  A 10- and 25-day SMA
D.  A 30- and 31-hour SMA
7.  An advanced moving average often avoids whipsaws, but what is the 
trade-off?
A.  There is none.
B.  Some signals are less timely.
C.  There are too many signals.
D.  B and C
8.  True or false: Trendlines can make moving average analysis more effective.
A.  True
B.  False

Questions   ●  73
9.  When three moving averages of a relatively different time span con-
verge, what does this indicate?
A.  The balance between buyers and sellers is evenly matched.
B.  The price is poised for a relatively big move in either direction.
C.  They will soon cross each other.
D.  A and B
E.  A and C
10.  Which of the averages in the following chart is likely to be a weighted 
moving average (WMA)?
A.  The dashed line
B.  The solid line

This page intentionally left blank 

75
11    
Moving Averages
Answers
1.  front, simple, exponential
2.  D.
3.  B.
4.  E.
5.  C.
6.  C. All other combinations are either too close or spaced too widely to 
be of any use.
7.  B. Generally speaking, advancing a moving average results in fewer 
whipsaws, but some signals are less timely. By and large, if the time 
span and the number of periods to be advanced are selected carefully, 
this is a good approach.
8.  A. When a trendline and moving average are penetrated at around the 
same time, the two events reinforce each other.
9.  D.
10.  B. The solid line turns faster because it is front-loaded. Both averages 
in the chart have a time span of 50 days.

This page intentionally left blank 

77
12 
enVeLoPes AnD 
BoLLInGeR BAnDs
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Characteristics of envelopes
Varying the Bollinger band parameters
Interpreting Bollinger bands
1.  Two factors influence where an envelope should be drawn. What are 
they?
A.  The volume associated with the security in question
B.  The volatility of the security
C.  The time span of the moving average from which the envelope is 
constructed
D.  A, B, and C
E.  B and C

78 
●   Chapter 12
2.  This envelope for the Goldman Sachs software ETF is:
A.  Really useful for pointing out potential support and resistance 
areas
B.  Drawn too far apart to be useful on a regular and consistent basis
C.  Too closely drawn because of the substantial August 2011 down-
side penetration
Goldman Sachs Software ETF 
3.  As described in the text, what’s the best way to construct envelopes?
A.  By trial and error and studying the past history of the security in 
question
B.  By establishing the beta of a security
C.  By always using exponential moving averages
4.  Bollinger bands:
A.  Widen as prices become less volatile
B.  Narrow after a big move
C.  Widen as prices become more volatile
D.  None of the above

Questions   ●  79
5.  A high standard deviation factor for Bollinger bands:
A.  Makes them diverge from the price unduly, so they are of little 
practical use
B.  Results in more signals
C.  Does not have any effect on their appearance because the choice of 
moving average time span is more important
D.  A and C

This page intentionally left blank 

81
12 
Envelopes and 
Bollinger Bands
Answers
1.  E.
2.  B. In about 19 months of data, the upper envelope is only useful once 
as a resistance area. If anything, it is constructed too widely to be of 
any practical use.
3.  A.
4.  C.
5.  A.

This page intentionally left blank 

83
13 
MomentUm I: BAsiC 
PRinCipLes
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Terminology
Broad categories of interpretation
Differentiating between price and breadth momentum
Limitations of oscillators
Mega overboughts and oversolds
Extreme swings
Price discrepancy divergences
Complex divergences
Methods of ROC calculation
1.  Match up the following:
A.  Rate of change­_____  A.   Smooth and deliberate indicator con-
fined between 0 and 100
B.  RSI_____              B.   A form of trend deviation indicator
C.  Overbought/oversold 
  C.   Sign of a potential top
D.  Stochastics
        D.  Jagged indicator with no upside finite 
boundaries
E.  MACD_____         E.  Not to be confused with comparative 
relative strength

84 
●   Chapter 13
F.   Positive divergence_____    F.  Sign of a potential bottom
G.  Negative divergence_____  G.  Measures extreme moves
H.  Momentum is a_______  H.  Generic term    
2.  If you spot a negative divergence, you should:
A.  Sell immediately
B.  Watch to see if the divergence is confirmed by a trend break in the 
price and then sell
C.  Buy more
D.  None of the above
3.  What are the two broad categories of momentum interpretation?
A.  Momentum c_____
B.  Momentum t_____ r_____
4.  The interpretation of price and breadth momentum is: 
A.  More or less identical
B.  Totally different
C.  Depends on the time span
D.  None of the above
5.  When a security’s price is in a linear uptrend:
A.  It indicates that the momentum indicator will operate more accu-
rately than normal.
B.  It will always experience numerous divergences.
C.  A and B
D.  Momentum indicators will normally fail to operate, which is why 
we need to await some kind of confirmation from the price.
6.  Which conditions does a mega overbought require?
A.  To be preceded by a primary bull market and reach a multiyear 
overbought reading
B.  To be preceded by a mega oversold condition and reach a multiyear 
overbought condition
C.  To reach a multiyear overbought condition and diverge positively 
with the price
D.  To be preceded by a primary bear market and reach a multiyear 
overbought condition

Questions   ●  85
7.  Name the momentum phenomenon at point A in this chart.
A.  Mega oversold
B.  Negative price discrepancy divergence
C.  Bullish extreme swing
D.  Bearish extreme swing
8.  Name the momentum phenomenon that begins at point A in this 
chart. Tip: The price action leading up to point A takes at least a year.
A.  Mega oversold
B.  Negative price discrepancy divergence
C.  Bullish extreme swing
D.  Bearish extreme swing

86 
●   Chapter 13
9.  Name the momentum phenomenon at point A in this chart.
A.  Mega oversold
B.  Price discrepancy divergence
C.  Bearish extreme swing
D.  None of these answers
 
10.  Fill in the blank: When an oscillator is constructed from price, it is 
known as price momentum; when constructed from a basket of items, 
it is known as b_____ momentum.
11.  True or false: Divergences signal that a trend has reversed.
A.  True
B.  False
12.  In order to spot a complex divergence:
A.  It’s first necessary to plot two different indicators using identical 
time spans.
B.  Two indicators where the time spans are very similar should be 
identified in order to make sure that they confirm each other.
C.  Three indicators are plotted with widely differing time spans.
D.  Two indicators are plotted with widely differing time spans over-
laid on each other.
13.  True or false: If the price and momentum simultaneously violate 
trendlines, the resulting price move is likely to be weaker.
A.  True
B.  False

Questions   ●  87
14.  If prices are not experiencing their normal cyclic rhythm, then:
A.  The interpretation of oscillators is much easier.
B.  The price is experiencing a linear uptrend.
C.  Momentum interpretation will not work as well as normal.
D.  The price is in a linear downtrend.
E.  None of these statements are correct.
15.  The ROC is best calculated over very long periods using the: 
A.  Subtraction method
B.  Division method
16.  Which statement best describes a mega oversold?
A.  It is an extreme overbought following a bull market that is then 
followed by an extreme oversold.
B.  It is a multiyear overbought reading that follows a primary bear 
market.
C.  It is a multiyear oversold reading that follows a primary bull market.
D.  It is a multiyear overbought reading accompanied by expanding 
volume following a primary bear market.
17.  Which statement is incorrect?
A.  An ROC lends itself to trendline construction, but should not be 
used with MAs.
B.  An ROC lends itself to price pattern construction.
C.  An ROC lends itself to trendline construction, price pattern con-
struction, and divergences.
18.  True or false: Zero crossovers by oscillators should never be used 
because they throw up too many whipsaws.
A.  True
B.  False

This page intentionally left blank 

89
13 
Momentum I: Basic 
Principles
Answers
1.  A = D; B = E; C = G; D = A; E = B; F = F; G = C; H = H 
2.  B. It is important to await a price confirmation because you do not 
know if another divergence will develop.
3.  A. Momentum characteristics
      B. Momentum trend reversals
4.  A.
5.  D.
6.  D.
7.  B.
8.  D.
9.  D. This is an example of the oscillator barely rising above the equi-
librium level following a negative divergence. Such action, when con-
firmed by the price, is usually followed by an above-average decline.
10.  Breadth
11.  B. Only price can signal a trend reversal. Divergences merely tell us 
whether the underlying momentum is getting weaker or stronger. 
False is, therefore, the correct answer.

90 
●   Chapter 13
12.  D.
13.  B. When a simultaneous break develops, the signal is usually much 
stronger.
14.  C. The use of oscillators assumes that the price is undergoing a nor-
mal cyclic rhythm. Oscillators do not work well in linear uptrends or 
downtrends, or any other trend where normal cyclical activity is not 
being experienced.
15.  B. It does not matter much over the very short-term which method is 
adopted. However, over long periods of time, when prices advance or 
decline significantly, the subtraction method will distort the indica-
tor’s readings.
16.  C.
17.  A. This statement is incorrect because ROCs can be used in conjunc-
tion with MAs.
18.  B. Most of the time, zero crossovers will throw up too many whip-
saws to be of any practical use. However, there are exceptions, espe-
cially when long-term time frames are used. Reference should always 
be made to a long-term historical record to ensure that this approach 
works for the security and time frame selected.

91
14 
MomentUm II: 
InDiViDUAL InDiCAtoRs
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
RSI versus the ROC
Overbought/oversold lines for the RSI
Interpreting the RSI
The CMO versus the RSI and RMI
Calculating the trend-deviation indicator
Interpreting the MACD
The concept behind the construction of the stochastic
Differentiating between the %K and %D
1.  Name some useful advantages that the RSI has over the ROC. 
i.  It is smoother.
ii.  It is confined between 0 and 100. 
iii.  It is easier to compare the momentum of different securities.
iv.  It always throws up actionable divergences. 
v.  It is useful for zero crossovers. 
A.  i and v 
B.  i, ii, and iii 
C.  ii, iii, iv, and v 
D.  i, iv, and v

92 
●   Chapter 14
2.  What are the default overbought/oversold bands for a 14-day RSI? 
A.  80 to 20 
B.  60 to 40 
C.  20 to 30 
D.  None of the above
3.  True or false: The RSI becomes more volatile as the time span becomes 
shorter. 
A.  True 
B.  False 
4.  Which letter in the following chart corresponds with a bearish failure 
swing? 
A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E.  None of the above 
5.  Name one advantage that the CMO has over the RSI. 
A.  It reaches overbought/oversold extremes more often. 
B.  It is extremely smooth and deliberate in its trajectory. 
C.  It never gives false signals. 
D.  A and B 

Questions   ●  93
6.  In the following chart, which of the two RSIs is more likely to be 
plotted from a 6-day time span? 
A.  The one in the center panel 
B.  The one in the lower panel 
7.  Please match the following answers:
A.  RSI_____	
A.  Relative strength indicator
B.  Bearish failure swing_____	
B.  Relatively smooth and 
deliberate trading band
C.  Chande Momentum Oscillator_____	 C.  Relative momentum index
D.  9-day RSI_____	
D.  70/30 overbought/oversold 
defaults
E.  45-week RSI_____	
E.  Associated with a rever-
sal from an uptrend to a 
downtrend
F.  RSI 14-day time span_____	
F.  Volatile trading range
G.  RMI_____	
G.  CMO
8.  True or false: The RSI can be interpreted by using peak-and-trough 
progressions.
A.  False because it is too volatile
B.  True
C.  Yes, but only on monthly charts because intraday, daily, and weekly 
charts are too volatile
D.  Only after a failure swing

94 
●   Chapter 14
9.  The following momentum interpretive techniques can be used with 
the RSI. 
A.  Trendline and price pattern analysis 
B.  Moving-average analysis 
C.  Failure swings 
D.  Overbought/oversold analysis 
E.   A, B, and C 
F.   A, B, C, and D 
10.  A trend-deviation indicator is calculated by:
A.  Comparing two simple moving averages 
B.  Comparing two exponential moving averages 
C.  Expressing the closing price as a deviation of a weighted mov-
ing average 
D.  A and B 
E.   A, B, and C 
11.  True or false: There is no difference between the MACD and a trend-
deviation indicator. 
A.  True 
B.  False 
12.  According to the text, an MACD is best interpreted using: 
A.  The signal line 
B.  Trendline violations and overbought/oversold crossovers 
C.  Complex divergences 
D.  Mega reverse divergences 
13.  The calculation of the stochastic indicator assumes the price closes: 
A.  Close to the middle of its trading range in the middle of a trend 
B.  Close to the low at the start of an uptrend and close to the high at 
the end 
C.  Close to the low at the end of an uptrend and close to its high at the 
end of a downtrend 
D.  Close to the open at the end of a downtrend 
14.  Which is the faster and more volatile of the stochastic indicators?
A.  %D
B.  %K

95
14 
Momentum II: 
Individual Indicators
Answers
1.  B.
2.  D. 70/30 are the correct defaults.
3.  A.
4.  E. B happens to be a bullish failure swing, but the question asked for a 
bearish one.
5.  A. It reaches overbought and oversold extremes more often and there-
fore lends itself better to overbought/oversold analysis.
6.  A. This is because it is more volatile. The shorter the time span, the 
more volatile the indicator.
7.  A = A; B = E; C = G; D = F; E = B; F = D; G = C
8.  B.
9.  F.
10.  E.

96 
●   Chapter 14
11.  A. An MACD is a form of trend-deviation indicator.
12.  B. Signal-line crossovers are considered by many to offer good signals, 
especially if the chosen parameters result in a smoothed indicator, 
but the text indicates that numerous whipsaws are triggered from this 
approach using the default values on the daily charts. There is no such 
concept as mega reverse divergence.
13.  C.
14.  B.

97
15 
MomentUm III: 
InDiViDUAL InDiCAtoRs
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Terminology for the directional movement system
Suitable time frames and interpretation of the ADX
DI interpretation
Calculation of the KST
Interpretation of the KST
Basics of the Special K
Parameter requirements for the parabolic
1.  +DI stands for:
A.  Positive distance indicator
B.  Positive directional movement
C.  Directional Indicator
D.  None of the above

98 
●   Chapter 15
2.  If you know the probabilities favor directional movement increasing, 
it’s okay:
A.  To buy
B.  To sell
C.  To look at other indicators to see which direction the price trend is 
likely to move in and then take action
D.  To buy calls
3.  The following chart features two ADXs. Which one is calculated from 
the shorter time span?
A.  The one in the center panel
B.  The one in the lower panel
4.  At point A in the following chart, what factors suggest the rising price 
trend will continue?
A.  The breakout from the inverse head and shoulders in the price
B.  The breakout by the ADX
C.  The +DI remains above the –DI
D.  A and B
E.  B and C
F.  A, B, and C

Questions   ●  99
5.  An ADX reading that peaks from above 40 tells you:
A.  Nothing except that it has peaked
B.  Directional movement has now peaked and we should look for a 
significant change in trend
C.  Directional movement has peaked, but we do not know the 
significance
D.  None of the above
6.  The +DI crosses below the –DI and the price completes a head-and-
shoulders top. We should:
A.  Do nothing until we can observe a peaking in the ADX
B.  Sell
C.  Wait for the smoothed DIs to cross
D.  A and C
7.  The text indicates that a stochastic with the correct parameters can be 
used as a substitute for the KST. However, it suffers from a disadvan-
tage. What is that?
A.  It never reaches an extreme overbought/oversold reading.
B.  It reaches overbought/oversold extremes too many times to be of use.
C.  The KST typically leads the stochastic at major turning points, but 
does not unduly suffer from whipsaws as a result.
D.  A and B
E.  A, B, and C

100 
●   Chapter 15
8.  True or false: According to the text, the MACD on the monthly chart 
is a suitable substitute for the KST, but suffers in that it is subject to 
many whipsaws. 
A.  True
B.  False
9.  What do the letters KST stand for?
K_____ S_____ T_____
10.  True or false: Prices are determined by the interaction of a number of 
different time cycles. 
A.  True
B.  False
11.  Which one of the following statements is relevant to the assumptions 
made in calculating the long-term KST?
A.  Prices are going to revolve around the secular trend.
B.  The primary trend can be split into intermediate price movements.
C.  Intermediate price movements can be split into short-term price 
swings.
D.  None of the above
12.  Which letter in the chart points to the intermediate trend? 
A 
B 
C 

Questions   ●  101
13.  Long-term trends vary in length, but which range would capture the 
majority of these moves without including outliers?
A.  3 months to 12 months
B.  9 months to 2 years
C.  1 to 8 years
D.  9 to 14 months
14.  Does this chart reflect the principle of commonality? 
A.  Yes
B.  No
15.  Which of the following techniques are not used in interpreting the KST?
A.  MA crossovers
B.  Trendline analysis
C.  Divergences
D.  Complex crossovers

102 
●   Chapter 15
16.  Other things being equal, which signal is likely to be followed by the 
largest trend reversal?
A.  A short-term KST buy signal and a trendline violation by the inter-
mediate KST
B.  A long-term KST buy signal from a reading way above zero
C.  A price-confirmed long-term KST buy signal from below zero
D.  A short-term KST buy, an intermediate KST buy, and a trendline 
break
17.  How many ROCs are included in the calculation of the long-term 
KST?
A.  Two
B.  Five
C.  Four
D.  Three
18.  Why is the longest time span in the KST calculation smoothed with a 
longer MA than the other three?
A.  Because that makes the indicator turn faster
B.  To avoid whipsaw signals
C.  Because that time span has the biggest weighting
D.  To better reflect the underlying trend
19.  The KST tends to work reasonably consistently because:
A.  It is constructed from four different time spans that reflect differ-
ent cycles.
B.  It is weighted to give more dominance to the longer cycles.
C.  It has been rigorously tested.
D.  A and B
E.  A, B, and C
20.  Which statement best describes a valid sell signal in the classic way?
A.  A reversal by the KST itself to the downside
B.  A reversal in the MA of the KST to the downside
C.  A positive KST MA crossover confirmed by the price through an 
MA crossover or valid trendline break
D.  A negative KST MA crossover confirmed by the price through an 
MA crossover or valid trendline break
E.  None of the above

Questions   ●  103
21.  If a 9-month MA of a 24-month ROC reflects the long-term trend 
quite consistently, why bother to include shorter-term time frames in 
the KST calculation?
A.  Shorter-term spans help to turn the indicator quicker at tops and 
bottoms. As long as this keeps whipsaws to a minimum, it’s a good 
thing.
B.  To better reflect the long-term trend.
C.  It makes the indicator a better trading vehicle.
D.  It gives the KST greater credibility.
E.  None of the above
22.  Does the Special K give us a clue as to the maturity of the prevailing 
primary trend?
A.  Yes
B.  No
23.  Which statement is correct?
A.  The Special K gives us true summed cyclicality as the short-term, 
intermediate, and long-term KSTs are combined into one all-
encompassing series. 
B.  The Special K gives us true summed cyclicality as the short- and 
long-term KSTs are combined into one all-encompassing series. 
C.  The Special K gives us true summed cyclicality as the intermedi-
ate and long-term KSTs are combined into one all-encompassing 
series. 
D.  The Special K gives us true summed cyclicality as the short-term, 
intermediate, secular, and long-term KSTs are combined into one 
all-encompassing series. 
24.  True or false: It is abnormal for the SPK to peak and trough with pri-
mary trend turning points in the security it is monitoring. 
A.  True
B.  False
25.  When is the SPK unlikely to peak or trough with the price series it is 
monitoring? 
A.  Pretty well all the time
B.  When the primary trend cycle being monitored is substantially 
greater or smaller than normal
C.  When the primary bull and bear cycle being monitored is normal
D.  During the course of an extended linear uptrend or downtrend
E.  B and D

104 
●   Chapter 15
26.  Why is it helpful to include the daily KST on the daily SPK template?
A.  Because the SPK tells us when the short-term trend is up or down 
but not when it is overstretched in either direction; the KST does.
B.  Because the short-term KST is great at indicating short-term 
reversals.
C.  Because the short-term KST is more accurate than the SPK.
D.  None of the above
27.  By what method are the weekly and daily SPK indicators constructed?
A.  By calculating the sum of the short- and long-term KSTs
B.  By combining four different ROCs smoothed with their respective 
MAs and weighted accordingly
C.  Through the summed cyclicality of the short-, intermediate-, long-
term, and secular KSTs
D.  By adding the short-, intermediate-, and long-term KSTs and pro-
ducing one indicator 

105
15 
Momentum III: 
Individual Indicators
Answers
1.  B.
2.  C. Since you do not know which direction the price is likely to trend, 
it’s important to check out other indicators such as the +DI and –DI, 
so C is the correct answer.
3.  A.
4.  F.
5.  C. Since each security has different levels of volatility, we do not know 
the significance of the 40 level unless we can look at past history. All 
we know is that directional movement has peaked, but we do not know 
the significance. Therefore, C is the correct answer.
6.  B. The DI crossover is a momentum sell signal, and the head and 
shoulders is the price trend confirmation; therefore, based on this 
information, the correct thing to do is sell. Therefore, B is the correct 
answer.
7.  C.
8.  A.
9.  Know Sure Thing
10.  A.

106 
●   Chapter 15
11.  D.
12.  C.
13.  B.
14.  B. No, it does not, as the principle states that when several cycles are 
moving in the same direction, we should expect to see a stronger move. 
This chart features the exact opposite, where each indicator is behav-
ing in a different way.
15.  D. Complex crossovers do not exist as a technique as described in 
the text.
16.  C. Because it is a classic primary bull trend signal.
17.  C.
18.  D.
19.  D. A and B were partially correct, but the question asked for the “best” 
description.
20.  D.
21.  A.
22.  A.
23.  A.
24.  B. Because the SPK in the vast majority of situations does peak and 
trough simultaneously with the price series it is monitoring.
25.  E.
26.  A.
27.  D.

107
16 
CAnDLestIcK  
CHARtInG
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Candle construction
Differentiating between and recognizing the various patterns
Advantages of candlestick volume charts
1.  Candlestick charts consist of:
A.  Opening bars
B.   Closing bars
C.  A real body
D.  Two wicks
E.   A and C
F.   C and D
2.  If I only have price data for the high, low, and close, which patterns will 
not show up correctly in candlestick charts?
A.  Engulfing patterns
B.  Dojis
C.  Meeting lines
D.  All of the above

108 
●   Chapter 16
3.  Fill in the blanks: In candlestick charting, the greatest emphasis is 
placed on the o_____ and c_____ price.
4.  What is the shaded candlestick pattern in the following chart?
A.  A bearish engulfing 
B.  A piercing line
C.  Dark cloud cover
D.  None of the above
Advanced Micro  
5.  True or false: A hammer appears at a bottom and a hanging man at a 
top.
A.  True
B.  False
6.  Fill in the blanks: A candlestick where the real body is small and 
develops at the high end of the session’s trading range is called an 
u_____ line.

Questions   ●  109
7.  Are the patterns in the following chart labeled correctly? Please fill in 
the blank with a “yes” or “no.”
A.  _____
B.  _____
C.  _____
Aegean Marine Petroleum 
C Dark cloud cover
 Bullish engulfing pattern
Dark cloud cover
8.  Which of the following, if any, are reversal patterns?
A.  Rising three methods
B.  Falling three methods
C.  Upside gap (tasuki)
D.  Shooting star
9.  Candlestick volume charts are helpful because:
A.  It’s easy to spot candlesticks where volume is heavy or light and 
then relate these characteristics to the price action
B.  It’s possible to display more candlesticks in the same space
C.  More reversal candle patterns are displayed
D.  A and C

110 
●   Chapter 16
10.  Which of the following statements is not true?
A.  Candlesticks can be plotted for any time frame.
B.  Candlestick charting cannot be used with Western charting tech-
niques.
C.  Candlestick charting is enhanced when used with Western charting 
techniques.
D.  None of the above
11.  Following a rally, two white candlesticks have identical closing prices. 
Is this a tweezer top?
A.  Yes
B.  No
C.  It will depend on whether the closes represented the highs for the 
session.
12.  Which of the following correctly describes a counterattack line?
A.  Two candlesticks with long real bodies following an advance of dif-
fering colors with identical closing prices
B.  Two candlesticks with long real bodies following a decline where 
the first is black, the second is white, and their opening prices are 
identical
C.  Two candlesticks with long real bodies following a decline where 
the first is white, the second is black, and their opening prices are 
identical
D.  Two candlesticks with long real bodies following a decline where 
the first is black, the second is white, and their closing prices are 
identical
13.  Which answer best describes a bullish belt hold?
A.  A long white line
B.  A small real body that develops after a decline
C. A long white line that develops after a decline
D. An unusually long white line that develops after a decline
14.  Please match these patterns with the letters on the IBM chart.
Piercing line
Belt hold
Window
Harami

Questions   ●  111
15.  Please match these patterns with the letters on the Agrium chart.
Dark cloud cover
Hammer
Window
Agrium 
C 
A 
B 

This page intentionally left blank 

113
16 
Candlestick  
Charting
Answers
1.  F.
2.  D. Candlesticks also require the opening price. Since this was not 
available, it would not be possible to plot a correct candlestick chart, 
so none of these patterns could be plotted.
3.  opening, closing
4.  A. In an engulfing pattern, the second real body totally engulfs the first. 
A piercing line is the bullish equivalent of a dark cloud cover.
5.  A.
6.  Umbrella
7.  A = No; B = Yes; C = No
  Remember that dark cloud patterns require the opening of the second 
candlestick to exceed the high of the previous candlestick and for the 
close to develop more than halfway below that white real body of the 
first candlestick.
8.  D.
9.  A.
10.  B.

114 
●   Chapter 16
11.  C. A tweezer top requires the highs of two candlesticks to be identical.
12.  D.
13.  D.
14.  Piercing line = B
Belt hold = A
Window = D
Harami = C
15.  Dark cloud cover = A
Hammer = C
Window = B

115
17 
PoInt AnD FIGURe 
CHARtInG
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Point and figure versus bar charts
Setting up box amounts
Measuring objectives
Time as an element
1.  How do bar charts and point and figure charts differ?
A.  Point and figure charts are plotted at specific time intervals.
B.  Point and figure charts record all time periods.
C.  Point and figure charts can never be plotted for intraday intervals.
D.  None of the above
2.  If a box is set at price movements of 5 points, this means that:
A.  All fluctuations less than 5 will be recorded.
B.  Only fluctuations greater than 5 will be plotted.
C.  Price fluctuations of 5 points will be recorded.
D.  None of the above
3.  Fill in the blanks: In point and figure charts, _____ are plotted for 
rising markets and ____ for declining ones.

116  •   Chapter 17
4.  For stocks trading above $20, the accepted norm for the box is:
A.  1 dollar
B.  50 cents
C.  5 dollars
D.  2 dollars
5.  Fill in the blanks: When plotting a point and figure chart, there are 
two decisions to be made. The first is the b_____ size and the second 
is whether to use a regular point and figure formula or a r_____ chart.
6.  True or false: A reversal chart in point and figure jargon is the same as 
a reversal pattern in bar charts.
A.  True
B.  False
7.  True or false: Time is an important element in point and figure 
charting.
A.  True
B.  False
8.  Fill in the blanks: Measuring objectives for bar charts is achieved 
with a v_____ count, but with point and figure, it is done with a 
h_____ count.
9.  One disadvantage of point and figure charts is:
A.  They do not reflect support and resistance areas very well.
B.  Measuring objectives from irregular formations can be confusing 
to determine.
C.  They do not emphasize the amount of price swings that take place 
within a given congestion zone.
D.  All of the above
10.  The smaller the box size:
A.  The greater the number of price fluctuations.
B.  The bigger the reversal amount will be.
C.  The shorter the period that can be reasonably plotted and studied.
D.  A and C

117
17 
PoInt AnD FIGURe 
CHARtInG
Answers
1.  D. The principal difference is that point and figure charts ignore time. 
Time intervals are plotted at the base of point, and figure charts merely 
act as a reference point. They have no analytical significance.
2.  B.
3.  X’s and O’s
4.  A.
5.  box, reversal
6.  B. They are different. The reversal chart refers to a plotting technique; 
the reversal pattern is a price formation derived from any plotting 
technique, the completion of which signals a reversal in trend.
7.  B. Time is totally ignored in point and figure charting, though dates 
may be placed at the foot of the chart for reference purposes.
8.  vertical, horizontal
9.  B. The other answers outline pluses for point and figure charting; for 
example, they do reflect support and resistance well.
10.  D.

This page intentionally left blank 

119
18 
MIsCeLLAneoUs 
teCHnIQUes FoR 
DeteRmInInG tRends
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Proportion
Speed resistance lines
Fibonacci concepts
Ichimoku cloud charts
1.  What is the name of the known technique that can consistently fore-
cast the magnitude and duration of any price move?
A.  Price pattern objectives
B.   Trendline projection
C.  Proportionate retracements
D.  Fibonacci retracements
E.   A and B
F.    A, B, and C
G.  None of the above

120  •   Chapter 18
2.  True or false: A way to explain the principle of proportion is to say 
that crowd psychology, as reflected in market prices, has a tendency to 
move in specific proportional amounts that have a habit of repeating, 
but unfortunately not in a predictable pattern.
A.  True
B.  False
3.  Which of the following are examples of proportion in practice? 
A.  The measuring implications of price patterns on arithmetic charts
B.  The measuring implications of trendlines on ratio scale 
C.  The measuring implications of moving averages (MAs) on loga-
rithmic scale
D.  None of the above
E.   All of the above
F.    B and C
4.  According to the text, the 50 percent rule is:
A.  The best-known principle of proportion 
B.  A rule that says if you lose 50 percent, you need to exit the market 
for a while
C.  A rule that says if you gain 50 percent on your capital, you should 
take profits
D.  All of the above
5.  Which best describes the application of the principles of proportion?
A.  The principles of proportion are best used on arithmetic charts.
B.  Always use projections using the principles of proportion in con-
junction with other indicators, and make sure proportionate moves 
are always based on ratio charts.
C.  Always wait for a 50 percent or a 66 percent retracement before buying.
D.  All of the above
6.  Who developed the idea of speed resistance lines?
A.  W. D. Gann
B.  Leonardo Fibonacci
C.  Leonardo da Vinci
D.  Edson Gould
7.  Which of the following is not a Fibonacci number?
A.  3
B.  6
C.  144
D.  1

Questions   •  121
8.  If the price falls back to a Fibonacci fan line, which course of action is 
legitimate?
A.  Buy, because it’s a great opportunity.
B.  Consider buying, but also consider other indicators.
C.  Go short if the line is penetrated.
D.  Consider going short if the line is penetrated, but review the other 
indicators before taking any other action.
E.  B and D
F.  A and D 
9.  True or false: If the price retraces more than two-thirds of a rally, it is 
safe to conclude that the trend has reversed.
A.  True
B.  False
10.  If the angle of a line drawn from a pivotal point is 45 degrees and the 
chart measures price and time equally, what is the true rise and run?
A.  1 × 1
B.  2 × 1
C.  3 × 1
D.  1 × 2
11.  Which of the following are not Fibonacci numbers?
A.  23.6
B.  38.2
C.  50
D.  8
E.  161.8
F.  All are Fibonacci numbers
12.  True or false: The relationship between price and the Ichimoku 
cloud identifies basic uptrends and downtrends, and the relationship 
between two other indicators in the system generates short-term buy 
and sell signals under that context. 
A.  True
B.  False

122  •   Chapter 18
13.  True or false: The arrows at A and B point to leading span A and B.
A.  True
B.  False
14.  If this chart was colored, what color would the area at B be represented 
by according to the text?
A.  Red
B.  Green
C.  Purple
D.  Black
E.  None of the above

Questions   •  123
15.  True or false: Future cloud action indicates potential support/
resistance areas. 
A.  True
B.  False
16.  The quality of the uptrend is strengthened when: 
A.  The leading span B is rising and is above the leading span A. 
B.  The lagging line is above both leading spans.
C.  The leading span A (thick cloud border) is rising and is above the 
leading span B (thin cloud border).
D.  None of the above

This page intentionally left blank 

125
18 
Miscellaneous 
Techniques for 
Determining Trends
Answers
1.  G. There is no known technique that will enable consistent forecast-
ing of the magnitude and duration of a price move in freely traded 
markets.
2.  A.
3.  F. Prices do not move proportionately in arithmetic charts. Therefore, 
A is incorrect.
4.  A. B and C may be good advice, but they were not covered in the text.
5.  B. The principles of proportion should be applied to ratio, not arith-
metic, charts.
6.  D.
7.  B.
8.  E. Fibonacci only represents an intelligent place to anticipate a rever-
sal. Therefore, a review of other indicators is mandatory. When the 
line is penetrated, you can expect lower prices, but you must review 
the other indicators. For example, the price may be oversold at that 
point and so on.

126  •   Chapter 18
9.  B. Sometimes a price will retrace 100 percent of a move and more. 
This does not in and of itself signal that the trend has reversed. The 
two-thirds retracement concept is merely a guideline to indicate that 
we should expect to see most retracements fall within the two-thirds 
rule.
10.  A.
11.  C.
12.  A.
13.  A.
14.  A.
15.  A.
16.  C.

127
19 
tHe ConcePt oF 
ReLAtIVe strenGtH
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
What is relative strength?
Interpreting relative strength
Comparing relative strength to the absolute price
Using trendlines with relative strength
Comparing the relative action of two different stock markets
1.  Which of the following statements is true?
A.  Relative strength measures the relationship between two securities.
B.  The relationship between a stock and a market average is the only 
useful way of using relative strength.
C.  Comparative relative strength includes the RSI.
D.  A and B
2.  When the RS trend reverses to the downside, it is safe to conclude:
A.  That the price will sooner or later follow suit
B.  That it is probably a whipsaw since the price has not confirmed
C.  That you should be on the lookout for vulnerability in the stock 
because weakening RS often precedes a top in the absolute price
D.  None of the above

128  •   Chapter 19
4.  When a positive RS divergence develops for a stock, you should 
conclude:
A.  That the RS trend is now up and that it’s safe to buy the stock
B.  Nothing
C.  That the technical position is improving but you need to see more 
evidence of a trend reversal in the RS before buying the stock
D.  None of the above
3.  Please draw in a head-and-shoulders top in the following chart where 
the moving average is violated at approximately the same time as the 
neckline. An example (without the MA crossover) has already been 
constructed to offer you some guidance.
S&P Domestic Oil
S&P Domestic Oil Relative Strength
S
H
S

Questions   •  129
5.  Please draw two trendlines between 1997 and 1999 that would have 
signaled a trend reversal in price and RS. Tip one is a 4-year; the other 
is a 2-year line.
Conagra Inc 
Conagra Inc RS  
A 
B 
6.  What was the piece of conclusive evidence that suggested the rally at A 
in the chart for Question 5 was going to fail?
A.  There was a series of declining peaks and troughs in the price.
B.  The RS line was already falling sharply.
C.  There was no strong evidence.
7.  What price action suggested that the low in the absolute price at B in 
the chart for Question 5 would be taken out on the downside?
A.  The price was already falling.
B.  Gut feel.
C.  The RS line had already broken below its previous low.
D.  There is no evidence.

130  •   Chapter 19
8.  The price of corn is divided by the S&P Composite and the result 
plotted as a continuous line. Is this an RS relationship?
A.  Yes.
B.  No, because one is a commodity and the other is a market index.
9.  A strong up trendline in the NASDAQ/S&P ratio is violated and a 
head-and-shoulders top is completed. You should:
A.   Buy the NASDAQ
B.    Sell the NASDAQ
C.  Sell the S&P
D.  Short the NASDAQ and buy the S&P
E.     Short the S&P and buy the NASDAQ
10.  If the RS line for the UK FTSE breaks out to the upside against the 
World Stock Index but that for the Swedish market does not, ignoring 
currency fluctuations, which is the better buy based on this relationship 
alone?
A.  The FTSE
B.  The Swedish Index
C.  The World Index
D.  None of the above

131
19 
The Concept of 
Relative Strength
Answers
1.  A. B is incorrect because there are many ways to use the concept of 
relative strength. Comparative relative strength should never be 
confused with the relative strength indicator.
2.  C.
3. 
S&P Domestic Oil 
S&P Domestic Oil Relative Strength 

132  •   Chapter 19
4.  D. Because you need to see more evidence that the RS has turned, but 
more importantly, evidence that the stock itself is now in an uptrend.
5. 
Conagra Inc
Conagra Inc RS
6.  C. The declining RS line was evidence, but not conclusive evidence as 
asked in the question. For example, there was no evidence of an actual 
reversal in the absolute price trend at that point.
7.  C. The RS line was already below its previous peak and was leading 
the price.
8.  A. Because comparative RS compares one security with another, so it’s 
a valid RS relationship.
9.  D. There is no evidence that either of the components has reversed 
trend; therefore, choices A through C are not appropriate. Since the 
break indicates that the S&P will now outperform the NASDAQ, the 
S&P should be bought and the NASDAQ shorted.
10.  A.

133
21 
PRICe: tHe MAJoR 
AVeRAGes
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Types of averages and indexes
Dow Jones Utilities and their relationship to the Industrials
The Value Line as a market indicator
Nature of the Russell Indexes
Global indexes (ETFs) and bond ETFs
1.  True or false: The S&P Composite is an unweighted index.
A.  True
B.  False
2.  The DJIA: 
A.  Is a composite index
B.  Is a measure of 30 different stocks from all the principal industries
C. Uses a divisor in its calculation
D.  All of the above
3.  Fill in the blanks: The DJ Utility Average is i_____ sensitive. This 
means that it often l_____ the Industrials. 

134  •   Chapter 21
4.  Which moving average did William Gordon use in his calculation for 
the DJIA?
A.  25-week
B.  12-month
C.  45-week
D.  40-week
5.  Why is the relationship between the DJIA and the DJ Utilities often 
overlooked?
A.  Because it doesn’t work very well
B.  Because there is usually a lot of excitement elsewhere when they 
are diverging
C.  Because brokers are better indicators
D.  All of the above
6.  If the Value Line Arithmetic diverges negatively with the S&P Composite:
A.  Be on the lookout for a decline when the S&P confirms with a 
trend break
B.   Sell immediately
C.  Buy the S&P because it has superior relative strength
D.  Ignore the whole thing
7.  Which is the most comprehensive average?
A.  The DJIA
B.   The Russell 3000
C.  The S&P Composite
D.  The Wilshire 5000
8.  What year were the DJ Rails renamed the DJ Transports?
A.  1987
B.   1898
C.  1970
D.  1955
9.  Which of the following statements concerning the Barclay’s Aggregate 
Bond (AGG) is not true?
A.   It holds bonds across the spectrum.
B.   It holds treasuries.
C.  It holds corporate bonds.
D.  About 40 percent of its holdings at the end of 2012 were bonds 
with a maturity in excess of 5 years.
E.   B and C
F.    A and D
G.  None of the above

Questions   •  135
10.  What is the symbol of the ETF used to calculate a ratio between the 
S&P (SPY) and the rest of the world as described in the text?
A.  ACWI
B.  EWA
C.  EFA
D.  EEM
11.  When several closely related securities are being led by one of the 
group and that leader fails to signal a new high (or low in the case of a 
declining trend), what is likely to happen? 
A.  New leadership takes over.
B.  The leading group quickly regains composure and explodes to new 
highs (implodes to new lows) because of short covering (margin 
liquidation).
C.  This is usually a sign of exhaustion and is followed by a trend reversal. 
D.  This is usually a sign of exhaustion and, if confirmed, is usually 
followed by a trend reversal.
12.  The ratio between the Russell 2000 and 1000 measures the trend of the 
relationship between:
A.  Good- and poor-quality stocks
B.  Good- and poor-quality bonds
C.  Small- and large-cap stocks
D.  Small- and medium-cap stocks
13.  According to the text, why does the NASDAQ not normally have lead-
ing characteristics like, say, the utilities?
A.  Because it is dominated by technology companies, some of which, 
like semiconductors, tend to lag the market
B.  Because it is a speculative index, and speculation usually lags the 
overall market.
C.  Because it does not include utilities and financials, which lead the 
market
D.  None of the above

This page intentionally left blank 

137
21 
Price: The Major 
Averages
Answers
1.  B. The S&P is weighted by capitalization.
2.  C. The DJIA excludes utilities and transports and is not, therefore, a 
composite index.
3.  interest, leads
4.  D.
5.  B.
6.  A. The divergence warns that the technical position is suspect, but 
requires a confirmation from the S&P in the form of a trend-reversal 
signal before you can make a final conclusion that the odds favor a 
decline.
7.  D.
8.  C.
9.  G. All the statements were correct, and the question asked for incorrect 
statements.

138  •   Chapter 21
10.  C. This is the symbol for the MSCI Europe Australasia Far East Index. 
The ACWI is the symbol for the MSCI World ETF, but the question 
asked for the rest of the world. The remaining symbols are those for 
individual countries.
11.  D.
12.  C.
13.  A. The NASDAQ does include leading sectors such as financials, but 
has a higher weight in technology, some sectors of which have lagging 
tendencies.

139
22 
PRICe: seCtoR RotAtIon
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Characteristics of early-cycle (liquidity-driven) sectors
Characteristics of late-cycle (earnings-driven) sectors
Sectors that fall between early- and late-cycle leaders
1.  True or false: Since the business cycle moves from a deflationary to an 
inflationary phase, groups sensitive to inflationary conditions have a 
tendency to lead the market.
A.  True
B.  False
2.  Which of the following statements is true?
A.  Inflation-sensitive sectors do well when interest rates are declining.
B.  Occasionally, unusual fundamentals for a sector or industry group 
will override the normal rotational process.
C.  Liquidity-driven groups do well when commodity prices are rising 
sharply.
D.  None of the above
3.  Fill in the blanks: Steels often bottom out at the same time as the S&P 
Composite, but they tend to put in their best relative performance at 
the e_____ of the cycle. Electric utilities have a tendency to l_____ the 
S&P at market tops.

140  •   Chapter 22
4.  Which of the following falls under the term “liquidity driven”?
A.   Steels, papers, chemicals, insurance companies
B.   Retailers, computers, oils
C.  Utilities, tobacco, soft drinks, property casualty insurers
D.  None of the above
5.  Which of the following falls under the term “earnings driven”?
A.  Mines, oils, chemicals
B.   Steels, retailers, personal care
C.  Papers, mines, electric utilities
D.  Electric utilities, life insurers, retailers
6.  If the technical position indicates a switch favoring inflation-sensitive 
sectors, it’s okay to buy:
A.  Mines
B.   Oils
C.  Electric utilities
D.  Insurance companies
E.   C and D
F.    A and B, provided their technical position is positive as well
7.  If the market is peaking, which industry groups have probably already 
started their primary bear markets?
A.  Mines
B.   Oils
C.  Electric utilities
D.  Insurance companies
E.   C and D
8.  As described in the text, a bull market is:
A.  An extended period, usually lasting between 9 months and 2 years, 
in which most stocks move down most of the time
B.   A rising trend in the indexes that lasts, on average, between  
 9 months and 2 years
C.  A period lasting between 9 months and 2 years in which it is  
 difficult to lose money on the long side
D.  An extended period, usually lasting between 9 months and 2 years, 
in which most stocks move up most of the time
9.  True or false: There is a precise relationship between the equity market 
and the business cycle.
A.  True 
B.   False

Questions   •  141
10.  In a broad sense, the S&P Composite is:
A.  A leading indicator of the economy and of the stock market
B.  A coincident indicator for the market, as it lags some sectors and 
leads others
C.  A lagging indicator of the economy
D.  A coincident indicator for the economy
E.   A and D
F.    A, B, and C
G.  None of the above
11.  True or false: An industry group can be split into sectors.
A.  True
B.  False
12.  Dividing a group of inflation-sensitive industry groups by a similar 
measure constructed from deflation-sensitive issues correlates reason-
ably well with the trend of industrial commodity prices and interest 
rates. The text also describes a simpler way to calculate a ratio from 
two ETFs. Which of the following accomplishes that?
A.  XLP/IGE
B.  XLP/SPY
C.  IGE/DIA
D.  IGE/XLP
E.  GDX/IGE

This page intentionally left blank 

143
22 
Price: Sector Rotation
Answers
1.  B. It is the deflation- or liquidity-sensitive groups that lead the market 
at bottoms, not the inflation- or earnings-driven groups.
2.  B. Sometimes, specific changes in the fundamentals will cause it to 
move out of sequence.
3.  end, lead
4.  C.
5.  A.
6.  F.
7.  E.
8.  D. B and C are technically correct, but are not bull markets as described 
in the text.
9.  B. As described in this chapter, there is a close relationship between the 
two, but not a precise one. Sometimes, the market ignores the econ-
omy, as it did during 2002 when the economy came out of recession 
but the market declined. Normally, it advances under such conditions.
10.  B.
11.  B. It’s the other way around. Sectors can be split into industry groups.
12.  D. The Goldman Sachs Natural Resource ETF (IGE) by the Spider 
Consumer Staple (XLP)

This page intentionally left blank 

145
23 
tIMe: AnaLYZInG 
seCULaR tRenDs 
FoR stoCKs, BonDs, 
anD CoMMoDItIes
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
The long (Kondratieff) wave
The characteristics of secular trends
Causes of secular trends in equities
Characteristics of primary trends change according to the secular trend 
direction
1.  Recognizing that duration varies considerably, what represents a rea-
sonable range for the length of the average secular trend for bonds, 
stocks, or commodities?
A.  5 to 10 years
B.  30 to 40 years
C.  15 to 20 years
D.  9 months to 2 years
2.  True or false: The duration of a complete Kondratieff wave is typical 
of a secular trend.
A.  True
B.  False

146  •   Chapter 23
3.  Fill in the blank: Under the Kondratieff scenario, an up wave begins 
after the structural overbuilding of the previous cycle has been sub-
stantially worked off, but a t_____ war event often develops at that 
time to act as a catalyst. 
4.  True or false: Technical tools used to identify secular reversals are com-
pletely different from those used in intraday charts.
A.  True
B.   False
5.  Secular trends in equity prices are best monitored through the lens of:
A.  Nominal prices
B.   Prices adjusted for changes in bond prices
C.  Inflation-adjusted prices
D.  B and C
6.  Which of the following best describes the causes of secular bear mar-
kets in equity prices?
A.   Changing psychology in the form of long-term price earnings 
 swings
B.   Rapid rises in commodity prices
C.  Overbuilding in the economy
D.  Changing psychology in the form of contracting price earnings 
ratios as investors gradually become more discouraged due to fre-
quent recessions caused by structural and financial imbalances in 
the economy
E.   None of the above
7.  In any secular bull market, you would expect to see:
A.  Primary bear markets limited in scope
B.   Primary bull markets of significant magnitude and duration
C.  Severe primary bear markets
D.  No primary bear markets
E.   A and B
8.  What’s the best way to describe one of the causes of secular bear mar-
kets in equity prices? 
A.  Unstable commodity prices on both the upside and downside
B.   Sharply rising commodity prices
C.  Sharply falling commodity prices
D.  The Fed draining reserves from the system

Questions   •  147
9.  Which of the following signs, if any, indicate that a secular bull market 
in equities is or may be about to get under way?
A.  A long-term momentum of commodity prices that reflects secular 
trends peaks out
B.   A Shiller P/E in the 7 to 8 times range
C.  Dividend yields in the 6 to 7 percent range
D.  A, B, and C
E.   A and B
F.    None of the above
10.  What are the difficulties of using technical analysis to identify secular 
trend reversals in any market?
A.   Technical analysis does not work when identifying long-term trend 
reversals.
B.   There are not many data points, so reliability of signals is 
 undermined.
C.  Kondratieff was wrong with his theory of the long wave.
D.  Long-term trends do not lend themselves to trendline construc-
tion, and 52-week MA crossovers result in too many whipsaws.
11.  What’s a good MA crossover combination for monitoring secular 
swings in yields as described in the text?
A.  10-month by 12-month
B.   24-month by 36-month
C.  9-month EMA by 96-month EMA
D.  All of the above
12.  The text states that “surprises typically come in the direction of the 
trend.” What does that mean?
A.  You should not be surprised to see primary trends experience 
above-average duration when they move in the same direction as 
the secular trend.
B.   We should not be surprised when bear markets in secular uptrends 
 experience an above-average decline.
C.  Bear markets in secular uptrends rarely experience an above-
average decline.
D.  B and C
E.   A bear market in a secular uptrend could be surprisingly limited 
 on the downside.
F.    A and E

This page intentionally left blank 

149
23 
Time: Analyzing 
Secular Trends 
for Stocks, Bonds, 
and Commodities
Answers
1.  C.
2.  B. The Kondratieff wave lasts approximately 50 to 54 years and really 
consists of two secular trends separated by an 8- to 10-year plateau 
period.
3.  trough
4.  B. Peak trough analysis, trendlines, moving averages, price patterns 
momentum, etc., are tools that can be used for any time frame. Their 
parameters may differ and the signals are much more significant, but 
the principles of interpretation are identical for both time periods. To 
say that tools differ for these trends is, therefore, a false statement.
5.  C. Over a relatively short period of time, inflation has a minimal effect 
on equity prices, but taken over the kinds of long periods covered by 
secular trends, inflation can have a devastating effect on real returns.
6.  D. All the answers are technically correct, but the question asked for 
the best description.
7.  E.

150  •   Chapter 23
8.  A.
9.  D.
10.  B. Technical tools work very well. You just have to change the param-
eters to better suit the data, e.g., a 96-month MA being substituted for 
a 52-week one, etc.
11.  C.
12.  F. Since both answers reflect the idea of surprise developing in the 
direction of the dominant trend. Choice A offers an upside one of 
greater duration and E a downside one of a very limited sell-off.

151
24 
tIMe: CYcLes AnD 
SeAsonAL PAtteRns
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Cycle names and lengths
Characteristics of cycles
Principles such as summation and variation
Seasonal patterns
1.  Please match the following
A.	 Juglar	
———  A.  Business cycles 
B.	 Kitchin	
———  B.  Decennial cycle 
C.	 Kondratieff	
———  C.  Foundation for the study
	
  of cycles
D.	 Edgar Lawrence Smith	———  D.  7- to 11-year cycle 
E.	 Edward Dewey	
———  E.   50- to 54-year cycle 
F.	 Joseph Schumpeter	
———  F.   41-month cycle
2.  Fill in the blanks: Time is concerned with a_____, because the 
l_____ a trend takes to complete, the greater its psychological accep-
tance and the greater the necessity for prices to move in the o_____ 
direction and adjust accordingly.
3.  Fill in the blanks: Prices move in periodic fluctuations known as 
c______. C_____ can operate for periods ranging from a few days to 

152  •   Chapter 24
many decades. At any given moment, a number of c_____ are operat-
ing simultaneously, and since they are exerting different forces at dif-
ferent times, the interaction of their changing relationships often has 
the effect of distorting the timing of a particular c_____.
4.  True or false: The principle of variation states that while stocks 
go through similar cycles, the price magnitudes and durations of 
these nominal cycles will be different because of fundamental and 
psychological considerations.
A.  	True
B.  	False
5.  A magnitude failure:
A.  	Occurs in a bull market where a cyclic high develops below its 
predecessor
B.  	Occurs in a bear market where a cyclic high develops below its 
predecessor
C.  	Both A and B
D.  	Neither A nor B
6.  Fill in the blank: When a number of cycles are combined into one, this 
is known as the principle of s_____.
7.  Please match these answers:
The most bearish month based	———  A.  Last two and first three 
on % gain or loss	
 days 
The most bullish month based	 ———  B.  December
on % gain or loss
The most bullish year	
———  C.  Monday 
The most bearish year	
———  D.  Years ending in a 7
The most bullish time of the	
———  E.   September
month
The most bearish day of the	
———  F.   Years ending in a 5
week
8.  Recognizing that all cycles fail from time to time, which has proved to 
be the most reliable, relatively speaking?
A.  	The Kondratieff wave
B.  	The 18-year cycle
C.  	The 9.2-year cycle
D.  	The 4-year cycle

Questions   •  153
9.  Pre-holiday trading sessions tend to be bullish for equities. Which was 
the most bullish between 1963 and 1982?
A.  	Presidents’ Day
B.  	Thanksgiving Day
C.  	Independence Day
D.  	Christmas Day
10.  Research between 1897 and 1986 has shown that the 4 days preceding 
the third trading session of a new month offer superior returns than 
the average trading day for equities. That means:
A.  	You can buy on the last trading day and cash in on the third day of 
the month.
B.  	You should look at the position of the short-term oscillators before 
making a trade.
C.  	A and B
D.  	Use this as one indicator in the weight of the evidence approach.
E.  	C and D
11.  Fill in the blank: The idea of a reaction commensurate with the previ-
ous action is known as the principle of p_____.
12.  Fill in the blank: Since it occurs only rarely that two cycles are of 
identical length, an average, or n_____, period is calculated. This 
theoretical time span is used as a basis for forecasting.
13.  Which are the worst performing 6 months of the year?
A.  	October to April
B.  	January to June
C.  	May to October
D.  	December to May
14.  According to Sam Stovall at S&P Capital IQ, and as described in the 
text, what sectors offer above-average returns in the bearish May–
October period?
A.  	Gold and financials
B.  	Materials and industrials
C.  	Consumer staples and health care
D.  	Materials and health care
15.  Is the maxim developed by Yale Hirsch that “as goes the S&P in January, 
so does the whole year” basically accurate?
A.  	Yes
B.  	No

This page intentionally left blank 

155
24 
Time: Cycles and 
Seasonal Patterns
Answers
1.  Juglar	
  D.  9.2-year cycle
  	 Kitchin	
  F.   41-month cycle
  	 Kondratieff	
  E.  50- to 54-year cycle
  	 Edgar Lawrence Smith	   B.  Decennial cycle
  	 Edward Dewey	
  C.  Foundation for the study of cycles
  	 Joseph Schumpeter	
  A.  Business cycles
2.  adjustment, longer, opposite
3.  cycles, cycles, cycles, cycles
4.  A.
5.  A. B is a normal phenomenon in a bear market where it is expected 
that each succeeding peak will be lower than its predecessor. This type 
of characteristic is not expected in a bull market; hence the expression 
“failure.”
6.  summation

156  •   Chapter 24
7.  The most bearish month based	
  E.  September
  	 on % gain or loss is
     The most bullish month based	
  B.  December
  	 on % gain or loss is
     The most bullish year is	
  F.   Years ending in a 5
     The most bearish year is	
  D.  Years ending in a 7
     The most bullish time of the	
  A.  The last two and first three
  	 month is	
 trading days 
     The most bearish day of the	
  C.  Monday
  	 week is
8.  D.
9.  B.
10.  E.
11.  proportionality
12.  nominal
13.  C.
14.  C. These are defensive groups and, therefore, tend to do better in 
weaker environments for equities. These are average numbers and cer-
tainly do not repeat every year.
15.  A. Most of the time, this is true.

157
25 
PRACtICAL 
IDentIFICAtIon 
oF CYCLes 
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Cycles defined
How the timing of cycle peaks indicates strength or weakness
The importance of a confluence of cycles
Integrating cyles with other technical tools
1.  Fill in the blank: A c ______ is a recognizable price pattern or move-
ment that occurs with some degree of regularity in a specific time 
period.
2.  True or false: Successive lows that are higher or lower than their prede-
cessor are of great importance in identifying cycles.
A.  True
B.  False
3.  Fill in the blanks: When the cycle high develops shortly after the cycle 
low, the implications are that the upward part of the cycle is w_____ 

158 
●   Chapter 25
and that its overall strength lies on the d_____. In this situation, each 
cycle low is normally l_____ that of its predecessor. 
4.  A cycle high that is “late” in arriving, i.e., that ar­rives well after the 
halfway point of the idealized cycle, is:
A.  Likely to reflect a stronger-than-average rally
B.  Likely to be developing in a bull market
C.  Going to be followed by a sharp correction to catch up with the 
bearish side of the cycle
D.  All of the above
E.   A and B
5.  When a cycle high develops at the time when a low is expected, the 
cycle is said to be:
A.  Broken
B.   Invalid
C.  Inverted
D.  Inadvertent
6.  Which of the following statements are incorrect?
A.  The more cycles that are bottoming simultaneously, the more sig-
nificant the low is likely to be.
B.   The longer the cycle, the greater its significance.
C.  It is possible to observe cyclic highs that develop at regular intervals.
D.  None of the above
7.  Which of the following statements are correct?
A.  Cycles should always be used in conjunction with other indicators.
B.   Cycles should only be used with oscillators.
C.  Cyclic highs that develop halfway along a cycle are perfect.
D.  None of the above

159
25 
Practical 
Identification 
of Cycles 
Answers
1.  cycle
2.  B. It is the distance between the lows that is important, not their level.
3.  Weak, downside, lower. Substitute words that have the same meaning 
are acceptable as answers, e.g., soft for weak, below for lower, etc.
4.  E. Cycle highs that are late in arriving are usually a sign of a very strong 
trend.
5.  C.
6.  D. All of these statements are correct.
7.  A. Cycles are just another technical tool and, as such, are far from per-
fect. It therefore makes sense to always use them in conjunction with 
other indicators.

This page intentionally left blank 

161
26 
VoLUMe II: VoLUMe 
InDiCAtoRs
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Interpreting the rate of change of volume
The volume oscillator
The calculation and interpretation of the Demand Index
The assumptions underlying the calculation of the Chaikin Money Flow
Interpreting the Chaikin Money Flow
Construction and interpretation of the Arms Index
On Balance Volume
Upside/downside volume interpretation
1.  A high reading in a volume ROC indicates:
A.  A high level of volume
B.  An overbought market
C.  An oversold market
D.  A and B

162 
●   Chapter 26
2.  What is likely to happen when both trendlines in the following chart 
are violated? The series in the upper window is the price, and that in 
the lower one is a volume oscillator.
A.  The price will rally.
B.   The price will fall.
C.  The price will move sideways.
D.  There is not enough information to make a reliable forecast.
3.  When the volume oscillator reaches a peak and starts to reverse, this 
indicates:
A.  A top
B.   A bottom
C.  A probable trend reversal
D.  None of the above
4.  True or false: Volume usually leads price during rallies.
A.  True
B.  False
5.  True or false: The Demand Index combines price and volume into one 
indicator.
A.  True
B.  False

Questions   ●  163
6.  A high reading in the Demand Index indicates: 
A.  An overbought or oversold condition with the price
B.   An overbought condition
C.  An oversold condition
D.  A and C
7.  The Demand Index is interpreted:
A.  Using overbought/oversold levels
B.   With trendline breaks
C.  Using divergence analysis
D.  All of the above
8.  What does the Chaikin Money Flow assume in its calculation?
A.  That prices close near their low on decreasing volume at the end 
of a rally
B.   That prices close near their high at the end of a decline on rising 
 volume
C.  That prices close near their high on rising volume in an advance 
and near their low on rising volume during a decline
D.  None of the above
9.  What is the strongest interpretive technique for the Chaikin Money 
Flow as described in the text?
A.  Moving-average analysis
B.   Overbought/oversold crossovers
C.  Trendline analysis
D.  Divergences
10.  On Balance Volume is best interpreted with:
A.  Overbought/oversold conditions
B.   Divergences
C.  Trendline analysis
D.  B and C
E.   A, B, and C
11.  What statements are true of the Arms Index?
A.  It moves inversely with price.
B.   It is constructed from volume and breadth data.
C.  A reading in the 10-day series in excess of 1.5 is bearish.
D.  A and B
E.   A, B, and C

164 
●   Chapter 26
12.  What best describes the situation at point A in this chart of the Barclays 
20-year Trust?
A.  A selling climax
B.   Nothing special
C.  A small buying climax
D.  A volume price oscillator divergence
A 
Barclays 20-year Trust (TLT)
Price Oscillator
Volume
Oscillator
B 

Questions   ●  165
13.  What best describes the situation at point B in the chart of the Barclays 
20-year Trust?
A.  A selling climax
B.  Nothing special
C.  A small buying climax
D.  A volume price oscillator divergence
A 
Barclays 20-year Trust (TLT)
Price Oscillator
Volume
Oscillator
B 

166 
●   Chapter 26
14.  This chart of the Peritus High Yield ETF shows that the volume oscil-
lator has violated a down trendline and crossed above its MA. This 
means that the odds favor:
A.  Rising prices
B.  Falling prices
C.  That volume will expand and support higher prices
D.  That volume will expand and support lower prices
E.  That volume will expand
A 
Peritus High Yield
Volume Oscillator

167
26 
Volume II: Volume 
Indicators
Answers
1.  A. A high reading merely indicates a high level of volume. This could 
come during a rally or a decline.
2.  B. When the price falls and volume rises, as is happening in the chart, 
this is bearish.
3.  C. A peaking in the oscillator indicates a probable exhaustion move in 
volume, which is often followed by a trend reversal or trading range.
4.  A. 
5.  A.
6.  B. The Demand Index, unlike the volume ROC and oscillator, always 
moves in the same direction as the price.
7.  D.
8.  C.
9.  D. All of the choices are legitimate interpretive techniques, but the 
strongest characteristic of this indicator is its ability to point up 
divergences.
10.  D. The OBV is not an oscillator and does not experience overbought/
oversold conditions.
11.  D. A reading in excess of 1.5 is bullish, not bearish.

168 
●   Chapter 26
12.  C. It’s a buying climax because both oscillators are overbought.
13.  A. It’s a mild selling climax because the price oscillator was moderately 
oversold and the volume series overbought.
14.  E. All we know is that the odds favor volume expanding. We are given 
no clues in the chart as to the direction of any forthcoming price move.

169
27
MARKet BReADtH
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Methods of A/D line construction
Interpretation of breadth oscillators
The concept of diffusion indicators and their interpretation
The concept of seasonal momentum and its interpretation
The concept of net new highs
The McClellan Oscillator and Summation Index
1.  What are the ways in which an A/D line can be calculated?
A.  By cumulating the daily plurality of advances and declines
B.  By cumulating the difference between advances and declines divided 
by unchanged issues
C.  By cumulating the daily difference between the daily new highs and 
lows
D.  A and B
2.  What is the most common method for interpreting the A/D line?
A.  Overbought/oversold conditions
B.  Divergences
C.  Reverse price patterns
D.  A and C

170 
●   Chapter 27
3.  True or false: Advance decline lines can be constructed for any market 
that contains a basket of components.
A.  True
B.  False
4.  Before using any A/D line for comparative purposes, it is first neces-
sary to:
A.  Calculate an EMA
B.  Plot it with an oscillator
C.  Calculate winter momentum
D.  Check to see if the line has a historical downward bias
5.  Fill in the blanks: Breadth data may be expressed as an A/D l_____ or 
an o_____. Both forms may be used to identify positive and negative 
d_____.
6.  Which description best describes how the McClellan Oscillator is 
calculated?
A.  From advancing minus declining issues
B.  By comparing two simple moving averages
C.  By comparing two EMAs of the daily A/D line for a specific market
D.  By calculating a smoothed ROC of an A/D line
7.  Which, if any, are correct statements if the McClellan Oscillator is 
above zero?
A.  The Summation Index will also be above zero.
B.  The Summation Index will be rising.
C.  The Summation Index will be above its MA.
D.  None of the above
8.  The A/D line tends to lead the market at peaks because:
A.  Many issues are interest sensitive, and interest rates lead equities
B.   Market participants tend to lose confidence in smaller companies 
 before they lose confidence in larger ones.
C.  They all have a downward bias.
D.  A and B
9.  When using the concept of seasonal momentum, a high and reversing 
level in which season often signals major buying opportunities?
A.  Winter
B.  Spring
C.  Summer
D.  Fall

Questions   ●  171
10.  Fill in the blank: A d_____ indicator measures the percentage of a bas-
ket of securities that are experiencing a positive trend.
11.  Fill in the blanks: Under the concept of seasonal momentum, major 
declines are sometimes avoided when f_____ moves into s_____ 
instead of into winter.
12.  Which is a better bellwether for the general market?
A.  The A/D line
B.  The DJIA
C.  The S&P Composite
D.  The NASDAQ Composite
13.  True or false: The net new high data should always be calculated with 
a 52-week time span.
A.  True
B.  False
14.  Fill in the blanks: A new high indicator based on the c_____ plurality 
of daily net new high data is a useful addition to the breadth indica-
tor family. The text suggests that it can be successfully used with a 
____day MA to signal bullish and bearish environments.
15.  When a diffusion indicator reverses direction from an extreme read-
ing, the index it is monitoring usually reverses as well. If it does not 
and the diffusion indicator continues to correct, it is a sign that: 
A.  Many of the securities from which the diffusion indicator is con-
structed are themselves correcting.
B.  The index is guaranteed to reverse as well.
C.  The index will drag the diffusion indicator up.
D.  None of the above
16.  True or false: A net new high indicator based on cumulative daily data 
could realistically be constructed from a basket of gold shares.
A.  True
B.  False

This page intentionally left blank 

173
27 
Market Breadth
Answers
1.  D. There are actually several other ways in which the line can be calcu-
lated, but these are the two most common.
2.  B. There are many ways to interpret A/D lines, such as trendline vio-
lations, price pattern completions, and MA crossovers, but the most 
common is divergences, both negative and positive.
3.  A.
4.  D.
5.  line, oscillator, divergences
6.  C.
7.  B. If the oscillator is above zero, it will add to the total for the Summa-
tion Index, which means that it will be rising. The index itself could be 
above or below zero.
8.  D. Some, but not all, A/D lines have a downward bias.
9.  A.
10.  diffusion
11.  fall, summer
12.  A. because it reflects strengths and weaknesses in the broad list of 
stocks traded.

174 
●   Chapter 27
13.  B. The parameter for net new high time spans can be varied to suit 
the trend being monitored. Short-term trends, for example, could be 
analyzed with a 30-day parameter rather than 52 weeks, which is better 
for primary or intermediate price movements.
14.  cumulative, 100
15.  A.
16.  A. Net new high oscillators or a cumulative line can be constructed 
for any time period for any representative basket of securities for any 
market.

175
28 
InDiCAtoRs AnD 
ReLAtionsHiPs THAt 
MeAsURe ConFiDenCe
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Interpretation of confidence ratios
The importance of consumer staples
Bond market confidence ratios
Inflation-protected versus regular bonds
1.  What is the common thread between negative divergent action from 
an A/D line and relationships such as the relative action of consumer 
staples?
A.  There is a broad measure of a subtle loss of confidence by market 
participants.
B.  There are a lot of stocks in the consumer staples sector, so it mimics 
the A/D line.
C.  The A/D line has nothing in common with consumer staples.
2.  True or false: When a confidence ratio fails to confirm a new low in a 
market average, it is a sign of strength that, when confirmed by price 
action in the average, is usually followed by higher prices.
A.  True 
B.  False

176 
●   Chapter 28
3.  When the relative action of consumer staples is improving, that tells us:
A.  That consumer staples are underperforming the market
B.  That investors are losing confidence because these defensive stocks 
are outperforming
C.  That consumer staples are outperforming the market
D.  The market will definitely decline
E.  B and C
F.   C and D
G.  None of the above 
4.  Why do investors flock to foods and other consumer staples when they 
are worried?
A.  Their lack of cyclicality makes for more accurate earnings forecasts 
than, say, highly cyclical and volatile mining stocks.
B.  They tend to pay better dividends.
C.  They generally have a consistent record of earnings and dividend 
growth.
D.  Most of these companies have a solid balance sheet.
E.  A and D
F.   C and D
G.  All of the above
5.  Based on the description in the text concerning the relationship 
between the SPY and consumer staple KSTs, what is likely to happen 
next in the following chart?
A.  The SPY rallies
B.  It declines

Questions   ●  177
6.  What are the symbols of two NYSE-listed bond ETFs as described in 
the text that reflect rising and falling confidence in the credit markets?
H_____ and T_____
7.  Does confidence in the bond market as reflected in the ratio between 
the government 20-year constant maturity and Moody’s BAA yield to 
ratio help in identifying potential trend changes in the equity market?
A.  Yes
B.  No
8.  True or false: The market generally discounts the economy and bro-
kers generally discount the market. 
A.  True
B.  False
S&P ETF (SPY)
SPY KST
XLP RS KST

178 
●   Chapter 28
9.  Brokers have a tendency to lead the market because:
A.  During bull markets, volume and therefore brokerage commis-
sions tend to increase because traders and investors find it easier to 
take profits than losses. 
B.  When traders are making money, they also tend to make faster 
decisions, which inflates trading. 
C.  More companies go public during the course of a bull market 
because they obtain a higher price for their stock, thereby bloating 
underwriting fees. 
D.  Interest rates have a tendency to lead the stock market. That means 
that brokerage carrying costs decline at the start of an equity bull 
market, thereby enhancing profits.
E.  Researchers at brokerage houses do a better job of forecasting than 
other analysts.
F.   A, B, C, and D
G.  A, B, and E
H.  All of the above
10.  Positive and negative divergences between the brokerage ETF, the IAI, 
or the Amex Brokers Index and an overall measure of the market such 
as the S&P Composite help to identify latent strengths or weaknesses. 
Does the size of the divergences have a consistent record of isolating 
the characteristics of a forthcoming trend reversal?
A.  Yes 
B.  No
11.  Which is better at forecasting trends in commodity prices?
A.  The prices of inflation-protected bonds
B.  The price of Treasury bonds
C.  The ratio between inflation-protected bonds (TIP) to government 
bonds (TLT)

179
28 
Indicators and 
Relationships That 
Measure Confidence
Answers
1.  A.
2.  A.
3.  E.
4.  G. All of the statements are correct.

180 
●   Chapter 28
5.  B. As shown in the following chart.
S&P ETF (SPY)
SPY KST
Consumer staple KST crosses above
that for the SPY, which is bearish.
XLP RS KST
6.  HYG and TLT. The IBOXX Corporate High Yield Bond Fund and the 
Barclays 20-Year Trust, a government-bond ETF.
7.  A.
8.  A.
9.  F. There is no evidence that brokerage researchers are any better than 
others.
10.  B. There appears to be no consistent relationship between the size of a 
divergence and the magnitude of the price move following it.
11.  C.

181
29 
tHe IMPoRtAnCe 
oF sentiMent
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Differentiating between savvy and less smart groups of market participants
Interpretation of sentiment indicators
Substitutes for sentiment indicators
1.  Which of the following tend to act in a manner contrary to that of the 
majority, i.e., who is usually correct as a group?
A.  Market letter writers
B.   Traders
C.  Specialists
D.  Insiders
E.   C and D
F.   All of the above
2.  Why is it probable that short interest numbers have become distorted?
A.  Because of the big bull market in the 1980s and 1990s
B.  Because of the advent of futures and options, which increase arbi-
trage opportunities
C.  Because it’s easier to short now more than ever
D.  None of the above

182 
●   Chapter 29
3.  True or false: When 90 percent of market letter writers are bearish, this 
is a bullish sign.
A.   True
B.   False
4.  Which of the following statements is true?
A.   The trend of sentiment can be just as important as the level.
B.   All sentiment indicators are distorted and therefore should be used 
 sparingly.
C.   Trendline violations in sentiment indicators occasionally give good 
 buy and sell signals.
D.   A and C
E.   None of the above
5.  Fill in the blank: When sentiment indicators are not available, it is pos-
sible to substitute a m_____ indicator since both series reflect mood 
changes in traders and investors.
6.  Which is more likely to offer the stronger signal?
A.   An extremely low Market Vane bond bull reading in a bear market
B.   An extremely high Market Vane bond bull reading in a bear market
C.  An extremely high Market Vane bond bullish reading in a bull 
market
D.  B and C
7.  When the level of margin debt crosses below its 12-month MA, this is 
usually:
A.  Bullish
B.   Bearish
8.  What is an extreme reading in the Market Vane bullish bond numbers 
usually associated with?
A.   A short-term or intermediate-term turning point
B.   A primary-trend turning point
9.  Mutual fund cash/asset ratios are:
A.   Sentiment indicators
B.   Flow-of-funds indicators
C.   Oscillators
D.   A and B

Questions   ●  183
10.  True or false: Bull market highs have a greater tendency to form when 
sentiment diverges more seriously in a negative way rather than from 
extremely high readings.
A.  True
B.  False
11.  If a news event that would normally be expected to move the price 
does not do so, the likelihood is that all the news—good or bad:
A.  Will do so as investors drill down on the details
B.  Soon will be as investors adjust to it
C.  Is already reflected in the price
12.  True or false: Fundamental indicators make poor sentiment indicators.
A.  True
B.  False
13.  Which statement best describes the VIX?
A.  When prices are trending steadily upward, there is generally a 
declining level of volatility as complacency sets in. 
B.  When a market is falling, a growing level of fear results in an 
expanding trend of volatility. 
C.  A and B
D.  None of the above
14.  As a contrarian indicator, the higher the VIX, the more bullish the 
market. Conversely, the lower the VIX, the more bearish the market. Is 
this statement true?
A.  Yes
B.  No
15.  True or false: Put volume is usually greater than that of calls. 
A.  True
B.  False

This page intentionally left blank 

185
29 
The Importance 
of Sentiment
Answers
1.  E.
2.  B.
3.  A. Newsletter writers as a group are contrary indicators.
4.  D. When they do, it is always a good idea to get some kind of trend-
confirmation signal from the price itself.
5.  momentum
6.  B. Contratrend signals are usually less powerful than pro-trend signals.
7.  B. When margin debt is contracting, this indicates a lack of confidence 
and is bearish.
8.  A. Because this is a short-term indicator, it signals less important 
turning points.
9.  D. These indicators can be used as flow-of-funds or sentiment 
indicators.
10.  A. Sometimes the sentiment numbers are unusually high at the final 
peak, but in most cases, divergences are more likely.
11.  C.

186 
●   Chapter 29
12.  B. Fundamental indicators of value, such as a P/E ratio, reflect senti-
ment because they tell us how much investors are prepared to pay for a 
stock. If they are prepared to pay a high P/E, that tells us that they are 
optimistic and vice versa.
13.  C.
14.  A.
15.  B.

187
30 
InteGRAtinG ContRARY 
OPinion AnD TecHnicAL 
AnALYsis
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Contrary opinion defined
Personalities who have written about crowd psychology
Why it is difficult to go contrary
1.  Fill in the blanks: The guiding light of investment contrarianism is 
not that the majority view—the conventional or received wisdom—is 
always wrong. Rather, it’s that the majority opinion tends to solidify 
into a d_____ while its basic premises begin to lose their original 
v_____ and so become progressively more m_____ in the marketplace.
2.  As described in the text, the three steps to forming a contrary opinion 
might include:
A.  Reading popular magazines and jotting down notes
B.   Figuring out what the crowd thinks
C.  Talking to your friends
D.  Determining when the crowd reaches an extreme
E.   Forming alternative scenarios
F.   B, D, and E
G.  A, D, and E

188 
●   Chapter 30
3.  Fill in the blanks: When the c_____ reaches an extreme, the question 
is not w_____, but w_____ and by h_____ much.
4.  Please match the following
Le Bon	
_____    A. Charles 
Mackay	
_____    B.  John
Humphrey  _____    C. Neil
Schultz	
_____    D. Gustave
5.  True or false: When you see several bullish cover stories and the price 
has risen significantly over the previous 2 years, it is safe to buy.
A.   True
B.   False
6.  Which of the following are reasons why it is difficult to go contrary?
A.   Because most of us have a need to conform
B.   There is a certain comfort gained by heeding the advice of an expert
C.   We tend to believe that the establishment has all the answers
D.   Because of the fear of being ridiculed
E.   A, B, and D
F.    A, B, and C
G.  All of the above
7.  A good contrarian should:
A.  Not go contrary for the sake of going contrary
B.   Learn to think in reverse
C.   Turn bullish when everyone else is bearish
D.   Try and be early, as the theory of contrary opinion is pretty precise
E.   Creatively come up with alternative scenarios to that of the crowd 
F.    Try to figure out why the crowd may be wrong
G.  D, E, F, and G 
H.  A, B, E, and F
I.    All of the above
8.  Politicians are a:
A.  Leading indicator
B.  Coincident indicator
C.  Lagging indicator

Questions   ●  189
9.  Fill in the blank: Cover stories, best-selling books, reaction by politi-
cians, extremes in sentiment indicators, and gross over- or undervalu-
ations are all signs that the crowd has reached an e_____. 
10.  True or false: Contrary analysis should be used as one more indicator 
in the weight-of-the-evidence approach.
A.  True
B.  False

This page intentionally left blank 

191
30 
Integrating Contrary 
Opinion and Technical 
Analysis
Answers
1.  dogma, validity, mispriced
2.  F.
3.  crowd, whether, when, how
4.  	
Le Bon         D. Gustave
	
Mackay        A. Charles 
	
Humphrey     C. Neil
	
Schultz        B.  John
5.  B. The crowd can sometimes move to an extreme, well beyond any-
one’s wildest expectations; therefore, it is better to make sure that this 
is confirmed by a technical signal.
6.  G.
7.  H.

192 
●   Chapter 30
8.  C. Politicians as a group respond to public opinion; they rarely antici-
pate crowd swings. Thus, the crowd has usually moved to an extreme 
by the time politicians take up the issue. When the crowd has reached 
an extreme, it’s usually time to look for a new trend!
9.  extreme
10.  A.

193
31
WHY InteRest  
RAtes AFFeCt tHe  
StoCK MARKet
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
The relationship between interest rates and equity prices
Credit market sectors
The discount rate
1.  Which is usually more important as an influence on the economy and 
equity prices as described in the text?
A.  The level of short-term rates
B.  The level of long-term rates
C.  The rate of change of short-term rates
D.  The rate of change of long-term rates
2.  True or false: Changes in the primary trend of short-term interest rates 
have led every stock market bottom between 1921 and 2009.
A.  True
B.  False
3.  Changes in interest rates have an influence on stock prices because:
A.  Credit market instruments represent competition for equity money.
B.   Stocks are often bought on margin and changes in the cost of mar-
gin affect buying and selling decisions.

194 
●   Chapter 31
C.  Changes in interest rates affect the level of economic activity and, 
therefore, indirectly affect corporate profits.
D.  A, B, and C
4.  Was the answer to the previous question a complete list as indicated 
in the text?
A.  Yes
B.  No
5.  Please match the following:
A.  The long end of the bond	
A.  Maturity falling
	
market	
between 1 and 10 years
B.  A maturity of a year or less	
B.  Money-market instruments
C.  Intermediate maturities	
C.  A maturity of at least 10 years
6.  Fill in the blanks: Federal funds, 3-month eurodollars, and 3-month 
T-bills are all m_____ m_____ instruments. The F_____ R_____ has a 
greater influence over these sectors than over long-term i_____ r_____.
7.  If a short-term oscillator fails to reach an overbought condition over a 
period of several months and oversold conditions fail to signal a rally, 
this indicates:
A.  A primary bull market environment
B.  A primary bear market environment
C.  A or B
D.  None of the above
8.  The “three step and stumble” rule states:
A.  That if the discount rate had been raised three times, the top in the 
stock market has been seen
B.  That if the discount rate has been raised three times, we should 
expect equity prices to immediately stumble
C.  That if the discount rate has been raised three times, the clock has 
begun to tick for the bull market in equities
D.  That if the discount rate has been lowered three times, stock prices 
are likely to stumble
9.  Fill in the blanks: The three main sectors in the U.S. bond market are 
T_____ E_____, C_____, and G_____. Note: T and E are two words 
that describe one sector.
10.  Do reversals in the direction of the discount rate offer reliable signals 
of primary trend reversals in short-term interest rates?
A.  Yes
B.  No

195
31
Why Interest  
Rates Affect the  
Stock Market
Answers
1.  C.
2.  B. Interest rates almost always lead stock market bottoms, but there 
are rare exceptions, such as 1987. Since this was not associated with a 
recession, it could be argued that the relationship did not fall into the 
norm. However, the 1987 crash did meet the magnitude qualification 
for a bear market but not the duration.
3.  D.
4.  B. Changes in rates also affect the cost of capital and, therefore, affect 
corporate profits directly.
5.  A = C
B = B
C = A
6.  money market, Federal Reserve, interest rates
7.  B.

196 
●   Chapter 31
8.  C. Once the rate has been raised three times, the market becomes 
vulnerable, but the leads in each cycle since the inauguration of the 
Federal Reserve have varied considerably in each cycle.
9.  Tax Exempt, Corporate, Government
10.  A. Yes, they do because they reflect central bank policy and the central 
bank essentially controls the level of short-term interest rates.

197
32 
UsInG teCHnICAL 
AnALYsIs to SeLeCt 
InDIVIDuAL StoCKs
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Ownership stages of stocks
The importance of the secular trend
Relating absolute to relative price trends
Relating individual stocks to industry groups
Using ratios of early- to late-cycle industry groups
1.  Fill in the blanks: When a stock has risen sharply in price, bullish news 
is widespread, and the media has fallen in love with it, the stock is said 
to be o_____. When the opposite circumstances are present, the stock 
is said to be u_____.
2.  Which stocks best lend themselves to the buy/hold approach?
A.  Cyclicals
B.  Growth stocks
C.  Stocks with high betas
D.  All of the above

198 
●   Chapter 32
3.  A secular price trend:
A.  Is a deeply religious one
B.   Lasts from 1 to 2 years
C.  Lasts over several business cycles
D.  Is more important than a primary trend
E.   B and D
F.    C and D
4.  Fill in the blank: Stocks can be selected when the market conditions 
are right, the industry group to which it belongs looks positive, and 
the individual stock looks attractive, especially against the group. This 
approach is called t_____ d_____.
5.  When the secular trend of the relative strength line reverses but the 
uptrend in the absolute price trend is still intact, what is the best strategy?
A.  Hold on until the secular trend for the absolute price reverses.
B.  Sell and move into cash.
C.  Provided the overall market conditions are positive, switch to a 
stock with positive absolute and relative price trends that are not 
overextended. 
D.  None of the above
6.  Looking at this chart, is it reasonable to anticipate a long-term KST 
buy signal?
A.  Yes
B.  No
Short-term
Long-term KST

Questions   ●  199
7.  True or false: If the market and industry group have both turned positive, 
it is likely that some stocks in the group will outperform the others, 
but it is okay to buy any of them. 
A.  True
B.  False
8.  A ratio such as the aluminum/banks indicates that the cycle has moved 
to an inflationary stage. What does this mean?
A.  It is okay to buy late-cycle leaders.
B.  It is okay to buy early-cycle leaders, provided their technical 
condition is solid.
C.  It is okay to buy late-cycle leaders, provided their technical 
condition is sound.
D.  Early- and mid-cycle leaders should not be bought under any 
circumstances.
E.  C and D
9.  True or false: If a stock is overowned, it should be immediately shorted.
A.  True
B.  False
10.  True or false: When the stock market rallies off a bear market low, it is 
safe to by any stock.
A.  True
B.  False

This page intentionally left blank 

201
32 
Using Technical 
Analysis to Select 
Individual Stocks
Answers
1.  overowned and underowned 
2.  B.
3.  F. The secular trend lasts for several business cycles and is more 
dominant than the primary trend because it lasts longer.
4.  top down
5.  C. It’s okay to hold on until the absolute price trend reverses, but bet-
ter results will come from switching to a stock where the RS trend is 
positive.
6.  A. Because the short-term KST has violated a down trendline and the 
price has broken above a 1-year down trendline, this should reverse 
the course of the delicately balanced long-term KST.
7.  B. Each stock must be appraised on its own merits. The top-down 
approach is used merely as a shortcut filtering mechanism.
8.  C. In general, it is better to stay with the late-cycle leaders since the 
probabilities favor their fortunes. However, there may be special 

202 
●   Chapter 32
circumstances where some other groups can outperform the market. 
Provided their technical position is sound, there is no reason why they 
cannot be purchased.
9.  B. The stock may remain overowned for some time before it reverses. 
It should only be shorted when the technical position warrants such 
action.
10.  B. It is never safe to buy any stock. Each issue must be analyzed on its 
own merits.

203
33 
teCHnICAL AnALYsIs  
oF InteRnAtIonAL 
StoCK MARKets
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
The international 4-year cycle
Choice of world indexes
Applying breadth indicators to the global equity scene
Analyzing relative action
1.  Which years represented a bottom in the 4-year business cycle?
A.  1972, 1976, 1980, and 1984
B.  1981, 1985, 1986, and 1992
C.  1982, 1986, 1990, and 1995
D.  1986, 1990, 1994, 1998, and 2002
2.  The 4-year global stock cycle: 
A.  Repeats exactly every 4 years
B.  Repeats approximately every 4 years
C.  Has worked consistently well since the 1960s, so it is guaranteed to 
work in the future
D.  B and C

204 
●   Chapter 33
3.  Which statement is incorrect?
A.  All markets move in the same direction all the time.
B.  Diffusion indexes cannot be used with the World Index because 
there are not enough data.
C.  The MSCI World Index is the only one worth using.
D.  A, B, and C
4.  True or false: The MSCI World Stock Index (ETF symbol ACWI) is 
weighted by market capitalization.
A.  True
B.  False
5.  Based on the text, which are legitimate ways to interpret diffusion 
indicators constructed from a basket of individual country indexes?
A.  Divergence analysis
B.  Trendline analysis
C.  Relative action
D.  Overbought/oversold analysis
E.    A, B, and C
F.    A, B, and D
G.  A, B, C, and D
6.  If fewer country indexes are making new highs as the World Index is 
rallying, what would you expect to happen?
A.  The World Index will decline.
B.   This is a negative sign, but not a signal to sell, until the World Index 
confirms with a negative trend reversal signal.
C.  The index will rally.
D.  None of the above 
7.  The 1987 crash:
A.  Was confined to the United States
B.   Was a worldwide affair
C.  Probably facilitated closer correlation between the stock markets of 
individual countries
D.  B and C

Questions   ●  205
8.  Fill in the blanks: When the 4-year cycle develops in a secular b_____ 
market, what would normally be a business cycle–associated bear 
market occasionally turns into a t_____ range market.
9.  The following chart represents an individual country ETF together 
with its relative strength line against the ACWI. The long-term KSTs 
of these series are also included. Based on the evidence presented here, 
should the ETF be bought?
A.  Yes
B.  No
Long-term KST
RS World Index
RS Long-term KST

206 
●   Chapter 33
10.  Would there be a reasonable chance that the price of this country’s 
ETF would rise were it to close above $19.50?
A.  Yes
B.  No
RS World Index
11.  It’s possible to construct A/D lines for a basket of stocks in any coun-
try. What factors should we pay attention to?
A.  Whether it has a downward bias or not
B.  Whether it reflects movements in the country index and occasion-
ally sets up divergences, etc. 
C.  Whether it includes a wide variety of industries
D.  All of the above

207
33 
Technical Analysis  
of International 
Stock Markets
Answers
1.  D.
2.  B.
3.  D.
4.  A.
5.  F. Relative action was not discussed in the text.
6.  B.
7.  D.
8.  bull, trading
9.  B. Both series are below their long-term MAs, and the KST for the 
absolute price is bearish. That for the relative action is in a declining 
mode.

208 
●   Chapter 33
10.  A. First, a close above $19.50 would take the price above its MA and 
above the down trendline. Moreover, the relative line was very strong 
while the price was moving down. This suggests that the World Index 
was in a primary bear market, which actually was the case in 2002. 
Provided the relative action continues to remain positive when the pri-
mary trend turns up, this country’s ETF will outperform the rest of the 
world.
11.  D.

209
34
AUtoMateD TRaDInG 
sYsteMs
Questions
Subjects to Be Covered
Advantages and disadvantages of automated systems
Appraising systems
Troubleshooting poorly performing systems
1.  True or false: Mechanical systems can be used as a substitute for 
judgment and thinking.
A.  True
B.  False
2.  Which is likely to be a better system?
A.  One that has a perfect fit with historical data with one security
B.   One that has a profitably consistent but imperfect historical fit over 
many securities
C.  One that has a huge profit based on one or two signals
D.  None of the above
3.  What are some of the advantages of well-designed mechanical systems?
A.  They remove objectivity.
B.   They remove subjectivity.
C.  They allow the trader to participate in every worthwhile move. 
D.  A and C
E.  B and C

210 
●   Chapter 34
4.  What are the disadvantages of automated systems?
A.  Back-testing won’t necessarily simulate what actually would have 
happened.
B.  Random events can jeopardize a badly conceived system.
C.  There will be long periods when the best systems fail.
D.  All of the above
5.  If a buy signal is given but there is no countervailing sell system, what 
is the problem?
A.  You are using too much margin.
B.  The system was not properly back-tested.
C.  The system has not been designed precisely.
D.  The results were not extrapolated before entering the marketplace.
E.  B and D
6.  If you trade a proven and well-designed system and you lose all of your 
capital executing it, what is the problem likely to be?
A.  You do not have the aptitude to trade.
B.  You did not follow every signal without question.
C.  You did not make sure that you had enough capital to survive the 
worst losing streak during the test period.
D.  B and C
E.   You should have diversified by using several systems simultaneously.
F.    C and E
G.  B, C, and E
7.  Fill in the blank: The worst string of losses from a specific open equity 
peak is known as the greatest d_____.

Questions   ●  211
8.  Looking at the equity curves from three different systems in the fol-
lowing chart, which one is likely to offer the best results?
A
B
C
9.  Which statement is true?
A.  If you don’t invent enough rules, the sample data will not be profit-
able and neither will the real-time application.
B.  The size of the drawdown is unimportant if the system is really 
profitable.
C.  If your system starts out a big winner in real time, you know you’ve 
got it made.
D.  None of the above
10.  Using leverage with mechanical systems will:
A.  Always result in bigger gains for systems that test profitably
B.  Exaggerate the results both on the upside and downside
C.  Depend on the chronological sequence in which the gains and 
losses occur, but will definitely exaggerate the results both on the 
upside and downside
D.  Bust the account

This page intentionally left blank 

213
34
Automated Trading 
Systems
Answers
1.  B.
2.  B.
3.  E.
4.  D.
5.  C.
6.  G.
7.  drawdown
8.  B. This line has a consistent ring trend. A is too volatile and C loses 
money.
9.  D.
10.  C. But D cannot be ruled out either!

214
A
Advance/decline (A/D) line, 170–171, 173
calculation, 169, 170, 173
global, 206, 208
interpretation, 169, 173
major market averages and, 170, 173
Advisory service sentiment, 182, 185
Aluminum, 199, 201
Area gaps, 62, 64
Arithmetic scales, logarithmic (ratio) scales versus, 
51–52, 57
Arms Index, 163, 168
At round numbers, support and resistance zones, 28, 31
Automated trading systems, 209–213
Average directional movement (ADX), 98–99, 105
B
Bar charts, point and figure charts versus, 115, 117
Bear markets
sector rotation, 140, 143
secular trends, 146, 149
Belt-hold lines (Yorikiri), 110–111, 114
Bollinger bands, characteristics, 78–79, 81
Bond markets
in business cycle, 9, 10, 13
confidence measures, 177, 178, 180
long-term interest rates, 194, 195
sectors, 194, 196
Bottoms
double, 50, 54, 56, 58
head and shoulders (H&S), 54, 58
saucers, 61, 64
Breadth momentum, price momentum versus, 84,  
86, 89
Breadth oscillators, McClellan Oscillator, 170, 173
Breakaway gaps, 62, 64
Breakouts
rectangle, 53, 58
unknown direction, 52, 54, 57, 58
valid, 53, 58
Broadening formations, 52, 57
Brokers, as market leaders, 177–178, 180
Bull markets
seasonal breadth momentum, 169–174
sector rotation, 140, 143
secular trends, 146–147, 149–150
Business cycle, 9–14
inflation/deflation and, 141, 143
market movements and, 9, 13
sector rotations, 140, 143
stages, 11, 14
Buy-hold approach, 197, 201
Buying climax, 44, 46, 164, 168
C
Candlestick charts, 107–114
belt-hold lines (Yorikiri), 110–111, 114
construction, 107, 113
counterattack/meeting lines (Deai Sen/Gyakushu 
Sen), 107, 110, 113, 114
dark cloud cover (Kabuse), 109, 111, 113, 114
doji, 107, 113
engulfing pattern (Tsutsumi), 107, 108, 113
hammers (Takuri), 108, 111, 113, 114
harami lines (Yose), 110–111, 114
piercing line (Kirikorni), 110–111, 114
stars (Hoshi), 109, 113
tweezer tops and bottoms (Kenuki), 110, 114
volume charts, 109, 113
InDeX

Index   •  215
Candlestick charts (Cont.)
Western techniques and, 110, 113
windows (Ku), 110–111, 114
Chaikin Money Flow (CMF) indicator, 163, 167
Chande Momentum Oscillator (CMO), 92, 93, 95
Commodity markets
bond yields versus commodity prices, 178, 180
in business cycle, 9, 10, 13
confidence measures, 178, 180
Commonality, principle of, 101, 106
Confidence, 175–180
brokers as market leaders, 177–178, 180
consumer staple/food models, 175–177, 179
high-yield versus government bonds, 177, 180
Consolidation patterns, rectangle, 53, 57
Consumer staples, 153, 156, 175–177, 179
Continuation gaps, 62, 64
Contrary opinion, 187–192
difficulty of going contrary, 188, 191
extremes, 188–189, 191
Convergence, moving average, 73, 75
Copper, 29, 31
Corrective fan principle, 36, 40
Counterattack lines (Deai Sen), 110
Crash of 1987, 204, 207
Crossovers
directional movement system, 99, 105
moving average, 72, 75, 147, 150
price momentum, 87, 90
Cumulative Net New High, 171
Cycles, 151–159
cycle highs, 157–158, 159
cycle lows, 157, 159
defined, 157, 159
4-year (Kitchin), 151, 152, 155, 156, 203, 205, 207
Kondratieff wave, 145–146, 149, 151, 155
magnitude failure, 152, 155
summation, 152, 155
D
Dark cloud cover (Kabuse), 109, 111, 113, 114
Deflation Index, 141, 143
Demand Index, 162–163, 167
Dewey, Edward E., 151, 155
Diffusion indicators, 171, 173–174
international stock market, 204, 207
Directional movement system, 104
average directional movement (ADX), 98–99, 105
crossovers, 99, 105
Discount rate, 194, 196
Divergences, price momentum, 84, 85, 86, 89
Doji, 107, 113
Double cycle, 10, 14
Double tops and bottoms, 50, 54, 56, 58
Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA), 133–134, 137
Dow Jones Rail Average, 134, 137
Dow Jones Utility Average, 133, 134, 137
Dow theory, 15–19
buy-hold approach versus, 197, 201
criticisms, 16, 17, 19
introduction, 15–16, 19
tenets of, 15, 16, 17, 19
Drawdown, 210, 213
E
Earnings-driven (late-cycle) sectors, 139, 140, 143
Emotional points, gaps, 62, 64
Engulfing pattern (Tsutsumi), 107, 108, 113
Envelopes
characteristics, 77, 81
construction, 78, 81
Exhaustion
gaps, 62, 64
parabolic blow-off, 45, 47
trendline, 36, 40
Exponential moving averages (EMAs), 71, 75
Extreme swings
contrary opinion, 188–189, 191
price momentum, 85, 89
F
Failure swings, relative strength indicator (RSI), 92–95
Fibonacci fan lines, 120–121, 125
50 percent rule, 120, 125
Financial markets
business cycle and, 9–14
double cycle, 10, 14
Flags, 59, 60, 63
4-year (Kitchin) cycles, 151, 152, 155, 156, 203, 205, 207
Fundamental indicators, sentiment, 183, 186
G
Gaps
area, 62, 64
breakaway, 62, 64
closed/filled, 61, 64
continuation/runaway, 62, 64
as emotional points, 62, 64
exhaustion, 62, 64
on intraday charts, 61, 62, 64
Gartley, H. M., 22, 25
Gordon, William, 134, 137
Gould, Edson, 120, 125
H
Hamilton, William Peter, 16, 19
Hammers (Takuri), 108, 111, 113, 114

216  •   Index
Harami lines (Yose), 110–111, 114
Head-and-shoulders (H&S) pattern, 50, 56
at bottoms, 54, 58
failures, 51, 52, 56, 57
inverse failures, 51, 57
relative strength (RS), 128, 130, 131, 132
at tops, 53, 58, 99, 105
Health care, 153, 156
Hirsch, Yale, 153, 156
Holiday effect, 153, 156
I
Ichimoku cloud charts, 121–123, 126
Inflation
inflation-protected versus regular bonds as 
confidence measure, 178, 180
secular trends, 146, 149
Inflation Group Index, 141, 143
Inside bars, 66, 67, 69, 70
Insider trading, 181, 185
Interest rates, 193–196
Intermediate trends, 21–26
duration, 3, 7
to identify primary reversals, 21, 25
Know Sure Thing (KST), 100–102, 106
primary intermediate price movement, 21, 22, 25
International stock markets, 203–208
diffusion indicators, 204, 207
global A/D line, 206, 208
Intraday trends, gaps, 61, 62, 64
Inverted cycles, 158, 159
Island reversals, 66, 68, 69, 70
J
Juglar cycles, 151, 155
K
Key reversal bars, 68, 70
Kitchin cycles, 151, 152, 155, 156, 203, 205, 207
Know Sure Thing (KST)
intermediate-term, 100–102, 106
long-term, 100, 105
moving average (MA) and, 102, 106
rate of change (ROC), 102–103, 106
Special K (SPK) versus, 104, 106
in stock selection, 198
substitutes, 99–100, 105
Kondratieff wave, 145–146, 149, 151, 155
L
Lagging sectors, 139, 143
Late-cycle (earnings-driven) sectors, 139, 140, 143
Leading (liquidity-driven) sectors, 139, 140, 143
Liquidity-driven (leading) sectors, 139, 140, 143
Logarithmic/ratio scales, arithmetic scales versus, 51–52, 57
Long-term interest rates, 194, 195
Long-term trends
duration, 101, 106
Know Sure Thing (KST), 100–102, 105, 106
Kondratieff wave, 145–146, 149, 151, 155
M
Mackay, Charles, 188, 191
Magnitude failure, 152, 155
Margin debt, sentiment indicators, 182, 185
Market breadth, breadth momentum, 84, 86, 89
Market indexes, 133–138
advance/decline (A/D) line, 170, 173
weighted/unweighted, 133, 137, 138
Market Vane, 182, 185
Market Volatility Indicator (VIX), 183, 186
McClellan Oscillator, 170, 173
Meeting lines (Gyakushu Sen), 107, 113
Mega overbought/oversold levels, 84, 87, 89, 90
Moving averages (MAs), 71–75
centered, 71, 75
crossovers, 72, 75, 147, 150
envelopes, 77, 81
exponential MA (EMAs), 71, 75
Know Sure Thing, 102, 106
rate of change, 87, 90
simple MAs (SMAs), 71, 75
time spans, 72, 73, 75
trend-deviation indicators, 94, 95
weighted MA (WMAs), 73, 75
Moving-average convergence divergence (MACD), 83, 89
as substitute for KST, 100, 105
trend-deviation indicators versus, 94, 95
MSCI World Stock Index, 204, 207
Mutual funds, cash/assets ratio, 182, 185
N
NASDAQ Composite Index, 135, 138
Negative divergences
in price momentum, 84, 85, 89
volume, 44, 46
Neil, Humphrey, 188, 191
News events, 183, 185
O
On Balance Volume (OBV), 163, 167
One- and two-bar price patterns, 65–70
inside bars, 66, 67, 69, 70
key reversal bars, 68, 70
outside bars, 65, 69
two-bar reversal, 66, 69

Index   •  217
One-bar islands, 66, 69
Options
Market Volatility Indicator (VIX), 183, 186
put/call ratio, 183, 186
Oscillators
Chande Momentum Oscillator, 163, 167
McClellan Oscillator, 170
trend-deviation indicators, 94, 95
volume, 162, 167
Outside bars, 65, 69
Overbought/oversold levels
mega, 84, 87, 89, 90
relative strength indicator (RSI), 92, 94, 95
Overowned/underowned stocks, 197, 199, 201, 202
P
Parabolic blow-off, 45, 47
Peak-and-trough progression, 4, 7
identifying, 5, 8
relative strength indicator (RSI), 93, 95
reversal of rising, 5, 10
sequence of, 9, 13
Pennants, 59, 63
Piercing line (Kirikorni), 110–111, 114
Point and figure charts, 115–117
bar charts versus, 115, 117
reversal, 116, 117
Politicians, contrary opinion, 188, 192
Positive divergences
in price momentum, 84, 89
in relative strength, 128, 132
Price momentum
breadth momentum versus, 84, 86, 89
characteristics, 84, 89
crossovers, 87, 90
defined, 84, 89
directional movement system, 97, 105
divergences, 84, 85, 86, 89
sentiment and, 182, 185
stochastics, 83, 89
trend reversal techniques, 84, 89
trendline violations, 86, 90
Price patterns
double tops and bottoms, 50, 56
flags, 59, 60, 63
gaps, 61, 62, 64
head and shoulders, 50, 56
island reversals, 66, 68, 69, 70
pennants, 59, 63
rectangles, 49, 55
relative strength (RS), 129, 132
rounding tops, 61, 64
saucers, 61, 64
size and depth, 52, 57
transitional phase, 49, 55
triangles, 54, 58
wedges, 61, 63
Primary bear markets, mega overboughts and 
oversolds, 84, 89
Primary bull markets, 16, 19
mega overboughts and oversolds, 84, 89
Primary intermediate price movement, described, 23, 26
Primary trends
duration, 3, 7
secular trends versus, 147, 150
Principle of commonality, 101, 106
Principle of proportionality, 153, 156
Principle of summation, 152, 155
Principle of variation, 152, 155
Proportion
50 percent rule, 120, 125
support/resistance zone, 28, 31
trends, 120, 125
Proportionality, principle of, 153, 156
Put/call ratio, 183, 186
R
Rate of change (ROC), 83, 89
calculation, 87, 90
Know Sure Thing, 102–103, 106
of moving average, 87, 90
RSI versus, 91, 95
volume, 161, 167
Rectangles, 49, 55
consolidation patterns, 53, 57
downside breakout signal, 53, 58
reversals, 53, 57
upside breakout signal, 53, 58
Relative momentum index (RMI), 93, 95
Relative strength (RS), 127–132, 131–137
positive and negative RS divergences, 128, 132
price and, 129, 132
in stock selection, 198, 201
using, 127–132
Relative strength indicator (RSI), 83, 89
Chande Momentum Oscillator (CMO), 92, 93, 95
failure swings, 92–95
overbought/oversold levels, 92, 94, 95
peak-and-trough progression, 93, 95
rate of change versus, 91, 95
relative momentum index (RMI), 93, 95
time spans, 92, 93, 95
Retracements, support and resistance zones, 30, 31
Reversals
island, 66, 68, 69, 70
key reversal bars, 68, 70
point and figure chart, 116, 117
price momentum trend, 84, 89
rectangle, 53, 57
secular trends, 146, 150
two-bar, 66, 67, 69
Rounding tops, 61, 64
Russell 1000, 135, 138
Russell 2000, 135, 138

218  •   Index
S
Saucers, 61, 64
Schultz, John, 188, 191
Schumpeter, Joseph, 151, 155
Seasonal cycles, 151–159
holiday effect, 153, 156
seasonal (diffusion) momentum for stock market, 
170–171, 173
Seasonal (diffusion) momentum, 170–171, 173
Secondary movement/reaction
bull market intermediate corrections, 22, 25
described, 23, 26
Sector rotation, 139–143
business cycle in, 140, 143
inflationary/deflationary, 141, 143
lagging groups, 139, 143
sectors and industry groups, 141, 143
Secular trends, 145–150
duration, 3, 7, 145, 149
importance of, 6, 8
long (Kondratieff) wave, 145–146, 149, 151, 155
primary trends versus, 147, 150
reversals, 146, 150
stock market, 146, 149–150
stock selection, 198, 201
Selling climax, 42, 44, 46, 165, 168
Sentiment indicators, 181–186
advisory services, 182, 185
fundamental indicators, 183, 186
insider trading, 181, 185
margin debt, 182, 185
Market Vane, 182, 185
momentum as substitute, 182, 185
option data, 183, 186
reaction to news, 183, 185
Shooting stars, 109, 113
Short-term rates, economic impact, 193, 195
Short-term trends, duration, 3, 7
Simple moving averages (SMAs), 71, 75
advancing, 72, 75
convergence of averages, 73, 75
Smith, Edgar Lawrence, 151, 155
S&P Composite Index, as coincident indicator, 141, 143
Special K (SPK), 103–104
Know Sure Thing (KST) versus, 104, 106
Stars (Hoshi), shooting, 109, 113
Stochastic indicators, 94, 96
price momentum, 83, 89
as substitute for KST, 99, 105
Stock markets
in business cycle, 9, 10, 13
41-month (4-year) cycle, 151, 152, 155, 156,  
203, 207
interest rates and, 193–194, 195
secular trends, 146, 149–150
Stock selection, 197–202
Stovall, Sam, 153, 156
Substitutes
Know Sure Thing (KST), 99–100, 105
for momentum, 182, 185
Summation, principle of, 152, 155
Support and resistance zones, 27–31
at round numbers, 28, 31
dynamic levels of support and resistance, 36,  
37, 40
emotional points for potential support/resistance 
levels, 28, 31
nature of resistance zones, 27–28, 31
nature of support zones, 27–28, 31
proportionate moves, 28, 31
retracements, 30, 31
technical principles of support/resistance analysis, 
27–30, 31
T
Technical analysis, applying principles of, 4–5, 7
3 percent crossover rule, moving average, 72, 75
Three-step-and-stumble rule, 194, 196
Time frames/spans
moving average, 72, 73, 75
relative strength indicator (RSI), 92, 93, 95
trend, 5, 7
Top-down approach, 198, 201
Tops
double, 50, 54, 56, 58
head and shoulders, 53, 58, 99, 105
rounding, 61, 64
Transitional phase, 49, 55
Trend channels, 35, 40
Trend-deviation indicators, 94, 95
MACD, 94, 96
Trendlines, 33–40
angle of ascent or descent, 37, 40
consolidation or continuation pattern, 33, 39
constructing, 33–34, 39
exhaustion, 36, 40
length of line, 37, 40
moving average, 72, 75
number of times touched or approached,  
37, 40
price momentum violations, 86, 90
reversal pattern, 33, 34, 37, 39, 40
support and resistance, 36, 37, 40
trend channels, 35, 40
up trendlines, 35, 40
Trends, 3–8
characteristics, 9, 13
duration, 3, 7
Ichimoku cloud charts, 121–123, 126
proportion, 120, 125
time frames, 5, 7
Triangles, 54, 58
Trough wars, 146, 149

Index   •  219
Tweezer tops and bottoms (Kenuki), 110, 114
Two-bar reversal, 66, 67, 69
V
Valid breakouts, 53, 58
Value Line Arithmetic, 134, 137
Variation, principle of, 152, 155
VIX (Market Volatility Indicator), 183, 186
Volume, 41–47
buying climax, 44, 46, 164, 168
candlestick chart, 109, 113
parabolic blow-off, 45, 47
price and volume trends in bull and bear markets, 
41–45, 46–47
selling climax, 42, 44, 46, 165, 168
volume goes with trend principle, 44, 46
volume leads price in uptrend principle, 44, 46
Volume indicators, 161–168
Arms Index, 163, 168
Chaikin Money Flow (CMF), 163, 167
Demand Index, 162–163, 167
On Balance Volume (OBV), 163, 167
rate of change (ROC) of volume, 161, 167
volume oscillator, 162, 167
Volume rate of change (ROC), 161, 167
W
Wedges, 61, 63
falling, 61, 63
Weighted market indexes, 133, 137, 138
Weighted moving averages (WMAs), 73, 75
Wilshire 5000 Equity Index, 134, 137
Windows (Ku), 110–111, 114
About the Author
Martin J. Pring is the chairman of Pring Turner Capital group as well as 
the strategist for the Pring Turner Business Cycle ETF (symbol DBIZ). 
He is the founder of Pring.com, which provides research for financial 
institutions and individual investors around the world. The site also 
features a 15+ hour interactive online video training course on tech-
nical analysis. Since 1984, he has published the InterMarket Review, a 
monthly newsletter offering a long-term synopsis of the world’s major 
financial markets, and in 2013, he joined Golden Gate University as an 
adjunct professor teaching a virtual graduate level course on technical 
analysis.


