TUTTLE
TOKIIRO
Stylish
SUCCULENTS
Japanese Inspired Container 
Gardens for Small Spaces





Stylish
SUCCULENTS
Japanese Inspired Container 
Gardens for Small Spaces
TUTTLE Publishing
Tokyo   Rutland, Vermont   Singapore
TOKIIRO

04 	 Succulents are Dynamic
06 	 CHAPTER 1
	
A Little Universe in a Pot:  
	
Planting Succulents in Containers
08 	 Basic Tools and Materials
10 	 Basic Methods for Planting
13 	 A Little Composition That Fits in the Palm  
	
of Your Hand
14 	 Reaching to the Sky
16 	 Planting in a Container with No Holes
22 	 A City Veiled in Red
23 	 Life Passed Down 
24 	 Immeasurable Vitality
26 	 A New Star is Born
27 	 A Landscape Where a Guardian Deity Resides
Contents
28 	 On Wild Earth
29 	 A Mystical Forest
34 	 The Power of Vitality and Evolution
35 	 Celebrating Shadows
36	 The Gentleness of Pink; A Jewel on a Moonlit Night
37 	 Mr Rabbit, What Did You See That Made You Jump?
38 	 The Flowers of Succulent Plants
40	 Memory
41	 Quietly Listening to the Voices of Plants
42 	 CHAPTER 2
	
Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls:  
	
Creating Wreaths and Tableaux
48 	 How to Make a Succulent Wreath
	
Using Succulents to Add Color toWalls
57 	 Seasonal Color
58	 Tranquil Eternity
60 	 The World’s Most Enduring Greenery
61 	 Just Like a Corsage
62 	 Wreath Made with Air Plants
64 	 How to Make a Tableau Wall Hanging
69   A Pop-out Picture
    

70 	 CHAPTER 3
	
Floating in the Air:  
	
Hanging Succulents
74	 A Forgotten Forest
76 	 Prepare the Container for Hanging
79 	 Three Spacecraft Flying Through the Air
80 	 Leaving Home
	
A Guide to Succulents
18 	 ❶ Succulents That Grow Vertically 
20 	 ❷ Succulents That Spread Out
30 	 ❸ Rosette Types
32 	 ❹ Enjoying Haworthia 
44 	 ❺ Succulents for Wreaths
72 	 ❻ Succulents That are Ideal for Hanging
81 	 CHAPTER 4
	
Living with Succulents
 
82 	 What is a Succulent?
83 	 Succulents Love Water! 
	
Photosynthesis Prompts a Love of Water
84 	 Creating an Environment to Promote Photosynthesis
85 	 Photosynthesis in Succulents Differs from That in Other Plants 
86 	 Succulents are Not Good Indoor Dwellers	 
	
Light, Air and Water are Vital for Succulents
87 	 The Charm of Succulents
	
The Beauty of Succulents’ Fall Colors
88 	 The Growth Pattern of Succulents
	
A Little More About the Importance of Sunlight
89 	 Cultivating and Planting Tips for Succulents by Genus
90 	 Q&A: How to Grow Succulents Successfully
92 	 Our Own Journey with Succulents
93   To Our Readers

4  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Always remember that. The succulent you see now is ever-changing—a 
fleeting image that reflects its current environment. These plants respond to 
their surroundings—tomorrow; the day after; a week, month or year from 
now, they’ll sport a fresh new look. They are never really complete. They are 
constantly evolving.
At Tokiiro, we contemplate succulents from every angle so that our ar-
rangements will celebrate the plants’ transformation over time. They resemble 
ikebana in the way they conjure up a world unfolding in space, and bonsai in 
the snapshot of scenery they offer.
For Tokiiro, a plant container is like a sheet of drawing paper or a canvas. 
Succulents are the pastels, colored pencils and paints. We plant them as if 
drawing a picture inspired by a memory in the mind’s eye, or by the container’s 
small inner space (or outer space). Without the space created by the container, 
expression is impossible. The variations in the glazes and forms of the pots 
enhance the individuality of the “universes” created.
The pencils, paints and pastels that color these container universes aren’t 
anything special; they’re simply the materials at hand. In other words, the suc-
culents used aren’t hard-to-find hybrids; rather, they’re what could be called 
garden varieties.
The motifs we draw are narrow lanes traversed in country adventures; 
mountain ranges that rise up above fields; the claw of a crayfish; deep forests 
in which ponds turn up out of nowhere. Somehow, matched with containers 
and succulents, these memories and imaginings have become little gardens 
and forests that evoke warm feelings of nostalgia.
What kind of picture will you paint with succulents?
Succulents are Dynamic

Succulents are Dynamic  5

Chapter  
1
A Little Universe in a Pot 
Planting Succulents in Containers
Outer space is free of boundaries. Tokiiro thinks of plant 
arrangements in the same way. Because succulents have an 
incredibly strong life force, by responding to their environ-
ments they evolve over time to achieve their unique forms. 
Each succulent you plant in a little pot evokes a new world 
that far exceeds human imagination. That new world, too, 
continues to evolve. In it is a beauty that only time can  
create. In tiny pots, arrangements of succulents give birth 
to a world view thousands of times bigger than them-
selves. Try imagining this view of nature when planting 
succulents in containers. 


Basic Tools and Materials
Let’s begin by talking about the tools you’ll need to create arrangements of succulents. There’s nothing that’s particularly 
hard to obtain—it’s easy to make a start as these are all items that can be found at home or in a home center.
1 Mesh
Placed over the hole in the 
base, mesh prevents soil from 
trickling out of the bottom of 
the container. Use mesh sold at 
home centers for security doors, 
cutting it with scissors to the 
size of the container base.
5 Spatula
Use to pack soil in firmly in the 
container. A small version, such 
as a wooden coffee stir stick, is 
easy to use as its narrow shape 
and smoothness are just right.
3 Scissors
Use for cutting mesh to size, 
trimming succulents and so 
on. Easy-to-use craft scissors 
are fine.
7 Scoop
Use to pour dirt into a con­
tainer. If creating an arrange-
ment in a coffee cup or small 
container, a small scoop is 
handy.
4 Tweezers
Useful when planting small 
succulent sproutings in 
between gaps. Rather than 
gardening tweezers, use the 
type with bent tips intended for 
detailed work. 
8 Soil
Use soil for succulents which is 
sold at home centers, gardening 
stores and so on. Plants in the 
Crassulaceae family in partic-
ular have delicate roots, so use 
fine soil.
2 Container
The flower pot used for arrangements. 
In order to ensure good drainage, a pot 
with a hole in the base is recommended. 
However, as long as watering is carried 
out correctly, a container without a hole 
is fine too. There are also ways to make 
holes in containers (see p10).
6 Wire
Bend wire into a U-shape to secure 
succulents into soil if they’re tall or 
otherwise unstable. Use 24-gauge flo-
rist wire (preferably brown, to blend 
in with the soil). Florist wire is fairly 
rust-resistant.

A Little Universe in a Pot  9
1 
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

10  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Basic Methods for Planting
1. Prepare the Container
Find a container you’d like to use. If the base has a hole, place mesh over it (for containers without holes, see below and p16). A small con-
tainer is pleasing to look at and makes for an easy first arrangement. Try using a coffee cup or other small container that appeals to you 
to make the finished arrangement all the more charming.
Cut mesh to the size of the container base and place in container.
Fill container with soil to about 1/3 of its height.
HOW TO MAKE A HOLE IN A CONTAINER
A container that doesn’t have a hole in its base is fine to use as it is, but a hole allows water to drain well, making it easier 
to create a compatible environment for these plants. You’ll need an electric drill. Start with a fine drill bit, monitoring the 
hole and gradually increasing to thicker bits as you go. If you’re using a large container, it’s better to make several smaller 
holes rather than one large one. 
1. Start by using an extremely fine bit and drilling from the outside of the container. 2. Change to a thicker drill bit as you go, if neces-
sary. 3. Once the drill seems as if it will break through the surface, turn the container over and drill from the inside. 4. Drill from the 
outside again to adjust and increase the size of the hole. 5. Depending on the size of the container, make several holes 3/8 inch (1 cm)
in diameter. However, if the base of the container is thin, it may crack, so take care and don’t drill too many holes.
1
2
3
4
5

A Little Universe in a Pot  11
For plants that have 
grown to fill the pot, 
draw the succulent 
out of the pot and 
hold it at the roots 
with both hands. 
Brush off soil to see 
where the plants are joined, then divide them 
carefully so as not to damage the roots.
2. Prepare the Succulents
Divide the succulents to be used in the arrangement and place them on a tray. There are three methods of division, 
as shown below, with each method appropriate for different plant types. If you’re using the bouquet method sug-
gested by Tokiiro (see p12), leave soil attached to roots. 
Sedum Oaxacanum
This type of Sedum 
grows comparatively 
tall and sends out 
buds at the sides. 
The edges of its 
leaves are dusted 
with a white powder.
Acre Aureum  
A member of the Sedum 
genus, the new buds 
at the tips of its leaves 
turn lemon yellow as 
winter approaches, 
brightening up arrange-
ments that feature it. It 
soon weakens if it dries 
out, so make sure not 
to cut its roots when 
planting. 
Harmsii  
Genus Echeveria. In win-
ter, the leaves are attrac-
tive, turning wine red to 
resemble velvet. Plants 
that have been growing 
for some time have 
straight trunks, creating 
an impressive feature in 
an arrangement.
Momiji Matsuri  
(Red leaf festival) Genus Crassula-
ceae. As the name suggests, these 
plants turn red in winter, creating 
accents in arrangements of 
succulents. They grow rapidly from 
spring to fall, forming many new 
buds at the base of the leaves. If 
trimmed off, these can be used as 
cuttings to easily increase stock.
Sedum Pachyphyllum
Genus Sedum. Known 
as “Maiden’s mind” in 
Japan, its name likely 
comes from the blush 
of red at the tips of its 
leaves. It spreads from 
buds along its sides and 
can be made to resem-
ble a bonsai.
METHODS OF DIVISION
For succulents with 
new stock plants that 
are small and have 
delicate stems, use 
tweezers with bent 
ends to carefully pull 
plants out of the soil.
In the case that the 
stock plant has not 
grown very large, grip 
at the roots using 
tweezers and pull 
it up carefully so as 
not to damage the 
roots. If unable to raise it out of the soil, use the 
methods of division at left.

12  Stylish SUCCULENTS
3. Create a Form as If Putting Together a Bouquet
4. Add the Soil
This method involves arranging succulents in your hand as if putting together a bouquet, then planting in a container.  
Create the look of a world where time has elapsed by winding the succulents around one another as they would grow naturally after a while. 
Once you’ve decided on the form of the arrangement, hold the plants gently in one hand in the container and add soil in from the side. 
Make sure not to lift the plants up out of the pot but rather keep them securely in place as you do this. As the soil needs to be packed in 
firmly, this is the task that takes the most time.
Consider the overall balance of the arrangement as you put succu-
lents together.
Once the arrangement is ready, place it in the container and make 
necessary changes to aspects such as the volume of foliage and the 
overall flow. Use scissors to trim arrangement to desired shape for 
planting. 
Hold plants in place while gently adding soil in at the side. Press 
soil in by working the spatula up and down. Keep adding soil and 
pressing it in with the spatula to stabilize plants.
You’ll need quite a lot of soil. Once soil has been added, consider 
the overall composition, turning the pot around to view it from all 
aspects. Use tweezers to add extra plants in any gaps, making 
adjustments until you’re satisfied.

A Little Composition That  
Fits in the Palm of Your Hand
Tokiiro’s succulent arrangements are small 
and companionable. We also like to decide on a 
theme and build around it, just like visualizing 
what you want to draw and how you’ll draw it 
before actually putting paint to canvas. Having a 
theme in mind makes arranging succulents more 
fun. The arrangements on the following pages 
serve as examples, so please refer to them for 
ideas on how to build on your vision. Watering 
techniques will be discussed on page 25.

Container Garden 1
Reaching to the Sky
Up in the sky… what kind of world is up there? 
For sure, it’s a world where unimaginable beauty abounds… 
The sky-blue color of the cup entices you to look up at the 
world above, so the succulents selected here are mainly the 
sort that grow straight up towards the sky.
PLANTS USED
Sedum pachyphyllum (Genus Sedum)
Echeveria carnicolor (with flower buds; Genus Echeveria)
Crassula lycopodioides (Genus Crassulaceae)
Kalanchoe eriophylla (Genus Kalanchoe)
Momiji matsuri (Genus Crassulaceae)
Sedum oaxacanum (Genus Sedum)
Graptopetalum bronze (Genus Graptopetalum)
Echeveria white rose (Genus Echeveria)
GROWING TIP
We’ve used an attractive coffee mug and miniature pitcher in this 
arrangement, neither of which have holes in their base. When using 
containers without holes, it’s important to control the amount of water 
given. Please refer to p25 for information on watering.
14  Stylish SUCCULENTS


16  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Planting in a Container with No Holes
1. Prepare the Container
Spread stones over the entire base of the container. Doing this 
creates gaps which improves air flow around the roots, helps to 
prevent root decay, and aids root development. Take the size of 
the pot into account, but aim to add roughly 2 inches (5 cm) 
of soil to cover the stones at the bottom.
2. Prepare the Succulents
Prepare the succulents you’ve selected. It’s a good idea to prepare  
more than are required as this allows for more freedom of expression.
1. Sedum pachyphyllum (Genus Sedum) 2. Graptopetalum bronze (Genus Graptopetalum) 3. Crassula lycopodioides 
(Genus Crassulaceae) 4. Acre aureum (Genus Sedum) 5. Snow (Genus Sedeveria) 6. Momiji matsuri (Genus Crassula-
ceae) 7. Lola (Genus Echeveria) 8. Debbie (Genus Graptoveria) 9. Sedum oaxacanum 10. Echeveria carnicolor (Genus 
Echeveria) 11. Harmsii (Genus Echeveria) 12. Kalanchoe eriophylla (Genus Kalanchoe)
1 
2
3 
4 
5
6
10
11
12
8
9
7 

A Little Universe in a Pot  17
3. First Position the Main Plants
4. Place the Other Plants Around the Main Plants as If Creating a Bouquet
Depending on the theme, start by planting the main plants. In this example, the theme is “reaching to the sky” so plants that grow verti-
cally form the centerpiece. Plants that grow vertically such as Sedum pachyphyllum have bulk to them and are difficult to balance, so in 
order to increase their stability, you have to secure them with soil. 
Gather the remaining succulents in the palm of 
your hand like a bouquet and plant them in the 
container, scooping the soil and packing it in as 
shown on p12. Consider the overall balance as you 
work the other plants in around the main ones.
Decide where to position the main plants 
and secure them with soil. 
Bend wire into a U shape to create a U pin.
Wedge the stem into the U pin and poke the 
pin into the soil. Use a pin on either side of 
the plant to secure it.

18  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Crassula Lycopodioides 
Genus Crassulaceae. Grows vertically, sending 
out buds all the way up the stem. It remains 
green all year round, so it’s easy to work its 
form and color into arrangements.
Kalanchoe Eriophylla 
Genus Kalanchoe. The hairs on the leaves are 
white and remain relatively the same color all 
year round, making it a suitable plant to use 
when white is desired. It is relatively strong 
and easy to cultivate type.
Echeveria Carnicolor
Genus Echeveria. Echeveria have long flower 
buds with blooms at the end. Make use of their 
height in arrangements. The flowers bloom for 
a long time.
A Guide to Succulents 1
Succulents That Grow Vertically

A Little Universe in a Pot  19
Harmsii
Genus Echeveria. The stems resemble tree 
trunks. With some time, a sense of movement 
forms. They make good seedlings.
Tetragona
Genus Crassulaceae. These plants shed their 
lower leaves as they grow upwards. They 
grow relatively tall, so keep this in mind when 
planting.
Sedum Pachyphyllum
Genus Sedum. There’s no doubt that these 
plants, with their foliage at the end of stems 
resembling bonsai, are the stars in any 
arrangement. Make sure to play up their 
free-flowing form.
Vertically-growing succulents can be used in arrangements to resemble huge trees standing solo 
on a vast plain, or a jungle in which one has lost one’s way, and so on. They also can be used as 
accents in an arrangement to express the movement of clouds and lightning, waves, animals, 
dragons and more. Echeveria stock plants that have been left for a while and plants in the Cras-
sulaceae genus grow relatively quickly. In the Sedum genus too there are plants that move in 
interesting ways, such as the Sedum pachyphyllum with foliage that grows at the end of a stem.

Eurema Mexicana 
(Genus Sedum)
Sedum Makinoi 
(Genus Sedum)
Acre Aureum 
(Genus Sedum)
Little Missy  
(Genus Crassulaceae)
Sedum Japonicum ‘Morimura’ 
(Genus Sedum)
Purple Haze  
(Genus Crassulaceae)
20  Stylish SUCCULENTS
A Guide to Succulents 2
Succulents That Spread Out

Sedum Oryzifolium 
(Genus Sedum)
Makinoi Ogon
(Genus Sedum)
Pallidum
(Genus Sedum)
Sedum Mexicanum  
Green Mound
(Genus Sedum)
Ground Cover Plants 
(Genus Sedum)
Sedum Uniflorum
(Genus Sedum)
Even within the Sedum genus, some types such as the stonecrops have small leaves that grow 
not at the ends of stems but along the sides, creating ground cover as they increase. A similarly 
spreading type can be found in the Crassulaceae genus, which allows for combining the plants 
within an arrangement. The various colors make gradation possible.
A Little Universe in a Pot  21

Colors change with the seasons in this 
city. Now, it’s veiled in red as the midwin-
ter sun casts shadows, embracing winter 
rather than longing for the coming of 
spring: this is the image we have tried to 
create here. In summer, it will be trans-
formed into a city cloaked in green.
PLANTS USED
Momiji matsuri (Genus Crassulaceae)
Sedum rubrotinctum (Genus Sedum)
Acre aureum (Genus Sedum)
PLANTING TIP
These succulents are red as they change 
color in the fall. Imagine a cool breeze 
blowing by, quietly embraced by the scen-
ery, and maintain a feeling of calm as you 
face the container to create this vision.
GROWING TIP
Succulents sense the season through 
the changes in temperature between day 
and night, among other means. Make sure 
to let them stay connected to nature by 
allowing them to feel the outside air.
22  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Container Garden 2
A City Veiled in Red

A Little Universe in a Pot  23
The life force in a succulent plant is truly 
amazing. A leaf that falls from a stem can put 
out roots. A new bud forms from something 
that seemed dead. Succulents teach us a lot 
about the wonder of life.
PLANTS USED
Party dress (Genus Echeveria)
Crassula mesembrianthoides (Genus Crassulaceae)
Sedum pachyphyllum (Genus Sedum)
Sedum rubrotinctum (Genus Sedum)
Sedum spathulifolium ssp. pruinosum (Genus Sedum)
Sedum japonicum ‘morimura’ (Genus Sedum)
Senecio rowleyanus (Family Zsteraceae, Genus Senecio)
Container Garden 3
Life Passed Down
GROWING TIP
Plants in the Sedum genus with 
small leaves love water. They dry 
out easily, so check the soil and 
leaves daily and water accordingly. 
Constant attention is the key to 
growing them well.
PLANTING TIP
Start by planting the Party dress first 
as it is the centerpiece. Keep in mind 
how the plants’ growth over time will 
affect the arrangement and plant 
vertically growing succulents beside 
trailing succulents to create balance 
as plant coverage increases.

24  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Immeasurable Vitality
When it comes to succulents, a life force dwells even in a single easily-plucked leaf. Place one on 
top of dry soil and after two to three months it should grow roots and buds. That’s just one of 
the appealing aspects of succulents.
ABOVE Roots and buds 
growing from a fallen leaf. 
Once the roots have started 
emerging, plant the leaf in 
soil to cultivate the plant. 
BELOW When the plant puts 
out new buds, the old leaves 
on the lower part of the 
stem may wither and die. 
This does not mean anything 
is wrong with the plant, 
so don’t be alarmed. This 
phenomenon occurs because 
in order to develop, the new 
buds need moisture which 
the old leaves supply. In this 
way, one generation of leaves 
makes way for the next.

A Little Universe in a Pot  25
Sprouting New Buds  
from Fallen Leaves
In the course of creating arrangements, leaves often fall off, but don’t worry—
placed like this on top of soil, they’ll generate a new life. 
There’s no need to water when creating an arrangement! Succu-
lents are susceptible to stress, so in order to settle them into the 
surroundings in their new container, hold off on watering for a 
week and place them in a sunny spot outdoors. A week after plant-
ing, give them plenty of water, and a week after that, feel the soil 
and look at its condition. If it’s moist, it means it’s not suited to the 
current location, so move the container to somewhere conducive 
to photosynthesis such as a spot that receives a lot of sun. Once 
the soil is dry, wait another week before watering. It doesn’t matter 
if water gets on the leaves, but some if water collects around the 
base of their leaves some plants can rot or it may make it difficult 
for the leaves to breathe, so it’s best to aim water at the soil. 
Splash plenty of water over containers with holes in the base, but 
be careful not to overwater for container that have no holes. Give 
them about a third of the container’s volume in water.
Place on top of dry soil. Fleshy leaves 
such as those of the Echeveria genus 
only need to be placed on top of dry 
soil—there’s no need to embed them 
in the soil or water them. They’ll put 
out roots in two to three months.
Leaves damaged through stress.
Plants can experience various kinds of 
stress from extremes in heat or cold, 
lack of oxygen, excessive humidity and 
so on. Be aware of changes in surround-
ings where the leaves are placed.
Plant leaf cuttings in soil The leaves of succulents such as Sedum pachy-
phyllum (left) and Crassula lycopodioides (right) can be planted in soil to 
increase stock plants. Plants increase differently depending on their genus, 
so try to remember how each genus generates new stock.
How to Water Arrangements  
of Succulents
Watering schedule
Day of arranging.  
Don’t water.
Water
Check if soil 
is dry 
1 week
2 weeks
If it’s dry, water 
after one week
If it’s not dry, move to 
a place where it will 
dry out easily–once 
dry, wait a week and 
then water

A cloud of gas surrounding a clear blue earth 
creates the fluctuating world of a newborn planet. 
It appears that this new planet hosts new life—
floating into view comes the glowing white  
Kalanchoe eriophylla with its white life.
PLANTS USED
Kalanchoe eriophylla (Genus Kalanchoe)
Momiji matsuri (Genus Crassulaceae)
Crassula capitella (Genus Crassulaceae)
PLANTING TIP
White plants are something of a rarity. The 
glistening of the white hairs on their leaves 
as the sun touches them creates an aura of 
holiness. New life is born, and clad in their 
fall colors, Momiji matsuri and Crassula 
capitella support its increasing vitality. 
GROWING TIP
This is a relatively easy combination to grow. 
However, if the correct balance of sunlight 
and water isn’t maintained, the whiteness 
of Kalanchoe eriophylla can be affected, so 
make sure to keep an eye on its condition. 
Container Garden 4
A New Star is Born

The red Kalanchoe thyrsiflora has managed to 
get this big after growing as a new shoot from a 
cutting. Watching over things from above like a 
protector, its huge leaves envelop the scenery. 
PLANTS USED
Kalanchoe thyrsiflora (Genus Kalanchoe)
Sedum makinoii (Genus Sedum)
Crassula lycopodioides (Genus Crassulaceae)
PLANTING TIP
A single Kalanchoe thyrsiflora is placed in the 
center of the container. To emphasize the fact 
that the small leaves at the bottom of the  
plant will inherit its life, evergreen succulents 
have been planted around it.
GROWING TIP
Makinoi does not cope well with heat  
or humidity, so take care during hot  
summer days. Place it in a well ventilated  
spot or create a breeze near it by using  
an electric fan.
Container Garden 5
A Landscape Where a 
Guardian Deity Resides

28  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Even in the harshest places, plants con-
tinue to survive. These plants put out 
“aerial roots” from their branches that 
become genuine roots when they reach 
the ground. They’re a brilliant example 
of how plants can seek and acquire the 
means to survive on the tiniest amount 
of nutrients.
PLANTS USED
Aeonium haworthii Tricolor (Genus Aeonium)
Sedum uniflorum (Genus Sedum)
PLANTING TIP
The Aeonium haworthii Tricolor is planted in such  
a way as to play up its aerial roots, with succu-
lents that spread over the ground accompanying 
it in this arrangement. The aerial roots appear to 
connect heaven and earth. At a glance, it looks  
like a bonsai, don’t you think?
GROWING TIP
As Aenium haworthii Tricolor does not cope well 
with high temperatures and humidity, make sure 
to place it somewhere well ventilated in summer. 
With plenty of sunlight and time, it’s possible to 
grow a compact plant similar to a bonsai.
Container Garden 6
On Wild Earth

A Little Universe in a Pot  29
Deep, deep in the mountains where no 
one has ventured before lies a dimly lit 
forest in which some plants make their 
way up, up to the tiny bit of light that 
reaches them, while others trail down, 
down, the combination creating a verita-
ble paradise for plants. This is where 
nature’s true form can be found.
PLANTS USED
Crassula lycopodioides (Genus Crassulaceae) 
Green pet (Genus Sedum) 
Senecio prymidatuabar (Family Asteraceae,  
Genus Senecio)
Acre aureum (Genus Sedum)
PLANTING TIP
In order to evoke a forest, succulents are planted 
to fill the container and twist around each other. 
The vertically growing Crassula lycopodioides is 
straight and tall while the trailing Acre aureum is 
allowed to hang down naturally. Make an effort to 
play up the plants’ inherent “flow."
GROWING TIP
In the same Asteraceae family as Senecio row-
leyanus, Senecio prymidatuabar requires plenty 
of water and becomes weak if it doesn’t receive 
enough. Consider the other succulents in the 
arrangement and try to water only the part where 
it is planted.
Container Garden 7
A Mystical Forest

Perle Von Nurnberg
Genus Echeveria. This is one of the 
most popular types of Echeveria, 
with attractive purple leaves. In 
spring it has small flowers. It is 
coated in a white powdery dusting.
Echeveria Pulidonis
Genus Echeveria. The 
green leaves are subtly 
tinged with red around 
the edges. Yellow flowers 
bloom in the spring.
Letizia
Genus Sedeveria. Charac-
terized by its green color. 
The leaves gradually turn 
red as if they were burning 
when changing color.
Chihuahualinze
Genus Echeveria. There 
are claws at the ends of 
the leaves, which have a 
swollen look to them. The 
area around the claws is 
a red color.
A Guide to Succulents 3
Rosette Types
30  Stylish SUCCULENTS

Immediately catching the eye of anyone looking at an arrangement, this type is the model 
succulent. It is mainly seen in rosette form in the Echeveria genus in the Crassulaceae family. 
This attractive petal-like arrangement of leaves has won this plant many admirers, and for this 
reason, it has been hybridized and developed into many unusual varieties. The plants shown 
here are common varieties that Tokiiro uses regularly, with the developed parent plant above 
and the offspring shown below. Quietly sending out more and more leaves as they grow, their 
beauty is there to be enjoyed as time passes.
Echeveria White Rose 
Genus Echeveria. Formed 
from layers of thick whitish 
leaves with reddish tips, this 
plant closely resembles a 
pale green rose.
Echeveria Secunda
Genus Echeveria. The roundish 
leaves have a little reddish claw 
at their tip. The leaves form 
layers like a rose and become 
a more vivid green the more 
sunlight they receive.
Peacockii Princess Pearl
Genus Echeveria. Covered all 
over in a dusting of white pow-
der, this plant has an aura of 
elegance. Its leaves are pointed 
at the tips and tinged slightly 
red around the claws. 
Powder Blue
Genus Echeveria. The leaves 
have a bluish tone and faint red 
tinge around the edges. Dusted 
with a white coating, this plant 
is characterized by its translu-
cent, subtle shading.
A Little Universe in a Pot  31

Haworthia Cuspidata
Genus Haworthia. The tips of 
the leaves are quite sharp. 
Triangular in shape, they fan 
out in a rosette formation.
Haworthia Cymbiformis  
Var Obtusa
Genus Haworthia. Small and 
spherical in form, this plant has 
leaves that appear full of water, 
creating a sense of viridescence.
Haworthia Cooperi  
Var Truncata
Genus Haworthia. White 
veins stand out clearly 
against the green of the 
leaves, which are adorably 
plump and round.
Cymbiformis
Genus Haworthia. The leaves of this 
plant are large and slightly flat. Buds 
grow from the side of the main plant, 
blossoming with pink flowers in the 
spring. Grow in a well ventilated spot.
Obtusa
Genus Haworthia. Plump, 
petal-like leaves fan out 
to form a rosette shape as 
this plant grows. It likes dry 
conditions, so take care not 
to over water.
32  Stylish SUCCULENTS
A Guide to Succulents 4
Enjoying Haworthia

Inhabiting the dimly lit spaces in the shadows cast 
by cliffs and tall trees, the Haworthia genus in the 
Liliaceae family have evolved to take in as much as 
possible of the tiny amounts of sunlight they receive. 
The tips of their leaves are translucent, giving them 
a mystical appearance. When they’re in sunlight, the 
veins of the leaves clearly stand out, highlighting 
their translucency. These translucent segments are 
called “windows.” Their size and form vary depend-
ing on the plant variety. Each time one looks at these 
succulents, one finds something to learn from their 
vitality and the evolutionary process that resulted in 
their windows. 
Haworthia Leightonii
Genus Haworthia. Turns a 
blackish purple in the fall.  
If it receives insufficient  
sunlight it tends to grow 
spindly (the stem becomes 
thin and unsteady and gaps 
between leaves become larger) 
so take care to prevent this. 
Haworthia Turgida Var Pallidifolia
Genus Haworthia. This hybrid has fleshy, 
triangular, roly-poly semi-translucent leaves 
growing in layers, forming a cute shape. It 
grows best in a semi shaded spot outdoors 
where it is protected from rain.
Haworthia Cooperi Var  
Pilifera Variegata
Genus Haworthia. Appearing 
white due its white dusting, even 
the veins in the leaves of this 
plant are transparent. Its long, 
narrow leaves grow upwards and 
spread out. It has white flowers.
Haworthia Retusa (Var.)
Genus Haworthia. This plant 
has fleshy light green leaves 
that are pointed at the tip.
A Little Universe in a Pot  33

When we found this pot, we knew in a 
flash that we wanted to use it. But none 
of the succulents we considered planting 
in it were a match for the pot itself in 
terms of making a strong impression.  
A lot of time passed as the pot went 
unused—and then we found this  
Haworthia cooperi. It was the perfect 
combination: the green and white with 
the red and the plant with the pot struck 
just the right balance.
PLANTS USED
Cooperi (Genus Haworthia)
PLANTING TIP
When planting just one plant, prepare the 
container and pour the soil in the same way as 
outlined in Basic Methods for Planting on p10.
GROWING TIP
Although plants in the Genus Haworthia have 
evolved to be able to take in a lot of sunlight 
through their windows, they’re unable to pho-
tosynthesize if continually in dark conditions. 
When the sun is shining softly, put them out to 
sunbathe. However, take care, as strong rays can 
cause the leaves to burn.
34  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Container Garden 8
The Power of  
Vitality and Evolution

A Little Universe in a Pot  35
Container Garden 9
Celebrating Shadows
The reason we’ve planted succulents in 
glass containers is that we want you to look 
at the shadows that they cast. Whether 
they’re blurred or clearly defined, all these 
shadows are beautiful.
PLANTS USED
1. Echeveria secunda (Genus Echeveria)
2. Pachyphytum oviferum (Genus  
	 Pachyphytum) Sedum rubrotinctum 	
 
	 (Genus Sedum) Dragon’s blood (Genus Sedum)
3. Sedum pachyphyllum (Genus Sedum)
	 Pallidum (Genus Sedum)
4. Dragon’s blood (Genus Sedum) Aurora (Genus Sedum)
5. Haworthia retusa (Genus Haworthia)
6. Echeveria sumirebotan (Genus Echeveria)
1 
2
4
3
5
6
GROWING TIP
Place succulents on top 
of white sand. Do not 
water until they start 
putting out roots; begin 
watering once roots are 
showing. 

36  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Container Garden 11
A Jewel on a Moonlit Night
We chose this round pot because it appears to co-
coon the plant. The deliberately off-center position-
ing makes for a less constrained look.
Discovered in a jet black container, this jewel is the lit-
tle child of Powder blue, which emits a calm blue light.
PLANTS USED
Perle von Nurnberg (Genus Echeveria)
PLANTING TIP
White ornamental sand has been used here. Carefully wash the 
salt off white Okinawan sand before strewing it over the surface 
of the soil. The white sand makes the pink of the succulent 
appear more saturated.
GROWING TIP
Leaves store water and sugar, so it’s fine not to water too often. 
However, make sure plants receive plenty of sunlight.
PLANTS USED
Powder blue (Genus Echeveria)
PLANTING TIP
Plant in the same way as the Perle von Nurnberg on the left. 
After placing soil in the pot and planting in the Powder blue, 
white ornamental sand was strewn over the surface of the soil 
to complete the arrangement.
GROWING TIP
Place in a well ventilated area that receives good sunlight. This 
plant copes well with the cold, so even in winter it is best grown 
outdoors until the temperature drops below 37˚F /3˚C. When 
watering, give just enough to moisten the soil. 
Container Garden 10
The Gentleness of Pink

A Little Universe in a Pot  37
In the hollow of a snow-white fluffy cloud sits the full moon. 
Are those rabbit footprints I see amid this quiet calm? What 
can those rabbits have been playing at, I wonder?* 
PLANTS USED
Kalanchoe eriophylla (Genus Kalanchoe)
PLANTING TIP
This arrangement is tied together with white— 
white ornamental sand in a white container and 
a white Kalanchoe eriophylla, which looks like 
rabbit ears (hence its Japanese name of “Lucky 
Rabbit Ear/s”). The image of playfully frolicking 
white rabbits is one that brings happiness.
GROWING TIP
The white hairs on the leaves of Kalanchoe  
eriophylla disappear if they get too much water,  
so when watering, make sure to direct the  
water onto the soil.
*Rabbits and the moon share a special  
relationship in the East. The Japanese  
version of the Man in the Moon is a rabbit 
pounding rice cakes. Though his story  
varies from country to country, he dwells  
in the moon over China, Korea and  
Vietnam as well. 
Container Garden 12
Mr Rabbit, What Did You  
See That Made You Jump?

38  Stylish SUCCULENTS
The Flowers of  
Succulent Plants
Although there are individual dif-
ferences, succulents do have flowers. 
Sadly, though, unlike other plants, 
they live in places with few birds or in-
sects. Even if they want to send their 
descendants far away, there are no 
birds to carry them. So instead, they 
have evolved into attractive shapes and 
blossom for a long time so that some-
one—anyone at all—will find them. 
It’s an evolutionary survival tactic.
If succulents are kept indoors where 
bright lights are on at night, they 
won’t bloom. Please put them out-
doors where it is dark. Succulents 
need to experience the change of light 
from day to night.


40  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Container Garden 13
Memory
Thinking back to old memories, 
things become simple. Clear forms 
are out of reach and only fuzzy 
silhouettes remain. Colors are the 
same—they fade, leaving a mono-
tone view of the world.
PLANTS USED
Echeveria pulvinata “frosty” (Genus Echeveria)
Crassula lycopodioides (Genus Crassulaceae)
Echeveria sumirebotan (Genus Echeveria)
Sedum Alice Evans (Genus Sedum)
PLANTING TIP
“Frosty,” planted in the center, is covered in 
hair and looks white, making the image of 
faded color even stronger. There’s the whitish 
succulent of the sumirebotan; Crassula 
lycopodioides has beautiful greenery all 
year round and Sedum Alice Evans has white 
flowers.
GROWING TIP
When planting, leave some space around 
each plant. This allows each plant to receive 
enough light and water.

A Little Universe in a Pot  41
Container Garden 14
Quietly Listening to 
the Voices of Plants
Why are you a certain shape? Why are 
you a certain color? Try to see things 
from a succulent’s perspective and listen 
to what they’re saying: these plants that 
have evolved so slowly over time will start 
telling you about their history. 
PLANTS USED
Echeveria white rose (Genus Echeveria)
Echeveria domingo (Genus Echeveria)
Crassula salmentosa (Genus Crassulaceae)
Aeonium undulatum (Genus Aeonium)
PLANTING TIP
The “Memory” on the left is created to conjure 
the image of a city. Conversely, to bring the 
image of a forest to mind in this arrangement, 
we planted the succulents together densely. 
It’s a wild look, with plants doing as they 
please.
GROWING TIP
To bring out plants’ inherent wildness, don’t 
fuss over their maintenance too much, but at 
the same time, don’t forget to check on them 
daily.

Tokiiro had its start with wreaths made from succulents. 
Guided by the first wreath we made, succulents have be-
come our life’s work. If we hadn’t had that encounter with 
the wreath, Tokiiro would never have come into exist-
ence. We treasure these wreaths and sincerely hope you 
will create them too. They are “living wreaths”—capturing 
the shift between seasons, they change from green to red, 
red to green as time passes, as only a wreath made from 
succulents can. It’s something special that is possible only 
because the plants are alive. We hope you’ll enjoy them all 
year round.
Chapter  
2
Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls 
Creating Wreaths and Tableaux


44  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Wreaths are usually meant for hanging, so making 
sure nothing can fall out of the arrangement is an 
ironclad rule. For this reason, select succulents 
with stems that are thick and sturdy. Check the 
condition of the stems as you prepare them as 
per the photos. Don’t they look sweet all lined up 
together like this? Even succulents of the same 
type each have their own different expressions, 
so consider their individual looks as you choose 
which ones to use. 
A Guide to Succulents 5
Succulents for Wreaths


46  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Succulents Suitable for Wreaths
Echeveria White Rose 
Genus Echeveria. Fleshy with a 
white tinge and pink around the 
tips of the leaves. They love light, 
so make sure they get plenty 
of sun. Insufficient light makes 
them spindly and unattractive.
Snow 
Genus Sedeveria. Leaves are 
long and thin with a roundness 
to them and develop a pink tinge 
at the tips. They do not cope well 
with heat so care is needed in 
midsummer, and they should be 
moved to a cool spot. Have large 
and small specimens on hand to 
combine in arrangements.
Sedum Rubrotinctum 
Genus Sedum. The glossy, chubby 
leaves are cute, and change color 
depending on the season, so 
enjoy the gradation this creates. 
They tend to grow towards light, 
so make sure it falls around them 
evenly.
Sedum Pachyphyllum 
Genus Sedum. Only the tips of 
the leaves change color, turning 
pink. Any damages to the stems 
weaken the plant, so when 
removing lower leaves, handle 
carefully to avoid damage.


48  Stylish SUCCULENTS
How to Make a Succulent Wreath
Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls
Besides being a ring of flowers or greens, a wreath is a symbol of eternity and immortality. The neat, round form 
of a wreath has no end. It’s a bit of everlasting happiness. Let’s create that out of succulents. Depending on the 
time of year, the wreath will be green or will turn red, allowing you to feel the never-ending connection of the 
seasons.
Basic Tools for  
Making Wreaths
Tokiiro’s style is to plant suc-
culents in a wreath base in such 
a way that they’ll go on living 
forever. In order for these plants 
to live, there must be soil in the 
wreath base. The succulents must 
be allowed to take root in this 
soil. Roots should start to appear 
in about a month.
1 Screwdrivers (thick, medium, fine)
When planting succulents in the wreath base, use these to make holes in the base and 
then insert the plants. Have screwdrivers in three different thicknesses to match the 
various stem thicknesses of the plants. When making the wreath, the soil is packed in 
hard and firm, so if you don’t have a screwdriver some other kind of metal skewer that 
can withstand the soil will be fine.
2 Sphagnum Moss
Sphagnum moss is used to cover the 
surface of the wreath base, as well as to 
stabilize the plants within it and prevent 
soil from spilling out of it. It can be 
purchased at a home center.
4 Pliers
Use to mend and alter the metal mesh 
used to make the wreath base, bending 
wire into wall hooks, and so on.
6 Tweezers
Use to insert sphagnum moss into the 
wreath base. Again, the type with bent 
tips is recommended as they make 
detailed work easier.
3 Scissors
Use to trim off the lower leaves from the 
succulents to be planted in the wreath 
base. This makes it easier to insert the 
stems in to the base.
5 Wire
Use for making into wall hooks. Have a 
length of #24 florist’s wire on hand.
7 Wreath Base
Instructions for making the wreath base 
are on p50–52. For the succulents to 
develop comfortably, soil is a key compo-
nent. This applies to all planting, whether 
in containers or in wreaths. Make sure 
the plants take root and that they’re able 
to absorb water, nutrients and so on.

Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls  49
1 
2
7
6
5
4
3

50  Stylish SUCCULENTS
1. Create the Wreath Base
As just mentioned, you will be putting soil into the wreath base. However, your work will be for nothing if the 
soil falls out when the wreath is hanging on a wall. The soil must be firmly covered with sphagnum moss and 
mesh to prevent it from spilling out. This wreath base construction forms the foundation for a beautiful wreath. 
Materials and equipment (for one 
wreath 5 inches [12 cm] in diameter)
1	 Pliers
2 	 Scissors
3 	 Florist’s wire #24: eight pieces,
      each 2 inches (5 cm) long
4 	 Scoop
5 	 Soil
6 	 Tray x 2 (with one side longer 	
	
than 13.5 inches [34 cm])
7 	 Sphagnum moss
8 	 Wire mesh (13.5 x 4 inches  
	
[34 x 10 cm])
9 	 Doweling (7/8 inches [2 cm] 
      diameter, 13¾–15¾ inches 
      [35 x 40 cm] long)
Create a Sheet of Sphagnum Moss
Lay out plenty of sphag-
num moss on tray.
Place another tray on top. 
Keeping the trays togeth-
er, turn upside down and 
place a weight on top. 
Leave overnight.
The completed sheet.
3
7
9
4
5
6
8
2
1

Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls  51
Create the Outer Shell for the Wreath (Sphagnum Moss Net)
Form It Into a Cylinder
Turn up the edge of the 
long side of the wire mesh.
Place the doweling on top of the sphagnum moss sheet 
and roll the edges in as you would a sushi roll. Remove 
the doweling and make sure there are no holes. 
Bring the two edges together, overlapping slightly. The 
entire cylinder should be covered with sphagnum moss 
so the soil isn’t visible.
Thread wire in through places where the mesh joins
and secure so mesh will not open out. Do this in 
about 5–6 places, about 2 inches (5 cm) apart.
Place the sphagnum moss sheet on top of the mesh 
and cut it to the size of the mesh. Bend the other edge 
of the wire mesh over to hold the sheet in place.
If there are any, use your hands to add sphagnum moss 
to fill them in. Add soil inside moss. Press the soil in 
with your hands.
Use pliers to twist the edges of the wire mesh together 
into the wreath base and secure it in place. Trim the 
edges of the wire after securing.
Trim off excess wire and poke edges into wreath base 
so it is no longer visible. Cover one end of the rod-
shaped net with mesh to close it off.
Cover the edges with 
sphagnum moss so the 
soil doesn’t fall out.
Press more sphagnum 
moss into places where 
the black soil is visible.
Use pliers to open out the 
mesh at the other end. 
The mesh should now look like this.

52  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Twist a fine piece of wire into a ring shape. With the ring 
section on the outer edge, wrap the wire around the 
wreath base.
Bend the rod-shaped 
net into a circle and join 
the ends together.
Run two pieces of wire through the sections above and 
below the joins to keep the circle in place.
Trim off excess wire and 
neaten. 
Create a Wall Hook
The completed wreath base. 
This is what the succulents 
will be planted in.

Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls  53
2. Prepare the Succulents
The succulents needed for this wreath are listed on p44–47. In order to make it easy to work them into the wreath, round out 
the foliage and neaten the stems. If the removed leaves are placed on soil as shown on p25, they’ll start to put out roots and 
buds in about a month’s time and continue to live and grow.
Brush off excess soil and trim 
roots.
Trim stems to about 7/8–11/8 
inches (2–3 cm) long.
Remove excess leaves so that foliage forms a round shape.
LEFT Stems should be the length of the wreath’s base. In 
the case of this wreath, which has a base 11/8 inches (3 cm) 
thick, the stems should ideally be about 7/8–11/8 inches (2–3 
cm) long. It’s helpful to have screwdrivers of different thick-
nesses at hand to match the thicknesses of the stems. 
ABOVE A “tray” of mesh wrapped over a shallow box or deep 
tray makes it easier to organize succulents. It also reduces the 
stress on the plants, so is like killing two birds with one stone.

54  Stylish SUCCULENTS
3. Planting the Succulents in the Wreath Base
Put simply, this task involves making holes in the wreath base and planting the succulents in the holes, securing them so they 
don’t fall out. Securing them into place is the tricky part. Use the side of the screwdriver blade to press in the sphagnum moss 
and soil surrounding the plants’ stems from all directions. Do this thoroughly, without rushing. 
Planting the Succulents
Securing the Succulents in Place
Make a hole with the screwdriver. The soil is packed in firmly in the 
wreath base, so this requires a bit of strength. 
Place the succulent in the hole.
If the stem of the succulent is long, use scissors to trim it until the plant 
can sit with the leaves flush against the wreath base. This is how it 
should look.
Work the screwdriver in from an adjoining hole in the mesh and use the side 
of it to press sphagnum moss and soil around the stem of the plant. Do this 
all around the stem, pressing it in firmly from every direction until the plant 
is fully secured.
Work in sphagnum moss to fill in 
any holes that may have formed 
around the stem so that the soil 
isn’t visible.
A surprising amount of sphag-
num moss is necessary. Even 
amounts that appear exces-
sive turn out to be just right, 
as the moss becomes concen-
trated when compacted.

Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls  55
Balance the Wreath with 
Three “Accent” Succulents 
Create an attractive balance by first placing three large “accent” plants and then planting other small 
succulents in between them to fill in the spaces. Plant them all in the same way as on the page at 
the left, using screwdrivers the same thickness as the stems to make holes to put the plants in, 
leaving no gaps. Fill in any holes made when securing the stems by working in sphagnum moss 
before planting the next plant. The key to an attractive result is to complete each task thoroughly. If 
the sphagnum moss in the wreath base is visible, it ruins the overall look of the wreath, so it’s also 
important to plant the succulents so that the base is completely covered when seen from the front.

56  Stylish SUCCULENTS
4. Turn the Wreath Upside Down and Fill in Any Holes with Sphagnum Moss
Fill in holes using sphagnum moss as shown on p54. Make sure to work the moss in thoroughly to get rid of the visible 
sections of black soil and prevent soil from falling out of the wreath.
Turn over and check thoroughly.
Place the wreath in a large bowl and use a sprayer to add water.
Viewed from the side.
Once the water fills up the bowl, leave the wreath to sit for 
15 minutes.
As when planting in a container, plants undergo a stress period right after the wreath is made. Leave it to rest undis-
turbed so the plants can settle into their new environment. If watered at this time they’ll lose their vitality, so care is 
needed. Leave the wreath undisturbed for around three weeks, then check its appearance before watering. Water the 
wreath by placing it in a bowl and spraying it with a shower hose from above. Once the entire wreath is covered in water, 
leave it there for 15 minutes. The next watering depends on the plants’ condition, but aim for about two weeks later. 
Check the plants daily and if they seem thirsty, give them some water. By monitoring them daily and caring for them you 
will get a feel for what the plants need. 
HOW TO WATER THE WREATH

The wreath is complete. The red succulents are sporting their fall 
colors. This red will change to green in spring as it gets warmer 
and the sun’s rays increase. The red returns in the fall as the tem-
perature drops and the sun’s rays weaken, but because the wreath 
is alive and dynamic, it still looks different from year to year.
Wreath 1
Seasonal Color

58  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Colors are kept simple and subtle in this white and 
green wreath, which gives off a quiet air of relaxed 
sophistication. Here is a simple, enduring vitality 
that remains unchanged despite the passing of time.
PLANTING TIP
The number of types that change color has been reduced in 
this arrangement. Succulents that turn vivid shades are in- 
evitably seen as cute, so this has been slightly toned down to 
create a more grown up look. Other succulents change rela-
tively little with the seasons, so this aspect is played up here. 
GROWING TIP
Water as per p56. Make sure to immerse thoroughly.
Wreath 2
Tranquil Eternity


60  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Commonly known as air plants, plants in the genus Tillandsia are also succulents. This 
wreath consists entirely of Tillandsia. Able to withstand extremes in heat and humidity, 
the resilient plants used here can live anywhere as long as they get light.
PLANTS USED
Tillandsia usneoides 
(Family Bromeliad, 
Genus Ttillandsia)
Tillandsia lonantha 
(Family Bromeliad, 
Genus Tillandsia)
PLANTING TIP
The base is a store-bought 
wreath made from woody 
vines. Masses of usneoides 
threads are placed over it, 
neatened and fastened into 
place with 0.3mm brass wire. 
For instructions, see step 2. 
(Attaching the Air Plants) on 
p63.
GROWING TIP 
As long as sunlight can get in and it 
is bright enough, even the window 
frame of a bathroom makes an 
interesting spot to grow this wreath. 
Of course it does OK indoors, but 
this is a plant that has evolved to 
grow along the branches of large 
trees, so it will be happiest if it re-
ceives plenty of water and fresh air.
Wreath 3
The World’s Most  
Enduring Greenery 

Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls  61
How would it be possible to use succulents as an accent in an arrangement and keep 
them alive? Pondering this question, we came up with this. Doesn’t it look exactly like 
the wreath is wearing a corsage? 
PLANTS USED
Bartramii (Genus Graptopetalum) 
Aeonium domesticum (Genus Aeonium)
Senecio rowleyanus (Family Asteraceae, Genus Senecio) 
Silver pet (Genus Sedum)
Crassula expansa (Genus Crassulaceae)
Sedum rubrotinctum (Genus Sedum)
Graptopetalum bronze (Genus Graptopetalum)
Tillandsia usneoides (Family Bromeliad, Genus Tillandsia)
Wreath 4
Just Like a Corsage
PLANTING TIP
The defining characteristic of 
this store-bought wreath covered 
in Tillandsia is the soil added to 
a section of the wreath base to 
ensure the succulents stay alive. 
Detailed instructions for making it 
are on p62–63. Many succulents 
live together in this small space.

62  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Wreaths Made with Air Plants
Variations
As a variation on the wreath, we tried using air plants. The wreath on page 60 is made solely from air plants, while the 
wreath on page 61 combines air plants and other succulents. The official name of this plant is Tillandsia usneoides. It is 
also called Spanish moss. It can live without soil, so a wreath of air plants can be made simply by winding the plants around 
a store-bought wreath. For a combined wreath, sections with succulents will need to include soil.
1. Make the Air Plant Wreath Base
A store-bought wreath is used for the section with the air plants, while the wreath base outlined on p50–52 is used for 
the succulents. A combination of these two is used for the wreath shown here.
For a section with succulents…
Follow the directions for making a wreath 
base on p50–52, however only make a 
very short section. And when packing the 
soil in, add a thick piece of wire so this 
part can be attached to the store-bought 
wreath.
Materials and equipment
1.	 Garden Shear
2.	 Scissors
3.	 Construction Wire
4.	 0.3mm Brass Wire
5.	 Florist’s Wire #24
6.	 Base in which to plant succulents 	
	
(see above)
7.	 Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneoides 	
	
Family Bromeliad)	
8.	 Store-bought Wreath (made from vines)
2
4
3
5
6
7
8
1

Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls  63
Place the base for the succulents made from sphagnum moss 
against the store-bought wreath to check the size. Wind wire 
around the store-bought wreath to hold it at the left and right of 
the section where the succulent base will be slotted in.
Spread air plants lightly over store-bought 
wreath base so the base can no longer be seen.
Use 0.3mm brass wire to fasten air plants to 
the store-bought wreath base in about eight 
places, checking the effect as you work. 
Use shears to cut out the section where the succulent base will 
be added. Slot the succulent base into the cut-out section.
To secure the joints of the wreath and succulent base, tie two pieces of construction wire at the 
outer and inner edges of the wreath on both sides and join the sections together firmly. 
2. Attaching the Air Plants
3. Add Succulents to the Wreath
Once the wreath base is ready, add Spanish moss using fine brass wire. We’ve found that 
this type of wire is the least obtrusive and gives the neatest result.
Use the same method given on p54 to add succulents to the section of the wreath you’ve 
added for them. The result is shown on p61. Beautiful!

64  Stylish SUCCULENTS
2 Tableau Base
For the tableau base, use a board 
in your preferred size, painted 
whatever color you like, with 
a hole cut out. The base in the 
photo is 3½ x 8 inches (8 x 20 
cm) and the hole is 1 inch  
(2.5 cm) in diameter.
1 Sphagnum Moss
Use this to create a soil base for 
the section where the succulents 
will be planted. Handle it in the 
same way as you would when 
creating a wreath. The aim is to 
cover soil to prevent it spilling 
out.
4 Tweezers
Use to plant succulents, rein-
force sphagnum moss and so on.
7 Pliers
Use to bend back the loose ends 
of wire mesh.
5 Doweling
Use to roll wire mesh into a 
cylinder, to compress sphagnum 
moss and water and so on.
3 Wire Mesh (3¼ x 3¼ inches 
[8 x 8 cm])
Use the same type as is used to 
create wreath bases.
6 Scissors
Use to cut wire mesh to a suit-
able size.
How to Make a Tableau Wall Hanging
A “tableau” is the French term for a wall hanging. At Tokiiro we make name plaques, 
message boards and so on that incorporate succulents. Even the smallest amount of green 
adds a touch of chic to any room and has a healing effect on those viewing it. Although 
small, its effects are significant!
Basic Equipment and Materials for Creating Tableaux
The equipment needed for creating tableaux is basically the same as that needed for creating wreaths. The only difference is that a tableau 
base is used. This can be square, round, or whatever shape you like, so try making various tweaks to get the desired result. Here, we are 
using a basic rectangular base. Create a section at the edge of the board to plant the succulents, with blank space left for writing some-
thing such as a message.

Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls  65
2
3
4
5
6
7
1

66  Stylish SUCCULENTS
1. Create the Tableau Base
The tableau essentially uses the same methods as those for creating wreaths. As for a wreath, create a sphagnum moss net, 
then roll it into a ball. Press it into the hole in the tableau base and plant succulents into it.
Press a large doweling or brown handle into the wire mesh and 
round it out to the size of the hole in your base.
Open out the wire mesh and line it with sphagnum moss.
After doweling is removed, 
the moss should form a solid 
sheath inside wire mesh.
Pour in the soil and use the doweling to compact the soil down. 
Cut to about 2 inches (5 cm)
long and trim off the excess with 
scissors.
Use the doweling to press the sphagnum moss and compact it 
inside the mesh.

Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls  67
Cover the soil with sphagnum 
moss so it is no longer visible.
Use pliers to bend the edges of 
the wire mesh around the sphag-
num moss to form a ball shape.
Press ball from behind to flatten it and make it flush with the 
back of the board. This means it will sit flat when it is hung on a 
wall and will not fall out.
Space has been left to write messages, names and so on, but if you get 
rid of the message space and increase the size of the section in which 
to plant succulents, the board can be made into a frame of succulents 
(see p69). 
The moss worked into a ball.
Place the ball of moss into the 
hole in the tableau base.

68  Stylish SUCCULENTS
2. Preparing the Succulents
Line up your choice of succulents on a tray. The succulents to use are 
the same as those for the wreath (see p44) but adding a little move-
ment makes the arrangement more interesting, so here we’ve added 
some “trailing succulents” (see p72).
1 	 Sedum mexicanum (Genus Sedum)
2 	 Echeveria white rose (Genus  
	
Echeveria)
3 	 Silver pet (Genus Sedum)
4 	 Echeveria mini bell (Genus  
	
Echeveria)
5 	 Sedum spurium cv Tricolor (Genus 	
	
Sedum)
6	 Sedum adolphi (Genus Sedum)
7	 Sedum rubrotinctum (Genus 		
      Sedum)
8	 Sedum pachyphyllum (Genus 	
	
Sedum)
9  	Bartramii (Genus Graptopetalum) 
10	Aeonium domesticum (Genus 	
	
Aeonium)
11	Senecio rowleyanus (Family  
	
Asteraceae, Genus Senecio)
3. Planting the Succulents in the Ball
The basic planting technique is the same as for the wreath, but this arrangement uses trailing plants, so plant them in first.
Use a screwdriver to create a hole in the ball and insert the roots 
of Senecio rowleyanus into the hole. The roots and stem are soft, 
so plant using tweezers for a neat finish.
Plant the other plants into the ball as per the wreath. 
Begin with the larger eye catching succulents and then 
work smaller ones in to cover the ball.
Prepare the length of Senecio 
rowleyanus you want to use as the 
trailing succulent in the arrange-
ment and consider the overall 
balance of the composition.
Position the Senecio rowleyanus around the ball and secure in place with mini U pins. 
Use U pins that are smaller than the width of the tableau base for an attractive finish, 
working them into the ball section in about two different places to secure the plant.
2
3
4
6
10
11
5
9
8
7
1

Using Succulents to Add Color to Walls  69
The tableau differs from the wreath in that the succulents hang out 
beyond the frame. It’s a living picture, whimsical and novel. If it is hung 
on a wall for an extended period, each plant in the tableau tends to grow 
towards the sun. Sedum rubrotinctum responds quickly and its capacity 
for sun-following can’t be surpassed. The other plants do as they please, 
some growing vertically while others trail down. All this natural activity 
plays out in this small space, highlighting the inherent natural power in 
each plant.
Tableau 1
A Pop-out Picture
An old clock turned into a tableau with soil poured into the backing of 
the clock.
This frame of succulents has been created by removing a large section 
from the center of a board and planting it with succulents. 
Tableau 2
Tableau 3

These hanging succulents leap out from their 
containers as if floating in mid-air. They look 
like green airships on a journey into space! 
Plant them with the thought of opening up 
new horizons as you gaze at them.
Chapter  
3
Floating in the Air  
Hanging Succulents


72  Stylish SUCCULENTS
ABOVE Punctulata
BELOW Sedum Oaxacanum
Punctulata belongs to the genus 
Crassulaceae. They’re character-
ized by their leaves, which grow 
crucifix-style. Oaxacanum is part 
of the genus Sedum. The leaves 
grow radially around the stem and 
they have white flowers.
Little Missy 
Genus Crassulaceae. Over 
time this plant trails further 
and further down as it grows. 
It likes dry conditions.
Crassula Marnieriana
Genus Crassulaceae. It actually 
grows vertically, but after a 
while begins to trail down. The 
square leaves appear to be 
stacked one on top of the other 
but closer inspection shows 
that they grow in alternating 
cross formations.
Senecio rowleyanus, Othonna capensis and so on from the 
Asteraceae family are typical examples of trailing plants. 
Hanging arrangements are meant to be enjoyed for the world 
they evoke as they spill out of the container, rather than to be 
closely scrutinized for what the container holds, and as such, 
the Asteraceae are ideal for this purpose. Other plants used 
here have actually been trained to hang down, the cherished 
results of months and years of work. 
72  Stylish SUCCULENTS
A Guide to Succulents 6
Succulents That are  
Ideal for Hanging

Senecio Rowleyanus 
Family Asteraceae, Genus 
Senecio. A member of the 
Asteraceae family, like the 
Othonna Capensis, it loves 
water. However, it is a differ-
ent genus, and this shows in 
its flowers. It is a fast grower.
Sedum Morganianum
Genus Sedum. This plant never 
stands erect. It thrives in high 
humidity but is vulnerable to 
cold, and may freeze if placed 
outside in winter. Covering it in 
plastic to create an impromp-
tu greenhouse is an effective 
measure against cold.
Othonna Capensis
Family Asteraceae, Genus Oth-
onna. Plants in the Asteraceae 
family love water, so if you plant 
them in an arrangement with 
succulents that like dry con-
ditions, make sure to give only 
the section in which they’re 
planted plenty of water.
Floating in the Air  73

74  Stylish SUCCULENTS
On page 93 we write about environmental changes 
and how the inherent power of nature takes over 
with such strength in places from which people have 
become absent, turning them into a paradise for 
plants. This is what we’ve tried to express here—
succulents continuing to generate life from inside 
the iron relics.
PLANTS USED
Sedum mexicanum (Genus Sedum)
Sedum morganianum (Genus Sedum)
Sedum Alice Evans (Genus Sedum)
Sedum rubrotinctum (Genus Sedum)
Graptopetalum bronze (Genus Graptopetalum)
Echeveria white rose (Genus Echeveria)
Snow (Genus Sedeveria)
Sedum adolphi (Genus Sedum)
Sedum makinoi (Genus Sedum)
Senecio rowleyanus (Family Asteraceae, Genus Senecio)
Crassula salmentosa (Genus Crassulaceae)
Graptopetalum paraguayense (Genus Graptopetalum)
Momiji matsuri (Genus Crassulaceae)
PLANTING AND GROWING TIP
Here, it is as if untouched nature has been planted and is 
being cultivated. Succulents that want to reach upwards grow 
vertically, while those that want to hang down do just that. 
When a strong succulent is next to a weak one, the weak suc-
culent may give up its place to the strong one. That’s the way 
of nature, and it’s acknowledged in this arrangement.
Hanging Garden 1
A Forgotten Forest


76  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Prepare the Container for Hanging
Whether you set your container on a flat surface or suspend it in the air, the planting technique is essentially 
the same, so here we focus on preparing containers for hanging, both from overhead and from a wall.
1. Creating a Container to Hang from the Ceiling
The finished item. The length of the 
hanging wire is up to you.
Bend one end of a piece of wire 
90 degrees.
Pass the long end of the unbent 
section of wire through the hole 
in the base of the container.
Bend the wire into a square to fit 
underneath of the container base.
Turn the container so the base 
faces down and pass the center 
of the mesh over the wire. 
After making three bends, make 
a shorter fourth bend, then a fifth 
bend so the long end of the wire 
can pass up through the hole in 
the base of the container.
Bend the end of the wire into a J 
shape to form a hook.
Materials/equipment: pliers, container, mesh for base, wire. Drill a hole 
in the container as shown on p10.

Floating in the Air  77
2. Creating a Container to Hang on a Wall
The finished item. 
Drill two holes in the side of the 
container, each equidistant from 
the rim. Start with a fine drill bit, 
gradually increasing until the 
holes are wide enough for the 
wire to pass through.
Bend the wire into a U shape 
matching the distance between 
the holes. Decide on the length of 
the wall hook.
Wrap the ends around the hanger 
wire securely and trim any excess.
Bend the wire ends up and over 
the container rim.  
Hold the wire against the container as it will look when finished and
bend both ends at a 90-degree angle, making sure your ends will be long 
enough to bend up and wrap around your hanger wire. Working from 
inside the container, pass the ends of the bent wire through the holes. 
Materials/equipment: pliers, container, mesh for base, wire, electric drill.
Type that hangs overhead.
Type that hangs on walls.

78  Stylish SUCCULENTS
ABOVE RIGHT
Echeveria white rose  
(Genus Echeveria)
Makinoi ogon (Genus Sedum)
Sedum makinoi (Genus 
Sedum)
Acre aureum (Genus Sedum)
PLANTS USED
ABOVE LEFT
Echeveria runyonii (Genus  
Echeveria)
Little missy (Genus Crassulaceae)
Acre aureum (Genus Sedum)
Punctulata (Genus Crassulaceae)
Momiji matsuri (Genus  
Crassulaceae)
Perle von Nurnberg (Genus  
Echeveria)
Senecio rowleyanus (Family Astera-
ceae, Genus Senecio)
OPPOSITE
Crassula lycopodioides  
(Genus Crassulaceae)
Senecio rowleyanus (Family 
Asteraceae, Genus  
Senecio)
Little missy (Genus Crassu-
laceae)
Sedeveria silver frost  
(Genus Sedeveria)
Dragon’s blood (Genus Sedum)
Sedum spurium cv tricolor 
(Genus Sedum)
Sedum adolphi (Genus 
Sedum)
Silver pet (Genus Sedum)
PLANTING TIP
Senecio rowleyanus and other trail-
ing types of succulent are planted 
in the very center of the container. 
If there are plenty of places where 
they're in direct contact with the 
soil, they'll put roots out and secure 
themselves firmly in the ground.
GROWING TIP
Hanging the containers in the air 
prevents an influx of ants. Good 
ventilation is another plus. When 
watering, check plants’ condition and 
give them plenty of water as per the 
instructions for containers on p25.

A spaceship loaded with trailing plants
A spaceship with a few plants trailing from it 
A round, compact spaceship
Which one will you ride in?
Hanging Garden 2
Three Spacecraft Flying  
Through the Air

80  Stylish SUCCULENTS
The simpler the container, the more eye-catching are the succulents leaping out of 
it. Where’s that one going that’s jumping out of its container home? Changing your 
perspective reveals different viewpoints and personalities in the plants.
PLANTS USED
Echeveria pulidonis (Genus Echeveria)
Crassula marnieriana (Genus Crassulaceae)
Punctulata (Genus Crassulaceae)
Little missy (Genus Crassulaceae)
Aurora (Genus Sedum)
Acre aureum (Genus Sedum)
Sedum spurium cv tricolor (Genus Sedum)
PLANTING TIP
Starting with Crassula marnieriana which 
plays the leading role, consider the silhou-
ette of the arrangement in order to work out 
positions for planting.
GROWING TIP
Immediately after being planted is an 
unnatural time for plants. They’ll be stressed 
in their new environment, so wait a week 
before watering them (refer to the watering 
schedule on p25). After a month, each suc-
culent will display its natural characteristics 
and bring forth the beauty of nature.
Hanging Garden 3
Leaving Home 

Up to this point, we’ve discussed various aspects of 
arranging succulents. In this chapter we’ll discuss the 
things you should know in order to care for and live 
with succulents. Always remember that succulents are 
living things, so as you gather info, keep the plants’ 
perspective in mind. What kind of environments have 
succulents survived in up until now? Taking a look even 
at this single aspect will give us insights into the souls of 
succulents. 
Chapter  
4
Living with Succulents

82  Stylish SUCCULENTS
What is a Succulent?
While “succulent” is just one word, types of succulent number in 
the thousands. However, what they all have in common is that they 
store water in their leaves, stems or inside their roots. The general 
term for plants that do this is “succulent." TOKIIRO tends to handle 
succulents that store water and nutrients mainly in their leaves 
such as some of those in the families Crassulaceae, Asteraceae and 
Liliaceae. Cacti typify those that store water in their stems, while 
caudiciforms are representative of those that store it in their roots.
Succulents originate mainly from arid regions such as the des-
erts and coastlines of Latin America and South Africa. Imagine 
what these places are like—during the day, the sun is fierce, and 
there is little moisture so the air is as dry as a bone. At night, 
temperatures drop dramatically, with a difference in day to night 
temperatures of as much as 104˚F/40˚C. Plants have evolved to 
be able to live resiliently in such conditions by taking in moisture 
to store inside their structures and drawing on it in order to live. 
During the heat of the day, they close the pores (openings that 
act as mouths for plants) in their leaves to avoid moisture from 
inside their structures evaporating, while in the cool of the night 
they open their pores to allow them to regulate their temperature. 
Therefore, there are lots of succulents that can’t cope well with the 
hot, humid nights. 

Living with Succulents  83
Succulents Love Water! 
Photosynthesis Prompts a Love of Water
Once you hear that succulents’ natural habitat is deserts and arid 
regions, you probably think they like hot places and don’t need 
much water at all. 
However, in actual fact, succulents love water. As mentioned 
previously, succulents came to grow in arid environments with 
strong sunlight and over a long stretch of time they have evolved 
to suit these surroundings, storing water in their structures, de-
veloping unique forms and colors and so on. This is why the way 
they grow and how they propagate have also come to differ from 
other plants. As they have evolved to keep up with the changes 
to the earth’s environment, I believe that they’ll continue their 
process of evolution.
We’ve noted that succulents love water, as it allows them to carry 
out photosynthesis. All plants, not just succulents, perform pho-
tosynthesis. Maybe you didn’t do so well in this subject in middle 
school, but don’t close the book—please keep reading!
Photosynthesis is a biological activity, as are breathing, drawing 
nutrients from food and turning those nutrients into energy for 
humans. Plants breathe and convert sugars (nutrients) into energy 
to support life. To do this, they need three elements: carbon diox-
ide, water and sunlight. Carbon dioxide is absorbed into the body 
of the plant and in response, the plant creates oxygen, water and 
nutritional sugars. In chemical terms, this process is: 6 CO2 +  
12 H2O → C6H12O6 + 6 H2O + 6 O2.
The oxygen created is expelled into the atmosphere via the 
pores in the plant. If you look at modern buildings with greenery 
incorporated into the walls and gardens installed throughout the 
stories, it’s clear that harmony with nature is being fostered as part 
of city planning. But is it only for the benefit of humans?
Growing greenery on buildings is an attempt to convert carbon 
dioxide, one of the gases in the atmosphere that causes global 
warming, into oxygen. From the plants’ perspective, carbon dioxide 
is vital for survival. So for all our sakes, it’s important for each of 
us to make even a small effort to enable photosynthesis.
Succulents store water internally, and if given too much from 
external sources, a detrimental excess will result. Because of this, 
it’s easy to think that watering succulents isn’t necessary. But while 
they need far less than other types of plants, succulents do still 
need water. 

84  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Creating an Environment to Promote Photosynthesis
The speed at which photosynthesis occurs depends of course 
on the strength of sunlight, with the density of carbon dioxide, 
temperature and so on also having a major influence. Generally, 
photosynthesis is activated between in temperatures of 50–85˚F/ 
10–30˚C. Chlorophyll, the pigment that causes leaves to be green, 
is also actively stimulated, but outside of this temperature range 
photosynthesis radically slows and chlorophyll gradually breaks 
down. Similarly, photosynthesis is impeded if there is an imbal-
ance of water, carbon dioxide or sunlight—that is, if any of these 
are significantly lacking.
When this happens, the plant attempts to transform in pursuit 
of the lacking element. For example, insufficient sunlight will cause 
a plant to grow long and spindly as it seeks light, while a lack of 
water will cause it to use up its internal water stores. When a plant 
receives insufficient water, it cannot circulate the sugars created 
during photosynthesis or the essential elements absorbed through 
the roots. Once its internal stores of water are used up, the plant 
withers. Given the earth’s environment, it’s hard to imagine supplies 
of carbon dioxide becoming scarce, but if it were to happen, the eco-
system would not be able to exist and plants would wither and die.
In winter seasons below 50˚F/10˚C and summer seasons above 
85˚F/30˚C the temperature restricts photosynthesis. For this 
reason, it’s fine to replenish water only minimally. During times 
when photosynthesis is limited, succulents draw on their reserves of 
nutrients in order to maintain their vitality.
Photosynthesis
Oxygen
Carbon 
dioxide
Light
Chlorophyll
Sugar
Water
Sugar
Oxygen
Water
Water
Carbon 
dioxide

Living with Succulents  85
Photosynthesis in Succulents Differs  
from That in Other Plants
Having adapted and evolved over many years to suit the climate 
and environment of their habitat, succulents have also evolved 
their method of photosynthesis to match their surroundings. This 
particular method, or carbon fixation pathway, is called Crassu-
lacean Acid Metabolism (CAM) photosynthesis. Most plants 
absorb carbon dioxide during the day and create sugars through 
photosynthesis, releasing oxygen. However, in the case of succu-
lents, photosynthesis begins at night. 
To prevent themselves from drying out, during the heat of the 
day succulents close the pores which allow the passing of carbon 
dioxide and oxygen, thereby minimizing the loss of moisture. In 
the cool of the night, they open their pores to take in carbon diox-
ide, storing this nourishment as malic acid in their vacuoles until 
daytime, when they use the reaction of malic acid and light to 
produce sugar (glucose). This process is CAM photosynthesis. It 
is thought that development of succulents is slow due to the large 
amount of time and energy involved in this photosynthesis.
CAM Photosynthesis
Chlorophyll
→
Night
Day
Malic acid
Malic acid
Chlorophyll
Carbon 
dioxide
Water
Water
Water
Water
Sugar
Oxygen
Light
Sugar
Sugar

86  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Succulents are Not Good Indoor Dwellers
Light, Air and Water are Vital for Succulents
Succulents take in carbon dioxide at night, so it makes sense that 
being placed in an enclosed space overnight causes them stress. 
Unable to breathe adequately, they cannot create nourishment and 
will thus become weak, causing a build-up of stress and leading to 
the plant suffering unbearably. Therefore, as much as possible, at 
night as well as during the day, place succulents in a spot where air 
circulates well. This is a good environment for succulents.
“An enclosed space overnight” basically means indoors, so make 
sure to keep that in mind. Succulents are not indoor greenery!
Although succulents are shown more and more as interior ob-
jects in lifestyle magazines and so on, most of them have evolved 
to thrive in environments with harsh sun. For plants such as these, 
the amount of light indoors is nowhere near sufficient and survival 
becomes difficult.
Having said that, it is difficult to recreate the environment in 
which succulents grow naturally. If you’re caring for them out-
doors, airflow should not be a problem. However, air is not the 
only thing succulents require to grow happily. 
Light, air and water—these three basics are essential to a 
succulent’s longevity. It’s that simple. Additionally, rather than 
looking at things from a human perspective in terms of where to 
place them, consider things from the plant’s viewpoint as to where 
it would like to live.
Check in daily with your plants as to where they’d like to be, 
whether they have enough water, whether they’re getting enough 
light and air and so on. By doing this, you’ll gradually be able to 
hear plants’ voices and understand what it is that they want.

Living with Succulents  87
The Charm of Succulents
The Beauty of Succulents’ Fall Colors
Why do we enjoy succulents do much? It’s because of their shape 
and color, their vitality and their ability to adapt to their environ-
ment that have so charmed us.
The first time we saw succulents, we were thrilled by their 
individuality. We remember talking to them, saying things like, 
“what a wonderful form you have… you’re truly alive, aren’t you?" 
Researching them, we discovered such an abundance of varieties, 
all with their own charming shapes and colors, that we became 
more and more captivated by them. As we spent time with them, 
we found there were many moving moments to be had and discov-
eries to be made. For example, new shoots grow from a single leaf; 
the bare stalk of a plant that we were so disappointed about was 
actually growing sweet offspring!
Why are shoots sprouting? Why do they have these particular 
shapes? Why are they so colorful? Why are they growing hairs? 
We came up with more and more questions about succulents and 
wanted to learn more about them. 
We learned that succulents live in unforgiving environments 
and have evolved slowly in order to survive, changing to adapt to 
their conditions, persisting with their appearance, form and color 
to ensure their survival.
For example, it’s believed that the Haworthia genus of the 
Liliaeceae family evolved in the shadows of large cliffs and trees 
and developed transparent sections at the tips of their leaves to 
maximize what little light reached them. The eriophylla (see p18) 
with its rabbit ear-like leaves, and others in the Kalanchoe family, 
are covered in hair to control the amount of sunlight that reaches 
their leaves. Similarly, some types of plants in the Echeveria genus 
control the amount of sunlight they receive by means of a pow-
dery substance that covers their leaves.
Certain succulents change color in the fall. Of course these 
succulents originated in South America, South Africa and so on, 
but since succulents were introduced to other parts of the world, 
many producers have bred to suit the local climate. In some cases, 
this process goes back two hundred years. 
There are two types of color transformation—yellow and red. 
Plants have a yellow pigment in their leaves called carotenoid. In 
seasons where photosynthesis is occurring at a great rate, large 
stocks of pigment that appears green (chlorophyll) are produced 
via photosynthesis and carotenoid becomes concealed. However, 
once the temperature drops and photosynthetic activity decreases, 
the production of chlorophyll also decreases and under the influ-
ence of the inherent yellow pigment of the carotenoid, the plant 
turns yellow.
So, why do plants change color? When the temperature drops 
and photosynthesis decreases, the sugars stored in plants’ leaves 
react to the ultraviolet rays from the sun to produce a red pigment 
called anthocyanin, resulting in the leaves turning red. The degree 
of change in color depends on the amount of glucose stored in the 
plant. If photosynthesis has been occurring effectively until the 
start of fall and there is plenty of glucose stored in the leaves, they 
will turn a deep red. On the other hand, if there is only a little 
glucose in the leaves, the red will be a fainter color.

88  Stylish SUCCULENTS
The Growth Pattern of Succulents
A Little More About the Importance of Sunlight
Think of leaves changing color and the next thing that springs to 
mind is probably leaves falling. For example, ginkgo and maple 
trees drop their leaves after turning beautiful colors. But despite 
changing color, succulents do not shed their leaves. Why is this so?
Leaves changing color and leaves falling tend to be thought of 
as a series of events, but in actual fact these are totally unrelated 
processes.
Deciduous trees drop their leaves in the fall to protect them-
selves from the cold and dehydration in the winter months that 
follow. However, succulents have come to live in unforgiving 
environments. In order to survive, their fleshy leaves have come to 
efficiently store water, sugars created through photosynthesis, and 
essential elements absorbed through their roots.
Of course, being plants, succulents do flower, but there are 
extremely few insects, birds or other creatures to aid pollination in 
their natural habitat. For this reason, they do not rely on their flowers 
to perpetuate the existence of their species, but rather have growing 
points throughout their structures where they can regenerate, sprout-
ing new shoots from their leaves or sometimes from broken stems.
Succulents don’t give out any opinions on the environment in 
which they’re currently situated, they simply accept their surround-
ings and continue to evolve, and will keep doing so into the future. 
Succulents need light in order to develop and grow, but how much 
light is necessary?
When plants perform the photosynthesis needed for their 
growth and development, the chlorophyll in their structures 
absorbs light of particular wavelengths. Mainly, it is blue (400–
500nm) and red (600–700nm) wavelengths being absorbed, with 
the amount measured in a unit called photosynthetic photon flux 
density or PPFD (μ mol m-2 s-).
Light from direct midsummer sun measures 2000, when 
cloudy it is 50, and on a desk in an elementary school classroom 
it is 10 PPFD. As an elementary school classroom is meant for 
study, you would think of it as being bright even though it’s 
indoors, wouldn’t you?
Succulents need between 300–500 PPFD to grow and devel-
op. We recommend placing them in the shade during midsummer 
because at the time of year the sun is too strong, but if they’re not 
placed in direct sunlight during the rest of the year, they won’t 
receive enough light. 
Think of the light inside a building. On a fine midsummer’s 
day there may admittedly be enough light by the living room 
window. However, on a cloudy day, the light outdoors measures 
50 PPFD; indoors the PPFD will be even lower.
In the previous section we mentioned that one of the charac-
teristics of succulents is that they don’t fight their environment 
but rather adapt to wherever they’re placed. If you place them 
somewhere where light is insufficient, they’ll react by trying their 
best to reach the light, growing long and spindly in the process.
In the end, if there isn’t enough light, photosynthesis cannot occur 
and the plant will not be able to produce energy and, like anything 
else, it will become exhausted.
As ultraviolet light is the mechanism which triggers changing 
of leaf color and plentiful sunlight from outdoors is necessary for 
accumulating sugars, unless they’re in a specialized environment, 
succulents cannot do these things if kept indoors.

Living with Succulents  89
Cultivating and Planting Tips for Succulents by Genus
“I know there are many types of succulent but I can never remember their characteristics.” We hear this a lot. Like all plants, succulents 
share the basic characteristics with others in their given genus. So as long as you know its genus, you will have a broad idea of a plant’s 
preferences, shape and other characteristics. Here we have collated the succulents that are often used in Tokiiro arrangements. This 
should give you some hints for your own arrangement and cultivation of succulents.
TYPE
ATTRIBUTE
MAIN EXAMPLES
TIPS
Genus Echeveria
Genus Sedum
Genus Crassulaceae
Genus Pachyphytum
Liliaceae
Crassulaceae
Genus Kalanchoe
Genus Sedeveria
Genus Haworthia
Genus Senecio
Genus Othonna
Genus Aeonium
Genus  
Graptopetalum
White rose, Secunda, Pulidonis, Party dress, Perle von 
Nurnberg, Chihuahualinze, Peacockii princess pearl, 
Powder blue, Sumirebotan, Frosty, Domingo, Mini bell, 
Runyonii. 
Rubrotinctum, Acre aureum, Pachyphyllum, Spathulifoli-
um ssp. pruinosum, Japonicum ‘morimura’, Dragon’s blood, 
Makinoi ogon, Uniflorum, Green pet, Mexicanum, Spurium 
cv tricolor, Adolphi, Oaxacanum, Morganianum, Makinoi.
Momiji matsuri, Mesembrianthoides, Capitella, Lyco-
podioides, Salmentosa, Expansa, Punctulata, Little 
missy, Tetragona, Ovata
Oviferum, Compactum, Hookeri, Pachyphtooides, 
Momobijin, Shireiden.
Eriophylla, Kalanchoe tomentosa, Thyrsiflora, Pink 
butterflies kalanchoe
Obtusa, Cooperi var truncata, Cooperi var pilifera 
variegata, Cymbiformis var obtusa, Leightonii, Cuspi-
data, Cymbiformis, Turgida var pallidifolia, Retusa var, 
Cooperi, Turgida 	
Rowleyanus, Prymidatuabar
Othonna capensis
Growing in the shadows of cliffs and beneath large 
trees, this genus has evolved to absorb even the 
smallest amount of light. Its leaves appear translucent, 
especially when held up to the light. Keep out of direct 
sunlight in summer but allow to get some sun on days 
of soft sunlight. (see p32–33)
There are many trailing types in this fast-growing genus. 
Roots grow wherever the plant is in contact with the 
ground, so the more ground surface it covers, the better  
it will take root. Loves water, so make sure it has plenty.
Grows in the same way as plants in the Senecio genus 
but its flowers are of a different form.
Letizia, Snow, Silver frost
Haworthii Tricolor, Undulatum, Domesticum, Purple 
Crest, Lemonade, Sunburst
Bartramii, Paraguayense, Bronze
The archetypal “succulent." Grows in a rosette forma-
tion to resemble a rose, with flamboyant, outspread-
ing leaves. There are many hybrids and the genus has 
many fans. (See p30–31)
More than 400 types exist. They grow in clusters, de-
velop quickly and are relatively easy to grow. They love 
water and light. There are types that stand erect and 
stonecrops that cover the ground. (see p20–21)
Leaves grow in cross formations and the plant develops 
like a staff. Some types stand erect while others trail 
down, with the form of their leaves adding accent to 
arrangements. 
Leaves grow in layers. Cultivate in a spot that receives 
plenty of sun and is well ventilated.
A hybrid created by breeding Sedum and Echeveria, this 
genus has the characteristics of both these genii. Cultivate  
in a well ventilated place that gets as much sun as possible.
Well suited to the Japanese climate, this type is easy to 
grow. There are various types, with some covered in hair 
and some that change color.
Grows aerial roots which become genuine roots once they 
reach the ground. Develops in winter.
Has fleshy leaves, and many varieties start to trail 
after a while.
Asteraceae

90  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Q&A: How to Grow Succulents Successfully
Whenever we hold displays of succulents or run workshops teaching how to arrange them, we are overwhelmed by the 
number of people asking questions.
A supposedly hardy succulent withered when they started looking after it, or the color faded away… 
This section is a compilation of our most frequently asked questions. Now, how are the succulents doing at your place?
How much water do they need?
If they’re placed in a spot where they can receive a lot of sunlight, 
water about once every two weeks to the extent that plenty of 
water comes out of the hole in the base. People grow succulents 
in various kinds of environments, so there is no hard and fast 
rule—check the condition of the plant and schedule watering 
accordingly.
While succulents don’t need frequent watering and are easy 
to care for, if they receive insufficient water they won’t be able 
to perform photosynthesis or transport nutrients through their 
systems. Plentiful light and appropriate watering are important. 
For more on this, please refer to p25.
Where is a good place to put them?
Outdoors, in a spot with plenty of sunlight is ideal. The 
amount of light they receive indoors is nowhere near suffi-
cient. Please refer to p86, 88 for more about light. 
When should I repot them?
Succulents in the Crassulaceae family are mainly spring and fall 
growers, so spring and fall are the best times to repot them. In  
Japan in particular, around the times of the spring and fall  
equinoxes are probably best for repotting.
Is fertilizer necessary?
The fertilizer used at the time of planting should more than suffice 
for about two years. If you’re topping up fertilizer after a while, use 
slow release fertilizer, available at home and garden centers.
Watering schedule
Day of arranging.  
Don’t water.
Water
Check if soil 
is dry 
1 week
2 weeks
If it’s dry, water 
after one week
If it’s not dry, move to 
a place where it will 
dry out easily–once 
dry, wait a week and 
then water

Living with Succulents  91
Is it OK if they get some rain?
Succlents hail from parts of the world that offer no protection 
from rain. Yet while these places receive little rain, it’s not as if it 
never falls at all. So the answer is yes, rainfall is fine, but only for 
a day or two.
Beware of any particularly rainy times of year! Continuous 
rain weakens succulents. It causes the pores on their leaves to 
remain closed for a prolonged period, rendering them unable to 
take in the carbon dioxide necessary for photosynthesis. Three 
or more days of rain causes succulents to become stressed, and 
active oxygen is released in their leaves—basically, they attack 
themselves. In human terms, it’s like getting a stomach ulcer from 
stress. Be particularly vigilant against rain during the night when 
pores are open.
When watering, there’s no need to worry about water getting 
on the leaves—in fact, it washes away dust and dirt so to a cer-
tain extent, water is helpful.
What about when they get big?
Repotting will promote root growth, and allows for nutrients to 
be replaced, so it’s a good idea. 
Consider the condition plants are in when they “get big." We 
often have people telling us that the plant they took home was 
little and chubby and cute, but it quickly grew big and was no 
longer attractive. In cases like these, “big” usually means the plant 
has become spindly due to insufficient sunlight, making it grow 
vertically.
Most succulents use CAM carbon fixation pathways to per-
form photosynthesis (see p85), and it is said that their develop-
ment is slower than other plants’ due to photosynthetic response 
occurring in two stages during the day and at night. Sudden 
obvious changes in a succulent’s leaves indicates that the plant is 
stressed and taking unavoidable measures in order to continue to 
survive. If, within a month of bringing it home, a succulent has 
grown significantly, look first at whether it is receiving insuffi-
cient light or whether it is being overwatered.

92  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Our Own Journey with Succulents
We’d like to tell you about how we, Tokiiro, became acquainted with succulents. That encounter led us to where we are, 
and continues to be our unflagging motivation on the path we tread today.
A married couple with no connections to plants or greenery, we 
encountered horticulturist Shingo Yagyu’s succulent wreath when 
visiting Yatsugatake Club on the recommendation of a relative. 
Wife said, “I want it” but Husband said, “It will die, so we’re not 
buying a living plant."
Wife really wanted it, so we bought a book by Yagyu that showed 
how to make a succulent wreath, and headed home.
The next day, Husband had the day off from work and dropped 
by neighborhood florists and home centers, buying succulents 
(which were not plentifully available at the time) and getting 
materials together, then referring to the book in order to make a 
wreath which he gave to Wife as a present. Wife was radiant with 
happiness. Her smiling face made Husband feel very happy.
After this, we made more and more of the arrangements and 
tableaux as per the instructions in Yagyu’s book, until the backyard 
was full of succulent arrangements. There was nowhere left to 
display them and we weren’t sure what to do with them. Soon they 
were spilling out of the backyard and into the front entranceway. 
People passing by on the street were starting to ask where they 
were sold, so we started taking orders and making them. Realizing 
we would be able to deal with plant markets, farmers and so on if 
we registered as a business, we decided on a business name.
The Birth of TOKIIRO 
Taking time out to enjoy one of the many charms of succulents—
the changing seasonal colors—this is the concept that led us to the 
name Tokiiro (seasonal color). In the day-to-day we’re so busy 
with work, responsibilities and so on that no sooner do we realize 
that the peak of the summer heat is upon us than we’re shivering 
from the winter cold, letting the changing of the seasons just pass us 
by. If only we could take the time to truly appreciate each season.
Succulents have gently taught us about the seasons—and 
have made us more relaxed. We want to share that. This is what 
Tokiiro is about.
Regardless of how much time passes, our concept has remained 
clear. We hope that Tokiiro will evolve so that we can communi-
cate the excitement and appeal of succulents to others. Tokiiro 
started with a happy smile from someone close. Now we spend 
our days making things we hope will be the source of even more 
smiles all over the world. 

Living with Succulents  93
To Our Readers
Succulents—including cacti and caudiciforms—attract attention 
not only in their countries of origin, but all over the world. 
We think there’s a reason that this single category of plants is 
so popular. Could it be that somewhere inside us all is a wish to 
spread these resilient plants across the world, to help counter the 
effects of environmental change? We all breathe and survive on the 
by-product of what plants produce for their own benefit—oxygen. 
If plants didn’t perform photosynthesis, we wouldn’t survive. If 
there were no plants we would cease to exist. Plants, on the other 
hand, could continue to survive perfectly well without people.
Thirty years have passed since the nuclear reactor disaster at 
Chernobyl, thirty years since people left the city. Toxic radioac-
tive Caesium-137 has approached its half life, and with this have 
emerged images of the current state of Chernobyl captured by 
drones. These images are astounding in some ways as they reveal 
a “paradise” of plants and animals who have transcended human 
capabilities. In this city from which humans have disappeared, 
plants whose DNA is damaged continue to flourish, taking over 
structures built by humans, and thriving. This is the perfect exam-
ple of plants accepting their environment, absorbing radioactive 
material and returning to the soil, leaving their offspring, and 
repeating the process over and over as if to protect the earth.
From ancient times, people have co-existed with plants, whose 
claim to the earth is older than ours. From them, we have grate-
fully received food, drink and even medicine over the years we 
have lived together. But the pursuit of mass production and mass 
consumerism, convenience and efficiency that has arisen from 
modernization has resulted in a gradual breakdown of the power 
balance between humans and plants. 
What Tokiiro would like to tell people all over the world via 
the charm of succulents is to fix your eyes firmly on the future of 
people, plants and the planet. Consider things not only from a 
human perspective but also from the point of view of plants and 
the planet to create an environment we can all be part of. Why 
not make the simple act of placing succulents outside the first step 
towards this? It’s with this thought that we will continue to devote 
ourselves to getting more and more people to understand the ap-
peal of succulents, experience them hands-on and cultivate them.

94  Stylish SUCCULENTS

Living with Succulents  95

96  Stylish SUCCULENTS
Published by Tuttle Publishing, an imprint of Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd.
www.tuttlepublishing.com
TANIKUSHOKUBUTSU SEIKATSU NO SUSUME
Copyright © 2017 by TOKIIRO
English translation rights arranged with SHUFU-TO-SEIKATSUSHA, 
CO. LTD.
through Japan UNI Agency, Inc., Tokyo
Translation copyright © 2018 by Periplus Editions(HK) Ltd.
Translated from Japanese by Leeyong Soo
ISBN 978-0-8048-5095-7
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,  
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without prior  
written permission from the publisher. 
STAFF 
Author: Yoshinobu Kondo (TOKIIRO)
Photography: Shuhei Tonami
Illustrations:Takayuki Fujikawa
Distributed by
North America, Latin America & Europe
Tuttle Publishing
364 Innovation Drive, North Clarendon, VT 05759-9436 U.S.A.
Tel: 1 (802) 773-8930; Fax: 1 (802) 773-6993
info@tuttlepublishing.com; www.tuttlepublishing.com
Japan
Tuttle Publishing
Yaekari Building, 3rd Floor, 5-4-12 Osaki, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 141 0032
Tel: (81) 3 5437-0171; Fax: (81) 3 5437-0755
tuttle-sales@gol.com
Asia Pacific
Berkeley Books Pte. Ltd.
61 Tai Seng Avenue #02-12, Singapore 534167
Tel: (65) 6280-1330; Fax: (65) 6280-6290
inquiries@periplus.com.sg; www.periplus.com
First edition
21  20  19  18	
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Printed in Hong Kong        1804EP
TUTTLE PUBLISHING® is a registered trademark of Tuttle Publishing,  
a division of Periplus Editions (HK) Ltd.
About Tuttle: “Books to Span the East and West” 
Our core mission at Tuttle Publishing is to create books which bring people together one page at a time. Tuttle was founded in 1832 in the small 
New England town of Rutland, Vermont (USA). Our fundamental values remain as strong today as they were then—to publish best-in-class 
books informing the English-speaking world about the countries and peoples of Asia. The world has become a smaller place today and Asia’s 
economic, cultural and political influence has expanded, yet the need for meaningful dialogue and information about this diverse region has 
never been greater. Since 1948, Tuttle has been a leader in publishing books on the cultures, arts, cuisines, languages and literatures of Asia. Our 
authors and photographers have won numerous awards and Tuttle has published thousands of books on subjects ranging from martial arts to 
paper crafts. We welcome you to explore the wealth of information available on Asia at www.tuttlepublishing.com.

A Little Universe in a Pot  A



Yoshinobu and Tomomi  Kondo, collectively known 
as TOKIIRO, are garden and green interior 
designers,  authors, exhibitors, holders of 
workshops and purveyors of beautiful gardening 
containers.  Their atelier in Tokyo off ers a wealth 
of ideas for adding succulents to your living space.
Also available from Tuttle Publishing 
ISBN: 978 4 8053 1477 7
ISBN: 978 4 8053 1427 2
ISBN: 978 4 8053 1438 8
ISBN: 978 4 8053 1435 7
tuttlepublishing.com

