
SUBSTANCE ABUSE

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner
Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and
Catherine Vaughan
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
DNA Technology, David E. Newton
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton
Global Organized Crime, Mitchel P. Roth
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and
James Clay Moltz
Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith and
Katrina D. Taylor
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann
Sexual Health, David E. Newton
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Trade Issues, Alfred E. Eckes, Jr.
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly written,
up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting point
for research by high school and college students, scholars, and
general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, activists,
and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an over-
view of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical sketches,
facts and data and/or documents and other primary-source
material, a directory of organizations and agencies, annotated
lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
ﬁnd the information they need to have a better understanding of
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing the
world today.

This page intentionally left blank

SUBSTANCE ABUSE
A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES

Copyright 2010 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Newton, David E.
Substance abuse : a reference handbook / David E. Newton.
p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-509-9 (hard copy : alk. paper) —
ISBN 978-1-59884-510-5 (ebook)
1. Substance abuse—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Title.
HV4998.N488
2010
362.29—dc22
2010007451
ISBN: 978-1-59884-509-9
EISBN: 978-1-59884-510-5
14 13 12 11 10
1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

For Ed Semeyn and Tom Littell
and all the young men and women of Wilcox Park
for the great honor their friendship has done me;
thanks for the memories!

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
List of Tables and Figures, xiii
Preface, xv
1
Background and History, 1
Introduction, 1
A Brief History of Substance Use and Abuse, 2
Speaking of Drugs, 7
Classifying Drugs, 11
How Do Drugs Work?, 15
A Survey of Legal and Illegal Drugs, 18
Tobacco, 19
Alcohol, 22
Marijuana, 24
Cocaine, 26
Amphetamines, 28
Other Drugs and Their Effects, 30
References, 31
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 35
Introduction, 35
Substance Abuse Prevention, 36
Substance Abuse Treatment, 40
Drug Testing, 42
Drug Testing in the Workplace, 42
Drug Testing in Schools, 45
Drug Testing in Amateur and Professional Sports, 47
Controlling the Use of Drugs, 49
Taxation of Drugs, 51
Outright Bans on Substances, 58
Federal Legislation since the Controlled Substances Act,
1970–2010, 63
ix

Should Illegal Substances Be Legalized?, 69
Marijuana and Tobacco, 74
References, 79
3
Worldwide Perspective, 87
Introduction, 87
Legal or Illegal?, 89
Drug Laws Today, 90
Marijuana: A Special Case?, 100
Alcohol and Tobacco, 103
Substance Abuse Worldwide, 107
References, 111
4
Chronology, 119
5
Biographical Sketches, 141
Richard Alpert, 141
Harry J. Anslinger, 142
Steve Bechler, 143
William Bennett, 144
Bill W., 145
Thomas de Quincey, 147
Pablo Escobar, 148
Francis B. Harrison, 149
Albert Hoffman, 150
Aldous Huxley, 151
C. Everett Koop, 152
Timothy Leary, 153
Otto Loewi, 155
Albert Niemann, 156
Quanah Parker, 157
Nancy Reagan, 158
Friedrich Sertu¨rner, 159
Alexander ‘‘Sasha’’ Shulgin, 160
Luther L. Terry, 161
R. Gordon Wasson, 163
Hamilton Wright, 164
6
Data and Documents, 167
Documents, 167
Laws and Treaties, 167
Reports and Recommendations, 182
National Institute of Drug Abuse Reports, 185
x
Contents

Court Cases, 191
Vernonia v. Acton, 515 U.S. 646 (1995), 191
Gonzalez v. Raich, 545 U.S. 1 (2005), 194
United States of America v. Philip Morris, USA, Inc., et al. Civil
Action No. 99-CV-02496 (GK) (2006), 196
Data, 200
Scheduled Drugs, 200
Nonmedical Use of Prescription-type Psychotherapeutics
in Lifetime, Past Year, and Past Month among Persons
Aged 12 or Older, 2002–2004, 201
Illicit Drug Use in the Lifetime, Past Year, and Past Month
among Persons Aged 12 or Older: Percentages, 2006
and 2007, 203
Prevalence of Illegal Drug Use in the United States,
2002–2007, 204
Cigarette Consumption in the United States, 1900–2007, 205
Alcohol-related Vehicular Accident Fatalities, United
States, 1982–2004, 207
Emergency Room Visits Involving Nonmedical Use of
Selected Pharmaceuticals, 208
Treatment Admissions for Substance Abuse (2007), 209
7
Directory of Organizations, 211
Governmental, 211
Academic Organizations, 219
Private, 222
Professional Organizations, 236
8
Resources, 241
Print, 241
General, 241
Legal Substances, 253
Illegal Substances, 263
Nonprint, 271
Web sites, 271
Glossary, 281
Index, 287
About the Author, 299
Contents
xi

This page intentionally left blank

List of Tables and Figures
Tables
1.1
Some Street Names for Illegal Drugs, 10
1.2
Consumption of Certain Legal and Illegal Substances by
Persons Aged 12 and Older in 2008, 19
1.3
Some Constituents of Tobacco Smoke and Their Health
Risks, 20
1.4
Some Substances of Abuse and Their Health Effects, 30
2.1
Effectiveness of Selected Drug Prevention Programs, 39
2.2
Drug Testing Programs in U.S. Schools, 1998–2002, Percent
of Schools/Students, 47
2.3
Major Classes of Designer Drugs and Their Analogs, 65
3.1
Some Marijuana Laws around the World, 102
3.2
Legal Status of Medical Marijuana Worldwide, 103
3.3
Prevalence in Consumption of Cocaine and Marijuana in
Selected Nations, 109
6.1
Schedules of Drugs, as Deﬁned by the Controlled
Substances Act of 1970, 201
6.2
Nonmedical Use of Prescription-type Psychotherapeutics in
Lifetime, Past Year, and Past Month among Persons Aged 12
or Older, 2002–2004, 202
6.3
Illicit Drug Use in the Lifetime, Past Year, and Past Month
among Persons Aged 12 or Older: Percentages, 2006 and
2007, 203
6.4
Prevalence of Illegal Drug Use in the United States,
Percentages, 2002–2007, 204
6.5
Cigarette Consumption, in Billions, in the United States,
1900–2007, 206
6.6
Alcohol-related Vehicular Accident Fatalities, United States,
1982–2004, 207
xiii

6.7
ED Visits Involving Nonmedical Use of Selected
Pharmaceuticals, 209
6.8
Treatment Admissions for Substance Abuse (2007), 209
Figures
1.1A
Barbituric acid, 12
1.1B
Phenobarbital, 12
1.1C
Amobarbital, 12
1.1D
Pentobarbital, 13
xiv
List of Tables and Figures

Preface
N
ature has provided the human race with a dazzling variety of
plants, from which an endless number of useful products
have been produced. Some of these products are essential for
the very survival of animal life on the planet. Others are so toxic
that minuscule amounts are sufﬁcient to cause almost immediate
death. Somewhere within this array of plant products are substan-
ces that have very special effects on an animal’s nervous system,
so-called psychoactive substances. Some of the best known
psychoactive substances are caffeine, found in the coffee, tea, and
chocolate drinks consumed around the world; nicotine, a compo-
nent of tobacco products; opium and its derivatives, such as
codeine, heroin, and morphine; marijuana and other products of
the cannabis family of plants; cocaine and other products of the
coca plant; psilocybin; peyote and mescaline; cathinone and other
products of the khat plant; and an almost uncountable number of
synthetic products not derived from plants, but similar in their
psychoactive effects on humans and other animals. These
so-called designer drugs include amphetamine and methampheta-
mine and their analogs (chemical relatives); the barbiturates; ﬂuni-
trazepam; gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB); phenylcyclidine
(PCP) and its analogs; and meperidine and its analogs.
Many of these substances have been known to and used by
humans almost since the beginnings of civilization. Archaeolo-
gists have found representations of their use in cave paintings,
artwork on stone walls, and even remnants of the substances
themselves in ancient dwellings, all dating back thousands of
years. These traditions survive today in a number of different reli-
gions, where the consumption of psychoactive substances is still
an integral part of many religious and cultural ceremonies. In fact,
those ceremonies often make explicit reference to the role that
xv

opiates, coca products, and derivatives of cannabis (for example)
played in the earliest stages of Chinese, Indian, South American,
Oceanic, and other cultures. The essential role of psychoactive
substances in these traditions is reﬂected in a variety of ways in
modern society: in India, the psychoactive material bhang (a can-
nabis product) is openly sold through government-owned and
operated shops; in parts of Africa, khat is sold commercially
through shops no different from those that offer fruits and vegeta-
bles; and in the United States, special legal exemptions are pro-
vided for Native American tribes that have long incorporated
peyote or psilocybin into their traditional ceremonies.
Evidence suggests that humans may also have been using
psychoactive substances for non-religious, non-medical purposes
for thousands of years. Men and women enjoy smoking opium or
chewing coca leaves for no other reason that just to ‘‘get high,’’ to
relax, or to enjoy some type of ‘‘out-of-body’’ experience. And it is
this recreational use of psychoactive substances that is of such
great concern throughout the world today, and it is the subject of
this book.
The use of these substances is seldom an entirely positive or
benign experience; it may often be followed by a harmful or destruc-
tive episode or series of episodes, which may include psychological
or mental disturbances, as well as physical ailments affecting the
circulatory, nervous, and other systems. Individuals who become
addicted to a psychoactive substance may also ﬁnd themselves spi-
raling into a life of crime, required in order to support their expen-
sive drug habit. For people who lose control of their ability to use
psychoactive substances on a moderate and safe basis, then, these
substances can easily ruin a person’s life. They can also create social,
political, legal, medical, economic, and psychological problem of
enormous scope for society as a whole.
It is hardly surprising, then, that human cultures have long
attempted to provide legal mechanisms for keeping substance
abuse under control in the general population. In their harshest
forms, these mechanisms may include penalties as severe as life
imprisonment or even death for what some viewers would say
are mild abuses of a psychoactive substance. More commonly,
penalties involve shorter prison terms and/or ﬁnes. Increasingly,
societies are attempting to deal with the problems of substance
abuse with programs of prevention and treatment for consumers
of psychoactive substances and massive programs of interdiction
for the producers and purveyors of these drugs.
xvi
Preface

This book attempts to provide a general overview of the
extensive and complex problem of substance abuse. Chapter 1 is
devoted to a brief review of the major psychoactive substances
and their background and history in human culture. Chapter 2
focuses on a number of issues that the United States faces with
regard to substance abuse, issues such as methods that have been
devised for controlling the use of illegal substances; drug testing
in the workplace, in schools, and in athletic programs; prevention
and treatment programs; and the legalization (or decriminaliza-
tion) of drugs. Chapter 3 refers the status of substance abuse
worldwide, reviewing not only the extent of the problem in vari-
ous regions and nations around the world, but also the variety
of drug laws that have been developed to deal with this problem.
Chapter 4 provides a chronology of the use of psychoactive
substances by humans and of the mechanisms that societies have
developed to deal with problems of drug abuse. Chapter 5
includes biographical sketches of a number of individuals who
have been involved in the attempt to deal with substance abuse
in the United States and other parts of the world. Chapter 6 is a
collection of portions of important documents dealing with sub-
stance abuse, including laws and treaties, reports and recommen-
dations, and decisions in court cases. The chapter also provides
data and statistics on topics such as drug schedules, drug use by
various substance, cigarette consumption, and alcohol-related
vehicle accidents. Chapter 7 provides a list of organizations that
are concerned with one aspect or another of the use of illegal sub-
stances as well as legal psychoactive substances, such as tobacco
and alcohol. Chapter 8 is an annotated bibliography of print and
nonprint resources. The book concludes with a glossary of impor-
tant terms used in a discussion of substance abuse.
Preface
xvii

This page intentionally left blank

1
Background and History
Introduction
In June 2009, the U.S. Congress passed and President Barack
Obama signed the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco
Control Act, instituting a number of new controls on the sale of
cigarettes. For the ﬁrst time, the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) was given authority to regulate tobacco products, just as
it oversees a host of foods, pharmaceuticals, and other products
sold in the country. The act allows the FDA to ban certain types
of advertising for tobacco products and to prohibit the use of
certain chemicals in cigarettes. It also prohibits the use of certain
terms about tobacco products, such as ‘‘mild’’ and ‘‘light,’’ and it
requires cigarette packages to contain graphic images of the harm
caused by smoking on at least half of their front and back panels.
This legislation raises new questions about the status of tobacco
users in the United States. Are such individuals now to be
thought of as ‘‘drug addicts’’ or ‘‘substance abusers’’? Should
they be classiﬁed with people who use marijuana (or cocaine or
heroin), or are they just another group of Americans, like those
who drink alcoholic beverages, who enjoy a legal product with
detrimental side effects? These questions are more complex than
they may at ﬁrst appear, and they pose the primary challenge for
this book. Who is the substance abuser? What personal mental
and physical challenges do such individuals face? Of what concern
is substance abuse to society in general, and what regulations, if
any, should be applied to the use of body- and mind-altering
substances?
1

A Brief History of Substance Use and Abuse
The use of natural and synthetic products that alter one’s con-
sciousness has been part of human culture as far back as records
exist. In some instances, it even predates any written or pictorial
accounts that humans left behind. In 1992, for example, Jan
Lietava, of Comenius University in Bratislava, reported on the dis-
covery of a number of natural herbs with mind-altering properties,
including ephedra, at a Neanderthal burial site in the Shandihar
region of Iraq dating to at least 50,000 BCE. Lietava wrote that
the substances found at the site had ‘‘marked medical activity’’
(Lietava 1992). The discovery is thought to be the earliest evidence
of drug use by humans.
Most other drugs with which humans are familiar today
have long histories also. The ﬁrst references to the cultivation of
the cannabis plant, from which marijuana is produced, date to at
least 10,000 BCE. The precise use of these plants is not clear, how-
ever, as the plant is used not only for the production of marijuana,
but also for the manufacture of hemp, a valuable ﬁber used to
make cloth. The earliest evidence of a cannabis product, in fact,
is a piece of cord attached to pottery dating to about 10,000 BCE
in China. The ﬁrst reliable evidence that the plant was also used
to make a product that could be smoked dates to somewhat later,
about the ﬁrst or second century CE, also in China. Myths dating
to the period claim that the Chinese deity Shen Nung tested hun-
dreds of natural products, including marijuana, to determine
their medical and pharmacological properties (Iversen 2000,
18–19). These myths form the basis for a very early Chinese
pharmacopeia, which describes the hallucinogenic properties
of marijuana, which is called ma, a Chinese pun for ‘‘chaotic.’’
(Iversen 2000, 19).
The use of marijuana as an intoxicant also has a long history in
Indian culture, where its ﬁrst mention dates to about 2000–1400 BCE
in the classic work Science of Charms. According to legend, the
Indian god Shiva became embroiled in a family argument that so
angered him he wandered off into the ﬁelds, where he lay down
and fell asleep under a leafy cannabis plant. When he awoke, he
tasted a leaf of the plant and found that it so refreshed him that it
became his favorite food. Thus was born the tradition of making
and consuming a concoction of the cannabis plant known as bhang
in honor of the Lord Shiva at many religious ceremonies, a tradition
2
Background and History

that continues today (Booth 2003, 24; also see Society for the
Conﬂuence of Festivals in India 2009).
The history of opium and other opiates (derivatives or chemi-
cal relatives of opium) is similar to that of marijuana and other
psychoactive substances. Although there is some evidence that
the poppy was cultivated and used by the Neanderthals, the ﬁrst
concrete, written evidence of its use dates to about 3500 BCE in
lower Mesopotamia. Tablets found at the Sumerian spiritual
center at Nippur describe the collection and treatment of poppy
seeds, presumably for the preparation of opium. The Sumerians
gave the name of Hul Gil, or ‘‘joy plant,’’ to the poppy, almost cer-
tainly reﬂecting the sensations it produced when eaten (Kritikos
and Papadaki 1967). Thereafter, the plant and the drug are men-
tioned commonly in almost every civilization of antiquity, where
they were used for medical and, apparently, psychoactive rea-
sons, probably in association with religious ceremonies. Interest-
ingly, opium was almost universally ingested by mouth rather
than by smoking. In fact, the ﬁrst mention of the drug’s use by
smoking is not found until about 1500, when the Portugese intro-
duced the practice, then thought by the residents of all other
nations as being a ‘‘barbaric and subversive’’ custom (‘‘A Brief
History of Opium,’’ 2009).
Although marijuana and opium were apparently not known
in the New World, the Western Hemisphere had its own psycho-
active drugs of choice, one of which was mescaline, derived from
the peyote cactus (Lophophora williamsii). As in the Old World, this
drug was apparently popular thousands of years ago, although it
became known to Europeans only with the Spanish conquests of
South America in the sixteenth century. One of the early chroni-
clers of the history of peyote was a Spanish priest, Bernardino
de Sahagun, who estimated from extant documents that the drug
had been in use for at least 1,800 years before the Spanish arrived
in the New World. De Sahagun’s estimate is problematic, how-
ever, partly because the conquistadors so aggressively destroyed
all historical documents of the natives on which they could lay
their hands. Later ethnologists and archaeologists think his
estimates are conservative, and that the drug was used at least a
thousand years earlier. One writer has placed the ﬁrst use of
peyote in the New World of at least 8,000 years ago (Spinella
2001, 344). In any case, it was still being widely used for both reli-
gious and recreational purposes when the Spaniards arrived, and
the conquerors’ efforts to abolish this practice were largely
A Brief History of Substance Use and Abuse
3

unsuccessful. One of the most thorough and detailed observers of
native practices in the region, Danish ethnologist Carl Lumholtz,
described peyote ceremonies he observed during an extended
trip to Mexico:
The plant, when taken, exhilarates the human system and
allays all feeling of hunger and thirst. It also produces
colour-visions. . . . Although an Indian feels as if drunk
after eating a quantity of hikuli [native name for peyote],
and the trees dance before his eyes, he maintains the
balance of his body even better than under normal
circumstances (Lumholtz 1902, 364).
The other psychoactive plant native to the New World is the
coca plant, Erythroxylum coca. Recent studies have shown that
the plant was being used at least 3,000 years ago. Two of eleven
mummies from a burial area in northern Chile contained small
quantities of the drug, whose age was determined by carbon-14
dating. Historically, archaeologists had previously set 600 CE as
the earliest date for which good evidence of the use of coca has
been set. That evidence consists of mummies that had been
buried with a supply of coca leaves and whose cheeks were
deformed by a bulge characteristic of those who chew leaves of
the plant (Peterson 1977, 17). As with peyote, the Spaniards
attempted to abolish the practice of coca use but were entirely
unsuccessful. As they discovered, coca provides the chewer with
energy and stamina, qualities of considerable beneﬁt especially
to those who lived in the thin air of the high Andes, and also of
use for the exhausting manual labor in mining and other occupa-
tions to which the natives were assigned by the conquistadors.
The use of psychoactive substances has often been the subject
of dispute within nations and regions. Indeed, Chapters 2 and 3 of
this book discuss in some detail some of the issues surrounding
the use of such substances in the United States and the rest
of the world today. An example of the historical controversies
about the use of psychoactive substances is the Opium Wars of
the mid-nineteenth century between China and Great Britain.
Although opium had been known in China and used for medical
purposes for hundreds of years, by 1800 it had been banned for
recreational use. Coincidentally, however, Great Britain had just
come into control of the world’s largest source of opium with
its conquest of the Indian subcontinent. That situation was a
4
Background and History

tinderbox, with the British eagerly searching for a market for the
massive amounts of opium they now controlled and the Chinese
determined not to permit the importation of the drug to their
country.
The British took advantage of this opportunity in 1836 when
they bribed ofﬁcials at the port of Canton to allow them to bring
opium into the country. Before long, the drug was widely avail-
able throughout China, and the number of people addicted to its
use rose to an estimated two million (Chrastina 2009). The Chinese
government ﬁnally decided to take vigorous action against the
smuggling of opium into their country by the British in 1839.
Emperor Tao-kuang appointed a trusted bureaucrat named Lin
Tse-hsu¨ to lead an anti-opium campaign across the country. Lin
was especially aggressive against British merchants in China
who trafﬁcked in opium and against merchant ships who were
attempting to deliver the drug at the port of Canton. As the year
progressed, skirmishes between the Chinese and British increased
in number and severity, and war between the two nations broke
out in mid-1840. The result of the conﬂict was a foregone conclu-
sion, with the British then having one of the largest and strongest
military establishments in the world. In 1842, the Chinese sued
for peace, which was conﬁrmed by the Treaty of Nanjing, signed
on August 29 of that year. The treaty called for China to open
ﬁve ports to foreign trade, to pay signiﬁcant reparations to Great
Britain, and to cede Hong Kong to the British. The treaty settled
matters temporarily, but discord between the two nations contin-
ued, and war broke out again in 1856. As before, the British pre-
vailed, and the war ended with the Treaty of Beijing in 1860.
Again, the Chinese were required to open more ports to foreign
trade (10 this time) and to pay very large reparations to Great Britain
and its ally, France. (For an excellent overview of the Opium Wars,
see Beeching 1975)
Controversies over the use of psychoactive substances have
extended to every material that might ﬁt that description. Even a
substance that hardly attracts opprobrium today—coffee—has
been the subject of controversy at a number of times in the past.
In 1511, for example, the governor of Mecca banned all coffee-
houses within his district. His action was based on the belief that
coffee is an intoxicant and therefore forbidden by Islamic law.
To his misfortune, the governor was later overruled by his supe-
rior, the Sultan of Cairo, and paid with his own life. After a coffee
craze swept through Europe in the seventeenth century, similar
A Brief History of Substance Use and Abuse
5

concerns about its use arose in a number of locations. In 1600, for
example, a number of Christian clerics asked Pope Clement VIII
to ban coffee because it came from the land of the inﬁdels (the
Islamic world) and it would cause drinkers to lose their souls.
After tasting the new drink, however, Clement had a somewhat
different take on the issue. He could not believe, he said, that such
a delicious drink could be evil. Instead, he decided to ‘‘fool the
devil’’ by baptizing coffee and allowing its free use among all
Christians (Grierson 2009).
The pope’s decision did not, however, resolve the contro-
versy over the use of coffee in many parts of Europe. The disputes
that arose illustrate that such controversies may or may not arise
solely out of the medical or health effects of a substance. In some
cases, for example, objections to the rapid spread of coffeehouses
were raised by tavern owners, who probably cared little one way
or another about the psychoactive effects of coffee, and a great
deal more about the competition coffeehouses posed to their busi-
nesses. Like earlier Christian leaders, they argued that coffee was
a product of unbelievers, and that good Christian men should
drink only the brew that had been prepared traditionally by
monks: beer. Other efforts to close coffeehouses did focus on their
supposed health risks. Perhaps the most famous of these efforts
was the ‘‘Women’s Petition against Coffee,’’ published in 1674 in
London. In this petition, a group of women asked the authorities
to close coffeehouses because the drink was harming their sexual
lives with their husbands. They complained of the ‘‘Grand
INCONVENIENCIES accruing to their SEX from the Excessive
Use of that Drying, Enfeebling LIQUOR’’ (Clarkson and Gloning
2003). (Some critics have observed that women’s greatest com-
plaint about coffeehouses, to the contrary, was that they were
not permitted to enter such establishments [Grierson 2009].)
The Women’s Petition drew a comparable response from men,
or at least a man purporting to represent the male position on cof-
feehouses. The ‘‘Men’s Answer to the Women’s Petition against
Coffee’’ was a long harangue that insisted that the coffeehouse
is ‘‘the citizen’s academy, where he learns more wit than ever
his granmum taught him [and that] . . . ’Tis Coffee that . . . keeps
us sober.’’ He continues: ‘‘[Let] all our wives that hereafter
shall presume to petition against it, be conﬁned to lie alone all
night, and in the day time drink nothing but bonny clabber’’
(Svensk 2009). If there is any lesson to be learned from this contre-
temps, and the longer history of coffee itself, it is that virtually
6
Background and History

any substance with some effect on a person’s mental or physical
condition is likely to be the subject of controversy at some point
in history.
The above review provides only a modest introduction to the
earliest history of drug use in the Old and New Worlds. Similar
stories could be told for other naturally occurring psychoactive
plants and their products, such as tobacco, alcohol, caffeine, and
psilocybin, as well as a host of synthetic products developed in
the last century, such as amphetamine, the barbiturates, lysergic
acid diethylamide (LSD), and MDMA (3,4-Methylenedioxyme-
thamphetamine). Those stories would require a series of books
much larger than this work, however, although salient points in
that history will be discussed in this and following chapters.
Speaking of Drugs
Any discussion of substance abuse makes use of a number of
terms whose deﬁnitions are essential to a clear understanding of
the subject. Some of the most important of these terms are the
following:
Drug is probably the most fundamental term used in talking
about substance abuse, but it is also the term with the greatest
variety of meanings. According to Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary,
for example, the two major deﬁnitions of the term refer to its
medical use and its recreational use. In the former instance, drug
is deﬁned as
(1) a substance recognized in an ofﬁcial pharmacopoeia
or formulary (2) a substance intended for use in the diag-
nosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of dis-
ease (3) a substance other than food intended to affect
the structure or function of the body (4) a substance
intended for use as a component of a medicine but not
a device or a component, part, or accessory of a device.’’
In the latter instance, the term is deﬁned as ‘‘something
and often an illegal substance that causes addiction,
habituation, or a marked change in consciousness
(Merriam-Webster’s Online Dictionary 2009).
Legal and illegal are terms that describe substances that are or
are not permitted by law to be manufactured, transported, sold,
Speaking of Drugs
7

and consumed. The term legal drugs refers both to prescribed
drugs, that is, drugs that can be obtained only with a medical pro-
fessional’s prescription, and over-the-counter (OTC) drugs,
which are freely available to any consumer without a prescrip-
tion. A number of substances that produce psychoactive effects
are also legal in the United States. These substances include amyl
nitrite, betal nuts, caffeine, catnip, henbane, hops, a variety of
inhalants, kava kava, ketamine, mandrake, nitrous oxide, nut-
meg, and tobacco. Illegal drugs cannot be obtained legally except
by clearly speciﬁed medical applications. Legal and illegal drugs
are also known as licit and illicit drugs, respectively.
Substance abuse is a term now more widely used than the for-
merly popular drug abuse. The term has become more common at
least partly because it can be used for a wider variety of materials
that are not in and of themselves illegal, such as alcohol, tobacco,
and caffeine, which may also be abused in much the same way as
illegal drugs, such as marijuana, cocaine, and heroin.
The term substance abuse itself is somewhat vague, since it can
refer to a variety of conditions ranging from relatively harmless to
life-threatening. In his book Illegal Drugs, Paul Gahlinger
describes four levels of drug abuse (Gahlinger 2004, 90). The ﬁrst
level he calls ‘‘experimental use,’’ because it involves the ﬁrst
exposure people have to drugs. They ‘‘try out’’ a glass of beer, a
cigarette, or a lid of marijuana. For some people, that is as deeply
as one becomes involved in ‘‘substance abuse.’’ They do not enjoy
the experience or decide not to go any further. (Although, as
Gahlinger points out, even this level of drug abuse is an illegal
act for substances such as marijuana and cocaine, although not
for alcohol and tobacco.) The next level of drug use is one that
Gahlinger labels ‘‘recreational use.’’ It refers to cases in which a
person takes a drink, has a cigarette, or uses an illegal drug from
time to time ‘‘just for the fun of it.’’ The person’s life is not dis-
rupted in any way by this occasional, low-key use of a substance.
Gahlinger calls the next level of drug use ‘‘circumstantial use,’’
because it includes those occasions when substance use develops
into a certain pattern: a person uses a drug to deal with a personal
problem, because of the feelings the drug produces, or just to be
sociable with others. Again, drug use at this level is not necessarily
harmful, but it may be the gateway to the fourth level, ‘‘compulsive
use,’’ or, as most people would describe the situation, an addiction.
Addiction is a medical and psychiatric condition that typically
involves both physiological and psychological elements. It is more
8
Background and History

commonly known among many professionals as substance depen-
dence. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
edition (DSM-IV) deﬁnes substance dependence as a ‘‘maladaptive
pattern of substance use’’ that is characterized by at least three of
seven symptoms: (1) tolerance of the substance, meaning that an
individual gradually becomes able to consume the substance with-
out unpleasant side effects; (2) withdrawal, meaning that depriva-
tion of the substance causes signiﬁcant physical and emotional
stresses; (3) increased consumption of the substance over time;
(4) a lack of desire or ability to stop using the substance; (5) large
amounts of time devoted to ﬁnding ways to obtain amounts of
the substance needed to achieve a desired effect; (6) abandonment
of otherwise typical social, occupational, and recreational activities
because of the time needed for substance use; and (7) continued use
of the substance in spite of an individual’s knowledge of its
deleterious effects (First, Frances, and Pincus 2004, 128).
Narcotics is a term that was traditionally used for opioids,
drugs that are derivatives of or similar to opium. The word narcot-
ics comes from the Greek term ‘‘narko¯sis,’’ which means ‘‘to make
numb.’’ Today, the term is used more generally for any substance
that cause numbness or stupor, induces sleep, and relieves pain.
Psychoactive is an adjective used for any substance that acts
on the central nervous system and alters one’s consciousness or
mental functioning. The word psychotropic is sometimes used as
a synonym for ‘‘psychoactive.’’ A number of other terms with
the preﬁx psycho- are also used to describe certain speciﬁc types
of psychoactive drugs. Psychotomimetic drugs, for example, are
compounds that produce symptoms similar to (‘‘mimic’’) those
of a psychosis. Psychedelic drugs are those that produce altered
sense of consciousness or distorted sensory perceptions. One
large class of psychoactive drugs are the hallucinogens, which, as
their name suggests, causes hallucinations, or perceptions of
images and events for which there is no real stimulus. Psychoac-
tive drugs have been used throughout history for a number of
purposes: as medicines, as recreational drugs, and as a means
for achieving spiritual experiences in religious ceremonies. Drugs
used for the last of these purposes are sometimes called entheogen
substances, from the Greek words for ‘‘to create’’, ‘‘the divine’’,
and ‘‘within.’’
Generic is a term used to describe a particular form of a drug,
or the name given to such a drug. Most drugs have at least two
names, and often, they have three. The ﬁrst name is its systematic,
Speaking of Drugs
9

or scientiﬁc, name. For example, the systematic name for the com-
pound that we commonly call aspirin is sodium acetylsalicylic
acid. The systematic names for compounds are derived from rules
established by the International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC) and have the advantage of unambiguously
identifying every different compound in the world. Such names
are essential for researchers because they prevent any confusion
whatsoever as to the substance about which a person is talking.
The practical difﬁculty with IUPAC names is that they can be long
and quite beyond the understanding of the ordinary person. The
systematic name for the drug known as Ecstasy, for example, is
(RS)-1-(benzo[d][1,3]dioxol-5-yl)-N-methylpropan-2-amine.
The generic name for a compound does not necessarily
follow rules like those established by IUPAC. It is a simpler,
10
Background and History
TABLE 1.1
Some Street Names for Illegal Drugs
Generic Name
Street Names
Amphetamine
Black Dex, Bennies, Black and White, Black Bombers, Bumblebees, Dexies, Fives,
Footballs, French Blue, Horse Heads, Jolly Beans, Lid Poppers, Lightning, Oranges,
Pep Pills, Rhythm, Rippers, Snap, Sparkle Plenty, Sweets, Thrusters, Uppers
Cocaine
All-American Drug, Aunt Nora, Bazulco, Bernie, Big C, Bolivian Marching Powder,
Burese, C, Carrie Nation, Cecil, Charlie, Chloe, Double Bubble, Dream, Flake,
Florida Snow, Happy Trails, Henry VIII, Merck, Monster, Powder Diamonds,
Scorpion, Snow White
Heroin
Al Capone, Antifreeze, Aunt Hazel, Big H, Big Harry, Blow, Bozo, Brown Sugar, Dead-
on-Arrival, Dr. Feelgood, Galloping Horse, Good and Plenty, Him, Joy Flakes, Old
Steve, Rambo, Rawhide, Smack
Marijuana
Acapulco Red, Black, Boo, Canadian Black, Crying Weed, Don Juan, Flower Tops,
Giggle Weed, Grass, Indian Hemp, Jane, Kentucky Blue, Locoweed, Magic Smoke,
Muggles, Pot, Rainy Day Woman
MDMA
Adam, Batmans, Bermuda Triangles, Care Bears, E, Ecstasy, Four Leaf Clover, Hug
Drug, Igloo, Lover’s Special, Orange Bandits, Pink Panthers, Smurfs, Tom and
Jerries, Tweety Birds, Wafers
Methamphetamine
Beannies, Black, Boo, Blue Devils, Chicken Feed, Clear, Cris, Hot Ice, Mercedes, Meth,
Motorcycle Crack, Pink, Po Coke, Scootie, Sketch, Speckled Birds, Spoosh, Tick Tick,
Wash
PCP
Angel Dust, Black Dust, Busy Bee, Crazy Coke, Crystal Joint, Dipper, Elephant
Tranquilizer, Green Tea, Heaven & Hell, K, Lemon 714, Soma, Super, Tic Tac,
Wack
Peyote
Half Moon, Hikori, Hikuli, Hyatari, Nubs, Seni, Tops
A much more complete list of street names can be found on the Internet at: White House Ofﬁce of National Drug
Control Policy. ‘‘Street Terms.’’ http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/streetterms/Default.asp.

shorter name to which one can more easily refer. The compound
ofﬁcially known as (±)-1-phenylpropan-2-amine, for example, is
more commonly known by the generic name of amphetamine. Pro-
prietary formulations of drugs always carry a speciﬁc brand name
also that associates that formulation with the company that makes
the drug. Some brand names for amphetamine (sometimes mixed
with other compounds) are Dexedrine, Adderall, Biphetamine,
Desoxyn, and Vyvanse.
Finally, illegal drugs almost always have a number of street
names, nicknames by which they are known among substance
abusers, professionals, and the general public. The list of street
names is very long indeed. Table 1.1 shows only a sample of some
of these names and the drugs for which they are used.
Classifying Drugs
In many cases (as in the last part of this chapter), it may be useful to
discuss the speciﬁc characteristics of individual drugs, such as
cocaine, heroin, and PCP. In other cases, it is helpful to focus on
the common properties of large classes of drugs. Drugs can be clas-
siﬁed in a number of ways: on the basis of their chemical structures,
as to their medical uses, by the mental and physical effects they
produce, and on the basis of their legal status. A chemical system
of classiﬁcation organizes drugs according to their chemical struc-
tures. One might speak, for example, about the amphetamines,
which are all derivative of the speciﬁc compound, amphetamine;
barbiturates, which are all derivatives of barbituric acid; and
the benzodiazepines, which are all derivatives of the chemical
compound by that name. Figure 1.1 shows three members of the
barbiturate family with its parent compound, barbituric acid.
A more common system of classiﬁcation is based on the effects
produced by drugs. The most common categories included in such
as system are depressants, stimulants, and hallucinogens. The ﬁrst
group of substances, the depressants, get their name from the
fact that they depress the central nervous system, reducing pain,
relieving anxiety, inducing sleep, and, in general, calming a person
down. Some common depressants are opium and its relatives,
cannabis, alcohol, the barbiturates, the benzodiazepines, muscle
relaxants, antihistamines, and antipsychotics. Depressants are com-
monly referred to as ‘‘downers’’ because they reduce the activity of
the central nervous system.
Classifying Drugs
11

FIGURE 1.1A
Barbituric acid
FIGURE 1.1C
Amobarbital
FIGURE 1.1B
Phenobarbital

Stimulants have just the opposite effect. They increase the
activity of the central nervous system, promoting physical and
mental activity. Stimulants are used medically to treat a number
of conditions that are characterized by depression, such as sleepi-
ness, lethargy, and fatigue; to improve attentiveness and concen-
tration; to promote weight loss by decreasing appetite; and to
treat attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and clinical
depression. Because of their effects, compounds in this category
are sometimes called ‘‘uppers.’’ Some common stimulants are
amphetamine and its chemical analogs, caffeine, cocaine, Ecstasy
(ethylenedioxymethamphetamine), and nicotine. (In chemistry,
analogs [or analogues]) are chemical compounds similar in struc-
ture and function to other chemical compounds.)
Hallucinogens differ from stimulants and depressants in one
important way. The latter classes of drugs amplify normal mental
conditions, increasing those conditions in the case of stimulants
and decreasing them in the case of depressants. Hallucinogens, by
contrast, produce qualitatively different mental conditions, such as
the perception of objects and events that do not, in fact, actually
exist. The experiences produced by hallucinogens are, in some
respects, similar to other kinds of so-called out-of-body experiences,
Classifying Drugs
13
FIGURE 1.1D
Pentobarbital

such as those experienced during dreaming, meditation, and tran-
ces. Ironically, the one effect that is not produced by hallucinogens
is hallucination, an experience in which a person completely
accepts as real an event or object that has no basis whatsoever in
reality. To someone who has taken a hallucinogen, by contrast, there
is almost always some realization that the bizarre experiences he or
she is having do have at least some basis in reality.
Hallucinogens can be subdivided into three groups: psyche-
delics, dissociatives, and deliriants. The term psychedelic comes
from two Greek words, pysche, meaning ‘‘soul,’’ and delos, mean-
ing ‘‘to reveal.’’ The term thus suggests a chemical that allows a
person to look into her or his innermost self to discover one’s
authentic person. For this reason, psychedelics (as well as other
hallucinogens) have a very long history of use in religious and
mystical ceremonies since they are thought to allow a person to
go beyond the simple (and limited?) reality of everyday life. Dis-
sociatives are chemicals that disrupt normal nerve transmissions
in the brain so that one loses touch, to a greater or lesser extent,
with the physical world. He or she literally ‘‘disassociates’’ from
that world with the result, as with psychedelics, that one can
focus on one’s innermost soul without the distraction of physical
reality. Deliriants are a form of dissociative that have even more
extreme effects on an individual. A person who takes a dissociative
may be aware of the mental changes he or she is experiencing,
while someone who has taken a deliriant is probably not aware of
these changes. Of all hallucinogens, deliriants are most likely to
produce true hallucinations.
Some categories of drugs in addition to stimulants, depres-
sants, and hallucinogens are antipsychotics, used to treat psychoses
because of their calming effects; antidepressants, used to treat
depression and similar mood disorders; inhalants, abused by some
individuals as a way of achieving some type of altered mental
states, such as a ‘‘high’’; and marijuana, which is often listed as a
drug group in and of itself.
Finally, drugs can be categorized on the basis of their legal
status in any particular nation. This method of categorization is
of special interest and concern, of course, because it clariﬁes which
substances are legal for individuals to use and which are not. The
basis for classifying the legal status of drugs in the United States
was established by the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. That
law created ﬁve classes, or ‘‘schedules,’’ of drugs according to their
medical use and potential for abuse. Drugs placed in Schedule I,
14
Background and History

for example, currently have no approved legitimate medical use in
the United States and a high potential for abuse. Some Schedule I
drugs include the stimulant cathinone, the depressant methaqua-
lone (Quaalude), the psychedelic 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphet-
amine (MDMA), and most opiates. Schedule II drugs include a
number of substances that, while strongly subject to use as recrea-
tional drugs, do have some legitimate medical uses. These drugs
include the amphetamines, most barbiturates, cocaine, morphine,
opium, and phencyclidine (PCP). An excerpt of the law creating
the drug schedules and a list of drugs in each schedule are to be
found in Chapter 6 of this book.
How Do Drugs Work?
The transmission of a nerve impulse within the central nervous
system (CNS) is a two-step process, one of which is an electrical
mechanism, and one of which is chemical. A nerve impulse passes
along a neuron (nerve cell) by means of a constantly changing elec-
trical charge on the membrane of that cell. When that electrical
impulse reaches the outermost edge of the cell structures known
as axons, it initiates the release of chemicals from the axon into the
space between that neuron (the presynaptic neuron) and some other
adjacent neuron (the postsynaptic neuron), a space known as the
synapse, or synaptic gap. These ‘‘message-carrying’’ chemicals are
known as neurotransmitters. Some examples of neurotransmitters
are acetylcholine, epinephrine (adrenaline), γ-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), dopamine, serotonin, and nitrous oxide. After a neuro-
transmitter has crossed the synaptic gap, it attaches itself to a sec-
tion of the dendrite on a receiving cell. A dendrite is a short
projection in a neuron designed for the acceptance of neurotrans-
mitters from another neuron. The point at which a neurotransmit-
ter docks is called a receptor site. A speciﬁcally designed receptor
site exists for each different type of neurotransmitter. Once a neuro-
transmitter has bonded to a receptor site on a dendrite, it stimulates
the dendrite to initiate an electrical impulse, similar to the one that
traveled through the ﬁrst neuron. That electrical impulse then
passes through the dendrite and into the neuron cell body, repeat-
ing the process of nerve transmission from the presynaptic neuron.
Meanwhile, the neurotransmitter is released from the dendrite,
travels back across the synaptic gap to the presynaptic neuron,
and is available for reuse in transmission of the nerve message.
How Do Drugs Work?
15

Most drugs exert their effects on the CNS by interrupting the
action of neurotransmitters at some point in the process described
above. Stimulants, for example, tend to prevent the reuptake of a
neurotransmitter at the very end of the process. As a result, neu-
rotransmitters tend to accumulate in the synaptic gap and reinsert
themselves into receptor cells on the second neuron which is, as a
result, restimulated over and over again. This repetitious stimula-
tion is responsible for the increased activity observable in the
brain after the ingestion of a stimulant.
Other stimulants have other modes of action. Nicotine, for
example, causes its effects because its structure is somewhat sim-
ilar to that of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Just as acetyl-
choline works by stimulating an acetylcholine receptor in a
dendrite, so nicotine exerts its inﬂuence by stimulating a receptor
similar to that for acetylcholine, called the nicotinic receptor.
Caffeine operates in yet another way on the nervous system.
It exerts its effects by acting as antagonist at a dendrite receptor
site for the neuromodulator adenosine. A neuromodulator is sub-
stance that affects the rate at which nerve messages pass through
the brain. In the case of adenosine, the effect is to slow down this
process. Thus, whenever an adenosine molecule locks onto one of
its receptor sites in a dendrite, no other neurotransmitter can enter
that site, and a nerve message is interrupted. The brain’s reaction
rate slows down as a result of this event. If caffeine is present in
the bloodstream, it may also enter the brain and dock at a receptor
site normally reserved for adenosine molecules. A molecule
that is able to act in a manner similar to some other molecule to
produce a diminished response is said to be an antagonist for the
second molecule. (By contrast, a molecule that acts like another
molecule to produce an augmented response is called an agonist.)
Thus, caffeine is an antagonist for adenosine. The only difference
between the two substances is that caffeine has no effect on the rate
at which nerve messages are transmitted. When it docks at an
adenosine receptor, it prevents an adenosine molecule from dock-
ing there also, preventing a slowdown in the brain’s activity. A per-
son who has had a cup of coffee, then, does not experience the
‘‘slow down’’ responses, such as drowsiness, that might typically
result from the action of adenosine in the brain.
As one might expect, the action of depressants on the nervous
system is quite different from that of stimulants. In most cases,
the neurotransmitter most commonly affected is γ-aminobutyric
acid, generally known as GABA. GABA is a somewhat unusual
16
Background and History

neurotransmitter in that it tends to reduce the rate at which nerve
transmission takes place. (Most neurotransmitters increase brain
activity.) That is, as the ﬂow of GABA from the presynaptic neuron
to the postsynaptic neuron causes changes in the structure of the
latter, that tends to reduce the rate at which nerve transmission con-
tinues. Depressants tend to enhance this effect. For example, mem-
bers of the benzodiazepine family, a group of depressants, are able
to bind to GABA receptor sites on postsynaptic neurons, increasing
the efﬁciency with which those receptors work. Thus, with benzo-
diazepine molecules present in the brain, GABA neurotransmitters
operate more efﬁciently and tend to signiﬁcantly slow down brain
activity, resulting in drowsiness and slower mental activity.
Another process by which depressants work takes advan-
tages of the body’s natural system for dealing with pain. Neurons
contain receptor cells especially adapted to a group of natural opi-
ate neurotransmitters called endorphins, enkephalins, and dynor-
phin. These neurotransmitters are often called endogenous opiates
or endogenous opioids because they are opium-like compounds that
occur naturally within (‘‘endo-’’) the body. By contrast, the class of
drugs generally known simply as ‘‘opiates’’ are more correctly
called exogenous opiates (or exogenous opioids) because they occur
naturally outside of (‘‘exo-’’) the body (as in plants). Endogenous
opiates exert their effect on a receptor in the presynaptic neuron
that controls the release of GABA from that neuron. When an
opiate neurotransmitter docks at this receptor site, it reduces the
release of GABA. Fewer GABA molecules ﬂow through the syn-
aptic gap and stimulate the postsynaptic neuron.
The importance of this change is that the amount of GABA
in a neuron affects the amount of a second neurotransmitter, dop-
amine, also present in the neuron. Speciﬁcally, the more GABA, the
less dopamine (recall that GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter).
Thus, with less GABA present in the postsynaptic neuron, the
greater the amount of dopamine. The signiﬁcance of this change
is that one of the primary effects of dopamine is the production of
feelings of elation and well-being. The effect in an endogenous opi-
ate on the presynaptic neuron, then, is to produce a sense of eupho-
ria. Scientists now believe that this system, beginning with the
release of endogenous opiates from the pituitary gland, has
evolved as a way for the body to deal with pain.
The action of depressants (exogenous opiates) is simply to
enhance this process. If one ingests heroin, for example, there are
simply more opiate molecules in the bloodstream, some of which
How Do Drugs Work?
17

reach the brain. Once in the brain, the heroin molecules act in a
virtually identical fashion to the way endogenous opiates work.
A person who has taken heroin, then, feels the same sense of pleas-
ure and rapture that comes from the action of endogenous opiates.
The above discussion might be taken to mean that scientists
have now essentially solved the puzzle as to how drugs affect
the CNS. Such is not the case. In fact, the mechanism(s) by which
some drugs affect mental and physical behavior is still largely a
mystery. The case of lysergic diethylamide (LSD) is a case in
point. For some time, scientists have known that LSD has a chemi-
cal structure similar to that of the neurotransmitter serotonin.
Serotonin itself is a bit of a puzzle for neuroscientists because
there are so few cells that produce the chemical in the brain (only
a few thousand), but its inﬂuence is widespread, with each seroto-
nergic (serotonin-making) cell activating at least 500,000 other
neurons (Frederickson 2002). The presence of LSD molecules in
the brain almost certainly means that the substance will dock with
serotonin receptor sites, either in the presynaptic or postsynaptic
neuron, exerting either an agonistic or antagonistic effect. Theo-
ries have been developed around all of four these possibilities,
with a number of variations. Thus far, however, no one theory
has been shown to explain the bizarre physical and mental effects
that occur as the result of the ingestion of LSD.
A Survey of Legal and Illegal Drugs
The rest of this chapter is devoted to a review of some of the most
common and most important substances involved in substance
abuse problems. Each section deals, where appropriate, with a
brief history of the use of the drug in the United States, current
and historical patterns of drug consumption, and health effects
associated with each substance. Other considerations, such as
legal, political, social, moral, and other issues for each substance
are discussed in Chapter 2 for the United States, and Chapter 3
for the rest of the world. To provide a perspective on the relative
popularity of some legal and illegal substances, Table 1.2 provides
a general summary of the consumption of these substances within
three contexts: lifetime use (used at least once in a person’s life-
time); past year (used at least once in the year before the survey
was conducted); and past month (used at least once in the month
before the survey was conducted.)
18
Background and History

Tobacco
Tobacco is a product obtained from the leaves of plants belonging
to the genus Nicotiana, the most widely cultivated of which is the
species Nicotiana tabacum. When dried and cured, tobacco leaves
are used to make a variety of products including cigarettes,
cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, and snus, a moist
form of the powder placed under the lip. Tobacco was ﬁrst grown
in the New World, where it was used almost exclusively for reli-
gious ceremonies and other special occasions, such as the signing
of treaties and the celebration of important life events such as
birth and marriages. Tobacco was used for these purposes largely
because of its mild hallucinatory effects. Europeans who arrived
in the New World in the ﬁfteenth century and later were intro-
duced to the product and began using it for purely recreational
purposes. When they returned home, they brought with them sam-
ples of tobacco, which soon became widely popular for chewing,
smoking, and for use as snuff.
Chemically, tobacco is a very complex substance, with at least
4,000 discrete components having been identiﬁed as constituents.
The most important of these components is probably nicotine, a
toxic stimulant that produces the ‘‘high’’ for which tobacco is used
and which also produces the substance dependence that results
A Survey of Legal and Illegal Drugs
19
TABLE 1.2
Consumption of Certain Legal and Illegal Substances by Persons Aged 12 and Older
in 2008 (in thousands)
Substance
Lifetime Use
Past Year Use
Past Month Use
Marijuana and hashish
102,404
25,768
15,203
Cocaine
36,773
5,255
1,855
Heroin
3,788
453
213
Hallucinogens
35,963
3,678
1,060
Inhalants
22,274
2,047
640
Nonmedical use of legal
prescription drugs
51,970
15,166
6,224
Tobacco products
173,927
84,370
70,868
Alcohol
205,404
165,071
128,974
Source: Results from the 2008 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings, Tables 1.1A and 2.1A.
Washington, D.C.: Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, September 2009.

from tobacco use. The health effects of tobacco use were largely
unknown or ignored until the second half of the twentieth century.
At that point, a number of scientiﬁc studies began to show that
tobacco and tobacco smoke contain a number of ingredients with
possible health effects, ranging from respiratory disorders, to dis-
eases of the eyes and nose, to heart problems, to cancer. Table 1.3
lists some of the most important constituents of tobacco smoke,
with the health risks they pose.
Although the health effects of tobacco use were ignored for
most of its history, such is no longer the case. Public health agen-
cies, private groups, and nonproﬁt organizations now work dili-
gently to advertise the harmful effects of tobacco products on the
20
Background and History
TABLE 1.3
Some Constituents of Tobacco Smoke and Their Health Risks
Constituent
Concentration in Smoke1,2
Health Risk to Humans
Acrolein
60–140 μg
Toxin
4-Aminobiphenyl
2–5.6 ng
Carcinogen
Ammonia
10–130 μg
Respiratory irritant
Arsenic
40–120 μg
Carcinogen
Benzene
20–70 μg
Carcinogen
Benzo(a)pyrene
20–40 ng
Carcinogen
Cadmium
7–350 ng
Carcinogen
Carbon monoxide
10–23 mg
Toxin
Chromium (VI)
4–70 ng
Carcinogen
Ethylene oxide
7 μg
Carcinogen
Hydrogen cyanide
400–500 μg
Toxin
Hydrogen sulﬁde
10–90 μg
Respiratory irritant
Maleic hydrazine
1.16 μg
Mutagen
Methanol
100–250 μg
Toxin
2-Naphthylamine
1–334 ng
Carcinogen
Nickel
0–600 ng
Carcinogen
Nicotine
1–3 mg
Toxin
Nitrogen oxides (NOx)
100–600 μg
Respiratory irritant
Polonium-210
0.03–1.0 pCi
Carcinogen
Prussic acid
400–500 μg
Toxin
Pyridine
16–40 μg
Respiratory irritant
Vinyl chloride
11–15 ng
Carcinogen
1As measured by a standard cigarette-smoking machine.
2ng = nanograms; μg = micrograms; mg = milligrams; pCi = picocuries.
Source: Adapted from Knut-Olaf Haustein and David Groneberg, Tobacco or Health?: Physiological and Social
Damages Caused by Tobacco Smoking, 2nd ed. Berlin, New York: Springer, 2009, 35–37, Tables 3.1, 3.2, 3.3.

human body. In its most recent announcements about the health
effects of smoking, the Ofﬁce of Smoking and Health of the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) pointed out that
tobacco use is responsible for an estimated 438,000 deaths in the
United States every year, about one out of every ﬁve deaths in the
nation. That total is greater than the total number of deaths from
human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), illegal drug use, alcohol
use, motor vehicle injuries, suicides, and murders combined
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2009). The CDC report
went on to note that tobacco use is responsible for cancer of a num-
ber of organs, including the bladder, blood (leukemia), oral cavity,
pharynx, larynx, esophagus, cervix, kidney, lung, pancreas, and
stomach. In fact, tobacco use is now implicated in about 90 percent
of all cases of lung cancer in men and 80 percent of all cases of lung
cancer in women in the United States (Center for Disease Control
and Prevention 2009). In addition, many diseases of the respiratory
system are caused by the use of tobacco products, with an esti-
mated 90 percent of all case of chronic obstructive lung diseases
based on the use of tobacco.
In recent years, health authorities have become increasingly
concerned about the effects of tobacco use—especially smoking—
even among those individuals who do not use tobacco. Research
has shown that the smoke emitted by cigarette use can affect indi-
viduals in close proximity to a smoker, and even, in some cases,
those who are at some distance from a smoker. Evidence now sug-
gests that up to 50,000 deaths in the United States annually can be
attributed to secondhand smoke, with an addition 3,400 cases of
lung cancer and 22,700 to 69,600 cases of heart disease attributable
to secondhand smoke. Secondhand smoke, also referred to as envi-
ronmental tobacco smoke (ETS), is a special problem for children,
partly because their immune systems may not be fully developed,
and partly because they may be less able to remove themselves
from locations in which they are exposed to smokers (as when their
parents smoke). According to some estimates, secondhand smoke
may be responsible for as many as 150,000 to 300,000 cases of lower
respiratory tract infections among children in the United States
each year, and between 400,000, and 1,000,000 children with
asthma may have their conditions aggravated by exposure to
secondhand smoke (American Lung Association 2009).
The considerable health risks posed by tobacco use have led
to increased regulation of the product and more aggressive cam-
paigns to discourage smoking and other tobacco use in the United
A Survey of Legal and Illegal Drugs
21

States and other parts of the world, a topic discussed in more
detail in Chapters 2 and 3. The results of these efforts have begun
to bear fruit in the United States, where the percentage of smokers
has continued to drop over the past 40 years from a maximum of
about 42 percent of the general population (52% of men and 34%
of women) in 1965 to less than 21 percent of the general popula-
tion in 2007 (24% of men and 19% of women) (Health, United
States, 2008–2009, 116). The only group for which this trend did
not hold was high school students, among whom the proportion
of smokers rose from 27.5 percent in 1991 (the ﬁrst year for which
data were available) to 36.4 percent in 1997, before falling back to
a recent low of 20.0 percent in 2007, in line with patterns for older
Americans.
Alcohol
The production and use of alcoholic beverages dates to the earliest
periods of human civilization. The ﬁrst evidence of jugs designed
to hold alcoholic beverages dates to about 10,000 BCE, while the ﬁrst
record of the use of wine appears in Egyptian pictographs dating to
about 4,000 BCE (Patrick 1952, 12–13; Lucia 1963, 216). The produc-
tion of alcoholic beverages is generally thought to be one of the ﬁrst
chemical processes discovered by humans, at least partly because
the fermentation of fruit and vegetable matter, a process that results
in the production of alcohol, occurs naturally and commonly. It is
not difﬁcult to imagine early humans discovering that the taste
and effects of fermented plant products was pleasant enough to
prompt them to ﬁnd ways of making such beverages artiﬁcially.
Today, alcoholic beverages of one kind or another are a part
of every human culture of which we know. In some cases, they
are used for religious or ceremonial purposes, but most com-
monly, they are enjoyed solely for recreational purposes. In the
United States, the annual consumption of alcohol per person has
tended to remain at 2.0–2.5 gallons for more than 150 years.
In 1850, for example, the average consumption for all alcoholic
beverages was 2.10 gallons, the largest proportion of which con-
sisted of hard liquor (1.88 gal), with much smaller amounts of
beer (0.14 gal) and wine (0.08 gal). In 2006, average consumption
was 2.27 gallons annually, although the proportions of beverages
had changed, with consumption of beer at 1.19 gallons, wine at
0.37 gallons, and hard liquor at 0.71 gal). Except for a number
of years that include World War II and the years following
22
Background and History

Prohibition, when alcoholic beverage consumption fell signiﬁ-
cantly, Americans’ consumption of beer, wine, and hard liquor
has remained remarkably constant (National Institute on Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism 2009a).
Studies of people who drink alcoholic beverages often divide
subjects into about six categories: abstainers, who have never had
an alcoholic beverage; former drinkers; light drinkers, deﬁned as
having three drinks or less per week; moderate drinkers, deﬁned
as having three to seven drinks a week for women and fewer than
14 drinks per week for men; and heavy drinkers, which includes
women who have more than one drink per day and men who
have more than two drinks per day. Based on these deﬁnitions,
the number of Americans who can be classiﬁed in each category
has changed relatively little over the past decade. The percentage
of lifetime abstainers in the population has remained at about 14 to
17 percent, with an upward trend from 1997 to 2007. The number of
former drinkers has remained at about 14.5 to 15.5 percent, with
essentially no change over time. The number of current drinkers,
at all levels, has also remained about the same, dropping only from
70.5 percent in 1997 to 68.4 percent in 2007. The percentages of light
drinkers (39.8–42.0%), moderate drinkers (21.1–22.4%), and heavy
drinkers (5.1–6.1%) have also remained relatively constant from
1997 to 2007 (National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
2009b).
A form of alcohol consumption that has become of increasing
concern in recent years is so-called binge drinking. The National
Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) deﬁnes
binge drinking as consumption of alcohol that brings a person’s
blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to 0.08 percent or above,
which typically happens when a man consumes ﬁve or more
drinks or a woman consume four or more drinks in about two
hours (‘‘NIAAA Council Approves Deﬁnition of Binge Drinking
2004, 3). Binge drinking has often been associated with younger
drinkers, particularly men and women of college age. And there
is some reason for this focus. The proportion of binge drinkers is
highest in the 18–20 years age group, and 90 percent of the alcohol
consumed by those under the age of 21 is used for binge drinking
(Naimi et al. 2008). Nonetheless, almost three-quarters (70%) of all
binge drinking episodes occur among individuals (men twice as
often as women) over the age of 25.
Binge drinking is of concern not only because of the health
problems associated with all forms of alcohol use, but also because
A Survey of Legal and Illegal Drugs
23

of the additional likelihood of other events associated with the
stupor that accompanies binging. These additional risk factors
include many kinds of accidents, such as falls, drowning, automo-
bile accidents, and burns; intentional injuries, such as attacks
on other individuals, sexual assaults, and suicide attempts; an
increased possibility of sexually transmitted infections; loss of
control over one’s own health problems, such as care for diabetic
symptoms; and unintended pregnancy.
Alcohol consumption has been implicated in a number of
life-threatening diseases and conditions. One study found that it
is the third leading lifestyle-related cause of death in the United
States, after tobacco use and overeating. In 2000, alcohol was
found to be responsible for 85,000 deaths in the United States, or
about 3.5 percent of all mortalities in 2000 (Mokdad, Marks,
Stroup, and Gerberding 2004, 1238). Some of the medical and
psychiatric problems that are associated with alcohol use include
liver disease, pancreatitis, cardiovascular disease, malignant
neoplasms, depression, dysthymia, mania, hypomania, panic
disorder, phobias, generalized anxiety disorder, personality disor-
ders, schizophrenia, suicide, neurologic deﬁcits, brain damage,
hypertension, coronary heart disease, ischemic stroke, and cancers
of the esophagus, respiratory system, digestive system, liver, breast
and ovaries (Cargiulo 2007, S5).
Some researchers have found that moderate consumption of
alcohol may have some health beneﬁts, such as reducing the risk
of coronary disease, dementia, and diabetes (Alcohol Problems
and Solutions 2009). This evidence appears to be strong enough that
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the U.S.
Department of Agriculture included a comment in their 2005
Dietary Guidelines for Americans the statement that ‘‘Alcohol
may have beneﬁcial effects when consumed in moderation’’
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture 2006, 43). Given the very serious health prob-
lems associated with alcohol consumption, however, most
statements like this one are followed by a warning that overcon-
sumption of alcohol can pose a serious risk to human health and,
for some people, even moderate amounts of alcohol can be harmful.
Marijuana
As indicated earlier in this chapter, marijuana and related
substances (such as hashish) have been used in some parts of
24
Background and History

the world for many centuries. The use of the drug in the United
States, however, appears to have been relatively limited until the
1960s. Prior to that time, marijuana was largely the drug of choice
of certain small, specialized groups, such as jazz musicians
(Harrison, Backenheimer, and Inciardi 1995). Surveys conducted
by various agencies of the federal government found that mari-
juana use among the general population was relatively low, with
an estimated 553,000 persons between the ages of 12 and 25 hav-
ing reported that they tried marijuana in 1965 (‘‘Marijuana Use
and Drug Dependence,’’ 2002, [2]). That number changed fairly
dramatically over the next decade, however, largely as the result
of a rebellion by young people against the adult culture, accord-
ing to some observers (Harrison, Backenheimer, and Inciardi
1995). By 1970, the number of ﬁrst-time marijuana users had risen
to about ﬁve times the 1965 rate, peaking at about 1.25 million
college-age individuals. The number continued to rise for high
school-age respondents, however, until it peaked at about
1.75 million new users in 1978 (‘‘Marijuana Use and Drug Depen-
dence,’’ 2002, [2]). The number of new users for both age groups
continued to decline after these peak years before increasing once
again between 1990 and 2000. Another decline occurred during
the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century until the number of
ﬁrst-time users of marijuana between the ages of 12 and 25
reached just over four million (1.1 million ages 12 through 17 and
2.9 million ages 18 through 25) in 2007, the last year for which data
are available (government agencies have changed from reporting
raw numbers to percentages of ﬁrst-time users; these numbers are
estimated from Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration 2009b, Table B5, and U.S. Census Bureau 2009).
One of the most controversial issues in the ﬁeld of substance
abuse concerns the health effects of consuming marijuana. Even
though literally thousands of studies on the topic have been con-
ducted, experts still disagree as to the precise effects that result
from consuming marijuana and the severity of these effects. In its
own review of the research, the National Institute of Drug Abuse
has listed the following acute and chronic effects of marijuana
ingestion:
•
impairment of short-term memory;
•
impairment of attention, judgment, and other cognitive
functions;
•
loss of coordination and balance;
A Survey of Legal and Illegal Drugs
25

•
increase in heart rate;
•
reduction and memory and learning skills in a medium
time range;
•
increased risk of cough, bronchitis, emphysema, and
cancer of the head, neck, and lungs;
•
increased risk of addiction (National Institute of Drug
Abuse 2009).
In addition to the risks of ingesting marijuana, there may be
some health beneﬁts to the practice. Thus far, research seems to
suggest that these beneﬁts derive from ingesting by mouth (as a
pill) the primary constituent of marijuana, a chemical called
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC). In fact, the FDA has
approved the use of a product called Marinol® (dronabinol) for
two speciﬁc purposes only: treatment of nausea for cancer chemo-
therapy patients and as an appetite stimulant for persons with
AIDS suffering from wasting. The FDA has not approved any
medical use of marijuana that involves smoking the product.
Cocaine
Cocaine is obtained from various plants belonging to the genus
Erythroxylum, most commonly the coca plant E. coca. Residents
of the South American Andes Mountains have used the leaves of
the coca plant for religious, recreational, and medical reasons for
many hundreds (or thousands) of years. In Bolivia and Peru, for
example, people chew coca leaves as a way of dealing with the
lassitude that results from living in very thin air at altitudes of
3,000 meters or more.
Once the plant was introduced to Europe by early Spanish
conquerors, it became widely popular for medical applications
and as a recreational drink. One preparation was a coca-infused
wine, Vin Mariani, which apparently was a favorite of Pope Leo
XIII (Vintage Wine 2009). Coca products were also imported to
the United States, where they appeared in any number of prepa-
rations, ranging from toothache remedies to a popular soft drink
(Coca-Cola) to pills, liquids, and even an injectable solution from
the drug ﬁrm of Parke-Davis (Parke-Davis Cocaine Injection Kit
2009; Sure Cure Antiques 2009).
By 1900, evidence of the health consequences of cocaine use
had become widely known, and legal prohibitions on the drug’s
use were being instituted. Illegal cocaine was still readily available,
26
Background and History

however, usually in the form of the salt cocaine hydrochloride, in
the form of a white powder which users inhaled or dissolved in
water and injected. Reports of serious damage to the nasal passages
as a result of cocaine ‘‘snorting’’ appeared as early as 1910,
although these studies appear not to have much effect on the use
of the drug for recreational purposes (Erowid 2009).
Until the 1970s, powder cocaine was the drug of choice among
many substance abusers, especially among well-to-do individuals.
Its cost was usually too high for low- or moderate-income persons,
accounting for its common name ‘‘the champagne of drugs’’
(Gahlinger 2004, 242). In the mid-1970s, a new form of cocaine
became available, so-called freebase cocaine. The name comes from
the method by which the product is made: cocaine hydrochloride is
treated with a base, such as sodium bicarbonate, which neutralizes
the acidic cocaine hydrochloride, leaving behind free cocaine. The
cocaine is extracted from the reaction mixture with ether, which is
then allowed to evaporate, leaving behind pure cocaine crystals,
which can then be smoked. (The one serious risk here is smoking
crystals that still contain some ether, resulting in a ﬁre when the
product is lighted.) Freebase cocaine rapidly became very popular
because it was generally purer than powder cocaine and, as a result
of being smoked, reached the brain more rapidly.
About a decade after the discovery of freebasing, yet another
form of cocaine was developed: crack cocaine. The process for
making crack cocaine is essentially the same as that for making
freebase cocaine. Powder cocaine is neutralized with sodium
bicarbonate, sodium hydroxide, or another base and heated.
When the excess water in the mixture has evaporated, pure
cocaine and additional by-products remain in the form of a rock-
like crystalline substance. The substance gets its name of ‘‘crack’’
from the sound it makes during the chemical reaction by which
it is formed. Because it is much safer and cheaper to make than
freebase cocaine, crack cocaine soon became very popular among
low- and middle-income individuals, resulting in an epidemic
that peaked between 1984 and 1990 in the United States.
Determining the prevalence (the number of users) of crack
cocaine in the United States is difﬁcult because so many individ-
uals who fall into this category are likely to be missed by traditional
survey methods. Instead, some researchers have developed a crack
index, which estimates the number of crack users based on secon-
dary data, such as the number of emergency room visits, number
of arrests, and number of newspaper citations (Fryer, Heaton,
A Survey of Legal and Illegal Drugs
27

Levitt, and Murphy 2005, 2). This index shows a remarkable surge
in the apparent use of crack cocaine during the second half of the
1980s, when the crack index rose from essentially 0 in 1984 to
almost 1.5 in 1987 to 3.0 in 1989. The index then leveled off at
between 2.5 and 3.0 until 1995, when it gradually began to decline
(Fryer, Heaton, Levitt, and Murphy 2005, 44, Figure 4). In its most
recent report on the prevalence of crack cocaine, the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration reported that
73 percent of all emergency room admissions for cocaine-related
problems were caused by smoking (i.e., crack), 22 percent by inha-
lation (i.e., powder), and 5 percent by some other means of
administration. During the period of study (1995 through 2005),
the number of smoking admissions decreased slightly, from 79 per-
cent to 73 percent, while the number due to inhalation increased
slightly, from 14 percent to 22 percent (Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration 2009a, 2, Figure 1).
Users of cocaine do so because of the heightened feelings
of sensation they experience, which may be described as an
increased sense of energy and alertness, a feeling of supremacy,
an elevated mood, and a sensation of euphoria. These feelings
may not be entirely positive, as they can be accompanied by more
unpleasant reactions, such as a sense of anxiety or irritability or a
sensation of paranoia. As with any drug, however, these short-
term feelings are balanced by longer-term physiological and
psychological effects such as an increase in heart rate, that may lead
to cardiovascular problems; irritation of the upper respiratory tract
and lungs among those who inhale the drug; constriction of blood
vessels in the brain, which may lead to seizures or stroke; disrup-
tion of the gastrointestinal system, which can results in perforation
of the inner walls of the stomach and intestines; kidney damage
that can be serious enough to lead to kidney failure; and impair-
ment of sexual function among both men and women.
Amphetamines
Amphetamine was ﬁrst synthesized in 1887 by the Romanian
chemist Laza˘r Edeleanu while conducting research on ephedrine,
one of the oldest psychoactive stimulants known to humans.
Edeleanu’s discovery was largely ignored for four decades before
British chemist Gordon Alles, working at the time at the University
of California at Los Angeles (UCLA), repeated Edeleanu’s work
and decided to explore the effects of amphetamine on humans
28
Background and History

(using himself as a subject). Alles found that amphetamine worked
as a stimulant, much as does ephedrine, but even more effectively.
He decided to continue and expand his research, eventually syn-
thesizing and studying the effects of two amphetamine analogs,
3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA) and 3,4-methylenedioxy-
methamphetamine (MDMA). Alles soon realized the potential
medical beneﬁts of amphetamine and its analogs and sold the pro-
cess for making the drugs to the pharmaceutical company of Smith,
Kline, and French, who ﬁrst marketed amphetamine for the control
of high blood pressure and the symptoms of asthma under the
commercial name of Benzedrine in 1932.
The potential use of the amphetamines for recreational use did
not escape the attention of many individuals, and the drugs soon
became widely popular for this purpose in the mid-twentieth cen-
tury (Rasmussen 2008). Even national governments realized their
potential beneﬁts as stimulants during World War II, when the
armed forces of both Allied and Axis nations distributed amphet-
amines in large quantities to improve the endurance and aggres-
sion of their troops (Borin 2003). One problem was that the end of
the war did not mean a loss of interest in amphetamines by former
members of the armed services, and amphetamine abuse became a
major public health problem in the late 1940s and 1950s. Eventually,
the U.S. government attempted to solve the problem by banning
the over-the-counter sale of amphetamine products in 1953.
Although these efforts at controlling the production and use
of amphetamines was moderately successful at ﬁrst, it was only
the beginning of a long war between users of the drugs and drug
enforcement agencies, a history that will be told in more detail in
Chapter 2 of this book. Sufﬁce to say that the abuse of metham-
phetamine and its analogs still poses one of the most serious
problems of substance abuse in the United States and some other
parts of the world. A recent study by the National Association of
Counties, for example, found that 87 percent of 500 law enforce-
ment agencies conducted for the study reported an increase in
arrests for methamphetamine-related crimes over the preceding
three years. Those agencies also reported that methamphetamines
are by far the most serious drug problem in their counties, with
58 percent listing them as their number one priority, compared
to 19 percent for cocaine, 17 percent for marijuana, and 3 percent
for heroin (The Meth Epidemic in America, 2005, 2).
The immediate results of taking amphetamines result from
stimulation of the central nervous system and include increased
A Survey of Legal and Illegal Drugs
29

heart rate and blood pressure, a sense of euphoria, increased
wakefulness and need for physical activity, increased respiration,
and decreased appetite. An excessive dose of an amphetamine
can lead to irregular heartbeat, respiratory problems, cardiovas-
cular collapse, and death. Some long-term effects of amphetamine
use are related to these short-term effects, as overstimulation of
the body may result in more serious respiratory and cardiac prob-
lems. It may also result in the onset of psychotic episodes that
may include anxiety, confusion, insomnia, mood disturbances,
violent behavior, feelings of paranoia, visual and auditory halluci-
nations, and delusions.
Other Drugs and Their Effects
The preceding review covers only a few of the most important
substances abused by individuals today. Table 1.4 provides a brief
summary of some other substances of abuse, their classiﬁcation,
and their long-term health effects.
30
Background and History
TABLE 1.4
Some Substances of Abuse and Their Health Effects
Substance
Type of Drug
Long-Term Health Effects
Barbiturates
Derivatives of barituric acid; depressants
Chronic tiredness, loss of coordination, vision
problems, dizziness, slowed reﬂexes, sexual
dysfunction, menstrual irregularities, breathing
disorders
LSD
Derivative of the ergot fungus (Claviceps
genus); synthetic compound primary
form of consumption
Depression, HPPD1, anxiety, panic attacks,
depression, disorientation; no conﬁrmed physical
effects
Mescaline
Obtained from the peyote cactus,
Lophophora williamsii; hallucinogen
Psychological dependence, depression, anxiety,
HPPD1, schizophrenic and paranoid episodes,
depression, panic attacks, miscarriage, birth
defects, liver damage (from ingestion of the
wrong cactus)
Opiates
Narcotic alkaloids found in the opium
plant (Papaver somniferum) and their
synthetic analogs; analgesics and
sedatives
Minor health effects from pure drugs; health effects
from ancillary factors, such as the use of needles
(clean or dirty) for injection; presence of
impurities in drugs; substance dependence
PCP
Synthetic compound; dissociative
anesthetic
Severe psychotic episodes that may develop after
a single use and persist for days, weeks, months,
or years
1HPPD is Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder; continual presence of visual disturbances reminiscent of
those experienced during an earlier ingestion of hallucinogenic substances; also known as ﬂashbacks.

References
Alcohol Problems and Solutions (2009). ‘‘Alcohol and Health.’’ http://
www2.potsdam.edu/hansondj/alcoholandhealth.html. Accessed on
September 19, 2009.
American Lung Association (2009). ‘‘Secondhand Smoke Fact Sheet.’’
http://www.lungusa.org/site/pp.asp?c=dvLUK9O0E&b=35422. Accessed
on September 19, 2009.
Beeching, Jack (1975). The Chinese Opium Wars. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
BLTC Research (2009). ‘‘A Brief History of Opium.’’ http://www.opioids
.com/timeline/. Accessed on September 15, 2009.
BLTC Research (2009). Photograph, ‘‘Parke-Davis Cocaine Injection Kit.’’
http://cocaine.org/parkedavis-works.htm. Accessed on September 21,
2009.
BLTC Research (2009). ‘‘Vintage Wine.’’ http://cocaine.org/cocawine.htm.
Accessed on September 21, 2009.
Booth, Martin (2003). Cannabis: A History. New York: Thomas Dunne
Books/St. Martin’s Press.
Borin, Elliott (2003). ‘‘The U.S. Military Needs its Speed.’’ http://
www.wired.com/medtech/health/news/2003/02/57434. Accessed on
September 22, 2009.
Cargiulo, Thomas (2007). ‘‘Understanding the Health Impact of Alcohol
Dependence.’’ American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy 64 (1, March):
S5–S11.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2009). Health, United States,
2008. Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2009). ‘‘Smoking and
Tobacco Use.’’ http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/
health_effects/effects_cig_smoking/. Accessed on September 19, 2009.
Chrastina, Paul (2009). ‘‘Emperor of China Declares War on Drugs.’’ http://
opioids.com/opium/opiumwar.html. Accessed on September 16,
2009.
Clarkson, Janet, and Thomas Gloning (2003). ‘‘The Women’s Petition
Against Coffee (1674).’’ http://www.uni-giessen.de/gloning/tx/wom-pet
.htm. Accessed on September 16, 2009.
Erowid (2009). ‘‘Cocaine Timeline.’’ http://www.erowid.org/chemicals/
cocaine/cocaine_timeline.php#Note2. Accessed on September 21, 2009.
First, Michael B., Allen Frances, and Harold Alan Pincus (2004). DSM-IV-
TR Guidebook. Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association.
References
31

Frederickson, Anne (2002). ‘‘Mechanisms of LSD: a Glimpse into the
Serotonergic System.’’ http://serendip.brynmawr.edu/bb/neuro/neuro98/
202s98-paper3/Frederickson3.html. Accessed on September 17, 2009.
Fryer, Roland, Paul S. Heaton, Steven D. Levitt, and Kevin M. Murphy
(2005). ‘‘The Impact of Crack Cocaine.’’ NBER Working Paper No. W11318.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=720405. Also available in preliminary form at
http://www.internationalpolicy.umich.edu/edts/pdfs/NBER%20SI
%20crack%20paper.pdf. Accessed on September 21, 2009.
Gahlinger, Paul (2004) Illegal Drugs: A Complete Guide to Their History,
Chemistry, Use and Abuse. New York: Plume.
Grierson, James (2009). ‘‘The History of Coffee.’’ http://www.mrbreakfast
.com/article.asp?articleid=26. Accessed on September 16, 2009.
Harrison, Lana D., Michael Backenheimer, and James A. Inciardi (1995).
‘‘Cannabis Use in the United States: Implications for Policy.’’ In Peter
Cohen and Arjan Sas, eds. Cannabisbeleid in Duitsland, Frankrijk en de
Verenigde Staten. Amsterdam: Centrum voor Drugsonderzoek,
Universiteit van Amsterdam, 81–197. Available in English at http://
www.cedro-uva.org/lib/harrison.cannabis.01.html#prev.
Iversen, Leslie L. (2000). The Science of Marijuana. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Kritikos, P. G., and S. P. Papadaki (1967). ‘‘The History of the Poppy
and of Opium and Their Expansion in Antiquity in the Eastern
Mediterranean Area.’’ Bulletin on Narcotics 19 (3): 17–38 and 19(4):
5–10.
Lietava, Jan (1992). ‘‘Medicinal Plants in a Middle Paleolithic Grave.’’
Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 35(3; January): 263–266.
Lucia, Salvatore P. (1963). A History of Wine as Therapy. Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott.
Lumholtz, Carl (1902). Unknown Mexico. 2 vols. New York: Charles
Scribner & Sons.
Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary (2009). http://www.merriam
-webster.com/dictionary/drug. Accessed on September 16, 2009.
Mokdad, Ali H., James S. Marks, Donna F. Stroup, and Julie L.
Gerberding (2004). ‘‘Actual Causes of Death in the United States, 2000.’’
Journal of the American Medical Association 291 (10, March 10): 1238–1245.
Naimi, Timothy S., et al. (2003). ‘‘Binge Drinking among US Adults.’’
JAMA 289 (13, April 2): 70–75.
National Association of Counties (2005). The Meth Epidemic in America.
Washington, D.C.: National Association of Counties.
32
Background and History

National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (2002). ‘‘Marijuana Use and
Drug Dependence.’’ NHSDA Report.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (2009a). ‘‘Apparent
per Capita Ethanol Consumption for the United States, 1850–2006.’’
http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/Resources/DatabaseResources/QuickFacts/
AlcoholSales/consum01.htm. Accessed on September 18, 2009.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (2004). ‘‘NIAAA
Council Approves Deﬁnition of Binge Drinking.’’ NIAAA Newsletter No. 3.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (2009b). ‘‘Percent
Distribution of Current Drinking Status, Drinking Levels, and Heavy
Drinking Days by Sex for Persons 18 Years of Age
and Older.’’ http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/Resources/DatabaseResources/
QuickFacts/AlcoholConsumption/dkpat25.htm. Accessed on
September 18, 2009.
National Institute on Drug Abuse (2009). ‘‘Research Report Series—
Marijuana Abuse.’’ http://www.nida.nih.gov/researchreports/
marijuana/Marijuana3.html. Accessed on September 21, 2009.
Patrick, Charles H. (1952). Alcohol, Culture, and Society. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.
Peterson, Robert C. (1977). ‘‘History of Cocaine.’’ In Robert C. Peterson
and Richard C. Stillman, Cocaine: 1977. NIDA Research Monograph #13.
Rockville, MD: Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
Rasmussen, Nicolas. 2008. ‘‘America’s First Amphetamine Epidemic 1929–
1971: A Quantitative and Qualitative Retrospective With Implications for
the Present.’’ American Journal of Public Health 98 (6, June): 974–985.
Society for the Conﬂuence of Festivals in India (2009). ‘‘Tradition of
Bhang.’’ http://www.holifestival.org/tradition-of-bhang.html. Accessed
on September 15, 2009.
Spinella, Marcello (2001). The Psychopharmacology of Herbal Medicine: Plant
Drugs That Alter Mind, Brain, and Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (2009a).
Cocaine Route of Administration Trends: 1995–2005. Drug and Alcohol
Information Services. http://www.oas.samhsa.gov/2k7/crackTX/
crackTX.pdf. Accessed on September 21, 2009.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (2009b).
Results from the 2008 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National
Findings. Rockville, MD: Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, NSDUH Series H-36,
HHS Publication No. SMA 09–4434.
Sure Cure Antiques (2009). Photograph, ‘‘Lloyd’s COCA COCAINE for
Insanity, Hysteria & Migraine.’’ http://www.surecureantiques.com/
catalog30.html. Accessed on September 21, 2009.
References
33

Svensk, Hallock (2009). ‘‘Bonny Clabber, Convivial Solitude, and the
Rationalization of the Public Sphere.’’ Universal Journal: The Association of
Young Journalists and Writers. http://ayjw.org/articles.php?id=582284.
Accessed on September 16, 2009.
U.S. Census Bureau (2009). ‘‘2007 Population Estimates.’’ http://
factﬁnder.census.gov/servlet/QTTable?_bm=y&geo_id=01000US
&qr_name=PEP_2007_EST_DP1&ds_name=PEP_2007_EST&_lang=en
&_caller=geoselect&state=qt&format=. Accessed on September 18, 2009.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of
Agriculture (2006). 2005 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
34
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
Introduction
We believe that the possession offense [for marijuana] is
of little functional beneﬁt to the discouragement policy
and carries heavy social costs, not the least of which is
disrespect and cynicism among some of the young.
Accordingly, even under our policy of discouraging
marihuana use, the better method is persuasion rather
than prosecution. Additionally, with the sale and use of
more hazardous drugs on the increase, and crimes of
violence escalating, we do not believe that the criminal
justice system can afford the time and the costs of imple-
menting the marihuana possession laws. Since these
laws are not mandatory in terms of achieving the dis-
couragement policy, law enforcement should be allowed
to do the job it is best able to do: handling supply and
distribution (National Commission on Marihuana and
Drug Abuse 1971).
As noted in Chapter 1, the use of psychoactive substances has
been the subject of considerable dispute for much of human his-
tory in many parts of the world. These disputes are not based on
the question as to whether or not individuals should use alcohol,
tobacco, marijuana, cocaine, heroin, and other psychoactive sub-
stances to the point where they become addicted or where their
35

physical and/or mental health begins to deteriorate signiﬁcantly.
Almost no one would dispute that these consequences of sub-
stance use are undesirable, and they should be prevented or
treated. In the vast majority of instances, the real debate over the
use and abuse of psychoactive substances concerns the extent to
which they should be legal, if at all. The paragraph with which
this chapter opens, for example, comes from a report issued to
President Richard M. Nixon in 1971 on the legal status of mari-
juana. Marijuana had been illegal or closely taxed for almost half
a century before this report was issued. Continued aggressive
action against drugs such as marijuana, cocaine, and heroin was a
key element in President Nixon’s domestic program. But the com-
mittee reporting to him, the National Commission on Marihuana
and Drug Abuse, suggested a new approach to the problem of
marijuana use in the United States: decriminalization for posses-
sion of small amounts of the drug, and a more vigorous program
of prevention to reduce its use. Nixon rejected this and other rec-
ommendations made by the committee. As a Schedule 1 drug,
marijuana use continues to be illegal today.
This chapter reviews the ongoing debate about the legal sta-
tus of alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and other substances abused
by some individuals. First, however, the chapter reviews a discus-
sion of the alternatives posed by the National Commission on
Marihuana and Drug Abuse, and by many other expert commit-
tees and commissions, professionals in the ﬁeld of substance
abuse, and interested citizens and organizations: the role of pre-
vention and treatment in reducing substance abuse.
Substance Abuse Prevention
No matter how one feels about the legality of alcohol, tobacco,
marijuana, and other drugs as substances available for use by
the general public, nearly everyone agrees that efforts should be
made to prevent people from using these products to a point
where their lives are disrupted and to provide treatment for
such individuals for the worst effects of substance abuse and
addiction. Individuals and agencies at every level—from the
federal government to state government to local government to
small groups and individuals—have been and are involved in
programs of drug prevention. Some groups focus on one part of
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the problem of substance abuse, targeting alcohol, tobacco, or
other drugs for their efforts, while others think that drug preven-
tion programs must include some reference to all substances
of abuse.
Literally hundreds of drug abuse prevention programs (also
called simply drug education programs) are in existence in the
United States today. No brief summary can do justice to the vari-
ety of goals, activities, and accomplishments of these programs,
but many subscribe to a few general principles. One of the best
statements of those principles can be found in a 2003 publication
of the National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA), Preventing Drug
Use among Children and Adolescents: A Research-Based Guide for
Parents, Educators, and Community Leaders (Robertson, David, and
Rao 2003). The authors of that report list 16 general principles that
should guide prevention programs, such as:
•
Prevention programs should enhance protective factors
or reduce risk factors;
•
Prevention programs should address all forms of sub-
stance abuse, including alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs;
•
Prevention programs should be designed to address spe-
ciﬁc characteristics of the target population, such as age,
sex, and ethnicity;
•
Family-based programs should focus on strengthening
family ties, including classes in parenting where
necessary;
•
Prevention programs are appropriate at every age level,
from preschool to adult, and must be tailored to meet the
needs of each speciﬁc group;
•
Programs that involve more than one type of group, such
as family and a community organization, tend to be more
effective than those that focus on a single type of group;
•
Prevention programs should make use of the best infor-
mation available from research on substance abuse and its
prevention; and
•
Programs should have a long-term focus, with repetition
of key concepts constituting the program (adapted from
Robertson, David, and Rao 2003, 2–5).
One of the lead federal agencies dealing with drug preven-
tion education is the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
Substance Abuse Prevention
37

(CSAP) of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA). The mission of CSAP is to work with
local communities to develop programs of substance abuse pre-
vention that are appropriate for that community and its speciﬁc
problems in this area. CSAP uses a ﬁve-step approach in achiev-
ing this mission, beginning with an assessment of the speciﬁc sub-
stance abuse issues faced by a community, an analysis of the
resources available within that community to develop a program
of prevention, planning and development of such a program,
implementation of the program, and an evaluation of its successes
and failures (SAMHSA’s Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
2009).
A number of for-proﬁt and non-proﬁt organizations have
also been established to assist schools and communities in the
development and implementation of substance abuse prevention
programs. Perhaps one of the best known of these organizations is
D.A.R.E., the Drug Abuse Resistance Education. D.A.R.E. was
established in 1983 by Los Angeles police chief Darryl Gates and
one of his deputy chiefs, Glenn Levant, as a way of trying to deal
with the problem of substance abuse, especially among teenagers,
in Los Angeles. D.A.R.E.’s drug prevention program consists of a
series of classes run by police ofﬁcers who have had at least
80 hours of training in drug prevention programs. The organiza-
tion claims to have a presence in 75 percent of all American school
districts and in 43 foreign countries (‘‘About D.A.R.E’’ 2009).
An important question about D.A.R.E.—and all other drug
prevention programs—is how effective they are. Does participa-
tion in a D.A.R.E. class, or any other drug prevention program,
actually reduce the likelihood that individuals will become
involved in substance abuse? A number of studies have been con-
ducted to answer this question. One of the best known of these
studies was prepared by the Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General of the
United States in 2000. Among its many objectives, that report
attempted to identify substance abuse programs that were and
were not effective. It classiﬁed a number of programs as ‘‘model
programs,’’ because there was sound scientiﬁc evidence that the
programs signiﬁcantly reduced the likelihood that participants
would become involved in substance abuse; as ‘‘promising,’’
because they showed evidence of achieving this goal; and as
‘‘does not work,’’ because available evidence did not support the
goal of reducing substance abuse and, in some cases, actually
increased the likelihood that participants would become involved
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

in substance abuse (Youth Violence: A Report of the Surgeon General
2001, 102–109). Table 2.1 below shows some of the programs that
fell into each of the three categories.
It is interesting that D.A.R.E. is one of only two programs
classiﬁed as Does Not Work in the report (the other being a pro-
gram called ‘‘Scared Straight’’). Authors of the report acknowl-
edged the widespread popularity of D.A.R.E., but explained that
Substance Abuse Prevention
39
TABLE 2.1
Effectiveness of Selected Drug Prevention Programs
Category
Program
Model
Violence Prevention
Seattle Social Development Project
Prenatal and Infancy Home Visitation by Nurses
Functional Family Therapy
Multisystemic Therapy
Multidimensional Treatment Foster Care
Risk Prevention
Life Skills Training
The Midwestern Prevention Project
Promising
Violence Prevention
School Transitional Environmental Program
Montreal Longitudinal Study/Preventive Treatment Program
Syracuse Family Development Research Program
Perry Preschool Program
Striving Together to Achieve Rewarding Tomorrows
Intensive Protective Supervision Project
Risk Prevention
Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies
I Can Problem-Solve
Iowa Strengthening Families Program
Preparing for the Drug-Free Years
Linking the Interests of Families and Teachers
Bullying Prevention Program
Good Behavior Game
Parent-Child Development Center Programs
Parent-Child Interaction Training
Yale Child Welfare Project
Families and Schools Together
The Incredible Years Series
Preventive Intervention
The Quantum Opportunities Program
Does Not Work
Drug Abuse Resistance Education
Scared Straight
Source: Youth Violence: A Report of the Surgeon General. Washington, D.C.: Department of Health and Human
Services. U.S. Public Health Service, 2001: 109, Box 5–2.

it was classiﬁed as Does Not Work because ‘‘numerous well-
designed evaluations and meta-analyses . . . consistently show little
or no deterrent effects on substance use. Overall, evidence on the
effects of the traditional DARE curriculum, . . . shows that children
who participate are as likely to use drugs as those who do not par-
ticipate (Youth Violence: A Report of the Surgeon General 2001, 110).’’
Substance Abuse Treatment
Patterns of substance abuse among Americans are closely moni-
tored by a number of federal agencies, probably the most important
of which is the Ofﬁce of Applied Studies (OAS) of the Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) of
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. In its most
recent survey, OAS found that an estimated 23.2 million individ-
uals over the age of 12 needed treatment for some type of substance
abuse in 2007, a number largely unchanged from previous years.
However, only 10.4 percent of those who might have beneﬁtted
from treatment (2.4 million individuals) actually received the care
they needed at a specialty facility, such as a hospital, drug or alco-
hol rehabilitation center, or mental health center (‘‘Treatment
Approaches for Drug Addiction’’ 2009, 1).
As is the case with substance abuse prevention programs, a
number of organizations and agencies have developed principles
upon which programs of substance abuse treatment should be
based. The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) has pro-
vided one such set of guidelines in one of the newsletters in its
NIDA InfoFacts newsletters. Among the general principles the
NIDA suggests are the following:
•
No single treatment is appropriate for everyone.
•
Effective treatment attends to multiple needs of the indi-
vidual, not just his or her drug abuse.
•
Remaining in treatment for an adequate period of time is
critical.
•
Counseling—individual and/or group—and other
behavioral therapies are the most commonly used forms
of drug abuse treatment.
•
Medications are an important element of treatment for
many patients, especially when combined with counseling
and other behavioral therapies.
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

•
An individual’s treatment and services plan must be
assessed continually and modiﬁed as necessary to ensure
that it meets his or her changing needs.
•
Many drug-addicted individuals also have other mental
disorders.
•
Medically assisted detoxiﬁcation is only the ﬁrst stage of
addiction treatment and by itself does little to change
long-term drug abuse.
•
Treatment does not need to be voluntary to be effective
(quoted from ‘‘Treatment Approaches for Drug Addic-
tion’’ 2009, 2).
As these guidelines suggest, treatment for substance abuse
and addiction usually make use of two approaches: medication
and behavioral therapies. Medications are sometimes the ﬁrst
line of attack for individuals who have actually become addicted
to a substance. Such is most often the case with opiate addic-
tions, in which case four medications are generally available
for use: methadone, levo-acetyl methadol (LAAM), naltrexone,
and buprenorphine. For some substances, such as cocaine and
marijuana, no medications are available for assisting a person
with withdrawal and treatment of a dependence or addiction.
After a person has gone through the worst stage of recovery—
withdrawal from use of a substance—then personal and group
counseling are often helpful in weaning him or her entirely from
the substance.
One might reasonably ask which types of treatment work
best for each type of substance abuse and addiction for which
individuals and under what circumstances. In fact, researchers
have conducted many studies on just such issues. Because of the
many variables involved, it is not possible to make simple assess-
ments as to any one part of this complex equation. There is, how-
ever, an abundance of information about speciﬁc types of
treatment for speciﬁc situations. One of the best resources for that
information is a Web site operated jointly by the National Institute
on Drug Abuse; the National Development and Research Insti-
tutes, Inc.; the University of California at Los Angeles Integrated
Substance Abuse Program; and the Texas Institute of Behavioral
Research at Texas Christian University. The Web site is called Drug
Abuse Treatment Outcome Studies (DATOS). Readers interested
in learning more about the effectiveness of various types of treat-
ments for individuals of various ages dealing with speciﬁc types
Substance Abuse Treatment
41

of substance abuse under speciﬁc types of conditions should refer
to this Web site at http://www.datos.org/.
Drug Testing
As noted at the beginning of this chapter, the abuse of psychoactive
substances, such as alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and other drugs
has been a matter of concern in the United States for at least a cen-
tury. Individuals, private organizations, and government agencies
have searched for ways of dealing with this problem, with preven-
tion and treatment programs being viewed as two possible solu-
tions. A number of other ways of dealing with substance abuse
have also been developed. One of these methods is drug testing.
The 1960s and 1970s saw a dramatic increase in substance
abuse in the United States. In some cases, as discussed for the use
of marijuana in Chapter 1 of this book, that increase may have rep-
resented a general rejection of moral standards by some younger
members of society. But increased substance abuse was also
directly linked to the Vietnam conﬂict of the early 1960s to 1975.
Many men and women who served in Vietnam sought relief from
the horrible conditions they faced there by turning to alcohol and
other drugs. By the end of the war, very large numbers of personnel
had either used drugs from time to time or had become addicted to
them (see, for the most comprehensive study on this issue, Robins
1973). To track the severity of this problem, the Department of
Defense ordered that returning veterans be randomly tested for
drug use before being discharged from the service (‘‘A Timeline
of Drug Testing in the United States,’’ 2009).
Drug Testing in the Workplace
For a variety of reasons, President Richard M. Nixon soon over-
turned the Pentagon’s drug testing plan. But the idea of identify-
ing substance abusers in the society as a whole, but especially in
the workplace, had already begun to set in. Many studies have
been done on the prevalence of drug testing in the workplace over
the past three decades, but most seem to suggest that businesses
began to see value in screening job applicants (and, less com-
monly, current employees) for illegal drug use as early as the
1970s. During the 1980s, however, the number of businesses that
had adopted such programs increased dramatically, from about
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

20 percent at the beginning of the decade to more than twice that
number at the end of the decade (Hartwell, Steele, and Rodman
1996, 35). The longest continuous series of studies on drug testing
in the workplace is one conducted by the American Management
Association (AMA), which has collected data on the topic for
more than two decades. AMA surveys show that the percentage
of businesses contacted that require preemployment drug testing
rose to a peak of 81 percent in 1996. It then began to fall off fairly
rapidly until it reached a new low of 62.6 percent in 2004, the last
year for which data are available (American Management Associ-
ation 2001; American Management Association 2004). Through-
out this period, the number of companies that tested current
employees in addition to new hires was consistently much less,
usually by a factor of one-half, than those who screened for pre-
employment purposes.
Proponents of drug testing in the workplace offer a number of
arguments in support of their position. First, they point out that
workers who are under the inﬂuence of illegal substances are more
likely to have or cause accidents in the workplace, causing injuries
and deaths to coworkers, innocent bystanders, and themselves,
and costing the company signiﬁcant amounts of money in property
loss. A number of studies appear to conﬁrm this position. For
example:
•
About 40 percent of deaths in the workplace and 47 percent
of the injuries have been correlated with alcohol use or
alcoholism.
•
Anywhere from 38 to 50 percent of all workplace accidents
involve substance abuse involving alcohol or drugs.
•
A 1998 study found that 19 percent of the individuals
killed in workplace accidents had alcohol and/or drugs
in their bloodstream during a postmortem examination.
•
Companies that have adopted drug testing programs
have experienced a decrease of more than half (51%) in
the number of workplace-related accidents within a two-
year period of instituting the program.
•
Companies that have instituted drug testing programs
have also experienced a decline in workmen’s compen-
sation rates of more than 10 percent (Judge 2007, 14).
Proponents of workplace drug testing also pose a number of
other arguments in favor of the practice. For example, they point
Drug Testing
43

to data that suggest that workers who are drug-free tend to be
more productive at their jobs. They also suggest also that the use
of illegal substances in the workplace may affect general morale
and reduce the ability of coworkers to do their own jobs efﬁ-
ciently. Finally, they believe that testing programs may be an
important factor in helping to reduce the problem of substance
abuse overall, since workers will have to reduce or discontinue
use of illegal substances if they are to be hired for or retain a job
(Newton 1999, 31–38).
Opponents of drug testing have their own counterargu-
ments. They point out, in the ﬁrst place, that drug testing can be
a signiﬁcant intrusion on a person’s privacy, which is protected
in the United States by the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Consti-
tution’s ban on ‘‘unreasonable searches and seizures.’’ Since the
vast majority of drug tests are conducted randomly and are not
based on some illegal or improper act on the part of the testee,
they would appear to violate this constitutional protection.
Second, opponents note that drug tests tend to be notoriously unre-
liable with high percentages of false positives (a positive test when
a person has not actually used a drug) and false negatives (a nega-
tive test when a person has been using a drug). The authority most
often cited in defense of this position is a study conducted by
the National Research Council (NRC) in 1994, which concluded
that ‘‘[d]espite beliefs to the contrary, the preventive effects of
drug-testing programs have never been adequately demonstrated’’
(Normand, Lempert, and O’Brien 1994, 11). This ﬁnding still forms
the basis of some strong arguments in opposition to workplace
drug testing, such as the comment in a 2009 blog on workplace
drug testing which quoted an opinion that ‘‘urinalysis has been
imposed on millions of American workers involuntarily without
so much as a single scientiﬁcally controlled study to show that
it is a safe or effective means of promoting workplace safety’’
(Stepper 2009).
In fact, a number of studies conducted since the 1994 NRC
report suggest that that study might not be the deﬁnitive word
on the effectiveness of workplace drug testing. A 2007 study by
Christopher S. Carpenter at the University of California at Irvine,
for example, reviewed three large national studies and summa-
rized Carpenter’s own research on the topic. For all four studies,
Carpenter came to the conclusion that drug testing is, to some
extent, effective in reducing the probability that substance abuse
will occur in the workplace. He concluded that ‘‘[t]he overall
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

pattern of results remains largely consistent with the hypothesis
that workplace drug testing deters worker drug use’’ (Carpenter
2007, 795).
Opponents of workplace drug testing also argue that such
programs are not cost-effective. In a 1991 study of the use of drug
testing in federal agencies, for example, the cost of identifying a
single substance abuser was estimated to be about $77,000 (cited
in Zimmer 1999, 14). That number may be a gross underestimate,
however, if one assumes (probably correctly) that only one out of
10 individuals who tests positive is a serious substance abuser.
In such a case, the actual cost of identifying a single individual likely
to be a risk in the workplace may range from $700,000 to $1.5 million
(Donohoe 2005, 72). Given a number of options for locating poten-
tial substance abuser risks in the workplace, some critics say, other
options to drug testing should be considered. (An excellent review
of the issues involved in workplace drug testing on the Internet is
this pair of Web sites: Olson 2004a and Olson 2004b.)
Finally, opponents of drug testing in the workplace some-
times point to the fact that most testing programs ignore the one
drug—alcohol—responsible for by far the greatest proportion of
accidents in the workplace.
Drug Testing in Schools
Businesses are by no means the only place where drug testing has
become somewhat routine and, at the same time, controversial.
The practice is also carried out now in many schools, colleges,
and universities, and in professional sports. In fact, the debate
over the use of drug testing in schools began just at the nexus of
these two issues when a number of school districts in the late
1980s and early 1990s decided to institute mandatory drug tests
for students who wished to participate in sports at the schools.
Drug testing in schools was initiated among athletic teams for a
number of reasons, one being that illicit drug use was sometimes
thought to be (correctly or not) especially common among stu-
dent athletes. In addition, participation in athletics is a voluntary
activity, unlike school attendance itself, and so boys and girls
can choose whether or not to submit to drug tests. Finally, some
school districts felt that student athletes should be presentable as
desirable role models for the rest of the student body.
In any case, mandatory drug testing for student athletes was
met in some instances by objections from individuals who
Drug Testing
45

objected to the practice for one reason or another. The case that
eventually drew the most attention nationwide involved a deci-
sion by the Vernonia School District in Oregon in 1991 to require
student athletes to be tested for a number of illicit drugs. One stu-
dent, James Acton, objected to the policy and ﬁled suit to have the
district’s policy declared unconstitutional. That case worked its
way through the courts and was eventually decided four years
later by the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled in favor of the dis-
trict by a vote of 6 to 3. That decision served as an important prec-
edent for lower courts, who eventually issued decisions allowing
drug testing of students who participate in any extracurricular
activity and even of students who drive to school. The most recent
Supreme Court decision on school drug testing came in 2002 in
the case of Board of Education of Independent School District No. 92
of Pottawatomie Cty v. Earls (536 U.S. 822), when the court ruled
by a 5 to 4 vote that schools could require drug tests from students
who participate in any extracurricular activity. Writing for the
majority, Justice Clarence Thomas made the point that ‘‘[g]iven
the nationwide epidemic of drug use, and the evidence of
increased drug use in Tecumseh schools, it was entirely reason-
able for the School District to enact this particular drug testing
policy’’ (U.S. Supreme Court 2002, 836).
Today, drug testing in schools may take a number of different
forms. It may involve student athletes only, participants in other
types of extracurricular activities, a random sample of the student
body, or all members of the student body on either a voluntary or
required basis. A recent study on this variety of programs found
that about 20 percent of all schools (containing about 20% of all
students in the country) had one or another of these programs
(Yamaguchi, Johnston, and O’Malley 2003, 22–23, Table 2). The
most popular program was one in which testing was required
only when there was speciﬁc cause or reason to suspect illicit
drug use, with about 13.0 percent of all schools (and 13.4% of all
students) involved in this type of program. The pattern of drug
testing programs in about 170 schools from 1998 to 2002 is shown
in Table 2.2.
As with workplace drug testing, arguments both in support
of and in opposition to drug testing in schools have been pre-
sented, and, in many cases, the arguments are similar to those
used in the workplace controversy. Most importantly, proponents
of testing say, schools should do something to stem the tide of
substance abuse in the nation, and carefully controlled testing of
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

all or certain groups of students is one way to do that. Besides,
students who do not use drugs have nothing to fear from sub-
stance testing. Opponents disagree, pointing out that less invasive
methods of drug prevention are available, and students should
not have to give up their right of privacy for the purposes of drug
testing (see, for example, Jones 2009).
Drug Testing in Amateur
and Professional Sports
While interest in drug testing in the workplace and schools
appears to have diminished somewhat (in the ﬁrst instance) or
remained about constant (in the second), it has increased quite
signiﬁcantly in one other situation: professional sports. Some
modest efforts to limit the use of illegal substances by athletes
go as far back as 1970, when the National Collegiate Athletic
Association (NCAA) ﬁrst established a Drug Education Commit-
tee to provide information about drug use among college athletes.
It took more than 10 years, however, for the NCAA to authorize a
study of the use of drugs by college athletes and 16 years before
the association actually began testing athletes. That program
was initiated for championship and bowl games in the fall of
1986, based on a list of banned substances adopted a year earlier
by the NCAA. Today the NCAA bans thousands of drugs that fall
Drug Testing
47
TABLE 2.2
Drug Testing Programs in U.S. Schools, 1998–2002, Percent of Schools/Students
Category
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Any program
14.4/16.2
19.5/21.1
23.4/24.0
15.9/15.6
20.7/20.1
Athletes
n/a
2.9/4.6
7.0/7.4
5.0/5.7
6.5/6.9
Other extracurricular
n/a
0.6/1.6
2.9/3.1
3.3/2.8
3.0/2.9
Cause/Suspicion
n/a
14.4/15.2
15.8/15.7
12.1/11.2
13.0/13.4
School probation
n/a
4.0/3.4
4.1/3.4
2.8/1.4
1.2/1.1
Volunteered
n/a
4.6/5.7
3.5/3.9
3.3/3.0
3.0/2.5
Random
0/0
1.7/1.0
1.2/1.3
0/0
1.2/1.1
Routine
2.5/3.3
3.4/3.4
6.5/5.5
4.4/4.1
3.6/4.2
Mandated
5.6/5.2
2.3/2.0
5.9/4.6
5.5/5.3
4.1/3.3
Source: Yamaguchi, Ryoko, Lloyd D. Johnston, and Patrick M. O’Malley. Drug Testing in Schools: Policies, Practices,
and Association With Student Drug Use. Occasional Paper No. 2. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Institute for
Social Research, 2003, 22–23, Table 2.

into eight major categories: stimulants, anabolic agents, alcohol
and beta blockers, diuretics and other masking agents, street
drugs, peptide hormones and analogues, anti-estrogens, and
beta-2 agonists (‘‘2009–10 NCAA Banned Drugs,’’ 2009). Most of
these substances have short-term effects and must be taken just
prior to an activity or in an effort to mask the use of an illegal sub-
stance (masking agents). They are, therefore, relatively easy to
detect by standard drug tests.
The exception to that statement is the anabolic agents, also
known as anabolic-androgenic steroids (AAS), substances that
are chemically similar to the male sex hormone testosterone.
Anabolic-androgenic steroids are popular among athletes
because they produce weight gain, which occurs almost entirely
in the form of muscle mass, increasing an individual’s strength,
speed, and endurance. AAS compounds also have a number of
troubling side effects, however, which provide an important argu-
ment against their use. These side effects include increased blood
pressure and blood cholesterol levels along with increased risk
for cardiovascular disease, acne, and liver damage. A number of
mental conditions have also been associated with steroid use,
including aggression and violence (sometimes called ‘‘roid
rage’’), mania, and psychosis.
Anabolic agents are the primary cause of concern among both
amateur and professional sports associations because athletes
value their effects so highly and they are more difﬁcult to detect
than are stimulants, masking agents, and other drugs. In many
cases, it is difﬁcult to know if an athlete is bigger, stronger, and
faster as the result of training or because he or she has been taking
AAS drugs. Probably the most dramatic example of this dilemma
has been the revelation that many of the best known and most
successful professional baseball players achieved their physical
superiority not just by training, but by the use of substances that
have long been banned in most sports, although not in professional
baseball until 2004 (‘‘Steroids,’’ 2009).
Today, nearly all amateur and professional sports organiza-
tions have drug testing programs for a number of illegal substances.
National Football League (NFL) regulations, for example, call for a
four-game suspension after a ﬁrst positive test, a six-game suspen-
sion after a second positive test, and a one-year suspension after a
third positive test. A policy adopted by Major League Baseball in
2005 calls for counseling of a player who tests positive for an illegal
substance the ﬁrst time; a 15-day suspension and maximum ﬁne of
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

$10,000 after a second positive test; a 25-day suspension and a maxi-
mum ﬁne of $25,000 after a third positive test; a 50-day suspension
and a maximum ﬁne of $50,000 after a fourth positive test; and a
one-year suspension and maximum ﬁne of $100,000 after a ﬁfth pos-
itive test. Of all major sports, only the National Hockey League
(NHL) has no drug testing program (‘‘Anabolic Steroids: Road to
the Gold or Road to the Grave,’’ 2009).
Controlling the Use of Drugs
As discussed in Chapter 1, many countries have, at one time or
another in their histories, struggled with the question of how to
control the use of one psychoactive substance or another within
their boundaries. Three approaches have frequently been used
in such efforts: education, taxation, and outright prohibition.
Educational efforts are based on the assumption that the more
people know about the deleterious effects of a substance, the less
likely they are to use those substances for recreational purposes.
One of the classic examples of this approach to dealing with a
psychoactive substance in the United States has been the Wom-
en’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU). The WCTU was
founded in Cleveland, Ohio, in November 1874 as the outgrowth
of an 1873–1874 campaign known as the Woman’s Crusade.
During this campaign, a number of ordinary housewives decided
to rebel against what they saw as the evils of drinking alcohol that
they had experienced in their communities ﬁrsthand. They organ-
ized ‘‘sit-ins’’ and ‘‘pray-ins’’ at local taverns, demanding that the
sale of liquor be discontinued. Within the ﬁrst three months of
their campaign, these women had driven more than 250 establish-
ments out of business (‘‘Women’s Christian Temperance Union,’’
2009).
One of the WCTU’s earliest programs was an effort to intro-
duce anti-alcohol education into public schools. In 1879, the organi-
zation created a permanent committee, a year later to become the
WCTU Department of Scientiﬁc Temperance Instruction in Schools
and Colleges, for this purpose. WCTU members were encouraged
to appear before their local school boards of education to demand
that anti-alcohol classes be included in the regular curriculum,
and the organization itself began to produce materials to be used
in such classes, including a textbook called Alcohol and Hygiene.
When these efforts proved to be only moderately successful, the
Controlling the Use of Drugs
49

organization aimed its sights higher: at state legislatures. It lobbied
for the introduction of bills that would require local districts to
adopt anti-alcohol curricula, an effort that was ﬁrst successful in
the state of Vermont in 1882. The pressure from WCTU members
was so great that Vermont legislators passed the bill by large major-
ities in both houses (Hanson 2009). This success was replicated
elsewhere in the country, and by the end of the century, some form
of anti-alcohol education law had been adopted by almost every
state, the District of Columbia, and all U.S. possessions (Hanson
2009).
The success of educational efforts like those of the WCTU is
difﬁcult to determine. On the one hand, the average annual con-
sumption of alcohol in the United States actually increased in
the years in which the WCTU was most successful in passing
legislation on anti-alcohol education. That number increased
from 1.72 gallons of alcohol per person per year in the decade of
1871–1880 to 2.06 gallons in 1896–1900 to 2.56 in 1911–1915, a
49 percent increase in consumption in about 40 years (Nephew
et al. 2002, 18, Table 1). Average alcohol consumption among
Americans was not to reach that level again until the 1970s.
On the other hand, the efforts of the WCTU have generally
been credited with providing the momentum that eventually
culminated in the great ‘‘noble experiment’’ to ban alcohol com-
pletely in the United States with the Eighteenth Amendment to
the U.S. Constitution in 1919. That amendment did not actually
ban the consumption of alcoholic beverages, although it did pro-
hibit the manufacture, sale, and transportation of such beverages
within the United States. The educational efforts originally pro-
moted by the WCTU and other temperance organizations thus
evolved over time into a very different type of effort to restrict
the consumption of alcohol: legal remedies, the strongest of
which, of course, was an amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Many books and untold numbers of scholarly papers have
been written about the American prohibition movement, the
name given to the effort to stamp out the drinking of alcoholic
beverages in the United States between 1919 and 1933 (the year
in which the Twenty-ﬁrst Amendment to the Constitution,
rescinding the Eighteenth Amendment, was adopted). Experts
in the area have drawn conclusions from across the board, from
the experiment’s having been a great success in terms of reducing
the consumption of alcohol among Americans, to its having been
a nearly total failure, on the basis not only of no change in
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

drinking habits, but also in terms of the explosion of crime engen-
dered by the need to supply drinkers with alcoholic beverages
illegally. Of course, statistical data about alcohol consumption
during the period of 1919–1933 is unavailable, since alcoholic
beverages were illegal at the time. A number of studies suggest,
however, that the Eighteenth Amendment had, at best, only
limited success in reducing the consumption of alcohol. These
studies show that the number of deaths from alcohol-related
problems, the age at which males and females began drinking,
and the number of arrests for drunkenness and other alcohol-
related problems all suggest a signiﬁcant increase in the amount
of alcohol consumption during the period (‘‘Did Alcohol
Prohibition Reduce Alcohol Consumption and Crime?’’ 2009).
Taxation of Drugs
World history is replete with examples of efforts to control the use
of psychoactive substances by means of taxation or methods that
fall short of actual, total prohibition. Probably the earliest exam-
ple in American history of such an effort was the whiskey tax of
1791, imposed by the federal government on the producers of that
beverage. The tax was imposed by the young U.S. government for
a number of reasons, perhaps the most important of which was
the dire ﬁnancial status of the government. Under provisions
under which the federal government was established, that
government was required to assume all of the debts accumulated
by the states in association with the Revolutionary War. The
government began operation, then, with a huge debt. The ﬁrst
Secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton, envisioned a
modest tax on alcoholic spirits (whiskey, in particular) as being a
possible lucrative source of income for paying down this debt.
Even before the new government had formed, Hamilton presaged
this idea in his earlier writings. In the Federalist Papers, for exam-
ple, he had written that ‘‘[t]he single article of ardent spirits,
under federal regulation, might be made to furnish a considerable
revenue’’ (Hamilton 1787, 280). Interestingly, Hamilton’s interest
in a tax on spirits was motivated by more than just a concern
about revenue. He concluded the paragraph from which the
above quotation is taken with the observation that ‘‘[t]hat article
[spirits] would well bear this rate of duty; and if it should tend
to diminish the consumption of it, such an effect would be equally
favorable to the agriculture, to the economy, to the morals, and to
Controlling the Use of Drugs
51

the health of the society. There is, perhaps, nothing so much a sub-
ject of national extravagance as these spirits’’ (Hamilton 1787, 280).
In 1791, then, Hamilton was able to convince the Congress to
impose a tax on alcohol, based in part on the size of the manufac-
turing operation: large companies paid six cents a gallon in tax,
while small companies paid nine cents a gallon, a system that
was almost guaranteed to produce strong opposition from the lat-
ter, most of whom were then located on the western frontier. That
opposition eventually boiled over into the so-called Whiskey
Rebellion of 1794, with armed uprising breaking out in many of
the colonies. That rebellion continued for more than ﬁve years
and was met with considerable force by federal troops, whose
action was necessitated at least in part by the government’s desire
to establish a strong central government within the new nation.
Even though the federal troops prevailed in armed conﬂict on
the ﬁeld, opposition to the tax was so strong that it was eventually
repealed in 1802.
The U.S. government has sometimes taken somewhat circui-
tous routes—short of outright bans—to the control of psychoactive
substances other than alcohol. Such was long the case with cocaine
and opiates. During the second half of the nineteenth century,
these substances were generally available to the public and unregu-
lated by the government. The Sears, Roebuck catalogs of the late
nineteenth century, for example, carried advertisements for ‘‘coca
wine’’ that was recommended for the treatment of neuralgia, sleep-
lessness, and despondency (‘‘Vintage Wine,’’ 2009). Some catalogs
also listed small quantities of cocaine accompanied by a syringe
with which to inject the drug, sold for $1.50 (Buxton 2006, 16–17).
Perhaps the best known everyday use of cocaine, however, was as
an ingredient in a popular new soft drink invented by Atlanta
pharmacist John Pemberton in 1885, Coca-Cola. Originally sold as
a patent medicine, the drink soon became widely popular as a
refreshing soft drink. As its name clearly announces, the drink
originally contained cocaine. By 1903, however, the drug was
removed, largely in response to growing concerns about its harm-
ful and addictive effects.
By the turn of the century, pressures for some kind of control
over the use of cocaine and opiates began to grow from both
national and international sources. The ﬁrst factor of importance
was the annexation by the United States of the Philippine Islands,
one of the penalties paid by Spain following its defeat in the
Spanish-American War of 1898. Along with the many natural
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

resources provided by the Philippines, the United States inherited
a very large population of residents of the island who had become
addicted to cocaine. The federal government was forced
to develop some program for dealing with these individuals.
The decision was ﬁnally reached that addiction to cocaine and
other drugs, such as opiates, was really an international problem,
rather than one restricted to the Philippines. As a consequence,
President Theodore Roosevelt called for an international
conference, called the International Opium Commission, to be
held in Shanghai in February 1909. That meeting was followed
by a second international conference, held at The Hague, Nether-
lands, in May 1911. The Hague conference adopted the ﬁrst
international treaty for the control of psychoactive substances,
calling for all signatories to do whatever they could to ‘‘control,
or to cause to be controlled, all persons manufacturing, import-
ing, selling, distributing, and exporting morphine, cocaine, and
their respective salts, as well as the buildings in which these
persons carry such an industry or trade’’ (International Opium
Convention Signed at The Hague January 23, 1912, Article 10).
The treaty provided a powerful impetus for the U.S. government
to adopt measures for the control of cocaine and opiates within
its own borders.
Domestic issues also contributed to the increasing pressures
for regulation of psychoactive substances. By the ﬁrst decade of
the twentieth century, medical studies began to show possible
health issues associated with the use of these substances, for
example, an increase in respiratory diseases in connection with
the use of cocaine. Law enforcement ofﬁcers also pointed to the
legal problems created by addicts needing the money required
to support their drug habits. And a number of religious and social
leaders grew increasingly concerned about the moral effects of
the apparent spread of cocaine and heroin use among Americans.
As perhaps to be expected, much of the blame for the nation’s
growing substance abuse problem fell on minority groups.
A committee appointed to study this problem in 1903, for exam-
ple, singled out Chinese immigrants as a major factor in the sub-
stance abuse problem faced by Americans. In its report, the
Committee on the Acquirement of the Drug Habit noted that
opium use was rife among Chinese immigrants and concluded
somewhat ominously that ‘‘[i]f the Chinaman cannot get along
without his dope we can get along without him’’ (Drug Policy
Alliance 2001). Accusation increasingly fell on the African
Controlling the Use of Drugs
53

American community also. A number of legislators, law enforce-
ment personnel, and experts in the ﬁeld of substance abuse pointed
out that cocaine and heroin use were especially common among
Blacks, often with terrible social consequences. A leading advocate
for stricter controls on drugs, Hamilton Wright, the ﬁrst Opium
Commissioner of the United States, said at the Shanghai con-
vention in 1909 that ‘‘cocaine is often the direct incentive to the
crime of rape by the Negroes of the South and other sections of
the country’’ (Musto 1987, 43–44). (Somewhat ironically, no credible
evidence existed for Wright’s claim, or for any of the other similar
warnings raised about the special problems that Blacks created by
their abuse of illegal substances [Courtwright 1995, Chapter 10].)
The conﬂuence of international and domestic pressures led in
1914 to the adoption of the Harrison Act, the ﬁrst federal legisla-
tion designed speciﬁcally to control the consumption of cocaine
and opiates in the United States. (The act was actually written
by Wright, although introduced by Representative Francis Burton
Harrison of New York.) The main provision of the act was the
requirement that all individuals who ‘‘produce, import, manufac-
ture, compound, deal in, dispense, sell, distribute, or give away
opium or coca leaves, their salts, derivatives, or preparations,
and for other purposes’’ register with federal ofﬁcials and pay a
tax on all their proceedings. The practical effect of the Harrison
Act was to make the possession and consumption of cocaine and
opiates illegal for any use other than medical applications. As an
attempt to solve the nation’s substance abuse problems, however,
it was a failure, producing almost the opposite result. Individuals
who had become dependent on cocaine or an opiate could no
longer obtain their drug of choice legally and found it necessary
to ﬁnd ways of getting it on the black market and, in many cases,
to commit crimes to get the money they needed for the increas-
ingly expensive product.
Recognizing this disturbing trend, the Secretary of the
Treasury, William Gibbs McAdoo, appointed a committee to
evaluate the effects of the Harrison Act. The committee reported
a number of trends as a result of the act’s passage, perhaps most
signiﬁcant of which was that (1) the use of cocaine and opiate
had actually increased since adoption of the act and (2) a thriving
new community of ‘‘dope peddlers’’ had arisen, bringing drugs
illegally into the country from Canada and Mexico (Brecher 1972,
Chapter 8). To remedy this situation, the committee recommended
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

more of the same, that is, amendments to the Harrison Act that
would increase penalties for illegal use of cocaine and opiates.
Within a year of adoption of the new amendments in 1924, signs
appeared that stricter enforcement of the Harrison Act was not
working either. An editorialist for the Illinois Medical Journal wrote
in 1926 that ‘‘[t]he Harrison Narcotic law should never have been
placed upon the Statute books of the United States . . . instead of
stopping the [drug] trafﬁc, those who deal in dope now make
double their money from the poor unfortunates upon whom they
prey’’ (Brecher 1972, Chapter 8).
The ‘‘tax and regulate’’ approach to controlling cocaine and
opiates has also been used with other psychoactive substances.
The 1937 Marihuana Tax Act is an example. (Note that the
modern spelling of the substance, marijuana, is of relatively
recent origin, with an ‘‘h’’ instead of a ‘‘j’’ being more common
historically.) Marijuana is obtained from the cannabis plant, of
which three species are of commercial signiﬁcance, Cannabis
sativa, C. indica, and (less commonly), C. ruderalis. The plant is an
annual dioecious (one type of gamete per plant) ﬂowering herb
that grows to a height of about three meters (10 feet). It has histor-
ically been utilized primarily for two purposes. First, the soft,
ﬂexible ﬁbers obtained from its stalk—known as hemp—are used
in the manufacture of more than 25,000 industrial products,
including paper, cloth, construction materials, medicines, and
biofuels (North American Industrial Hemp Council, Inc. 1997).
Second, the dried ﬂowers and leaves of the plant are smoked to
produce a ‘‘high’’ for recreational and religious purposes.
For the ﬁrst 300 years of American history, hemp was a very
popular commercial crop. As early as 1619, the Virginia Assembly
passed a law requiring every farmer to grow at least some hemp
to be used both for domestic purposes and for exportation and
foreign trade. Hemp was also used as legal tender at the time in
Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. The ﬁber became espe-
cially popular during the Civil War when it was used as a substi-
tute for cotton and other natural materials by both sides in the
war (Frontline 2008). Largely because of its association with mari-
juana, hemp largely disappeared as a commercial crop in the
United States for many years. Recently, however, a number of
states have passed laws allowing the farming of cannabis plants
for the production of industrial hemp. As of early 2010, 16 states
had passed such laws (Guard 2009).
Controlling the Use of Drugs
55

The use of cannabis products for purely recreational purposes
appears to have had its beginning in the United States in the 1910s,
when immigrants ﬂeeing the Mexican Revolution arrived in this
country, often bringing with them a long-standing recreational
habit: the smoking of marijuana. The marijuana used for this pur-
pose comes from cannabis plants botanically different from those
used for the production of hemp. The latter have been developed
to contain the lowest possible amount of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), the chemical responsible for the psychoactive effects of
ingesting marijuana plant products. By contrast, other types of
cannabis plants have been developed with relatively high concen-
trations of THC which, in general, have stalks that yield poor-
quality hemp unsuitable for commercial use.
By the early 1930s, the use of marijuana for recreational
purposes had become relatively widespread in some parts of the
United States, producing a reaction among law enforcement ofﬁ-
cials, governmental ofﬁcials, and many private organizations
and individuals. In many cases, the objections to the use of mari-
juana appear to have had their basis in a general fear and dislike
of the immigrants who ﬁrst brought the product to the United
States (Frontline 2008). In any case, by 1931, 29 states had out-
lawed the use of marijuana and the federal government had
begun to consider ways of banning its use nationwide (Frontline
2008).
The ﬁrst step in this direction occurred in 1937 when the U.S.
Congress passed and President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed
the Marihuana Tax Act. Justiﬁcation for the legislation was based to
a considerable extent on some questionable statements about the
effects of marijuana on the human personality. In his testimony
before Congress as it considered the marijuana bill, for example,
Commissioner of Narcotics Harry J. Anslinger said that, while the
drug ﬁrst produces feelings of ‘‘well-being [and] a happy, jovial
mood,’’ that euphoria is soon replaced by must less salubrious
emotions, including:
a more-or-less delirious state . . . during which [users]
are temporarily, at least, irresponsible and liable to com-
mit violent crimes . . . [and] releases inhibitions of an
antisocial nature which dwell within the individual . . .
Then follow errors of sense, false convictions and the
predominance of extravagant ideas where all sense of
value seems to disappear.
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the drug
render it highly dangerous to the mind and body upon
which it operates to destroy the will, cause one to lose
the power of connected thought, producing imaginary
delectable situations and gradually weakening the
physical powers. Its use frequently leads to insanity
(‘‘Taxation of Marihuana,’’ 1937).
The bill that was ﬁnally passed by Congress did not speciﬁ-
cally outlaw the production, sale, or consumption of marijuana,
but it did impose a somewhat complex system of taxes and regu-
lations. Anyone involved in any of these activities had to register
with the federal government and to pay a tax for each type of
activity. For example, anyone who grew or processed a cannabis
product had to pay a tax of $24 annually (equivalent to $360 in
2009 dollars). The tax for sale of a cannabis product to anyone
who already held a license was $1 per transaction ($15 in 2009 dol-
lars), but $100 ($1,500 in 2009 dollars) to anyone who did not hold
such a license (‘‘Marihuana Tax Act of 1937’’ 2009). Federal
authorities did not take long to put the Marihuana Tax Act into
effect. On October 1, 1937, they arrested two men in Denver, Colo-
rado, for possession (Moses Baca) and selling (Samuel Caldwell)
marijuana. Judge Foster Symes sentenced Baca to 18 months in
jail and Caldwell to four years at hard labor and a $1,000 ﬁne
(Uncle Mike 2008).
Assessing the effectiveness of the 1937 legislation is difﬁcult,
of course, because marijuana has been, for all practical purposes,
illegal since passage of the act. However, substantial evidence is
available from arrests for marijuana-related crimes and other
sources to suggest that the act was somewhat less than totally
successful. A 1998 study found, for example, that the percent of
individuals surveyed who reached the age of 21 in the decades
following 1937 and who ﬁrst used marijuana increased from
0 percent in the 1940s to 2 percent in the 1950s to 6 percent in the
1961–1966 period to 21 percent in the 1967–1971 period to 40 percent
in the 1972–1976 period (Johnson and Gerstein 1998, 29, Table 2).
Ofﬁcial government statistics available since 1965 also suggest
similar trends, with a gradual increase in the number of marijuana
users from that year to a peak in the late 1970s, falling off then
to a ﬂuctuating but relatively constant level from that point
to the present day (‘‘Trends in Marijuana Incidence,’’ 2008,
Table 3.3).
Controlling the Use of Drugs
57

Outright Bans on Substances
The ﬁrst federal law designed to outlaw the consumption of a
psychoactive substance entirely was the Eighteenth Amendment
ban on alcohol, certiﬁed in 1919 and discussed earlier in this chap-
ter. Similar laws against other psychoactive substances had been
enacted much earlier, however, by individual states and municipal-
ities. Probably the ﬁrst of these laws was the prohibition of
the smoking of opium in opium dens, adopted by the city of San
Francisco in 1875. That law was very limited, designed to deal
almost entirely with Chinese immigrants who brought the habit
of opium smoking with them when they immigrated to the United
States. All other uses of opium were excluded from the law, and the
substance was still widely used by the non-Chinese population for
medical and recreational purposes (Gieringer 2000). (Hawaii had
passed a similar law in 1856, but had not yet been admitted to the
Union as a state [Forbes 1998–2003, 169, #2163].) A number of other
California cities soon followed San Francisco’s example, including
Oakland, Sacramento, Stockton, and Virginia City. In 1881, the state
legislature enacted a similar law applying to all parts of the state
(Gieringer 2000).
The ﬁrst laws prohibiting the consumption of marijuana were
enacted in the Rocky Mountain and Southwestern states toward
the end of World War I. At the time, a number of Mexicans were
ﬂeeing the Mexican Revolution of 1910–1920 and entering the
United States. Many of them brought with them the habit of smok-
ing marijuana, a practice largely unknown in this country at the
time. As with the San Francisco law, laws prohibiting the consump-
tion of marijuana usually reﬂected the dislike and disapproval of
foreigners as much as it did opposition to the use of psychoactive
substances. Somewhat ironically, however, the ﬁrst law banning
the use of marijuana had a somewhat different motivation. By the
mid-1910s, a number of Mormon missionaries returning from
assignments to Mexico brought with them the practice of smoking
marijuana, a practice that was quickly condemned by the Church
as opposed to doctrine (as was and is the use of all other kinds
of psychoactive substances). In August 1915, the synod of the
Mormon Church banned the use of marijuana among all church
members, and two months later, Utah state legislature passed
similar legislation, as was commonly the case with other church
prohibitions at the time in the state (Whitebread 1995b).
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

In the 20 years following adoption of the Utah law, a total of
27 states passed similar legislation, banning the use of marijuana.
Although most of those states were west of the Mississippi,
some were located in the Northeast, where there were few or no
Mexicans. In these states, the justiﬁcation for the laws was that
individuals who had become dependent on alcohol, cocaine, and
opiates and who were now deprived of those drugs because of
the Eighteenth Amendment and the Harrison Act were likely to
turn to marijuana as their new ‘‘drug of choice’’ (Whitebread
1955).
Thus, as has often been the case with the American federalist
system for much of our history, individual states made their own
decisions as to how they would deal with psychoactive substances,
whether they would ban them outright, and, if so, which substances
would be prohibited. The federal government itself took a number
of piecemeal actions, many (as noted above) that fell short of
outright bans on substances. During the mid-twentieth century,
some of the legislation that was adopted to deal with the nation’s
substance abuse problem were the following:
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938 was a comprehensive
revision of the nation’s laws dealing with foods, drugs, and
cosmetics. Among its many provisions was the recognition
that the deﬁnition of a ‘‘drug’’ could include substances that
could be used for purposes other than therapeutic applica-
tions. It assigned to drug manufacturers the responsibility for
deciding whether a product could be sold freely to the gen-
eral public (over-the-counter use) or required a prescription.
Opium Poppy Control Act of 1942 banned the growing of opium
poppies without a federal license, supposedly to guarantee a
dependable supply of opiates for the federal government
during World War II.
Durham-Humphrey Amendment of 1951 established two general
categories of drugs: prescription (also called legend) drugs and
over-the-counter (OTC) drugs. Legend drugs were deﬁned as
substances that were unsafe to use without supervision of a
medical professional. They could be purchased only with a
prescription from a medical professional and were required
to carry the statement: ‘‘Caution: Federal law prohibits dis-
pensing without a prescription.’’
Outright Bans on Substances
59

1951 Boggs Amendment to the Harrison Narcotic Act was passed
by the U.S. Congress in an atmosphere of increasing national
concern about the spread of substance abuse, especially
among teenagers. The Boggs amendment was signiﬁcant in
a number of ways, primarily in the dramatic increase in
penalties it provided for drug possession and use. It estab-
lished a minimum mandatory sentence of 2 years for simple
possession of marijuana, cocaine, or heroin, with a maxi-
mum sentence of 5 years; a minimum of 5 years and a maxi-
mum of 10 years for a second offense; and a minimum of
10 years and a maximum of 15 years for a third offense. In
addition, the Boggs amendment was signiﬁcant in that it
was the ﬁrst time that marijuana, cocaine, and opiates had
been included with each other in a single piece of federal
legislation.
The Boggs amendment was important not only as a piece of
federal legislation, but also because it served as a model that the
federal government urged states to use for their own state laws.
Many states took up the suggestion. Between 1953 and 1956,
26 states passed ‘‘mini-Boggs’’ bills, some of which carried penalties
signiﬁcantly more severe than those in the federal bill. The law in
Louisiana, for example, provided for a 5-to-99-year sentence with-
out the possibility of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence
for sale or possession of any illegal substance (Bonnie and White-
bread 1974, 210). Similarly, Virginia adopted a mini-Boggs law that
made possession of marijuana the most severely punished crime in
the state. While ﬁrst-degree murder earned a mandatory 15-year
minimum sentence and rape, a mandatory 10-year sentence, posses-
sion of marijuana drew a mandatory minimum of 20 years, and sale
of the drug a mandatory minimum of 40 years (Whitebread 1995a).
Narcotics Control Act of 1956 was yet another attempt by the
U.S. Congress to solve the nation’s drug problem with
harsher legislation. Coming on the heels of the widely-
popular Kefauver hearings on crime in the United States, the
Narcotics Control Act of 1956 provided for very stiff penalties
on the sale of and trafﬁcking in illegal substances, with a
mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years and a mandatory
10-year sentence for all subsequent violations. In addition,
judges were prohibited from suspending sentences or provid-
ing probation for convicted offenders.
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Drug Abuse Control Amendments of 1965 was yet another piece
of legislation designed to bring under control the spread of
illegal drug use in the United States. Among its many provi-
sions was one designed to deal with a new and growing
problem, the use of psychoactive substances other than mari-
juana, cocaine, and heroin. Amateur drugmakers had become
increasingly skillful in learning how to make products previ-
ously available only from drug manufacturers (such as meth-
amphetamines and LSD), as well as analogs of drugs already
banned by the federal government. For the federal govern-
ment, the effort was a bit like trying to grab hold of a balloon.
No sooner had some control been achieved over one part of
the nation’s drug problem when another issue arose else-
where. Instead of having to deal with three, four, or a handful
of illegal substances, the federal government was faced with
restricting the use of dozens upon dozens of modiﬁcations of
these drugs and entirely new drugs invented by imaginative
amateur chemists. The Drug Abuse Control Amendments of
1965 attempted to deal with this problem by giving the Secre-
tary of Health, Education, and Welfare authority to regulate
any substance whatsoever that might have the potential for
abuse because of its stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effects. Although penalties against these drugs were less
severe than those for marijuana, cocaine, and heroin, they rep-
resented the ﬁrst concerted effort by the federal government
to stem the growth of this new arm of the nation’s substance
abuse problem.
Controlled Substances Act of 1970 (CSA) was an effort by the
federal government to update and revise the various bills
previously passed in an effort to control substance abuse in
the nation. It was designed to be a comprehensive, overrid-
ing statement of federal policy about illegal substance use,
along with guiding principles for prosecution and punish-
ment. The act was enacted as Title II of the Comprehensive
Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. Arguably
the most important part of the CSA was Section 812, in which
ﬁve ‘‘schedules’’ of drugs are established. The schedules are
based on three features of any given substance: (1) its poten-
tial for abuse, (2) its value in accepted medical treatment in
the United States, and (3) its safety when used under medical
supervision. Thus, substances placed in Schedule I are those
Outright Bans on Substances
61

that (1) have a high potential for abuse, (2) have no currently
accepted use for medical treatments in the United States,
and (3) cannot be safely used even under appropriate medi-
cal supervision. Examples of Schedule I drugs are heroin,
LSD, marijuana, mescaline, peyote, and psilocybin. By con-
trast, substances listed in Schedule V (1) have minimal
potential for abuse, (2) have accepted medical applications
in the United States, and (3) are generally regarded as safe
to use under medical supervision (although they may have
the potential to lead to addiction). Examples of Schedule V
drugs are certain cough medications that contain small
amounts of codeine and products used to treat diarrhea that
contain small amounts of opium.
In the ﬁrst announcement of scheduled drugs in the Federal
Register in 1971, 59 substances were listed in Schedule I, 21
in Schedule II, 22 in Schedule III, 11 in Schedule IV, and ﬁve
in Schedule V (Title 21—Food and Drugs, 7803–7805). Since
that time, about 160 substances have been added to and dropped
from one or more of the schedules (Ofﬁce of Diversion Control
2009).
The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act
(CDAPCA) also included a perhaps unexpected provision that
repealed all mandatory minimum sentences for substance abuse.
As noted above, these sentences were ﬁrst established in the Boggs
amendment in 1951, and increased in later legislation. By 1970,
however, the Congress had become convinced that minimum
sentencing had had little or no effect on the problem of substance
abuse and decided to repeal all minimum mandatory sentences.
A report to the U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary, which
was considering the CDAPCA, noted that:
It had also become apparent that the severity of penalties
including the length of sentences does not affect the
extent of drug abuse and other drug-related violation.
The basic consideration here was that the increasingly
longer sentences that had been legislated in the past
had not shown the expected overall reduction in drug
law violations. The opposite had been true notably in
the case of marihuana. Under Federal law and under
many State laws marihuana violations carry the same
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

strict penalties that are applicable to hard narcotics, yet
marihuana violations have almost doubled in the last
2 years alone (Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate
1969, 2).
Federal Legislation since the Controlled
Substances Act, 1970–2010
For almost a century, state, local, and federal legislators have been
concerned about a substance abuse problem in the United States
that seems not to have been amenable to control by prevention
and treatment, educational programs, or punitive legislation.
Since adoption of the Controlled Substances Act in 1970, the U.S.
Congress has continued to pass law after law, attempting to deal
with this issue. State and local legislative bodies have generally
followed suit, often acting even more aggressively than the
federal government.
On one front, the U.S. Congress has continued to pass laws
increasing penalties for substance abuse and expanding the scope
of such laws. In 1984, for example, the U.S. Congress changed its
views on the effectiveness of harsh penalties for the control of
substance abuse, reversing the stand its predecessors had taken
in the CDAPCA of 1970. In the Federal Sentencing Reform Act
of 1984, it ordered the Federal Sentencing Reform Committee to
establish new minimum mandatory sentences for convictions for
various types of substance abuse. It also established new manda-
tory minimum sentences for drug offenses committed near
schools, mandated prison sentences for serious drug felonies,
and created probationary penalties for less serious offenses. Two
years later, the Congress followed up on its new, harder line
against substance abuse convictions by establishing new senten-
ces for cocaine possession. Continuing a historical trend that
singles out minorities in legislation of this kind, the Anti-Drug
Abuse Act of 1986 provided for a mandatory minimum sentence
of 5 to 40 years for cocaine possession, a sentence that could not
be suspended nor was it subject to parole. The inequity in the
law was based on the fact that the mandatory minimum sentence
was required for possession of 500 grams of powder cocaine (by
far the drug of choice among middle- and upper-class whites),
or ﬁve grams of crack cocaine (much more popular among blacks
Federal Legislation since the Controlled Substances Act, 1970–2010
63

and lower-income men and women) (Gahlinger 2004, 67–68). Two
years later, Congress extended this policy in the Omnibus Drug
Abuse Act of 1988 by imposing a ﬁve-year mandatory sentence
for possession of three grams of crack cocaine for second-time
offenders and for possession of one gram of crack cocaine for
third-time offenders (U.S. Code 2009c, 416–417).
While Congress has apparently remained convinced of the
effectiveness of strong penalties against substance abuse, it has
also had to deal with a change in the nature of that problem, spe-
ciﬁcally with the expansion of the number of chemicals similar in
chemical structure and psychoactive properties to cocaine,
heroin, and other traditional drugs of abuse, now available to
the general public. These chemicals are often called designer drugs.
The term designer drugs has at least two meanings. First, it is
used to describe new kinds of medications being developed for
the treatment of a variety of speciﬁc diseases. The ﬁeld of study
out of which such drugs develop is called pharmacogenomics,
a combination of two terms referring to the study of drugs (phar-
macy) and the study of genetics (genomics). Second, the term designer
drugs is used to refer to a number of synthetic chemicals that are
derivatives of legal drugs developed for use in recreational settings.
Chemists (usually amateur chemists) who synthesize designer
drugs usually do so primarily for the purpose of avoiding legal
restrictions on the production and sale of compounds that have
been declared illegal by the U.S. government. Such compounds
have generally been classiﬁed by the government as Schedule I or
Schedule II drugs, that is, drugs that have high potential for abuse,
that have some or no currently accepted medical use in treatment
in the United States, and that lack any accepted safety for use
under medical supervision. Table 2.3 outlines the major classes
of designer drugs that have been developed over the past few
decades.
The federal government ﬁrst became interested in controlling
the production and use of designer drugs used for recreational
purposes in the early 1980s when it became apparent that existing
legislation was ineffective against the many new psychoactive
compounds being produced by amateur chemists. In order to deal
with this issue, the Congress included a provision in the Compre-
hensive Crime Control Act of 1984 that allowed the administrator
of the Drug Enforcement Agency to place analogs of banned sub-
stances on Schedule I or Schedule II for a period of up to one year,
with a six month extension if necessary. The law was somewhat
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

TABLE 2.3
Major Classes of Designer Drugs and Their Analogs
Class of Drugs
Examples
Street Names
Fentanyl analogs
Alpha-methylfentanyl
Benyzlfentanyl
Carfentanil
Remifentanil
Thenyfentanyl
Thiofentanyl
Apache
China Girl
China Town
China White
Good Fellas
Great Bear
Tango & Cash
Phenylethylamine analogs
3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA)
3,4-methylenedioxymethylamphetamine
(MDMA)
3,4-methylenedioxyethylamphetamine (MDEA)
4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine
4-methylthioamphetamine (4-MTA)
Ecstasy
Adam
Eve
Eden
Flatliner
Death Drug
Chicken Powder
Bromo
Shamrock
Meperidine analogs
1-methyl-4-phenyl-4-propionoxypiperidine (MPPP)
l-(2-phenethyl)-4-phenyl-4-acetoxypiperidine
(PEPAP)
New Heroin
Synthetic Heroin
Flunitrazepam
(Rohypnol)
(single compound)
Rowies
Roachies
Rooﬁes
Ropies
Circles
Forget-Me-Pill
Mexican Valium
(also known as ‘‘date rape’’
pill)
Gamma-hydroxybutyric
acid (GHB)
(single compound)
G
Liquid E
Fantasy
Georgia Home Boy
Liquid Ecstasy
Easy Lay
Salty Water
Cherry Meth
Organic Quaalude
Methaqualone
Quaalude
Ludes
Mandrex
Quad
Quay

unusual in that no evidence of a compound’s properties or pos-
sible risks was needed for such an action; the administrator’s con-
cerns about a substance were sufﬁcient for listing. Two years later,
Congress moved to make its ban on analogs even broader and
more comprehensive in the Controlled Substances Analogue
Enforcement Act of 1986. It provided, ﬁrst of all, that:
A controlled substance analogue shall, to the extent
intended for human consumption, be treated, for the
purposes of any Federal law as a controlled substance
in schedule I (U.S. Code 2009b, 388).
It then deﬁned a ‘‘controlled substance analog’’ as any sub-
stance as:
1. the chemical structure of which is substantially similar
to the chemical structure of a controlled substance in
schedule I or II;
2. which has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system that is substantially
similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of a
controlled substance in schedule I or II; or
3. with respect to a particular person, which such person
represents or intends to have a stimulant, depressant, or
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that is
substantially similar to or greater than the stimulant,
depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous
system of a controlled substance in schedule I or II (U.S.
Code 2009a, 374).
As with other illegal substances, designer drugs have been
the subject of a number of other pieces of legislation since the
mid-1980s. Most of these acts deal with speciﬁc substances, such
as methamphetamine (Comprehensive Methamphetamine
Control Act of 1996, Children’s Health Act of 2000, and Combat
Methamphetamine Epidemic Act 2005) and MDMA (ecstasy;
Illicit Drug Anti-Proliferation Act of 2003).
Since the mid-1980s, the U.S. Congress has also begun to
focus on other aspects of the nation’s substance abuse problem.
In many cases, it has given more serious attention to other
approaches to solving this problem, such as the educational,
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

prevention, and treatment approaches discussed above. One of
the most famous of these efforts was the Just Say No program
espoused during the administration of President Ronald Reagan
by his wife, Nancy Reagan. After her husband’s election to the
Presidency in 1981, Nancy Reagan announced that her primary
ﬁeld of interest was going to be substance abuse. She began visit-
ing schools around the nation with the goal of educating young
people about the risks associated with using illegal drugs.
At one of these visits, to the Longfellow Elementary School in
Oakland, California, in 1982, she was asked by a student what she
should do if she were offered drugs. Mrs. Reagan’s reply was that
she should ‘‘just say no.’’ That brief comment soon became the
theme of a nationwide campaign to encourage young people to
refuse to become involved in substance abuse. In some ways
reﬂecting the efforts of early temperance workers, Mrs. Reagan
and her associates visited dozens of schools across the country,
encouraging students to sign agreements not to become involved
with drugs. She also appeared on made many television appearan-
ces; enlisted the help of the Girl Scouts of America, the Kiwanis
Club, and other service organizations; and sponsored an inter-
national conference of 30 ﬁrst ladies from around the world to
support her efforts (Women of the GOP 2009). Although for many
years the best known educational program on substance abuse, this
campaign was hardly the only or even necessarily the most suc-
cessful of its kind (see above).
The U.S. Congress and many state legislatures also recognized
the potential value of educating young people about the dangers of
substance abuse and began to commit tax dollars to such programs.
In 1998, for example, the U.S. Congress passed and President Bill
Clinton signed the National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign
Act. The purpose of this act was to ‘‘conduct a national media cam-
paign in accordance with this subtitle for the purpose of reducing
and preventing drug abuse among young people in the United
States’’ (‘‘Public Law 105-277,’’ 1998). The Ofﬁce of National Drug
Control Policy was later to describe this campaign as ‘‘the nation’s
largest anti-drug media campaign . . . generally thought to be the
single largest source of drug-prevention messaging directed to
teens’’ (Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy 2009a). By 2005,
the Congress had appropriated more than $1 billion for this effort.
Given the considerable ﬁnancial resources devoted to this
campaign, legislators have been interested in its effect on the atti-
tudes and practices of its targeted audience, America’s teenagers,
Federal Legislation since the Controlled Substances Act, 1970–2010
67

about substance abuse. Attitudes and reports on this issue have
varied considerably. The Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP) has argued that the campaign, known as Above the Inﬂu-
ence, has been very successful. It reports that the campaign has had:
a signiﬁcant positive impact on anti-drug beliefs and
intentions. As awareness of Above the Inﬂuence grows
among youth, youth attitudes and beliefs against drug
use and the importance of remaining drug-free, includ-
ing marijuana, have strengthened as well. . . . Further,
tracking studies have shown that teens who are more
aware of the Above the Inﬂuence advertising are more
likely to hold stronger anti-drug beliefs compared to
those who are unaware of the Media Campaign’s adver-
tising. Anti-drug beliefs and intentions are the best avail-
able predictor of actual non-drug-using behavior (Ofﬁce
of National Drug Control Policy 2009b).
Independent researchers have sometimes reached somewhat
different conclusions, however. For example, in a review of the
program’s effectiveness published in November 2002, Robert
Hornik and his colleagues wrote that:
There is little evidence of direct favorable Campaign
effects on youth. There is no statistically signiﬁcant
decline in marijuana use to date, and some evidence for
an increase in use from 2000 to 2001. Nor are there
improvements in beliefs and attitudes about marijuana
use between 2000 and the ﬁrst half of 2002. Contrarily,
there are some unfavorable trends in youth anti-
marijuana beliefs. Also there is no tendency for those
reporting more exposure to Campaign messages to hold
more desirable beliefs (Hornik 2002, xi; Also see
‘‘Common Sense on Drug Policy,’’ 2009).
By 2009, Congress had apparently begun to have second
thoughts about the massive anti-drug campaign effort. A report
from the Senate Committee on Appropriations outlining its
recommendations for the 2010 federal budget observed that:
If the best that can be said about the youth media cam-
paign is that there is evidence that it has a ‘‘weak’’
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

association with anti-drug attitudes, while a comprehen-
sive multi-year evaluation with more extensive data
found no evidence of any positive effect at all, consider-
ation must be given to shifting the substantial resources
used for the advertising campaign to other uses. That is
what the Committee recommendation seeks to do
(‘‘Other Federal Drug Control Programs,’’ 2009).
In conclusion, the federal government and individual states
have for nearly a century employed a combination of methods to
deal with the ongoing problem of substance abuse, including
educational, prevention, and treatment programs, along with
increasingly severe legal remedies for those convicted of possess-
ing, producing, transporting, and/or selling illegal drugs. In addi-
tion, extensive efforts to control the production of illegal drugs in
a number of countries around the world have been employed, a
topic of greater scope than can be included in this book.
Should Illegal Substances Be Legalized?
The premise underlying most of this chapter has been that the
consumption of certain substances is potentially harmful and
dangerous for the individuals who use them. Certainly the
federal government and both state and local governments appear
to have taken this stance over most of the last century. And yet, a
number of individuals and organizations have long taken the
position that governments should not be involved in legislating
the psychoactive substances individuals choose to consume for
recreational purposes. Since the 1960s, there has been an ongoing
debate as to whether these substances should be made legal or
not. The debate has been a somewhat unusual one, with liberal
Democrats and conservative Republicans—and individuals at
every point between these extremes—agreeing with each other
on either one or the other position.
Those in favor of decriminalizing substances currently listed
as illegal in the United States make one or more of the following
arguments:
The decision as to whether or not to use a particular psychoactive
substance is a personal decision in which the state should have no
role. One of the fundamental principles of a democratic state
Should Illegal Substances Be Legalized?
69

is that people should be allowed to do with their own bodies
whatever they want, provided they do no harm to other indi-
viduals. Having a marijuana cigarette or a Quaalude pill on a
Saturday night may provide pleasure to the person who uses
these substances without harming anyone else. As one blog-
ger puts this argument:
Someone walking through the park smoking a joint or
someone walking around their basement tripping on
LSD doesn’t affect me at all, so I don’t see why I should
be compelled to prevent someone from doing something
they want to do. That’s what personal freedom is
(‘‘Legalizing Drugs to Beneﬁt the Economy?’’ 2009).
The cost of the war on drugs is much too expensive, especially in
terms of the beneﬁts received. In the year that President Richard
M. Nixon ﬁrst declared a ‘‘war on drugs,’’ the federal budget
to carry on that war was about $350 million annually ($1.8 bil-
lion in 2008 dollars). Since the mid-1990s, that cost has climbed
to about $13–$19 billion, where it has remained ever since
(Manski and Petrie 2001, 1; Ofﬁce of National Drug Control
Policy 2008; DrugWarFacts 2009a). When non-direct costs,
such as the cost of keeping and caring for prisoners con-
victed of drug offenses, is taken into account, the cost of
the drug war may be nearly twice as much, closer to about
$30 billion annually (DrugWarFacts 2009a; DrugSense 2009).
Some observers feel this cost is much too high, especially in
terms of the progress made in the war on drugs (see next
point).
The vast efforts by state, local, and federal governments to reduce
substance abuse in the United States have been largely unsuccess-
ful. A number of studies conducted over the past 30 years
suggest that many (but certainly not all) efforts to reduce sub-
stance abuse by legal means have been a failure. Some exam-
ples of those ﬁndings have been cited earlier in this chapter.
In 1996, a committee of the New York Country Lawyers Asso-
ciation, the oldest bar association in New York City, issued
a report on state and federal drug policy. It concluded that
‘‘[n]otwithstanding the vast public resources expended on
the enforcement of penal statutes against users and distri-
butors of controlled substances, contemporary drug policy
appears to have failed, even on its own terms, in a number
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

of notable respects.’’ It went on to suggest that that drug
policy may actually have had more damaging effects on
society as a whole than have the harmful effects of psycho-
active substances and their abusers (Fischler et al. 1996).
A number of other individuals and organizations have
come to a similar conclusion. Jack Cole, one of the cofound-
ers of Law Enforcement Against Prohibition (LEAP) has
written that ‘‘[d]espite all the lives we have destroyed and all
the money so ill spent, today illicit drugs are cheaper, more
potent, and far easier to get than they were 35 years ago at
the beginning of the war on drugs’’ (‘‘Cops Say Legalize
Drugs!’’ 2009).
Legal prohibitions on drugs have spawned the growth of a huge
crime network and provide a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial asset for terror-
ist groups. Since cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and other recrea-
tional drugs are illegal, they can be obtained only through
black markets. These black markets have become an impor-
tant element of organized crime in almost every country of
the world. Drug organizations maintain control over their
operations by means of well-organized and efﬁcient crime
groups that involve distributors and enforcers. In addition,
substance abusers themselves often turn to crime to earn
the dollars they need to maintain their illegal habit. If the
government controlled the distribution of substances that
are now illegal, the primary motivation for drug cartels would
disappear, and drug-related crime rates would decrease
dramatically.
In addition, proﬁts made from the sale of illegal substances
such as cocaine, heroin, and marijuana is a major source of
income for terrorist groups, many of whom control the source of
production for such drugs. One report on this issue concluded
that ‘‘[r]efusing to address the role of prohibition [of drugs] in
ﬁnancing terrorism will enable terrorist groups to continue to
build the resources they need to engage in even more extensive
acts of terrorism than we have witnessed to date’’ (Oscapella
2001, 2).
Proponents of the decriminalization of illegal substances also
raise a number of other points in defending their position, such as
the fact that many legal substances, such as alcohol and tobacco,
are far more destructive than most illegal drugs; that some illegal
Should Illegal Substances Be Legalized?
71

substances have important practical applications in research,
medicine, religion, and other ﬁelds; that some substance abusers
become involved with drugs simply because they are illegal and
they are attracted by the adventure of becoming involved in an
illegal activity; that U.S. policies on illegal substances have
proved to be disastrous for domestic policies in nations where
these drugs are produced (such as Afghanistan, Colombia,
Bolivia, and Mexico); and governments should treat psychoactive
substances consistently, not granting approval to some (such
as tobacco and alcohol) and heavily penalizing others (such as
marijuana and cocaine). (For an excellent overall review of the
pro-legalization argument, see Cussen and Block 2000.)
The possibility of legalizing at least some currently illegal sub-
stances appears to be gaining some traction among the American
public. In a Zogby Inter-American Dialogue Survey conducted in
September 2008, 76 percent of respondents indicated that they
thought the U.S. war on drugs was failing, and about a quarter of
all respondents (27%) agreed with the statement that legaliz-
ing at least some currently illegal substances would be the best
approach to dealing with this problem (‘‘Zogby/Inter-American
Dialogue Survey: Public Views Clash with U.S. Policy on Cuba,
Immigration, and Drugs,’’ 2008). The substance that currently
receives the greatest support for legalization is marijuana. In a
survey completed in October 2009 by the Gallup organization,
44 percent of Americans favored legalizing the substance, while
54 percent opposed. These numbers represented a signiﬁcant shift
in opinion, however, over earlier polls. In 1970, the ratio was 12 per-
cent in favor of legalization and 84 percent opposed. Those num-
bers gradually changed to 23–25 percent in favor and 73 percent
opposed from 1978 to 1994, after which they slowly moved to their
present values (Saad 2009).
In spite of these shifts in public opinion, the thought of
decriminalizing drugs is still anathema to many people. Some of
the arguments for maintaining current prohibitions on illegal
substances are the following:
Illegal substances have been so classiﬁed at least partly because they
are harmful to human health. Hardly anyone who has studied
the health effects of drugs like cocaine, heroin, LSD, and
MDMA would argue with the contention that the use of such
drugs can have devastating short- and long-term effects on a
person’s health. The argument is less clear for other drugs,
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

marijuana perhaps being the best example. In any case, the
proponents of retaining prohibitions on Schedule I and
Schedule II drugs often point to mortality statistics for these
drugs. The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, for exam-
ple, says on its Web site that ‘‘during 2000, there were 15,852
drug-induced deaths; only slightly less than the 18,539 alcohol-
induced deaths,’’ this in spite of the fact that seven times as
many people use alcohol as use illegal substances (U.S. Drug
Enforcement Administration 2003, 16). These data are a bit dif-
ﬁcult to interpret, however, since a different and independent
report on the same set of data quoted by the DEA claimed that
85,000 deaths could be attributed to alcohol consumption in
one form or another, while 17,000 deaths were associated with
illegal substance use (Mokdad, Marks, Stroup, and Gerberding
2004, 1238, 1241).
Substance abuse is closely linked to crime and violence, so laws
against the illegal use of drugs are needed to reduce crime and vio-
lence. This argument is similar to the one presented above in
support of decriminalization of drugs in that it recognizes
the close relationship between substance abuse and many
kinds of crimes. Instead of arguing that legalizing drugs will
reduce this problem, however, proponents of drug prohibition
say that strong penalties are needed to keep a rein on crime
arising out of drug abuse. The DEA claims that legalizing
drugs would not eliminate the crimes associated with sub-
stance abuse because individuals under some age, such as
18 or 21, would still not be allowed to purchase or use cer-
tain substances, and that portion of the population is currently
and has long been a major consumer of illegal substances.
Therefore, a black market for the drugs would still exist,
retaining most of the violent crime now associated with
illegal drug use.
Drug prohibition programs have worked. Those in favor of retain-
ing strict penalties for the use of marijuana, cocaine, heroin,
and other drugs argue that illegal drug use has decreased
substantially as a result of stiff drug laws. The DEA reports
that illegal drug use has dropped by a third in the last 20 years,
and the use of cocaine by 70 percent during that time. The
agency claims that ‘‘[n]inety ﬁve percent of Americans do
not use drugs. This is success by any standards’’ (U.S. Drug
Enforcement Administration 2003, 2).
Should Illegal Substances Be Legalized?
73

Legalization of drugs will not achieve the objectives that proponents
claim for it. Individuals who have argued against the decrimi-
nalization of drugs frequently point to previous efforts in this
direction, which, they say, have always failed. These com-
mentators tend to use a common set of facts to support their
view, such as the claim that decriminalization of marijuana
in California in 1976 led to an increase in arrests for driving
under the inﬂuence of drugs in the state by 46 percent for
adults and 71 percent for juveniles. They also point to decrimi-
nalization of marijuana by the states of Alaska and Oregon in
the 1970s that resulted in a doubling of the use of the sub-
stance (see, for example, Maginnis 2009).
Opponents of decriminalization resort to a number of other
arguments to support their position. Perhaps the best single
source for these arguments is a booklet published by the Drug
Enforcement Administration in May 2003, Speaking Out against
Drug Legalization. In addition to the points made above, this book-
let suggests that the war against drugs requires a balanced
approach that includes both prevention and treatment, but also
requires laws prohibiting their use; that the drug war, although
expensive, is only a minor part of the overall federal budget,
which represents an important element in dealing with an impor-
tant national social issue; that alcohol abuse has already caused
the nation severe social and health problems, and that the legali-
zation of drugs will only make that situation worse; and that, in
any case, most people convicted of substance abuse do not go to
prison but, instead, are referred to treatment programs (U.S. Drug
Enforcement Administration 2003).
Marijuana and Tobacco
Within the general realm of substance abuse issues, two topics are
of special interest at the end of the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst
century: marijuana and tobacco. In one case, there is an increased
emphasis on legalizing the use of a currently illegal substance
(marijuana), while in the second case, the stress is on increasing
the prohibition of a currently legal drug, tobacco.
Marijuana and Medical Marijuana
Arguments over the legalization or prohibition of marijuana use
are generally similar to those for other drugs, outlined in the
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

preceding section. But proponents of legalization also point out
that marijuana is probably the least dangerous of all substances
listed under Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act. If used
in moderation, it almost certainly has fewer health effects than
alcohol and tobacco, both of which are legal in the United States.
It is also the least likely of all major drugs (tobacco, alcohol,
cocaine, and opiates) to lead to addiction. In its 1999 exhaustive
study, Marijuana and Medicine: The Scientiﬁc Base, the last major
study on the subject, the Institute of Medicine found that about
9 percent of all individuals who had tried marijuana eventually
became dependent on the drug, compared to 32 percent who
became addicted to tobacco, 23 percent to heroin, 17 percent to
cocaine, 15 percent to alcohol, and 9 percent to hypnotics and
sedatives (Joy, Watson, and Benson 1999, 95).
Opponents of the decriminalization of marijuana point most
frequently to the possible role of the substance as a ‘‘gateway’’
drug. A gateway drug is a substance that, when used, leads to
an increased risk of the use of other illegal substances. That is,
some individuals say that a person who uses marijuana is more
likely then to move on to cocaine, heroin, or other more serious
drugs. In a publication on the risks of smoked marijuana, for
example, the Drug Enforcement Administration argues that
‘‘[a]mong marijuana’s most harmful consequences is its role in
leading to the use of other illegal drugs like heroin and cocaine. . . .
The risk of using cocaine has been estimated to be more than 104
times greater for those who have tried marijuana than for those
who have never tried it’’ (U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration
2009).
Other authorities hold different views about the role of mari-
juana as a gateway drug. In its 1999 study cited above, the Institute
of Medicine concluded on this subject that ‘‘marijuana is not the
most common, and is rarely the ﬁrst, ‘gateway’ to illicit drug use.
There is no conclusive evidence that the drug effects of marijuana
are causally linked to the subsequent abuse of other illicit drugs’’
(Joy, Watson, and Benson 1999, 6; for further research on this ques-
tion, also see DrugWarFacts.org 2009b).
Arguably the issue of greatest concern about marijuana at the
beginning of the 2010s is its use for medical purposes. Evidence
suggests that marijuana; its primary component, cannabis; or
related compounds, the cannabinoids have been used for medici-
nal purposes for over two thousand years. Some of the earliest
mentions of these substances for medical uses occur in Chinese
Should Illegal Substances Be Legalized?
75

herbal and medical works dating to the ﬁrst century CE, if not
earlier (Abel 1980). In recent years, a number of medical beneﬁts
have been claimed for these substances. In a review of the litera-
ture on medical marijuana, German physician and researcher
Franjo Grotenhermen has classiﬁed these claims into four major
categories, as follows:
Established Effects: Control of nausea and vomiting; treatment
of anorexia and weight loss.
Relatively Well-conﬁrmed Effects: Treatment for spasticity, pain,
movement disorders, asthma, glaucoma.
Less-conﬁrmed Effects: Treatment for allergies, inﬂammation,
infections, epilepsy, depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety
disorders, dependency, and withdrawal symptoms.
Still at the Research Stage: Treatment of autoimmune
diseases, cancers, fevers, blood pressure disorders, and
protection of the nervous system (Grotenhermen and Russo
2002, 124–125).
These claims have been sufﬁciently convincing that, as of 2010,
13 states have passed laws permitting the growing and sale of
marijuana for medicinal purposes. The ﬁrst state to pass such a
law was California in 1996, later followed by Alaska (1998), Oregon
(1998), Washington (1998), Maine (1999), Colorado (2000), Hawaii
(2000), Nevada (2000), Montana (2004), Vermont (2004), New
Mexico (2007), Rhode Island (2006), and Michigan (2008). Legisla-
tion to permit the use of marijuana for medical purposes is
also under consideration in a number of other states, including
Illinois, Minnesota, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North
Carolina, and Pennsylvania. In all cases where marijuana has been
approved for medical purposes, prospective users require a physi-
cian’s prescription, which can be ﬁlled for some minimum fee at a
state-registered facility.
There remains strong opposition to the use of marijuana,
even for medical purposes. Probably the most common objection
is that the substance is still listed as a Schedule I drug by the
U.S. government under the provisions of the Controlled Substan-
ces Act of 1970. That means that a person in California or Maine
or New Mexico (or any other state that has approved use of medi-
cal marijuana), may be able to purchase and use the drug in his or
her own state, but will still be breaking federal law in doing so.
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, for example, says ﬂat
out that ‘‘[m]arijuana has no medical value that can’t be met more
effectively by legal drugs.’’ Instead, the agency says, people who
promote the use of marijuana for medical purposes really have
another goal in mind. ‘‘Drug legalizers use ‘medical marijuana’,’’
it says, ‘‘as red herring in effort to advocate broader legalization
of drug use’’ (U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration 2009).
Federal law enforcement ofﬁcials have, of course, carried out
DEA policy on the use of medical marijuana. During the
administration of George W. Bush, for example, law enforcement
ofﬁcials have raided marijuana dispensaries licensed to sell
marijuana to individuals with a prescription and have arrested
individuals who grow marijuana for such dispensaries (see, for
example, Americans for Safe Access 2009). Bush’s ﬁrst ‘‘drug
czar,’’ John Walters, frequently made clear his views on medical
marijuana. Not only was marijuana an invalid tool for treating
any medical condition, according to Walters, but, in fact, the push
for marijuana dispensaries was really a tool for obtaining com-
plete legalization for the substance. During one television inter-
view, for example, he said that:
In California, where medical marijuana has been used as
a kind of a wedge issue, or kind of phony effort to try to
say, ‘‘It’s only going to go to people who are sick.’’ It’s
not going to people who are sick. In fact, in San Francisco
it has been reported in the news there are now more
marijuana dispensaries than there are Starbucks in
downtown San Francisco (‘‘De-Filtering: Jeffrey Miron
vs. John Walters on CNN’’ 2009).
The administration of President Barack Obama, who took
ofﬁce in January 2009, has had a somewhat different view of this
controversy. In October 2009, Attorney General Eric H. Holder,
Jr. announced that the federal government would initiate a more
lenient view with regard to individuals who distribute or use
marijuana for medical purposes. ‘‘It will not be a priority to use
federal resources to prosecute patients with serious illnesses or
their caregivers who are complying with state laws on medical
marijuana,’’ Holder said, in a policy statement that represented a
180-degree change from that of the administrations of Presidents
Bill Clinton and George W. Bush (Stout and Moore 2009).
Should Illegal Substances Be Legalized?
77

Smoking Bans
For much of the twentieth century, the American public has had a
love affair with tobacco, especially with cigarettes. At the peak of
their popularity, in 1981, 736.5 billion cigarettes were produced
in the United States (Capehart 2006, 19, Table 1). Still, concerns
about the possible health effects of smoke have long lingered
in the public mind, and that of health and public ofﬁcials. Even
at the time when cigarette companies were advertising that doctors
themselves recommended smoking, professional health organiza-
tions were warning about the possible dangers of smoking.
Some of the earliest legislation restricting smoking dates to
the early twentieth century. That legislation was prompted not
by health concerns, as it is today, but about the morality of smok-
ing. Indeed, the earliest campaigns against smoking were
included in the ﬁrst temperance movements of the early 1830s
that dealt with a host of ‘‘sinful’’ behaviors, that included alcohol
and drug abuse, as well as the use of tobacco products, which
were regarded by reformers as a type of narcotic. Failed minister
and social reformer Sylvester Graham, for example, wrote that
the use of tobacco, coffee, alcohol, and other stimulants which
‘‘only cause a bothersome and excessive sexual appetite that dis-
tracted otherwise decent people from ‘civilized endeavors’ ’’
(Meredith 2008, 154).
At the time, cigarette smoking was hardly an issue of serious
concern in the United States. The per capita consumption of ciga-
rettes was only 0.4 pieces in 1870 and had risen to only 35 pieces
by 1890. At the time, health concerns were also insigniﬁcant, as
only 140 cases of lung cancer had been documented worldwide
by 1889 (Borio 2009). At this point, 43 of the 45 states had passed
laws banning smoking in public areas.
The popularity of cigarette smoking during the nineteenth
century has by now been well documented, with per capita con-
sumption rising from 54 pieces per capita in 1900 to 151 pieces
per capita in 1910 to 665 in 1920, and then to 1,485 in 1930, 1,976
in 1940, 3,552 in 1950, 4,171 in 1960, to its peak of 4,345 in 1963. It
has since gradually fallen off to a level of 1,814 per capita annually
in 2004, the last year for which data are available (Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention 2009). This decline is almost certainly
due to growing concerns about the health effects of cigarette smok-
ing and the laws that have been passed to deal with this issue.
Local communities and states began passing laws prohibit-
ing smoking in the 1970s. These laws varied considerably with
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

regard to the spaces they covered. One of the earliest comprehen-
sive bans was passed by the state of Arizona in 1973, a ban that
applied to public spaces such as libraries, theaters, and concert
halls, but not to restaurants or bars. Over the next decade, about
two dozen more states adopted smoking bans that covered simi-
lar and sometimes expanded areas. As of October 2009, 26 states
have comprehensive smoking bans that apply to virtually all pri-
vate and public enclosed areas; 29 states have laws that include
restaurants speciﬁcally, and 25 have bans on smoking in bars,
often the last refuge for smoking in a nonsmoking state. (Wiscon-
sin was scheduled to join these lists in early 2010.) In addition,
several hundred local communities have adopted bans on smok-
ing in all public and at least some private spaces (American Non-
smokers’ Rights Foundation 2009). In some of the most extreme
cases, smoking has also been banned in outside areas, such as
public parks (including eight cities in California, among them
Los Angeles, San Diego, and San Jose; Hawaii, Iowa, Louisiana,
and Minnesota) and all of the outdoor and indoor areas within
health service areas or educational institutions.
There are indications that the most severe restrictions on the
use of tobacco are yet to come. In June 2009, the U.S. Congress
passed and President Barack Obama signed the Family Smoking
Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, giving the Food and Drug
Administration the right to regulate tobacco products. With this
legislation, the agency has the authority to treat tobacco and its
components as drugs for the ﬁrst time in history.
References
Abel, Ernest L. (1980). ‘‘Marijuana—The First Twelve Thousand Years.’’
http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/hemp/history/ﬁrst12000/1.htm.
Accessed on October 22, 2009.
American Management Association (2001). ‘‘2001 AMA Survey on
Workplace Testing: Medical Testing—Summary of Findings.’’ http://
docs.google.com/gview?a=v&q=cache:c8mvYePZoYkJ:www.amanet
.org/research/pdfs/mt_2001.pdf+2000+AMA+Survey:+Workplace
+Testing:+Medical+Testing&hl=en&gl=us&sig=AFQjCNHZp56z
NzyW45F7BPXpLtZQOxAj8A. Accessed on September 24, 2009.
American Management Association (2004). ‘‘2004 AMA Survey on
Workplace Testing: Medical Testing.’’ http://docs.google.com/gview?
a=v&q=cache:bN67xw3yL9cJ:www.amanet.org/research/pdfs/
References
79

Medical_testing_04.pdf%3Fref%3Ddizinler.com+2004+%22workplace
+testing+survey%22&hl=en&gl=us&sig=AFQjCNFdM0xGMqxk4O7
XW9dive1V5i8WnA. Accessed on September 24, 2009.
Americans for Safe Access (2009). ‘‘Federal Cases.’’ http://www
.safeaccessnow.org/article.php?list=type&type=184. Accessed on
October 22, 2009.
Americans for Nonsmokers’ Rights Foundation (2009). http://www
.no-smoke.org/pdf/100ordlist.pdf. Accessed on October 26, 2009.
BLTC Research (2009). ‘‘Vintage Wine.’’ http://www.cocaine.org/
cocawine.htm. Accessed on October 2, 2009.
Bonnie, Richard J., and Charles H. Whitebread (1974). The Marihuana
Conviction. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press.
Borio, Gene (2009). ‘‘Tobacco Timeline: The Nineteenth Century—The
Age of the Cigar.’’ http://www.tobacco.org/resources/history/Tobacco
_History19.html. Accessed on October 26, 2009.
Brecher, Edward M., and the editors of Consumer Reports Magazine
(1972). The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs. Boston: Little,
Brown and Company. Available online at http://www.druglibrary.org/
Schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/cu/cumenu.htm.
Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (1971). ‘‘Title 21—Food and
Drugs.’’ Rules and Regulations, in Federal Register 36 (80; April 24): 7776–7826.
Buxton, Julia (2006). The Political Economy of Narcotics: Production,
Consumption and Global Markets. London: Zed Books.
Capehart, Thomas C. (2006). Tobacco Situation and Outlook Yearbook.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Agriculture. Economic Research
Service.
Capital Sports Injury Center (2009). ‘‘Anabolic Steroids: The Road to the
Gold or the Road to the Grave.’’ http://www.youcanbeﬁt.com/ster.html.
Accessed on September 25, 2009.
Carpenter, Christopher S. (2007). ‘‘Workplace Drug Testing and Worker
Drug Use.’’ Health Services Research 42 (2; April): 795–810.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2009). ‘‘Smoking & Tobacco
Use: Consumption Data.’’ http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/
tables/economics/consumption/. Accessed on October 26, 2009.
Common Sense for Drug Policy (2009). ‘‘The Persistence Of Folly:
ONDCP’s Anti Drug Media Campaign.’’ http://www.csdp.org/news/
news/ondcpads.htm. Accessed on October 19, 2009.
Courtwright, David T. (1995). ‘‘The Rise and Fall of Cocaine in the United
States.’’ In Jordan Goodman, Paul E. Lovejoy, and Andrew Sherratt, eds.
Consuming Habits: Drugs in History and Anthropology. London: Routledge.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Cussen, Meaghan, and Walter Block (2000). ‘‘Legalize Drugs Now! An
Analysis of the Beneﬁts of Legalized Drugs.’’ American Journal of
Economics and Sociology 59 (3; July): 525–536.
Donohoe, Martin (2005). ‘‘Urine Trouble: Practical, Legal, and Ethical
Issues Surrounding Mandated Drug Testing of Physicians.’’ Journal of
Clinical Ethics 16 (1; Spring): 69–81.
Drug Abuse Resistance Council (2009). ‘‘About D.A.R.E.’’ http://www
.dare.com/home/about_dare.asp. Accessed on September 23, 2009.
Drug Enforcement Administration, Ofﬁce of Diversion Control (2009).
‘‘Controlled Substances Schedule.’’ http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/
schedules/schedules.htm. Accessed on October 16, 2009.
Drug Policy Alliance (2001). ‘‘The Racial History of U.S. Drug
Prohibition.’’ http://www.drugpolicy.org/about/position/race_paper
_history.cfm. Accessed on October 2, 2009.
DrugSense.org (2009). ‘‘Drug War Clock.’’ http://www.drugsense.org/
wodclock.htm. Accessed on October 19, 2009.
DrugWarFacts.org (2009a). ‘‘Economics.’’ http://www.drugwarfacts.org/
cms/node/38. Accessed on October 19, 2009.
DrugWarFacts.org (2009b). ‘‘Gateway Theory.’’ http://www.drugwarfacts
.org/cms/node/43. Accessed on October 22, 2009.
Fischler, Alan B., et al. (1996). Report and Recommendations of the Drug
Policy Task Force. New York: New York Lawyers’ Association. Available
online at http://www.drcnet.org/nycla.html. Accessed on October 20,
2009.
Forbes, David W., ed. (1998–2003). Hawaiian National Bibliography, 1780-
1900. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Frontline (2008). ‘‘Busted: America’s War on Marijuana.’’ http://www
.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/dope/etc/cron.html. Accessed
on October 2, 2009.
Gahlinger, Paul (2004). Illegal Drugs: A Complete Guide to Their History,
Chemistry, Use, and Abuse. New York: Plume.
Gieringer, Dale (2000). ‘‘125th Anniversary of the First U.S. Anti-Drug
Law: San Francisco’s Opium Den Ordinance (Nov. 15, 1875).’’ http://
www.drugsense.org/dpfca/opiumlaw.html. Accessed on October 4, 2009.
Grotenhermen, Franjo, and Ethan Russo, eds. (2002). Cannabis and
Cannabinoids: Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutic Potential.
Binghamton, NY: Haworth Press.
Guard, David (2009). ‘‘Press Release: Oregon Hemp Farming Bill
Becomes Law.’’ http://stopthedrugwar.org/in_the_trenches/2009/aug/
05/press_release_oregon_hemp_farmin. Accessed on October 2, 2009.
References
81

Hamilton, Alexander (1787). Chapter: ‘‘From the New York Packet,
Tuesday, November 27, 1787. The Federalist, no. 12. Found in The Works of
Alexander Hamilton Vol. 11 (Federal Edition). Henry Cabot Lodge, ed.
New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1904.. Accessed from http://
oll.libertyfund.org/title/1388/93583/2090825 on October 1, 2009.
Hanson, David J. (2009). ‘‘National Prohibition of Alcohol in the U.S.’’
http://www2.potsdam.edu/hansondj/Controversies/1091124904_3
.html. Accessed on October 1, 2009.
Hartwell, Tyler D., Paul D. Steele, Michael T. French, and Nathaniel F.
Rodman (1996). ‘‘Prevalence of Drug Testing in the Workplace.’’ Monthly
Labor Review 119 (11; November): 35–42.
High Times Magazine (2009). ‘‘A Timeline of Drug Testing in the United
States.’’ http://hightimes.com/legal/ht_admin/538. Accessed on
September 24, 2009.
Hornik, Robert, et al. (2002). ‘‘Evaluation of the National Youth Anti-
Drug Media Campaign: Fifth Semi-Annual Report of Findings.’’
Rockville, MD: Westat.
House Committee on Appropriations (2009). ‘‘Other Federal Drug
Control Programs.’’ Financial Services and General Government
Appropriations Bill, 2010. http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/cpquery/
T?&report=hr202&dbname=111&. Accessed on October 19, 2009.
International Opium Convention Signed at the Hague January 23, 1912.
1912. http://www.tc.edu/centers/cifas/drugsandsociety/background/
OpiumConvention.html. Accessed on October 2, 2009.
Johnson, Robert A., and Dean R. Gerstein (1998). ‘‘Initiation of Use of
Alcohol, Cigarettes, Marijuana, Cocaine, and Other Substances in US Birth
Cohorts Since 1919.’’ American Journal of Public Health 88 (1; January): 27–33.
Jones, Eliot (2009). ‘‘Drug-Testing in Schools.’’ International Debate
Education Association. http://www.idebate.org/debatabase/topic
_details.php?topicID=95. Accessed on September 25, 2009.
Joy, Janet E., Stanley J. Watson, Jr., and John A. Benson, Jr., eds. (1999).
Marijuana and Medicine: Assessing the Science Base. Washington, D.C.:
National Academies Press.
Judge, J. W. (2007). ‘‘Workplace Drug Testing’s Mixed Success.’’ Behavioral
Healthcare 27 (4; April): 14, 16.
Law Enforcement Against Prohibition (2009). ‘‘Cops Say Legalize
Drugs!’’ http://www.leap.cc/cms/index.php?name=Content&pid=2.
Accessed on October 20, 2009.
Maginnis, Robert L. (2009). ‘‘Legalization of Drugs: The Myths and the
Facts.’’ http://www.sarnia.com/GROUPS/ANTIDRUG/argument/
myths.html. Accessed on October 22, 2009.
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Manski, Charles F., John V. Pepper, and Carol V. Petrie, eds. (2001).
Informing America’s Policy on Illegal Drugs: What We Don’t Know Keeps
Hurting Us. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
MasterYourCard.com (2009). ‘‘Legalizing Drugs to Beneﬁt the Economy?’’
http://masteryourcard.com/blog/2008/09/08/legalizing-drugs-to
-beneﬁt-the-economy/. Accessed on October 19, 2009.
Members of the National Academy of Science’s Committee on Drug Use
in the Workplace (1991). ‘‘Focus on Federal Drug Testing: Individual
Employment Rights.’’ Bulletin of the National Academy.
Meredith, Austin (2008). Drug Involvement in Previous Centuries. http://www
.kouroo.info/kouroo/trends/dope.pdf. Accessed on October 26, 2009.
Mokdad, Ali H., James S. Marks, Donna F. Stroup, and Julie L.
Gerberding (2004). ‘‘Actual Causes of Death in the United States,
2000.’’ Journal of the American Medical Association 291 (10; March 10):
1238–1245.
Musto, David E. (1987). The American Disease: Origins of Narcotic Control,
revised ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
National Collegiate Athletic Association (2009). ‘‘2009–10 NCAA Banned
Drugs.’’ http://www.ncaa.org/wps/wcm/connect/53e6f4804e0b8a
129949f91ad6fc8b25/2009-10+Banned+Drug+Classes.pdf?MOD=AJPERES
&CACHEID=53e6f4804e0b8a129949f91ad6fc8b25. Accessed on
September 25, 2009.
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse (1971). Marihuana:
A Signal of Misunderstanding. http://www.druglibrary.org/Schaffer/Library/
studies/nc/ncrec1_9.htm. Accessed on September 22, 2009.
National Institute on Drug Abuse (2009). ‘‘Treatment Approaches for
Drug Addiction.’’ INDA Info Facts. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health.
Nephew, Thomas M., et al. (2002). Surveillance Report #55: Apparent Per
Capita Consumption: National, State, and Regional Trends, 1977–98.
Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism,
Division of Biometry and Epidemiology: Alcohol Epidemiologic Data
System, September 2002.
New York Times (2009). ‘‘Steroids.’’ New York Times. http://topics
.nytimes.com/top/news/health/diseasesconditionsandhealthtopics/
steroids/index.html. Accessed on September 25, 2009.
Newton, David E. (1999). Drug Testing: An Issue for School, Sports, and
Work. Springﬁeld, NJ: Enslow Publishers.
Normand, Jacques, Richard O. Lempert, and Charles P. O’Brien, eds.
(1994). Under the Inﬂuence: Drugs and the American Workforce. Washington,
D.C.: National Academies Press.
References
83

North American Industrial Hemp Council, Inc. (1997). ‘‘Hemp Facts.’’
http://www.naihc.org/hemp_information/hemp_facts.html. Accessed
on October 2, 2009.
Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (2008). ‘‘Trends in Marijuana Incidence.’’ http://www.oas
.samhsa.gov/MJinitiation/chapter3.htm#top. Accessed on October 2, 2009.
Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy (2008). ‘‘National Drug Control
Strategy: FY 2009 Budget Summary.’’ http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy
.gov/publications/policy/09budget/index.html. Accessed on
October 19, 2009.
Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy (2009a). ‘‘National Youth Anti-
Drug Media Campaign.’’ http://www.mediacampaign.org/. Accessed
on October 19, 2009.
Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy (2009b). ‘‘National Youth Anti-
Drug Media Campaign.’’ http://www.mediacampaign.org/about.html
#ir. Accessed on October 19, 2009.
Olson, Dave (2004a). ‘‘Advantages and Disadvantages of Workplace
Drug Testing.’’ http://www.uncleweed.com/words/essays/
drugtesting-matrix.pdf. Accessed on September 25, 2009.
Olson, Dave (2004b). ‘‘Privacy Issues in Workplace Drug Testing.’’ http://
uncleweed.net/words/essays/Workplace-Drug-Testing.pdf. Accessed
on September 25, 2009.
Oscapella, Eugene (2001). ‘‘How Drug Prohibition Finances and
Otherwise Enables Terrorism.’’ Report to the Senate of Canada Special
Committee on Illegal Drugs. Available online at http://www.ukcia.org/
research/ProhibitionFinancesTerrorism.pdf. Accessed on October 20, 2009.
‘‘Public Law 105–277.’’ 1998. http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/
getdoc.cgi?dbname=105_cong_public_laws&docid=f:publ277.pdf.
Accessed on October 19, 2009.
Robertson, Elizabeth B., Susan L. David, and Suman A. Rao (2003).
Preventing Drug Use Among Children and Adolescents: A Research-Based
Guide for Parents, Educators, and Community Leaders. Bethesda, MD: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of
Health: National Institute of Drug Abuse.
Robins, Lee N. (1973). The Vietnam Drug User Returns. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce. Also available online at http://www
.eric.ed.gov/ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2sql/content_storage_01/0000019b/
80/35/72/be.pdf.
Saad, Lydia (2009). ‘‘U.S. Support for Legalizing Marijuana Reaches New
High.’’ http://www.gallup.com/poll/123728/U.S.-Support-Legalizing
-Marijuana-Reaches-New-High.aspx#1. Accessed on October 20, 2009.
84
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Schaffer Library of Drug Policy (2009). ‘‘Did Alcohol Prohibition Reduce
Alcohol Consumption and Crime?’’ http://www.druglibrary.org/
Prohibitionresults.htm. Accessed on October 1, 2009.
Schaffer Library of Drug Policy (2009). ‘‘The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937.’’
http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mjtaxact.htm.
Accessed on October 2, 2009.
ShowMeTheFacts.org (2009). ‘‘De-Filtering: Jeffrey Miron vs. John
Walters on CNN.’’ http://www.showmethefacts.org/2009/05/07/
deﬁltering-jeffrey-miron-john-walters-cnn/. Accessed on October 22,
2009.
Stepper, Jeff (2009). ‘‘The Pros and Cons of Drug Testing.’’ http://
www.helium.com/items/178231-the-pros-and-cons-of-drug-testing.
Accessed on September 25, 2009.
Stout, David, and Solomon Moore (2009). ‘‘U.S. Won’t Prosecute in States
That Allow Medical Marijuana.’’ New York Times. http://www.nytimes
.com/2009/10/20/us/20cannabis.html. Accessed on October 22, 2009.
Uncle Mike [pseud.] (2008). ‘‘U.S. District Court, Denver, Colorado
Imposes First Federal Marihuana Law Penalties.’’ http://www
.unclemikesresearch.com/u-s-district-court-denver-colorado-imposes
-ﬁrst-federal-marihuana-law-penalties/. Accessed on October 2, 2009.
U.S. Code (2009a). Title 21, Chapter 13, Subchapter I, Part A: Deﬁnitions.
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/usc.cgi?ACTION=RETRIEVE
&FILE=$$xa$$busc21.wais&start=2634952&SIZE=56838&TYPE=PDF.
Accessed on October 17, 2009.
U.S. Code (2009b). Title 21, Chapter 13, Subchapter I, Part B: ‘‘Treatment
of Controlled Substances Analogues.’’ http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/
cgibin/usc.cgi?ACTION=RETRIEVE&FILE=$$xa$$busc21.wais&start
=2743382&SIZE=1094&TYPE=PDF. Accessed on October 17, 2009.
U.S. Code (2009c). Title 21, Chapter 13, Subchapter I, Part D: ‘‘Offenses
and Penalties.’’ http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/usc.cgi?
ACTION=RETRIEVE&FILE=$$xa$$busc21.wais&start=2940795&SIZE
=9867&TYPE=PDF. Accessed on October 17, 2009.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration (2009). ‘‘SAMHSA’s Center for
Substance Abuse Prevention.’’ http://prevention.samhsa.gov/. Accessed
on September 22, 2009.
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (2003). Speaking Out against Drug
Legalization. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice.
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (2009). ‘‘Exposing the Myth of
Smoked Medical Marijuana—Marijuana: The Facts.’’ http://www.justice
.gov/dea/ongoing/marijuana.html. Accessed on October 22, 2009.
References
85

U.S. House of Representatives (1937). Committee on Ways and Means,
Hearings, May 4. ‘‘Taxation of Marihuana.’’ As cited in ‘‘The Marihuana
Tax Act of 1937.’’ http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/hemp/taxact/
t10a.htm. Accessed on October 2, 2009.
U.S. Public Health Service (2001). Youth Violence: A Report of the Surgeon
General. Washington, D.C.: Department of Health and Human Services.
U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary (1969). ‘‘Controlled Dangerous
Substances Act of 1969.’’ Senate Report No. 613, 91st Congress, 1st Session.
U.S. Supreme Court (2002). Board of Education of Independent School District
No. 92 of Pottawatomie Cty v. Earls (536 U.S. 822). Available online at
http://supreme.justia.com/us/536/822/case.html. Accessed on
September 25, 2009.
Whitebread, Charles. 1995a. ‘‘The History of The Non-medical Use of
Drugs In the United States: A Speech to the California Judges Association
1995 Annual Conference.’’ http://www.druglibrary.org/olsen/DPF/
whitebread08.html. Accessed on October 14, 2009.
Whitebread, Charles (1995b). ‘‘The History of The Non-medical Use of
Drugs In the United States: A Speech to the California Judges Association
1995 Annual Conference.’’ http://www.druglibrary.org/olsen/DPF/
whitebread.html#TOC. Accessed on October 4, 2009.
Women of the GOP Blog (2009). ‘‘The Life of Nancy Reagan.’’ http://
gopwomen.blogspot.com/2009/09/life-of-nancy-reagan.html. Accessed
on October 19, 2009.
Women’s Christian Temperance Union (2009). ‘‘Early History.’’ http://
www.wctu.org/earlyhistory.html. Accessed on October 1, 2009.
Yamaguchi, Ryoko, Lloyd D. Johnston, and Patrick M. O’Malley (2003).
Drug Testing in Schools: Policies, Practices, and Association With Student
Drug Use. Occasional Paper No. 2. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social
Research. University of Michigan.
Zimmer, Lynn (1999). Drug Testing: A Bad Investment. New York:
American Civil Liberties Union.
Zogby (2008). ‘‘Zogby/Inter-American Dialogue Survey: Public Views
Clash with U.S. Policy on Cuba, Immigration, and Drugs.’’ http://www
.zogby.com/NEWS/ReadNews.cfm?ID=1568. Accessed on October 20,
2009.
86
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Worldwide Perspective
Introduction
Psychoactive substances have played an important role in the
culture of most countries around the world throughout human
history. Typically, people discover that a particular plant, plant
product, mineral, or other substance has useful biological effects,
such as relieving pain or helping a person adjust to environmen-
tal conditions. Then, in many instances, that substance is put to
other uses, such as playing a role in religious ceremonies or serv-
ing as a recreational drug, simply helping people to relax and
escape the difﬁculties of everyday life.
The evolution of cocaine as a popular drug is an example of
this pattern. Cocaine is obtained from the coca bush, a plant
native to the Andes Mountains of South America. Four varieties
of the plant are generally available, Erythroxylum coca, E. ipadu,
E. novogratense, and E. truxillense. By far the most common and
popular of these species is E. coca, which accounts for about
95 percent of the modern production of cocaine (Gahlinger
2004, 241). Residents of the Andes region apparently discovered
the value of coca as a dietary supplement early in their history.
When chewed, dried and smoked, or made into a tea infusion,
coca leaves helped suppress hunger pangs and reduced fatigue,
making it easier for people to work under the harsh environ-
mental conditions of the high mountains. (Modern travelers
from sea-level countries still rely on drafts of coca tea or chewed
coca leaves to adjust to high altitudes during their brief visits
to Peru, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, and other regions of the
87

Andes Mountains.) Coca products were also widely used for a
variety of medical purposes, such as the treatment of asthma
and malaria, as a blood coagulant, as an aphrodisiac, to treat
infections, and to extend one’s longevity.
The many beneﬁts provided by the coca plant earned it a spe-
cial place in the cultural traditions and religious pantheon of
Andean peoples. Imbibing ‘‘Mama Coca’’ by chewing, drinking,
or smoking became a standard part of many Incan ceremonies, a
fact that led the Spanish conquistadores to ban the practice
as being a heathen custom unworthy of a newly converted
(to Roman Catholicism) subject population.
Although half a world apart geographically and in terms of
psychoactive properties, the early history of coffee is similar to
that of coca. The ﬁrst recorded use of coffee as a drink among
humans dates to the ninth century in a region that is part of
modern Ethiopia. According to one account, residents of the area
noticed that goats that fed on a particular native plant appeared
to have signiﬁcantly more energy than those that fed elsewhere;
they became known as ‘‘the dancing goats’’ (Weinberg and Bealer
2002, 3–4). Upon trying a concoction of the beans of that plant, a
member of the genus Coffea, people experienced the same feeling
of exhilaration and soon became addicted to the drinking of
coffee. As in South America, coffee drinking was also thought to
have medicinal beneﬁts and it soon became associated with
cultural and religious ceremonies and traditions. Especially in
regions where Islam took root, and alcoholic beverages were
prohibited, coffee became an essential part of many religious
events (‘‘Coffee in Religions,’’ 2009).
News about the potential uses of psychoactive substances
eventually spread far beyond the regions in which they originate.
As explorers, traders, and conquering armies travel from one region
to another, they often carry with them word of these substances,
introducing their use to their home countries. The cannabis species
from which hemp, hashish, and marijuana are derived is native to
China and India, where reports of its use date to at least 6000 BCE.
However, travelers carried information about the commercial,
medical, and recreational uses of the plant to other countries on a
number of occasions. By 500 BCE, for example, Scythian travelers
from the region of modern day Iran apparently had introduced
cannabis products to northern Europe. An urn containing leaves
and seeds of the plant dating to this period has been found in the
region of Berlin (Concept 420 2009). By some accounts, one of the
88
Worldwide Perspective

most important factors in the spread of hashish use in Europe in the
early nineteenth century was introduction of the practice by sol-
diers from Napoleon’s army returning from their battles in Egypt,
where the drug was regularly used by a large segment of the local
population. By the 1840s, the drug had become one of the most
popular of all recreational drugs in coffee houses throughout
Europe (Gahlinger 2004, 31).
The spread of tobacco use is similar to that of other psychoac-
tive substances. The tobacco plant is native to North and South
America, where it was used for medicinal, religious, and recrea-
tional purposes at least as early as the ﬁrst century BCE. Word
about the many uses of the tobacco plant began to spread in the
1490s as a result of the ﬁrst visits to the New World by Christopher
Columbus. Members of Columbus’ crew and of other exploratory
voyages found pleasure in smoking of tobacco, and soon became
addicted (at least in an informal sense) to the practice. Historians
point out that Portugese sailors, in particular, began to establish
small tobacco farms at their trading posts so that they would
always have a guaranteed supply of the product (Brooks 1952,
33–34). Smoking also spread to continental Europe as sailors and
explorers returned from their visits to the New World, bringing
the Native American custom with them. The practice was appa-
rently introduced to France in 1556, Portugal in 1558, Spain in
1559, England in 1564 or 1565, and Turkey and Poland in 1580
(Borio 2009b).
Legal or Illegal?
As mentioned in Chapter 1, the use of psychoactive substances
has often been surrounded by medical, moral, social, and legal
controversy. Typically, coca, tobacco, cannabis, coffee, and other
psychoactive substances have been accepted by cultures where
they have very long histories for their medical, religious, cultural,
or recreational uses. But their use has just as often been ques-
tioned by cultures into which they are introduced. Early users of
tobacco in Europe, for example, often touted the substance’s
many medical beneﬁts. For example, the ﬁrst scholarly book on
tobacco, De Hierba Panacea, by Spanish physician and botanist
Nicola´s Bautista Monardes, listed 36 medical problems for which
tobacco served as a cure (Frampton 1577). At almost the same
time, however, other writers were warning about the health
Legal or Illegal?
89

hazards posed by smoking. In 1602, for example, a prescient
anonymous physician wrote a pamphlet, Chimny-Sweepers or
A Warning for Tabacconists, cautioning about the potential health
effects of exposure to tobacco smoke. He had learned from treat-
ing chimney sweeps, he said, that prolonged exposure to smoke
could result in ‘‘rendering him incapable of propagation’’ and
leaving a man ‘‘in a state of depression, ‘mopishness and sottish-
ness,’ which in the long run must damage memory, imagination
and understanding’’ (Borio 2009a).
Similar tales can be told of other psychoactive substances. For
at least two thousand years, marijuana was widely used by Far
Eastern and Near Eastern civilizations for medical, religious,
ceremonial, and recreational purposes. The drug was commonly
used in the form of a puriﬁed resinous extract of the plant known
as hashish. The ﬁrst efforts to control its use are perhaps dated to
about 1378 when the Ottoman emperor Soudoun Scheikhouni
banned the eating of hashish, apparently because it had become
so popular among his subjects (Concept 420 2009). Such efforts,
repeated a number of times in a number of cultures, were seldom
effective in discouraging the use of hashish or other forms of mari-
juana. In fact, it was not until the early twentieth century that most
modern nations began active campaigns against the drug, either
attempting to tax it out of use or outrightly banning the use of can-
nabis products for recreational purposes (Concept 420 2009).
Drug Laws Today
A review of the prohibitions against psychoactive substances
worldwide would seem to be a daunting task. Given the variety
of histories, moral systems, beliefs, and other characteristics of
various cultures, one might expect there to be a bewildering vari-
ety of national positions about the recreational use of opiates,
cocaine, marijuana, tobacco, alcohol, and other psychoactive sub-
stances. And in some respects, that view is correct. Well over a
sixth of the world’s population, adherents of the Muslim faith,
for example, are forbidden by their faith from consuming any
type of psychoactive substance other than coffee and tea. As a
contemporary writer on the subject has explained,
The use of alcohol and other drugs is considered a
‘‘major sin.’’ Muslims are required to stay away from
90
Worldwide Perspective

khamr [an intoxicant] as it is considered the mother of all
evils (Muhammed 2009).
Such a position is clearly at odds with national policies in
other countries, such as the United States, where alcoholic prod-
ucts are generally available to any man or woman of legal age,
or the Netherlands, where marijuana is freely available for sale
and consumption at public establishments. Perhaps more to the
point, a cultural or religious ban on the use of psychoactive sub-
stances does not necessarily mean that substance abuse does not
exist in nations where such prohibitions are in place, as will be
noted in greater detail below.
Yet, in another sense, there is a certain continuity in drug
prohibition philosophies that extends across the globe. In his
paper, ‘‘The Secret of World-wide Drug Prohibition,’’ Harry G.
Levine, professor of sociology at Queens College of the City
University of New York, argues that:
Every country in the world has drug prohibition. Every
country in the world criminalizes the production and
sale of cannabis, cocaine and opiates. In addition, most
countries criminalize the production and sale of some
other psychoactive substances (Levine 2001).
In this paper, Levine outlines the history of the development of
drug prohibition policies around the world during the twentieth
century, largely as a result of the efforts by the United States
government.
The most important element in this worldwide effort to control
the recreational use of psychoactive drugs was the Single Conven-
tion on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. By the end of World War II, nations
around the world had adopted a crazy patchwork of laws restrict-
ing the use of psychoactive drugs for recreational purposes. (Such
drugs are almost universally permitted for medical and research
purposes, such as the control of pain by opiates.) The League of
Nations had also made a number of efforts to establish international
standards for the control of psychoactive substances. But changes in
the types of drugs available and their availability required constant
amendments to and revisions of these treaties, a process that was
always many years behind the rapid development of new drug
technology. Finally, in 1948, the United Nations initiated an effort
to write a new treaty that would provide a single standard for the
Drug Laws Today
91

control of psychoactive substances throughout the world. That
treaty did not come to fruition for 13 years. It was ﬁnally signed in
New York City in 1961 and took effect three years later.
The primary provision of the treaty was that all signatories
agreed to prohibit the production, export, and consumption of
certain speciﬁed substances, including opiates and coca products
(usually covered by all preceding treaties), as well as marijuana
(usually not covered by earlier treaties), and a host of new
psychoactive substances as they became generally available, such
as methadone, pethidine, morphinan, dextromoramide, fentanyl,
piritramide, and their analogs. Currently, 184 nations have
signed the Single Convention (Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
1961; United Nations Treaty Collection 2009). One of the main
features of the treaty was the establishment of four ‘‘schedules’’
of drugs, very similar to the schedule system developed by the
U.S. Controlled Substances Act of 1970.
In his article, Professor Levine argues that drug prohibition
serves some very useful purposes that go far beyond simply
depriving individuals of the ability to use psychoactive substan-
ces for recreational purposes. He claims that drug abuse laws
vastly increase the police and military powers of a government,
allow governments to demonize the use of drugs and blame them
for all manner of social failures, contribute to the belief that strong
national governments can act on behalf of the general welfare of
people, and provide a single theme on which politicians and
legislators of all stripes can agree (Levine 2001). Because of these
powerful elements, Levine suggests that revoking or amending
national drug laws will never be as simple as it might seem, since
such actions violate international treatment agreements that have
now been in place for almost half a century.
Whether Professor Levine’s argument is correct or not, the
fact remains that prohibitions against drug abuse vary widely
throughout the world. The following review illustrates the types
of laws that exist in a variety of nations around the world.
Canada. The controlling law for substance abuse in Canada is
the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act of 1996, which is the
nation’s implementing legislation for the Single Convention
on Narcotics Drugs. The act is similar in many ways to the U.S.
Controlled Substances Act of 1970 which, in fact, has served as
the model for drug legislation in many countries around the
world. One major difference between the Canadian and U.S. laws
is that the former has eight schedules of drugs, rather than the ﬁve
92
Worldwide Perspective

listed in the U.S. act. Without deﬁnition, the ﬁrst ﬁve schedules
under Canadian laws contain essentially the same substances listed
under comparable U.S. laws. Schedule I, for example, includes
opiates, coca products, fentanyls, ketamine, methamphetamine,
and PCP. Schedule VI includes precursors of illegal drugs and
substances, such as 1,4-butanediol, ephedrine, lysergic acid,
potassium permanganate, red and white phosphorus, acetone
diethyl ether, and hydrochloric and sulfuric acid. Schedules VII
and VIII contain two substances each, hashish and cannabis
(drugs that are listed under Schedule I in U.S. law). Schedule VII
is designed for large quantities of these two drugs, three kilograms
or more of either, while Schedule VIII lists much smaller amounts
of the two drugs, 1 gram of hashish or 30 grams of cannabis. The
distinctions made in Schedules VII and VIII were established
because penalties for the two categories are very different. While
possession or tracking in large quantities of a cannabis product
(Schedule VII) is punished with a prison term of up to seven years,
a Schedule VIII offense is punished by no more than a $1,000 ﬁne
and/or six months in prison.
Southeast Asia. Most countries in Southeast Asia have among
the most severe penalties for substance and drug abuse of any
region in the world. Some commentators suggest that the reason
for these penalties is the proximity of the countries to regions in
which illegal drugs are produced, such as Afghanistan and the
so-called Golden Triangle at the intersection of Myanmar, Laos,
and Thailand. As an example, Indonesian law calls for the death
sentence, life imprisonment, and/or a ﬁne of one billion rupiahs
(about $100,000) for conviction of the most serious drug crimes.
Even for less offenses, penalties can be severe. A person who uses
illegal substances, for example, and does not report himself or
herself to authorities may be imprisoned for six months, and the
family of such an individual is subject to three months imprison-
ment for failing to report the relative (National Narcotics Board,
Republic of Indonesia 1997). These penalties are not theoretical
warnings to drug users and dealers. In June 2008, for example,
the Indonesian government executed two Nigerians convicted of
drug trafﬁcking. General Sutanto (who, like many Indonesians,
uses only one name) argued that ‘‘[t]o give them a lesson, drug
trafﬁckers must be executed immediately’’ (Asia Death Penalty
2008). That philosophy did not bode well for at least 57 additional
individuals currently in prison because of drug trafﬁcking.
Those inmates will be executed, an assistant attorney general
Drug Laws Today
93

announced, ‘‘according to the law, after their appeals are
exhausted’’ (Gelling 2008).
Singapore’s drug laws may be even more draconian than
those of Indonesia. As with many nations, Singapore law presumes
that anyone who is carrying more than some stated amount of a
drug is not just a user of that drug, but also a trafﬁcker in the drug,
a category that almost universally brings a more severe penalty.
According to Section 17 of Chapter 185 of the Misuse of Drugs
Act the amount of a substance that qualiﬁes a person as a trafﬁcker
(rather than simply a user) is 100 grams (3.5 ounces) of opium,
3 grams (0.1 ounces) of morphine, 15 grams (0.5 ounces) of canna-
bis, 3 grams (0.1 ounces) of cocaine, and 25 grams (0.9 ounces) of
methamphetamine (‘‘Misuse of Drugs Act,’’ 2009). For anyone
convicted of having more than the stated amount of anyone of
these substances, the penalty is death by hanging, a sentence that
was carried out more than 400 times between 1991 and 2004
(Aquino 2009).
The death penalty for drug trafﬁcking also remains on the
books in the Philippines and Thailand, although it is less commonly
imposed than in Indonesia and Singapore. For the Philippines, the
penalty (death or life imprisonment) applies to anyone convicted
of possession of at least 10 grams (0.3 ounces) of cocaine, heroin,
marijuana resin, or morphine, or at least 500 grams (17 ounces) of
marijuana. For smaller quantities, such as 5 grams (0.17 ounces) of
an illegal drug, the penalty is a sentence of at least 12 years in prison
(‘‘Philippine Laws, Statutes & Codes. Republic Act No. 9165,’’ 2009).
Harsh penalties for possession of speciﬁed amounts of illegal
substances also remain in other parts of Southeast Asia. Vietnam
legislation describes in detail the amounts of illegal substances for
which a person may be prosecuted and punished, and the penalty
for each category of drugs, with the maximum penalty being death
(The [Vietnam] National Legal Database 2009). In 2007, 85 people
were put to death for drug-related crimes (Aquino 2009).
China. Ofﬁcial publications of the Chinese government
reinforce the general concern among most Asian countries about
the hazards posed by the production, trafﬁcking, sale, and use of
illegal substances. A document released by the Embassy of the
People’s Republic of China in the United States in June 2000, for
example, expressed concern about China’s exposure to drugs
because of its location near the Golden Triangle. It pointed out
that China had a long history of struggling against drug abuse
dating back hundreds of years and, in particular, to the revolution
94
Worldwide Perspective

of 1949 when the new Communist government ‘‘wiped out the
scourge of opium’’ (Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in
the United States 2000). The Chinese government has continued
an aggressive stance against the use of illegal substances, according
to the embassy statement, because ‘‘[l]aunching an anti-drug strug-
gle to eliminate the drug scourge is the historical responsibility of
the Chinese government’’ (Embassy of the People’s Republic of
China in the United States 2000).
As of the date of the embassy document, the war against illegal
substances was being conducted by police anti-drug squads in
24 (out of 31) provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities,
204 cities and prefectures, and 735 cities and districts as well as
agencies of the Chinese People’s Armed Police, the frontier defense
force, various judicial departments, the customs service, and agen-
cies of the pharmaceutical and other industrial and commercial
entities. These groups are guided by a governmental policy that
has identiﬁed 12 types of crimes involving the use of 118 narcotic
drugs and 119 psychoactive substances for which penalties up to
and including death have been established.
Near East. Some countries in the Near East have drug laws
at least as severe as those of Southeast Asia. In the United Arab
Emirates (UAE), for example, penalties for drug trafﬁcking may
range from a few years in prison to death. The UAE laws are espe-
cially harsh, however, since the possession of even trace amounts
of an illegal substance are taken as proof of one’s intent to sell
drugs, such that trafﬁcking penalties apply for essentially any
conviction for the possession of any illegal substance. UAE laws
cover a wide array of substances that includes some prescription
and over-the-counter drugs, as well as substances that might not
be considered as drugs in other cultures. Possession of culinary
poppy seeds, for example, falls within the range of the UAE laws
(U.S. Department of State 2009d). Similar penalties exist for drug
use in other Muslim countries. In Saudi Arabia, for example,
penalties for conviction of drug trafﬁcking include heavy ﬁnes,
imprisonment, public ﬂogging, and death (U.S. Department of
State 2009c). As with Southeast Asia, harsh penalties for illegal
drug use are not just symbolic representations of a nation’s moral
codes; they are guides to action. A recent report on the use of
death penalties for drug-related crimes indicated that the death
penalty had been carried out in at least four Near Eastern nations—
Egypt, Iran, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia—in the period between
2002 and 2006 (Lines 2007, 8).
Drug Laws Today
95

Africa. Drug policies in Africa appear to be undergoing a
signiﬁcant change. For most of their modern history, African
nations were confronted with a number of crucial practical issues—
such as internal and cross-border warfare, food shortages, and
rampant disease—that left them little time, energy, or resources
to deal with a ‘‘marginal’’ issue such as illegal substance abuse.
In addition, the use of illegal substances was not a signiﬁcant part
in nations on the continent, except among expatriates, who could
often bribe themselves out of legal problems involving drugs in
which they became involved (Drug Policy Alliance Network 2009).
That situation appears to have changed with the turn of the
new century, at least partly because of more severe laws and more
aggressive law enforcement in other parts of the world. The 2000s
have seen drug cartels from South America and Southeast Asia
increasing their shipments of opiates, cocaine, marijuana, and
other illegal substances to the African continent. According to
one report, at least 9 drug cartels from Colombia and Mexico have
established bases of operation in 11 West African nations alone
(Brice 2009).
In response to this new trend, a number of African nations have
begun to adopt laws considerably more aggressive than had been in
place in the past. In October 2009, for example, Liberia adopted a
new drug law that quintupled the penalty for drug possession, from
a previous 5-to-10 year prison term to a 25-to-60-year term. In addi-
tion, suspects of drug crimes are no longer eligible for bail while
awaiting trial, and they are subject to much more severe forfeiture
penalties (StoptheDrugWar.org 2009a). Another West African
nation, Namibia, has followed Liberia’s lead. In 2007, the
government proposed a new policy on the use of illegal substances
calling for a minimum 20-year sentence for a ﬁrst-time conviction,
and a 30-year sentence for a second conviction. These penalties are
to be assessed for use of any quantity of an illegal substance,
no matter how small (StoptheDrugWar.org 2009b). Other West
Africa countries have adopted similar policies, with Senegal dou-
bling its penalty for drug convictions to hard labor for 10 to 20 years
(IRIN 2009).
The growing threat of the drug problem on the African conti-
nent has begun to concern regional, continental, and international
agencies. For example, at the Third Session of the African Union
Conference of Ministers on substance abuse issues, held in Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia, on December 3–7, 2007, there was an acknowledg-
ment that the continent’s growing drug problem would require a
96
Worldwide Perspective

more aggressive and extensive involvement of law enforcement
ofﬁcials, rather than remaining strictly the purview of drug control
agencies, as it had in the past. The Revised Plan of Action on Drug
Control And Crime Prevention for the period of 2007–2012 adopted
by the African Union places a very strong emphasis on the wide-
spread and intensive use of law enforcement resources to deal with
the continent’s substance abuse problems. Little or nothing is said
in the plan about methods for dealing with the problem at the level
of individual consumption (African Union 2007).
Latin America. The survey of drug policies in Asia and Africa
illustrated thus far presents an almost universal collection of laws
that deal harshly with the production, sale, trafﬁcking, and con-
sumption of illegal substances. Sentences ranging from a few
years to life imprisonment, and including death penalties, are
not uncommon in most nations across these two continents.
Yet, a signiﬁcantly different trend can be detected in some other
parts of the world, especially South America, Europe, and North
America. In South America, for example, the most recent trend is
toward a liberalization of drug policies, with laws emphasizing
prevention and treatment of users rather than harsher prison sen-
tences. Within an eight-day period in August 2009, for example,
both Mexico and Argentina decriminalized the consumption of
small amounts of most drugs. In the former case, the action came
about as the result of legislative procedures, while in the latter
case, decriminalization came about when the Argentine supreme
court ruled that the nation’s drug laws against the use of mari-
juana were unconstitutional. Experts believe that the court’s rul-
ing will soon extend to all other Argentine national drug laws.
The actions in Mexico and Argentina were only the most
recent steps in a movement taking place throughout Latin
America. Colombia’s supreme court had announced a ruling
similar to that of its Argentine colleagues as early as 1994. Brazil
had decriminalized the consumption of small amounts of drugs
in 2006, replacing prison sentences with mandatory educational,
treatment, or public service sentences. The Uruguayan legislature
has given judges the authority to decide whether drug possession
falls into the category of trafﬁcking or personal consumption,
with the possibility of treatment instead of imprisonment as an
appropriate sentence for conviction in the latter instance. And
the Ecuadorean legislature was considering (as of early 2010)
the decriminalization of the consumption of small amounts of
drugs (StoptheDrugWar.org 2009c).
Drug Laws Today
97

One of the most important factors in the changing attitudes
about the decriminalization of drug consumption in South
America appears to be a philosophy expressed by the Latin
American Commission on Drugs and Democracy, a group of
17 individuals from 10 Latin American countries. The group was
formed through the efforts of three political leaders: Ce´sar Gaviria,
former president of Colombia; Ernesto Zedillo, former president
of Mexico; and Fernando Henrique Cardoso, former president of
Brazil. The commission held its ﬁrst meeting on April 30, 2008,
and issued its ﬁnal report a year later, in March 2009. The com-
mission came to the conclusion that drug policies pursued in their
nations for many years had been a failure, and a new approach to
the problem of substance abuse was needed. They formulated
ﬁve general principles on which they thought future efforts
should be based:
•
Changing the fundamental assumption that users of
illegal substances are criminals with the assumption that
they are patients who need to be treated by the public
health system.
•
Examining the medical evidence about marijuana with a
view toward decriminalizing the use of this substance for
valid health purposes.
•
Reducing the consumption of illegal substances with
programs of education for young people.
•
Redirecting national policies toward an aggressive cam-
paign against organized crime for which the distribution
of drugs is an essential element.
•
Reframing national policies on the prohibition of the
cultivation of illegal drugs by providing farmers with
reasonable alternatives to the growth of these products
(Drugs and Democracy, 2009, 8–10).
Europe. Arguably the most permissive drug laws in the world
can be found in Europe. A number of studies have found that
drug policies in this region have been changing to a signiﬁcant
degree to focus on the difference between personal use of small
amounts of illegal substances for recreational purposes and
large-scale trafﬁcking in drugs such as opiates, cocaine, and ana-
log designer drugs. Authorities now tend to regard the former
as a matter of public health concern that should be dealt with
through prevention and treatment programs, while the latter
98
Worldwide Perspective

remains the concern of law enforcement agencies. Penalties for
personal use of small amounts of illegal substances are now likely
to consist of required participation in treatment programs,
community service, or modest ﬁnes, while penalties for the latter
continue to involve long-term prison sentences, loss of property,
and signiﬁcant monetary ﬁnes. The European Monitoring Centre
for Drugs and Drug Addiction summarized this trend in its 2006
report The State of the Drugs Problem in Europe (an annual publica-
tion of the organization). It noted that:
A continuing trend . . . is for changes to national drug
laws to emphasise more strongly a distinction between
offences of drug possession for personal use and those
involving trafﬁcking and supply. Generally, there is a
shift towards increased penalties for the latter and a
reduced emphasis on custodial sentences for the former.
This development is in line with a greater emphasis
overall across Europe on widening the opportunities
for drug treatment and on giving more attention to inter-
ventions that divert those with drug problems away
from the criminal justice system towards treatment and
rehabilitation options (European Monitoring Centre for
Drugs and Drug Addiction 2006, 11).
The report provided a number of examples that illustrate this
trend. During the year covered by the 2006 report, for example,
Romania adopted a new penal code that distinguishes between cas-
ual users of illegal substances and drug addicts. Penalties for the
former were signiﬁcantly reduced, restricted to a certain number
of hours of community service and/or a day ﬁne (a ﬁne based on
a person’s income). Penalties can also be adjusted based on an indi-
vidual’s personal circumstances. On the other hand, penalties for
more serious drug-related crimes were increased under the new
legislation. New legislation in Italy was similar to that in Romania,
with the former six-schedule system reduced to just two schedules:
drugs with some therapeutic value and those without such value.
Penalties for personal use of small amounts of less dangerous drugs
were reduced to community service and/or house arrest and
the possibility of an alternative to prison sentence was expanded
(European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction, 21).
Perhaps the most dramatic example of the trend toward
decriminalization in Europe is the reversal of course in Portugal.
Drug Laws Today
99

At one time, the nation had some of the most severe drug laws
in Europe. First instituted in the mid-twentieth century under
long-term dictator Antonio Salazar, these laws punished drug
possession by harsh prison sentences and/or heavy ﬁnes. These
laws did little to solve the nation’s drug problems, however, and
by the 1990s, Portugal was widely acknowledged as having the
worst drug problems in Western Europe (Portugal’s Drug Laws
2009). At that point, the federal government decided to take a
totally different approach to controlling the nation’s drug prob-
lems. It decided to decriminalize the use of small amounts of all
drugs, ranging from marijuana to heroin and cocaine. The new
laws did not change penalties for trafﬁcking or dealing drugs,
but eliminated prison sentences for users of small amounts of ille-
gal substances and individuals addicted to drugs. Now, anyone
convicted of substance abuse is referred to a treatment center,
where he or she is helped to understand and control his or her
substance abuse problems (Vastag 2009).
A recent study conducted by the Cato Institute in Washington,
D.C., has found that the new drug policy appears to be extraordi-
narily successful. The number of drug overdoses in Portugal
dropped from an annual rate of about 400 in 2001 to 290 ﬁve years
later. During the same period, the number of new cases of HIV
infection resulting from the sharing of dirty needles dropped from
1,400 in 2001 to 400 in 2006 (Vastag 2009). By 2006, Portugal, alone in
Europe except for Italy, was the only nation to report a decrease in
the number of drug law offences (European Monitoring Centre for
Drugs and Drug Addiction 2006, 23).
A complete and up-to-date summary of drug laws and poli-
cies in all member states of the European Union is available online
at http://eldd.emcdda.europa.eu/html.cfm/index5174EN.html
?nNodeID=5174&sLanguageISO=EN#c2.
Marijuana: A Special Case?
The one psychoactive substance that continues to pose an issue in
many nations around the world is marijuana (and, in some cases,
other products of the cannabis plant, such as hashish). An impor-
tant part of the difﬁculty is that marijuana, hashish, and related
cannabis products have long been an essential part of many reli-
gious and cultural ceremonies. As noted above, the product
called bhang (a dried product made from the leaves and ﬂowers
100
Worldwide Perspective

of the female cannabis plant), has been consumed as part of reli-
gious ceremonies in India since at least the ﬁrst millennium BCE.
At least as old as bhang may be another cannabis product called
charas, made by hand-processing resin from the cannabis plant.
The earliest use of charas seems to date to the so-called booz rooz
religious ceremony of ancient Persia (International Cannagraphic
2009). Cannabis products have also been very popular in most of
West Africa for centuries. In Swaziland, Lesotho, and South Africa,
for example, the consumption of marijuana—known in the region
as dagga or insangu—is a centuries-old custom. Efforts to criminal-
ize the use of cannabis products in these regions ﬂy in the face,
then, of long-held cultural traditions (Hall 2009). Even some viru-
lently anti-drug parts of the world maintain traditional practices
of using otherwise illegal marijuana-like substances for religious,
ceremonial, or recreational purposes. For example, the Muslim
population of East Africa and Yemen, who otherwise are prohib-
ited by their religion from using psychoactive substances, have
long chewed the leaves of the qat plant (Catha edulis, also known
as kat, qat, qaat, quat, gat, jaad, chat, chad, chaad and miraa) to
obtain a mild psychoactive ‘‘buzz.’’ In fact, use of the plant is so
popular in some regions that its cultivation is currently threatening
the scarce water supplies in the region (Worth 2009, 9).
Probably for more than any other drugs, therefore, the laws
dealing with marijuana vary widely throughout the world.
Table 3.1 summarizes the legal status of cannabis products in a
sample of nations around the world.
As in the United States, there is a vigorous debate in some
countries about the decriminalization of marijuana use for medical
purposes. The guiding principle on which almost all national laws
are based, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, as
amended by the 1972 Protocol, is virtually silent on the subject.
It says only in Article 2 that:
A Party shall, if in its opinion the prevailing conditions in
its country render it the most appropriate means of protect-
ing the public health and welfare, prohibit the production,
manufacture, export and import of, trade in, possession or
use of any such drug except for amounts which may be
necessary for medical and scientiﬁc research only, includ-
ing clinical trials therewith to be conducted under or sub-
ject to the direct supervision and control of the Party
(Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs 1961, 3, Article 2).
Marijuana: A Special Case?
101

TABLE 3.1
Some Marijuana Laws around the World
Country
Law
Australia
Varies by state, but usually possession is illegal but punished by modest ﬁnes or warning
(The Age 2009).
Brazil
Possession of small amounts punished by a warning, required community service, or drug
education classes (Organization of American States 2006).
Canada
In dispute. Still illegal, although a number of court decisions have declared marijuana laws
unconstitutional (Munroe 2009).
Comoros
Legalized by president Ali Soilih in 1975 (Rushby 2001).
Cyprus
Punishable for imprisonment for up to eight years for use and up to life for possession (European
Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction 2007, Cyprus).
Czech
Republic
1998 law makes ‘‘possession of more than a small amount of drugs’’ illegal, currently viewed as
decriminalizing the consumption of small amounts of marijuana (Fleishman 2006).
France
Possession and use are illegal, punished by imprisonment of up to 10 years for the former, and up
to one year for the latter (European Legal Database on Drugs 2007, ‘‘France’’).
Germany
De facto decriminalization of ‘‘small amounts’’ of marijuana by virtue of a decision of the
Federal Constitutional Court in 2003 (Everything2 2003).
India
‘‘Production, manufacture, possession, sale, purchase, transport, import, export inter-state or
use’’ of ‘‘small amounts’’ of drugs, including cannabis: up to six months of ‘‘rigorous
imprisonment.’’ For more than a small quantity, but less than a commercial quantity: rigorous
imprisonment for up to 10 years. However, government of India operates shops for the sale
of bhang (cannabis) to the general public (Centre for Narcotics Training, National Academy of
Customs, Excise and Narcotics 2009; Sharma 2007).
Ireland
Punishment by a ﬁne for ﬁrst or second conviction for use of marijuana and by a prison term for
later convictions (European Legal Database on Drugs 2007, ‘‘Ireland’’).
Japan
Anyone who ‘‘unlawfully possesses, receives, or transfers cannabis’’ is subject to imprisonment
for up to ﬁve years (a law passed during the U.S. occupation in 1948; ‘‘Cannabis Control
Act,’’ 1948).
Malaysia
Mandatory death sentence for anyone convicted of drug trafﬁcking. Possession of more than
15 grams (0.5 ounce) is presumptive evidence of one’s intention to trafﬁc in a drug (U.S.
Department of State 2009a).
Mexico
Small amounts of marijuana and other drugs are legal for personal use (Grillo 2009).
Peru
Possession of less than eight grams of marijuana intended for personal use is legal. Possession
of larger amounts is severely punished as an indication of intent to trafﬁc in the drug
(Codigo Penal. Decreto Legislativo Nº 635, ‘‘Artı´culo 299—Posesio´n no punible’’).
Saudi Arabia
Possession of any quantity of marijuana (or any other drug) is punishable by death
(U.S. Department of State 2009b).
Switzerland
Laws and policies differ in each canton in the country, but penalties for small amounts of
marijuana intended for personal use tend to be light, consisting of small ﬁnes, usually
adjusted for a person’s income, that increase with repeat convictions (Verband Bernischer
Richter und Richterinnen 2006, 27).
United Arab
Emirates
Severe penalties for even vanishingly small quantities of marijuana and other drugs (‘‘Travelers
Warned of UAE Drug Laws,’’ 2008).
United
Kingdom
Possession of marijuana is punishable by imprisonment for up to ﬁve years. This policy has changed
twice in the last decade (‘‘UK Marijuana Policy Sees Two More Resign,’’ 2009).
Sources: All sources listed in References at end of chapter.

Thus far, only a handful of countries have approved the use
of cannabis products for medical purposes, almost all of them in
Europe. A handful of other nations have debated or are currently
debating changing their laws to allow this option. Table 3.2 sum-
marizes the current status of this issue as of early 2010.
Alcohol and Tobacco
As noted previously in this book, alcohol and tobacco remain the
two psychoactive substances most widely approved for general
use in most nations of the world. One major exception to that
statement is the religious prohibition against the use of alcohol
within the Islamic faith. Because of this prohibition, 10 countries
with large Muslim populations prohibit the sale or consumption
Alcohol and Tobacco
103
TABLE 3.2
Legal Status of Medical Marijuana Worldwide
Country
Legal Status of Medical Marijuana
Australia
Laws vary from state to state, and the issue is being debated in a number of states. All uses of
cannabis products have been decriminalized in Northern Territory, and growing cannabis for
one’s person use is currently legal there and in Western Australia, South Australia, and
Australian Capital Territory (StoptheDrugWar 2004).
Austria
A 2008 law allows the cultivation of marijuana for scientiﬁc and medical purposes, but only by state
agencies. Those agencies may then distribute the substance for therapeutic uses (NORML 2008).
Cameroon
Cannabis products may be used to treat the symptoms of HIV/AIDS infection (Songwe 2001).
Controversy surrounds the importation of the substance from Canada when cannabis is widely
grown in the country.
Canada
Following a series of court decisions, the federal government decriminalized the use of cannabis
products by individuals ‘‘suffering from grave or debilitating illnesses, where conventional
treatments are inappropriate or are not providing adequate relief.’’ For details of the
program, see Health Canada 2009.
Israel
Originally approved for use in the treatment of the most extreme symptoms of terminal cancer
and HIV/AIDS, marijuana is now used widely for a broader range of disorders and milder
symptoms. Research is also being conducted on the use of marijuana for the treatment of
post-traumatic stress disorder among soldiers who have been stressed after return from battle
(Shadmi 2009; ‘‘Israel to Soothe Trauma with Marijuana’’ 2004).
Netherlands
Pharmacies are allowed to stock and sell marijuana to individuals who have a physician’s
prescription for the product. Growers of the plant must have a license from the federal
government to supply marijuana for medical uses (NORML 2003).
Sources: All sources listed in References at end of chapter.

of alcohol, either just to citizens of that nation or to anyone living
or traveling in the country. For example, the drinking of alcoholic
beverages is not permitted in Brunei, although foreigners can
obtain a temporary license for the purchase and consumption of
small amounts of alcohol (U.S. Department of State 2009b).
By contrast, the drinking of alcohol is forbidden to anyone in
Saudi Arabia, whether citizen or foreigner (U.S. Department of
State 2009a).
Very few countries around the world have attempted to insti-
tute an outright ban on cigarette smoking. One exception is
Bhutan, which attempted to institute such a ban in 2004. That
ban prohibited both the sale and consumption of tobacco prod-
ucts, with a ﬁne equivalent to about $230, equivalent to a two-
months salary for the average citizen of the country (Weiner
2005). The effort survived only ﬁve years, however. In 2009, the
National Council decided to revoke the ban on smoking because
it had been largely ineffective. The smuggling of cigarettes
allowed smokers to continue pursuing their habit, but at a much
greater expense than before the ban had been instituted. The
council’s new approach is to place very high taxes on the sale of
cigarettes, hoping that this plan will reduce the use of tobacco in
the nation (National Portal of Bhutan 2009).
By far, the more common approach among governments has
been to place prohibitions on the places and circumstances under
which a person may smoke. These bans are similar to the range of
prohibitions adopted by the various states in the United States.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has classiﬁed these bans
according to the spaces to which they apply, such as:
•
The outright ban of smoking in all public places.
Belgium has probably come as close to such a law as
any nation. In 2009, the national legislature adopted a
law banning smoking in all public places with a small
number of exceptions, such as hotels and restaurants
where alcoholic beverages and simple snacks are served.
Before the law even went into effect, however, a ruling by
the Antwerp Court of Appeals on an earlier law made it
seem likely that even the exception would have to be
dropped and that all facilities of all kind would have to
be covered by the law (‘‘New Smoking Ban Will Not Be
Long-Lived’’ 2009).
104
Worldwide Perspective

•
The prohibition of smoking in all public places except for
areas that are speciﬁcally exempted and the designation
of speciﬁc locations in which smoking is banned. WHO
gives the smoking laws in Finland as an example of this
approach.
•
Combining a prohibition of smoking in all public places
with additional bans on speciﬁc locations, such as the
places at which children are likely to congregate.
A ban of this kind went into effect in Iceland in 2007
(Icelandguest.com 2007).
•
Specifying speciﬁc spaces where smoking is allowed and
prohibited, and making it the responsibility of facility
owners to ensure that patrons abide by those regulations.
Israeli statutes, for example, require owners to set aside at
least 75 percent of the space in their establishment for
nonsmokers, to ensure that nonsmoking areas are well
ventilated, that smoking paraphernalia are not present in
nonsmoking areas, and that proper signage designates
smoking and nonsmoking areas. Fines for ignoring these
regulations are substantial, amounting to 10,000 shekels
(about US$3,000; Khazzoom 2004).
The prohibition of tobacco smoking appears to be an idea
whose time has come in many parts of the world. Whether
based on concerns about the possibility of ﬁres started by smok-
ers, the health effects of tobacco, children’s welfare, or other
issues, governments appear to be gradually ratcheting up their
efforts to reduce the use of tobacco. Where bans have been put
into place, smokers appear to adjust to the new limitations
placed upon them, and agencies forced to take new actions to
comply with those bans appear not to be unreasonably incon-
venienced (World Health Organization 2009). Any review of
the changes in smoking legislation around the world suggests
rather strongly that more and more nations are adopting
increasingly severe restrictions on the use of tobacco products
(TimelinesDB 2009).
Still, smoking bans are absent from very large parts of the
world, especially in eastern Europe, central and eastern Asia, and
most parts of Africa. A partial list of the countries that have yet
to institute national laws on smoking includes Poland, Russia,
Hungary, Belarus, Ukraine, China, Mongolia, Japan, South Korea,
Alcohol and Tobacco
105

Sudan, Mauritania, Senegal, Congo, Angola, Namibia, Honduras,
Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Chile, and Paraguay (World Lung Founda-
tion 2009). This list is somewhat misleading, however, since some
countries included have already begun a discussion of legislation
limiting or prohibiting smoking in various types of facilities, while
other countries have a patchwork of laws and regulations estab-
lished by the federal government, state, and/or local governments.
In this regard, these nations are taking an approach to the control of
smoking similar to that which exists in the United States and
Canada.
The future direction of bans on the use of tobacco may be
seen in an important document prepared by the World Health
Organization in 2003. That document, the Draft WHO Framework
on Tobacco Control, was prepared for submission to the 56th World
Health Assembly held in Geneva on May 19–28, 2003. It clariﬁed
its goal as ﬁnding a way
to protect present and future generations from the dev-
astating health, social, environmental and economic con-
sequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to
tobacco smoke by providing a framework for tobacco
control measures to be implemented by the Parties at
the national, regional and international levels in order
to reduce continually and substantially the prevalence
of tobacco use and exposure to tobacco smoke (World
Health Organization 2003, 5, Article 3).
Adoption of the document at the Geneva Conference resulted
in the creation of an ambitious WHO program, the Tobacco Free
Initiative, which continues to direct and guide WHO’s efforts to
reduce smoking around the world today. Perhaps the most impor-
tant guiding principle for the program (among seven stated in the
draft framework) was that:
Every person should be informed of the health conse-
quences, addictive nature and mortal threat posed by
tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke
and effective legislative, executive, administrative or
other measures should be contemplated at the appropri-
ate governmental level to protect all persons from expo-
sure to tobacco smoke (World Health Organization 2003,
5, Article 4).
106
Worldwide Perspective

The draft framework also laid out a number of strategies by
which a smoke-free world could be achieved. These strategies
include the following:
•
The adoption of pricing and tax policies sufﬁciently
formidable to reduce the demand for tobacco products.
•
Provision of enough smoke-free areas of sufﬁcient size
to permit citizens to escape from exposure to tobacco
smoke.
•
Regulation of the contents of tobacco products.
•
Regulation of the advertising of tobacco products.
•
Regulation of the labeling of tobacco products.
•
Aggressive public education programs about the health
and other risks associated with smoking.
•
Aggressive programs to reduce and eventually eliminate
the smuggling of tobacco products between countries.
•
Legislative actions to prohibit the sale of tobacco products
to minors.
•
Provision of support programs for the development of
alternatives to cigarette smoking (World Health
Organization 2003).
Substance Abuse Worldwide
Perhaps the best way to conclude a review of the worldwide sta-
tus of substance abuse is simply to ask how extensive that prob-
lem currently is in various nations of the world. Probably the
best source of information on that question is an annual report
of the United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
World Drug Report. That publication, running in 2009 to more than
300 pages, covers many aspects of the production, trafﬁcking, and
consumption of illegal substances in most countries around the
world. The report’s value is somewhat limited for a number of
reasons, primarily because some countries do not respond to
UNODC surveys, some countries are more thorough in their
research on substance abuse than others, and countries use a vari-
ety of methods for collecting data. For example, relatively few
nations outside Europe, North America, and Australasia collect
and provide detailed information on long-term or current trends
in the consumption of illegal substances. It is difﬁcult, therefore,
Substance Abuse Worldwide
107

to make generalizations about worldwide trends in substance
abuse issues, especially with regard to consumption.
Nonetheless, World Drug Report almost certainly provides
the best overview of trends in drug use among people of all ages
in nations in all parts of the world. For example, it provides infor-
mation on long-term trends of the use of opiates, cocaine, mari-
juana, methamphetamine, and ecstasy, even though those data
are not precisely comparable. As an example, Table 3.3 summa-
rizes some trends in the use of cocaine and marijuana in selected
nations where those records have been kept for more than a
decade.
Determining the consumption of illegal substances other
than cocaine and marijuana is even more difﬁcult than it is
for these two drugs. In its 2009 World Drug Report, UNODC esti-
mated that there were between 16 and 51 million people aged
15–64 who used amphetamine-like substances (ATS) and 12 to
24 million worldwide who used an ecstasy-like drug. The annual
prevalence rate for these two groups of drugs were 0.4–1.2 percent
and 0.3–0.5 percent respectively. About half of these users are
thought to live in North America (United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs
and Crime 2009, 144). In terms of prevalence, the largest group
of ATS users are found in Oceania (rate = 2.6), followed by Asia
(0.2–1.4), North and South America (0.9–1.0), Africa (0.3–0.8),
and Europe (0.4–0.6) (United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime
2009, 146, Table 23). The increase in drug use of ATS substances is
considerably greater across the world than it is for any other drug
or group of drugs.
Because of the difﬁculties in collecting consistent and reliable
statistics across many nations about some forms of substance
abuse, UNODC ofﬁcials also use a second means of assessing
drug abuse trends. They ask experts in the ﬁeld of substance
abuse to provide their best expert opinions as to the trends they
see in their nation or region. In the 2009 World Report on Drugs,
UNODC reported on expert perspectives on trends for three
groups of drugs: opiates, amphetamine-type substances (ATS),
and ecstasy-type substances (ETS). In the ﬁrst of these categories,
UNODC received responses from 87 experts in Africa, Asia,
North and South America, and Europe. They received no
responses from experts in Oceania. Just over 40 percent of these
experts (38 respondents) felt that the situation for opiates in their
region had become more serious with an average increase in the
108
Worldwide Perspective

TABLE 3.3
Prevalence‡ in Consumption of Cocaine and Marijuana in Selected Nations
Cocaine
Country
*
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
England
1.2
2.0
2.4
2.6
2.3
Germany
0.6
0.9
1.0
0.6
Hungary
0.7
0.4
0.2
Ireland
1.3
1.1
1.7
Italy
1.1
1.2
2.2
2.2
Poland
0.5
0.2
Spain
1.6
2.5
3.0
3.0
Uruguay
0.2/0.4
0.2
1.4
United States†
1.5
1.9
2.5
2.5
2.4
2.3
2.5
2.3
2.1
*England: 1998; Germany: 1997; Ireland: 1998; Spain: 1999; Uruguay: 1994/1998.
†For comparison.
Sources: United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime. World Drug Report. Geneva, Switzerland: 2008, 82–84,
Figures 45, 46, 47, 49; Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. National Survey on Drug Use
and Health. Washington, D.C., 2001, Table 1.1B; 2008, Table 1.1B.
Marijuana
Country
*
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Australia
17.9
12.9
11.3
9.1
Austria
3.5
5.6
7.5
3.5
Denmark
5.0
6.2
5.2
England
9.5
10.5
10.9
7.4
France
4.7
8.4
9.8
8.6
Germany
4.4
6.0
6.9
4.7
Hungary
2.4
3.9
2.3
Ireland
5.0
6.3
Italy
6.2
7.1
11.2
14.6
Spain
7.0
9.2
11.3
11.2
10.1
Sweden
0.7
2.2
2.0
Uruguay
0.7/1.2
1.3
5.3
United States†
8.3
9.3
11.0
10.6
10.6
10.4
10.3
10.1
10.3
*Australia: 1998; Austria: 1984; Denmark: 1990; England: 1996; France: 1995; Germany: 1995; Spain: 1999;
Uruguay: 1994/1998.
†For comparison.
‡Ratio of individuals who used the substance in the past year in the general population.
Sources: United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime. World Drug Report, 108–111, Figures 62, 64, 65, 66,67;
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Washington,
D.C.: 2001, Table 1.1B; 2008, Table G.4.

extent of their problem of 44 percent. The problem was thought to
be most serious in Asia, the Americas, and Africa (worsening by
more than 50%), and less serious in Europe (worsening by 26%).
Another 32 percent of respondents (28 experts) said the drug sit-
uation was about the same in their regions, and about a quarter
of respondents (21 experts) felt that the drug problem was
improving in their region (United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and
Crime 2009, 54, Table 4).
Expert opinions on the abuse of amphetamine-like substan-
ces and ecstasy-like substances were similar to those for opiates.
In the former case, 40 of 86 experts (47%) thought that the ATS
problem was becoming worse in their region of the world, with
the average increase in severity being 47 percent. Little difference
among regions was observed, with Asian experts reporting
somewhat more of a problem and European experts somewhat
less of a problem than experts from Africa and the Americas. 34
experts (40%) reported little change in ATS problems in their
regions and 12 experts (14%) thought those problems were
improving (United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime 2009,
147, Table 24).
In the matter of ecstasy-like drugs, about a third of experts
who provided an opinion (22 of 63) felt the problem was becom-
ing worse in their part of the world, 32 of 63 (51%) saw no
change, and 9 of 63 (14%) saw their situation improving. Perhaps
the most troubling trend for both ATS and ETS drugs was a slow,
but steady, increase in the seriousness of substance abuse for
these two groups of drugs in every region of the world (United
Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime 2009, 157, Figure 113 and
Table 26).
One might expect the authors of World Drug Report to wade
through the volume of statistics and data presented in this docu-
ment and provide the reader with an overview of the current status
of substance abuse issues around the world. And they have done so.
In the preface to this report, those authors express the view that
‘‘[d]rug statistics keep speaking loud and clear. Past runaway
growth has ﬂattened out and the drug crisis of the 1990s seems
under control (United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime 2009, 1).
(A somewhat more disinterested observer might be forgiven for
taking a somewhat less optimistic view of the situation, however.)
The authors then devote the majority of their overview of the report
discussing current efforts to decriminalize or legalize substances
that have long been illegal. They argue that this approach is wrong,
110
Worldwide Perspective

that current drug policies have essentially the right objective in
mind, although the methods for achieving those objectives may
need to be reassessed and modiﬁed. What nations need to do, they
say, is to ﬁnd ‘‘different means to protect society against drugs, rather
than by pursuing the different goal of abandoning such protection
(United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime 2009, 1).’’
Such may very well be the case. Certainly, few people in the
world know more about the misuse of illegal substances than
members of UNODC. However, as the authors of this report them-
selves indicate, in the opening sentence of this report, the war on
drugs has now been going on for a hundred years, beginning with
the International Opium Commission conference held in Shang-
hai, China, in February 1909. The world has been looking for ways
of dealing with substance abuse problems ever since, often driven
by promises that the world has ﬁnally turned the corner, the drug
problem is ﬁnally being solved, and we need only to tweak our
present system of criminalizing drug production, trafﬁcking, and
consumption to reach a drug-free world. We will see.
References
African Union (2007). ‘‘3rd Session of the AU Conference Of Ministers for
Drug Control And Crime Prevention.’’ Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. http://www
.africa-union.org/root/AU/Conferences/2007/December/sa/ACMDCC
PIII/docs/en/Plan%20of%20Action%20FINAL%20-%2008-11-07.doc.
Accessed on November 11, 2009.
Age (2009). ‘‘Australia’s Cannabis Laws.’’ http://www.theage.com.au/articles/
2003/05/22/1053585645363.html. Accessed on November 10, 2009.
Aquino, Michael (2009). ‘‘Harsh Punishments for Drug Use in Southeast Asia.’’
http://goseasia.about.com/od/travelplanning/a/seasia_drugs.htm. Accessed
on November 8, 2009.
Asia Death Penalty Blog (2008). ‘‘Indonesia: Drug Offenders Executed,
More to Come.’’ http://asiadeathpenalty.blogspot.com/2008/06/
indonesia-drug-offenders-executed-more.html. Accessed on November 8,
2009.
BBC News (2008). ‘‘Travelers Warned of UAE Drug Laws.’’ http://
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/7234786.stm. Accessed on November 11,
2009.
Borio, Gene (2009a). ‘‘Tobacco Timeline: The Seventeenth Century—The
Great Age of the Pipe.’’ http://www.tobacco.org/resources/history/
Tobacco_History17.html. Accessed on October 30, 2009.
References
111

Borio, Gene (2009b). ‘‘Tobacco Timeline: The Sixteenth Century—Sailors
Spread the Seeds.’’ http://www.tobacco.org/resources/history/Tobacco
_History16.html. Accessed on October 30, 2009.
Brice, Arthur (2009). ‘‘Latin American Drug Cartels Find Home in
Africa.’’ http://www.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/africa/09/21/africa.drug
.cartels/index.html. Accessed on November 9, 2009.
Brooks, Jerome E. (1952). The Mighty Leaf: Tobacco through the Centuries.
Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
‘‘Cannabis Control Law’’ (1948). Law No. 124 of July 10, 1948, as
amended. http://www.japanhemp.org/en/taimalaw.htm#f05. Accessed
on November 11, 2009.
Centre for Narcotics Training, National Academy of Customs, Excise
and Narcotics (2009). ‘‘Drug Laws in India.’’ http://www.antidrugs.gov
.il/download/ﬁles/indian_drug-laws.pdf. Accessed on November 11,
2009.
Codigo Penal (1991). Decreto Legislativo No. 635. Penal Code of Peru (in
Spanish), as amended. http://www.devida.gob.pe/documentacion/
Decreto%20Legislativo%20635-CODIGO%20PENAL.doc. Accessed on
November 11, 2009.
Coffee Information Portal (2009). ‘‘Coffee in Religions.’’ http://coffee
-bean-java.com/Coffee_in_religions.html. Accessed on October 28, 2009.
Concept 420 (2009). ‘‘Marijuana History and Timeline.’’ http://www
.concept420.com/marijuana_cannabis_history_timeline.htm. Accessed
on October 30, 2009.
Drug Policy Alliance Network (2009). ‘‘Drug Policy around the World:
Africa.’’ http://www.drugpolicy.org/global/drugpolicyby/africa/.
Accessed on November 9, 2009.
Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in the United States (2000).
http://www.china-embassy.org/eng/zt/mzpkz/t36387.htm. Accessed
on November 8, 2009.
European Legal Database on Drugs (2007). http://eldd.emcdda.europa.eu/
html.cfm/index5769EN.html. Accessed on November 11, 2009.
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (2006). The
State of the Drugs Problem in Europe. Luxembourg: Monitoring Centre for
Drugs and Drug Addiction. Available online at http://ar2006.emcdda
.europa.eu/download/ar2006-en.pdf.
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (2007).
‘‘Country Overviews.’’ http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/
country-overviews. Accessed on November 11, 2009.
Everything2 (2003). ‘‘The German Federal Constitutional Court’s
Cannabis Decision.’’ http://everything2.com/title/The+Cannabis
112
Worldwide Perspective

+Decision+%2528German+Federal+Constitutional+Court%2529.
Accessed on November 11, 2009.
Flanders Today (2009). ‘‘New Smoking Ban Will Not Be Long-Lived.’’
Flanders Today. http://www.mediargus.be/ﬂanderstoday.admin.en/rss/
22365789.html?via=rss&language=en. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
Fleishman, Jeffrey (2006). ‘‘A Czech Toke on Freedom.’’ Los Angeles Times,
January 24. http://74.125.155.132/search?q=cache:92idsHx3OnoJ:
articles.latimes.com/2006/jan/24/world/fgweed24+czech+republic
+marijuana+los+angeles+times&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us. Accessed
on November 11, 2009.
Frampton, John (trans.) (1577). ‘‘Of the Tabaco and of His Greate
Vertues.’’ http://www.tobacco.org/resources/history/monardes.html.
Accessed on October 30, 2009.
Gahlinger, Paul (2004). Illegal Drugs: A Complete Guide to Their History,
Chemistry, Use, and Abuse. New York: Plume.
Gelling, Peter (2008). ‘‘Executions for Drug Crimes Are Resumed in
Indonesia.’’ New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/13/
world/asia/13indo.html. Accessed on November 8, 2009.
Grillo, Ioan (2009). ‘‘Mexico’s New Drug Law May Set an Example.’’
Time. http://www.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1918725,00
.html. Accessed on November 11, 2009.
Hall, James (2004). ‘‘Cultural Practices Hamper Anti-drug Campaigns.’’
http://www.newsfromafrica.org/newsfromafrica/articles/art_6082
.html. Accessed on November 10, 2009.
Health Canada (2009). ‘‘Fact Sheet—Medical Access to Marijuana.’’
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/marihuana/law-loi/fact_sheet
-infoﬁche-eng.php#a4. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
Icelandguest.com (2007). ‘‘Smoking Ban Takes Effect in Iceland.’’ http://
www.icelandguest.com/in-focus/nr/945/. Accessed on November 12,
2009.
International Cannagraphic (2009). ‘‘Cannabis.’’ http://www.icmag.com/
ic/showthread.php?t=32703. Accessed on November 10, 2009.
IRIN (2009). ‘‘Senegal: Stiffer Penalties for Drug Trafﬁckers.’’ http://
www.irinnews.org/Report.aspx?ReportId=75953. Accessed on
November 9, 2009.
Israel Is Real Blog (2004). ‘‘Israel to Soothe Trauma with Marijuana.’’
2004. http://israel_is_real.blogspot.com/2004/10/israel-to-soothe
-trauma-with-marijuana.html. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
Khazzoom, Loolwa (2004). ‘‘Israel Struggles with No-smoking Laws.’’ Jewish
News of Greater Phoenix. 56(19), January 30. http://www.jewishaz.com/
jewishnews/040130/struggles.shtml. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
References
113

Latin American Commission on Drugs and Democracy (2009). Drugs and
Democracy: Toward a Paradigm Shift (2009). [n.p.]
Levine, Harry G. (2001). ‘‘The Secret of World-wide Drug Prohibition: the
Varieties and Uses of Drug Prohibition.’’ Hereinstead.com. http://www
.cedro-uva.org/lib/levine.secret.html. Accessed on November 2, 2009.
Lines, Rick (2007). The Death Penalty for Drug Offences: A Violation of
International Human Rights Law. London: International Harm Reduction
Association. Also available online at http://www.scribd.com/doc/
7979638/Death-Penalty-for-Drug-Offences-A-Violation-of-International
-Human-Rights-Law.
Muhammad, Judith K. (2009). ‘‘Islam and Addiction.’’ IslamOnline.net.
http://www.islamonline.net/servlet/Satellite?c=Article_C&pagename
=Zone-English-Family/FYELayout&cid=1157365822643. Accessed on
November 2, 2009.
Munroe, Susan (2009). ‘‘Marijuana Reform Bill.’’ http://canadaonline.about
.com/od/bills/p/mjreform.htm. Accessed on November 10, 2009.
National Legal Database [Vietnam] (2009). http://vbqppl3.moj.gov.vn/
law/en/1991_to_2000/1996/199610/199610100001_en/lawdocument
_view. Accessed on November 8, 2009.
National Narcotics Board, Republic of Indonesia (1997). ‘‘Law of the
Republic of Indonesia. Number 22, Year 1997. On Narcotics.’’ http://
74.125.155.132/search?q=cache:Gqa4VecjDYJ:www.aseansec.org/Law
%2520of%2520the%2520Republic%2520of%2520Indonesia%2520Number
%252022,%2520Year%25201997%2520on%2520Narcotics.doc+%22Law+of
+the+Republic+of+Indonesia+on+Narcotics%22+ASEANSEC.org
&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us. Accessed on November 8, 2009.
National Portal of Bhutan (2009). ‘‘NC Decides to Revoke Tobacco Ban.’’
http://www.bhutan.gov.bt/government/newsDetail.php?id=1331%20&
%20cat=5. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
New Zealand Herald (2009). ‘‘UK Marijuana Policy Sees Two More Resign.’’
http://www.nzherald.co.nz/united-kingdom/news/article.cfm?l_id
=428&objectid=10606766. Accessed on November 11, 2009.
NORML (2008). ‘‘Austrian Parliament Approves Medical Marijuana
Use.’’ http://norml.org/index.cfm?Group_ID=7654. Accessed on
November 12, 2009.
NORML (2003). ‘‘Dutch Government Legalizes Prescription Pot Pharma-
cies Allowed To Distribute Medical Cannabis; Government To License
Prescription Pot Growers.’’ http://norml.org/index.cfm?Group_ID
=5581. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
Organization of American States (2006). ‘‘New Drug Legislation in
Brazil.’’ http://www.cicad.oas.org/APPS/Document.aspx?Id=440.
Accessed on November 10, 2009.
114
Worldwide Perspective

Philippine Laws, Statutes & Codes (2009). ‘‘Republic Act No. 9165.’’
http://74.125.155.132/search?q=cache:7D347Zpuy0UJ:www.aseansec.org/
Comprehensive%2520Dangerous%2520Drugs%2520Act%2520of
%25202002,%2520Republic%2520Act%2520No.%25209165%2520%2520
Philippines.doc+%22Dangerous+Drugs+Act+of+2002%22+Philippines
+aseansec.org&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us. Accessed on November 8,
2009.
Rushby, Kevin (2001). ‘‘Another Day, Another Coup.’’ Guardian. http://
www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2001/oct/01/features11.g2.
Accessed on November 11, 2009.
Shadmi, Haim (2009). ‘‘Medical Marijuana Transforms into Big Business
in Israel.’’ Haaretz. http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/1094284
.html. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
Sharma, Anil (2007). ‘‘Starting the Day with the Cup That Kicks.’’
Hindustan Times. http://www.hindustantimes.com/News-Feed/
rajasthan/Starting-the-day-with-the-cup-that-kicks/Article1-255630
.aspx. Accessed on November 11, 2009.
Singapore Attorney General’s Chambers (2009). ‘‘Misuse of Drugs Act.’’
http://statutes.agc.gov.sg/non_version/cgi-bin/cgi_retrieve.pl?actno
=REVED-185. Accessed on November 9, 2009.
Songwe, Omer (2001). ‘‘Cameroon to Import Cannabis.’’ BBC News.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/1106510.stm. Accessed on
November 12, 2009.
StoptheDrugWar.org (2009a). ‘‘Africa: Liberia Institutes Draconian New
Drug Sentences.’’ http://stopthedrugwar.org/chronicle/604/liberia_harsh
_new_drug_law. Accessed on November 9, 2009.
StoptheDrugWar.org (2009b). ‘‘Africa: Proposed Draconian Drug Law in
Namibia Runs Into Intense Opposition.’’ http://stopthedrugwar.org/
chronicle/472/proposed_namibia_drug_law_runs_into_opposition.
Accessed on November 9, 2009.
StoptheDrugWar.org (2009c). ‘‘Feature: Mexico and Argentina Enact Drug
Decriminalization.’’ http://stopthedrugwar.org/chronicle/599/mexico
_argentina_drug_decriminalization. Accessed on November 9, 2009.
StoptheDrugWar.org (2004). ‘‘Western Australia Marijuana Moves:
Possession Now a Ticketable Offense, Hemp Bill Passes.’’ http://
stopthedrugwar.org/chronicle-old/330/westernau.shtml. Accessed on
November 12, 2009.
The Health Report (2009). ‘‘Portugal’s Drug Laws.’’ http://www.abc.net
.au/rn/healthreport/stories/2009/2661510.htm. Accessed on
November 10, 2009.
Timelines DB (2009). ‘‘Smoking.’’ http://timelinesdb.com/listevents.php
?subjid=398&title=Smoking. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
References
115

United Nations (1961). Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. http://www
.incb.org/pdf/e/conv/convention_1961_en.pdf. Accessed on
November 2, 2009.
UN Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime (2009). World Drug Report. Vienna: United
Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime. Also available on the Internet at
http://www.unodc.org/documents/wdr/WDR_2009/WDR2009_eng
_web.pdf.
UN Treaty Collection (2009). ‘‘Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,
1961, as Amended by the Protocol Amending the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961.’’ http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/treaties/
single-convention.html. Accessed on November 2, 2009.
U.S. Department of State (2009a). ‘‘Brunei.’’ http://travel.state.gov/
travel/cis_pa_tw/cis/cis_1073.html. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
U.S. Department of State (2009b). ‘‘Malayasia.’’ http://travel.state.gov/
travel/cis_pa_tw/cis/cis_960.html. Accessed on November 11, 2009.
U.S. Department of State (2009c). ‘‘Saudi Arabia.’’ http://travel.state.gov/
travel/cis_pa_tw/cis/cis_1012.html. Accessed on November 8, 2009.
U.S. Department of State (2009d). ‘‘United Arab Emirates.’’ http://
travel.state.gov/travel/cis_pa_tw/cis/cis_1050.html. Accessed on
November 8, 2009.
Vastag, Brian (2009). ‘‘5 Years After: Portugal’s Drug Decriminalization
Policy Shows Positive Results.’’ Scientiﬁc American. http://www
.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article.cfm?id=portugal-drug-decriminalization.
Accessed on November 10, 2009.
Verband Bernischer Richter und Richterinnen (Bernese Judge and Judges
Association) (2006). Richtlinien fu¨r die Strafzumessung (Guidelines for
Sentencing), Version 2. Available online (in German) at http://www
.bav-aab.ch/art/pdf/regelemente_richtlinien/VBR-Richtlinien_01-01
-07.pdf. Accessed on November 11, 2009.
Weinberg, Bennett Alan, and Bonnie K. Bealer (2002). The World of
Caffeine: The Science and Culture of the World’s Most Popular Drug. London:
Routledge.
Weiner, Eric (2005). ‘‘The First Nonsmoking Nation?’’ Slate. http://
www.slate.com/id/2112449/. Accessed on November 12, 2009.
World Health Organization (2003). Draft WHO Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control. March 3. [no location: no publisher]. Available online at
http://apps.who.int/gb/fctc/PDF/inb6/einb65.pdf. Accessed on
November 12, 2009.
World Health Organization (2009). ‘‘Tobacco Free Initiative.’’ http://
www.emro.who.int/tﬁ/Giant-TobaccoFreePublic.htm. Accessed on
November 12, 2009.
116
Worldwide Perspective

World Lung Foundation (2009). ‘‘Smoke-Free Areas.’’ Tobacco Atlas.
http://www.cancer.org/downloads/AA/TobaccoAtlas3Revised/TA3
_Chapter_23.pdf. Accessed on November 13, 2009.
Worth, Robert F. (2009). ‘‘Thirsty Plant Steals Water in Dry Yemen.’’
New York Times, November 1.
References
117

This page intentionally left blank

4
Chronology
T
he use of natural plant products to produce altered states of
consciousness dates to the earliest years of human history.
There has hardly been a period since then when substances
such as cocaine, opiates, marijuana and other cannabis products,
and a host of other natural and synthetic materials have not been
used for such effects. This chapter lists a number of important
events in the history of the use of psychoactive substances in
human cultures, along with a number of efforts to control the
use of such products.
ca.
50,000 BCE
Archaeologists discover remains of the herbal stimu-
lant ephedra at a burial site in Iraq dated to about
50,000 years ago.
ca.
10,000 BCE
Among products discovered at the earliest agricul-
tural sites, dating to about 10,000 years ago, are canna-
bis, tobacco,
and
mandrake,
which
contains
hallucinogenic alkaloids.
ca. 7000–
9000 BCE
Prehistoric rock art suggests the use of psychedelic
mushrooms by early humans.
ca.
7000 BCE
Seeds of the betel nut, still chewed today for their
stimulant effects in many parts of the world, are
found at sites dating to 7,000 years ago.
119

ca.
7000 BCE
Clay vessels containing remnants of wine dating
to about 7000 BCE are found at the site of a Neolithic
village in Iran.
ca.
6000 BCE
The ﬁrst cultivation of tobacco in the New World
(South America) dates to about 6000 BCE.
ca.
4300 BCE
The ﬁrst recipes for making beer, recorded on clay
tablets from Babylonia, date to about 4300 BCE.
3300 BCE
The earliest written records of the use of opium date
to about 3300 BCE, although evidence for its cultiva-
tion dates to about 1,000 years earlier.
3000 BCE
Charred seeds of the cannabis plant found in a ritual
brazier at a burial site in modern-day Romania, sug-
gesting that they were used in a religious ceremony,
are found in modern day Romania at a location that
dates to about 3000 BCE.
2500–
1800 BCE
The earliest evidence for the cultivation of the coca
plant in northern Peru dates to 2500–1800 BCE.
5th cen-
tury CE
Greek historian Herodotus records the use of cannabis as
a recreational drug by the Scythians in his Persian Wars.
620 CE
In one of the earliest (perhaps the earliest) attempts at
regulating drinking, the prophet Muhammed prohib-
its the consumption of alcohol by Muslims (Qur’an
2:219 and 5:91).
1484
Pope Innocent VIII bans the use of cannabis. His
action was part of the Church’s program against her-
etics because common belief at the time was that
witches used cannabis as an ‘‘antisacrament’’ in place
of wine at their ‘‘black masses.’’
1493
Christopher Columbus and his crew, returning from
America, introduce the use of tobacco products to
Europe.
120
Chronology

ca. 1525
The Swiss-Austrian physician and alchemist Phillip
von Hohenheim (better known as Paracelsus) introdu-
ces the use of a tincture of opium called laudanum to
medical practice in Europe. He has learned about the
beneﬁcial effects of the substance during his visits to
the Middle East.
1590
A Japanese law makes possession of tobacco illegal.
Anyone found with the substance is subject to impris-
onment and/or loss of property.
1613–1614
John Rolfe, husband of the Indian princess Pocahontas,
sends the ﬁrst shipment of tobacco from the New
World to Europe.
1619
The Jamestown Colony adopts the ﬁrst so-called
‘‘must grow’’ law for hemp, noting that the product
has many useful applications. Other colonies soon
adopt similar laws as a way of improving the supply
of an essential raw material in difﬁcult economic
times.
1633
The Sultan Murad IV of Turkey declares the use of
tobacco a capital offense, punished by hanging,
beheading, or starvation.
1638
A Chinese law declares use of tobacco a capital
offense, to be punished by beheading.
1690
The British Parliament passes an Act for the Encour-
aging of the Distillation of Brandy and Spirits from
Corn, which results in the production of about a mil-
lion gallons of alcoholic beverages, primarily gin,
only four years later.
1736
Concerned about the widespread popularity of gin
among all classes, the British Parliament passes the
Gin Act, which raises taxes on the drink to 20 shil-
lings per gallon, a point at which only members of
the upper classes can afford the substance.
Chronology
121

1751
The British Parliament passes a new Gin Act. After
the Gin Act of 1736 resulted in riots in the streets, it
was revoked for a few years, before being reimposed
by this act, which imposes a tax of ﬁve shillings per
gallon on gin.
1785
In his book An Inquiry into the Effects of Ardent Spirits
Upon the Human Body and Mind, physician Benjamin
Rush calls the intemperate use of alcohol a disease
and lists a number of symptoms, such as unusual
garrulity, unusual silence, profane swearing and
cursing, a clipping of words, ﬁghting, and certain
extravagant acts which indicate a temporary ﬁt of
madness, such as singing, roaring, and imitating the
noises of brute animals. He estimates the annual
death rate from alcoholism at about 4,000 in a popula-
tion of about six million.
1789
An estimated 200 farmers living in the vicinity of
Litchﬁeld, Connecticut, meet to form the nation’s ﬁrst
temperance society.
1791
The U.S. Congress enacts the nation’s ﬁrst tax on
whiskey, the so-called ‘‘whiskey tax.’’
1793–1797
Opposition to the whiskey tax of 1791 leads to outbreaks
of violence in various parts of Pennsylvania, all of which
are eventually put down by federal forces.
ca. 1800
Members of Napoleon’s army, returning from the war
in Egypt, bring with them information about the use
of cannabis (in the form of hashish and marijuana) to
France. Medical personnel are impressed by the pain-
killing properties of the drug, and some members of
the general public are more interested in its use as a rec-
reational drug.
1802
The whiskey tax of 1791 is repealed.
1805
German chemist Friedrich Sertu¨rner extracts morphine
from opium. He names the substance after Morpheus,
the Greek god of dreams.
122
Chronology

1819
German chemist Friedrich Ferdinand Runge isolates
caffeine from coffee.
1848
President James Polk signs the Drug Importation
Act, which establishes standards for the purity
of drugs imported to the United States. The act is
necessitated primarily by the fact that the United
States is the last major nation in the world without
legislation of this kind. The act does not, how-
ever, establish standards for drugs manufactured
domestically.
1859
As a doctoral student, German chemist Albert
Niemann obtains pure cocaine from coca leaves.
1868
In one of the ﬁrst efforts to regulate the sale and use of
drugs, the British Parliament passes the Pharmacy
Act, which makes it illegal to sell opium and other
drugs without a license.
1870
In New York City, a group of ‘‘scientiﬁc and medical
gentlemen’’ found the American Association for the
Cure of Inebriates, with the goals of studying the con-
dition of ‘‘inebriety,’’ discussing its proper treatment,
and bringing about a ‘‘co-operative public sentiment
and jurisprudence.’’ The action was signiﬁcant
because it was one of the ﬁrst times that the medical
profession acknowledged that alcoholism might be a
hereditary disease that could be treated like other
medical conditions.
1875
The city of San Francisco adopts an ordinance prohib-
iting the smoking of opium, apparently the ﬁrst law
in the United States to deal with the practice.
1884
Largely through the inﬂuence of the Women’s Chris-
tian Temperance Union, the New York state legislature
passes a bill requiring the inclusion of an anti-alcohol
curriculum in all schools in the state. Pennsylvania
follows suit the next year, as do many other states in
succeeding years.
Chronology
123

1887
Romanian chemist Lazar Edeleanu ﬁrst synthesizes
amphetamine in an effort to make ephedrine syn-
thetically. With no known use, the compound is
essentially forgotten for about 40 years.
1893
Japanese chemist Nagayoshi Nagai synthesizes
methamphetamine.
1902
Physician C. B. Burr writes in the Journal of the American
Medical Association about the problems of morphine
addiction and its treatment. This article is one of the
earliest commentaries on the addictive properties of
morphine and heroin and their potential medical
implications.
1906
The U.S. Congress passes the Pure Food and Drug Law,
among whose provision is a requirement that all prod-
ucts containing alcohol be labeled to indicate that fact.
1909
The U.S. Congress passes the Smoking Opium Exclu-
sion Act, the ﬁrst federal regulation of the nonmedi-
cal use of a substance. The law bans the importation,
possession, and smoking of opium.
1910
New York becomes the ﬁrst state to adopt a drunk
driving law.
1912
The International Opium Convention is signed at
The Hague, the Netherlands, signed by China, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Persia,
Portugal, Russia, Siam, the United States, and the
United Kingdom. The convention called on all signa-
tories to make every effort to control ‘‘all persons
manufacturing, importing, selling, distributing, and
exporting morphine, cocaine, and their respective salts,
as well as the buildings in which these persons carry
such an industry or trade.’’ The convention is the ﬁrst
effort at reaching an international agreement on the
control of illicit drugs.
The ﬁrst opium clinic in the United States is opened
by Dr. Charles Terry, public health ofﬁcer in
124
Chronology

Jacksonville, Florida. The purpose of this and similar
clinics is to provide support for drug addicts who,
because of new laws and regulations (primarily at
the state level), are unable to obtain the drugs to
which they are addicted from physicians or other
sources.
1913
New York State passes a strict law prohibiting the use
of cocaine for other than speciﬁc medical, dental, and
veterinary purposes.
1914
The Harrison Act requires importers, exporters, man-
ufacturers, and distributors of all opiate products to
register with the U.S. government and pay taxes on
their sales. The act does not make the use of opiates
illegal.
1916
In the case of United States v. Jin Fuey Moy (241 U.S. 394
[1916]), the U.S. Supreme Court severely restricts
implementation of the Harrison Act, passed two years
earlier.
1919
Secretary of State Francis Polk certiﬁes the ratiﬁcation
of the Eighteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution,
placing severe restrictions on the manufacture, sale,
and transportation of ‘‘intoxicating liquors’’ within
the United States. The amendment was eventually rati-
ﬁed by every state in the union except for Connecticut
and Rhode Island.
The International Opium Convention is incorporated
into the conditions of the Versailles Peace Treaty
signed at the end of World War I. This action obligated
all signatories to the peace treaty to become signatories
to the opium treaty also.
1922
The Narcotic Import and Export Act restricts the
importation of crude opium except for medical use.
1924
The Heroin Act makes the manufacture and posses-
sion of heroin illegal.
Chronology
125

1925
The last narcotics clinic in the United States (see 1912)
in Knoxville, Tennessee, is closed by the U.S. Treasury
Department.
1927
The Bureau of Prohibition in the Bureau of Internal
Revenue is established as the enforcement arm of
the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution,
which had been adopted in 1919.
1928
Great Britain bans the use of cannabis for non-
medical purposes.
1930
The Federal Bureau of Narcotics is established to
enforce provisions of the Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914
and the Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act of 1922.
1931
At a meeting held in Geneva, a group of nations
adopt the Convention for Limiting the Manufacture
and Regulating the Distribution of Narcotic Drugs in
an effort to bring under control the manufacture, dis-
tribution, and use of a number of narcotic drugs. The
convention establishes two groups of drugs, one con-
sisting of morphine, cocaine, heroin, and dihydrohy-
drooxycodeinone and related compounds, and one
consisting of codeine, ethylmorphine, and related
compounds. The convention enters into force in 1933.
1932
The U.S. Congress passes the Uniform State Narcotics
Act, which encourages all states to adopt model legis-
lation described in the act so that the same penalties
for drug use will be applied throughout the nation.
By the mid-1930s, all states have adopted the model
legislation, essentially establishing a national drug
policy.
The pharmaceutical ﬁrm of Smith, Kline, and French
markets amphetamine as benzedrine, an over-the-
counter inhalant for respiratory congestion.
1933
Secretary of State Cordell Hull certiﬁes the ratiﬁca-
tion of the Twenty First Amendment to the United
States, nullifying the Eighteenth Amendment and
126
Chronology

ending national laws against the manufacture, sale,
and transportation of alcohol beverages in the
United States.
1935
Two American alcoholics, William Grifﬁth (‘‘Bill’’)
Wilson and Robert Holbrook (‘‘Bob’’) Smith, found
Alcoholics Anonymous.
1936
A ﬁlm entitled Reefer Madness about the dangers of
smoking marijuana is released to the general public.
The ﬁlm is reputedly produced originally by a small
church group aimed at frightening their youth
members about the risks of substance abuse.
Although produced at little cost with a cast of essen-
tially unknown actors, the ﬁlm has come to be a cult
classic and, in 2001, premiers as an off-Broadway
musical show.
Representatives of a number of nations meet in
Geneva to adopt the Convention for the Suppression
of the Illicit Trafﬁc in Dangerous Drugs, an effort to
criminalize trafﬁcking in illegal drugs. When the
United States ﬁnds itself unable to support the ﬁnal
document, it loses any chance of being a strong step
in preventing the worldwide distribution of illegal
drugs.
1937
The American Medical Association endorses the sale
of amphetamine tablets for the treatment of narco-
lepsy and attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD).
The Marijuana Tax Act imposes a tax on anyone who
deals in any form of cannabis, hemp, or marijuana.
The act does not criminalize the use of marijuana,
but it does provide for severe penalties for anyone
who fails to pay the tax associated with cannabis use.
1941–1945
The U.S. government distributes both amphetamine
and methamphetamine to military personnel to
improve their performance in battle.
Chronology
127

1942
The Opium Poppy Control Act prohibits the growing
of opium poppies (Papaver somniferum) in the United
States.
1948
The United Nations sponsors an international con-
ference to update a treaty for the control of narcotic
drugs signed in 1931. The document signed at the meet-
ing is called the Protocol Bringing under International
Control Drugs outside the Scope of the Convention of
13 July 1931 for Limiting the Manufacture and Regulat-
ing the Distribution of Narcotic Drugs. It takes an
important step in recognizing that a number of sub-
stances not previously deﬁned formally as illegal
substances—including a number of synthetic products—
have effects similar to those of marijuana, cocaine,
heroin, morphine, and other ‘‘traditional’’ drugs.
1951
The Boggs Act increases federal penalties for viola-
tions of federal drug laws. The act is the ﬁrst piece
of legislation in which marijuana and other illegal
drugs are given equal treatment.
In Executive Order 10302, President Harry S Truman
creates the Interdepartmental Committee on Narcotics,
consisting of one representative each from the depart-
ments of Treasury, State, Defense, Justice, and Agricul-
ture, and of the Federal Security Agency to maintain
information about illegal drugs, to study problems of
prevention and treatment, and to advise the President
on national drug policy. The committee is the ﬁrst such
body to be established within the federal government.
Lois W., wife of Bill W., cofounder of Alcoholics
Anonymous, and Anne B. found Al-Anon, a support
group for family members of alcoholics.
1956
The Narcotics Control Act further increases federal
penalties for violations of federal drug laws.
1957
The teenage son of alcoholic parents and members of
Alcoholics Anonymous in California form Alateen,
128
Chronology

an organization designed to provide support for the
children of one or more alcoholic parents. A year
later, the organization is adopted by Al-Anon as a
special committee of the organization.
1961
A conference sponsored by the United Nations adopts
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, an effort to
update and consolidate a number of previously
adopted conventions, protocols, and agreements on
the manufacture, distribution, and sale of illegal
drugs, including the International Opium Convention
of 1912; the Agreement Concerning the Manufacture
of, Internal Trade in and Use of Prepared Opium of
1925; the International Opium Convention of 1925;
the Convention for Limiting the Manufacture and
Regulating the Distribution of Narcotic Drugs of
1931; the Agreement for the Control of Opium Smok-
ing in the Far East of 1931; the Protocol Amending
the Agreements, Conventions and Protocols on Nar-
cotic Drugs of 1912; 1925, 1931, 1936, and 1946; the Pro-
tocol Bringing under International Control Drugs
Outside the Scope of the Convention of 1931; and the
Protocol for Limiting and Regulating the Cultivation
of the Poppy Plant, the Production of, International
and Wholesale Trade in, and Use of Opium of 1953.
1964
In the largest and most deﬁnitive study of its kind, the
so-called ‘‘Grand Rapids Study’’ ﬁnds that the risk of a
driver’s being involved in an accident rises sharply
with his or her blood alcohol concentration. These
ﬁndings are replicated a number of times in the future
with a variety of modiﬁcations in variables studied.
1965
The Drug Abuse Control Amendments Act is passed
for the purpose of dealing with problems caused by
the use of stimulants, depressants, and hallucinogens.
It authorizes the Food and Drug Administration to
designate such drugs as controlled substances and to
require that a federal license be obtained for their dis-
tribution and sale. The possession of small amounts
of such drugs for personal use is allowed.
Chronology
129

1965
(cont.)
An advisory committee to the Surgeon General issues
a report, Smoking and Health, that represents the ﬁrst
signiﬁcant review of the health effects of smoking.
The report is instrumental in the passage in the same
year of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertis-
ing Act, which, among other provisions, requires that
all cigarette packages carry the warning label: ‘‘Cau-
tion: Cigarette Smoking May Be Hazardous to Your
Health.’’
1968
The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs is
formed as an agency within the U.S. Department of
Justice. It combines the preexisting Bureau of Narcot-
ics and Bureau of Drug Abuse Control.
1969
The Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act of 1969
amends the 1965 Federal Cigarette Labeling and
Advertising Act to require the following warning on
all cigarette packages: ‘‘The Surgeon General Has
Determined That Cigarette Smoking is Dangerous to
Your Health.’’
1970
The U.S. Congress passes the Comprehensive Drug
Abuse Prevention and Control Act in an effort to con-
solidate a number of earlier laws regulating the
manufacture and distribution of narcotics, stimu-
lants, depressants, hallucinogens, anabolic steroids,
and chemicals used in the production of controlled
substances. Title II of the act is called the Controlled
Substances Act, which establishes a ﬁve-tier system
of categorizing drugs that is still used today.
The U.S. Congress passes legislation banning ciga-
rette advertising on television and radio. The ban
takes effect in 1971.
The cigarette industry voluntarily agrees to list tar
and nicotine content on all cigarette packages.
The U.S. Congress passes the Comprehensive Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment, and
Rehabilitation Act of 1970. One provision of the act
130
Chronology

establishes the National Institute on Alcoholism and
Alcohol Abuse (NIAAA), with the responsibility of
conducting intramural research and supporting extra-
mural research on issues of alcoholism and alcohol
abuse.
1971
President Richard M. Nixon declares a ‘‘war on
drugs,’’ calling for an aggressive anti-drug policy at
both federal and state level. He calls drug abuse
‘‘Public Enemy #1’’ in the United States.
The United Nations Protocol on Psychotropic
Substances is adopted in Vienna. The purpose of the
protocol is to expand coverage of the 1961 Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs (which covered natu-
ral substances and their derivatives exclusively) to a
host of synthetic psychotropic substances, such as
ketamine, ephedrine, 3,4-methylenedioxymetham-
phetamine (MDMA), and tetrahydrocannabinol not
covered by the 1931 agreement.
1972
The National Commission on Marijuana and Drug
Abuse (also known as the Shafer Commission, after
its chairman) issues its report, recommending,
among other things, that simple possession of mari-
juana be decriminalized and that all distinctions
between legal and illegal drugs be dropped. The
commission has been created by the U.S. Congress
by Public Law 91–513 to study the problem of sub-
stance abuse in the United States. President Richard
M. Nixon declines to implement any of the commis-
sion’s recommendations.
1973
As part of the Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1973,
President Richard M. Nixon establishes the Drug
Enforcement Agency to replace the Bureau of Narcot-
ics and Dangerous Drugs, the Ofﬁce of Drug Abuse
Law Enforcement, and a handful of other federal
agencies with drug control responsibilities.
The Methadone Control Act provides funding for the
establishment of clinics through which recovering
Chronology
131

1973
(cont.)
heroin addicts can receive methadone therapy.
Doctors at this point are no longer allowed to write
prescriptions for methadone for the same purpose.
1974
The National Institute on Drug Abuse is created to
conduct research on drug abuse and drug addiction.
1976
The Democratic Party national platform calls for
decriminalization of marijuana, with the abolishment
of all penalties for possession of one ounce or less of
the drug.
1978
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration introduces
the Compassionate Investigational New Drug pro-
gram, allowing a small number of patients to use
marijuana grown at a federal facility at the University
of Mississippi to relieve symptoms of medical condi-
tions. Currently seven individuals remain in that
program.
The U.S. Congress passes the American Indian Reli-
gious Freedom Act that acknowledges the elements
of traditional Native American religious ceremonies
and the conﬂicts that may arise between those cer-
emonies and some U.S. laws. It declares that Native
Americans do have the right to practice their tradi-
tional religious customs. The use of peyote is implic-
itly, but not explicitly, guaranteed by this act.
1984
The 1965 Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising
Act is amended to require that one of four warning
labels appear in a speciﬁc format on cigarette packages
and in most related advertising: ‘‘SURGEON GENER-
AL’S WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung Cancer,
Heart Disease, Emphysema, and May Complicate
Pregnancy,’’ ‘‘SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING:
Quitting Smoking Now Greatly Reduces Serious Risks
to Your Health,’’ ‘‘SURGEON GENERAL’S WARN-
ING: Smoking By Pregnant Women May Result in
Fetal Injury, Premature Birth, and Low Birth Weight,’’
or ‘‘SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Cigarette
Smoke Contains Carbon Monoxide.’’
132
Chronology

The U.S. Congress passes the National Minimum
Drinking Age Act (also known as the Uniform Drink-
ing Age Act) requiring all states to raise the mini-
mum age for drinking to 21. Any state that refuses
to adopt this standard is subject to loss of 10 percent
of the funds due it annually under the Federal Aid
Highway Act.
First Lady Nancy Reagan launches her ‘‘Just Say No’’
campaign against drug use.
The U.S. Congress passes the Comprehensive Crime
Control Act as an amendment to the Controlled Sub-
stance Act of 1970, allowing the administrator of the
Drug Enforcement Administration to classify a sub-
stance as a Schedule I drug on a temporary (up to
one year) basis without the normal legislative action
needed for such a decision.
1985
Minnesota becomes the ﬁrst state to enact legislation
setting aside a portion of the state tobacco tax for
smoking prevention programs.
1986
The U.S. Congress passes the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of
1986. The act consists of two major titles, one dealing
with Anti-Drug Enforcement, and the other with
International Narcotics Control. The ﬁrst title is
divided into 21 subtitles dealing with a host of issues,
perhaps the most important of which is Subtitle E:
Controlled Substances Analogue Enforcement Act of
1986, which states that substances that are chemically
and pharmacologically similar to substances listed in
Schedule I or Schedule II of the Controlled Substan-
ces Act of 1970 (known as analogues of the listed
drugs) are also classiﬁed as Schedule I drugs. Perhaps
the most controversial section is Subtitle B: Drug
Possession Penalty Act of 1986, which establishes the
so-called 100-to-1 rule, in which possession of
100 grams of powder cocaine (the drug of choice
among wealthy white Americans) is considered to
be legally equivalent to 1 gram of crack cocaine (used
most commonly by Blacks).
Chronology
133

1986
(cont.)
President Ronald Reagan signs Executive Order
12564 requiring all federal agencies to establish
drug-free workplace programs.
1988
The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 for the ﬁrst time
imposes penalties on the users of illegal drugs. Prior
to this time, penalties for illegal drug use were lim-
ited to the producers and distributors of such sub-
stances. One provision of the act establishes the
Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy, with respon-
sibility for developing policies for control of the
nation’s drug abuse problems. First director of the
ofﬁce is William Bennett.
Francis L. Young, administrative law judge at the
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), issues an opinion
that marijuana has clear and unquestionable medical
uses and should be reclassiﬁed as a Schedule II drug
from its current status as a Schedule I drug. The
DEA declines to act on that recommendation.
The U.S. Congress passes the Chemical Diversion and
Trafﬁcking Act, whose purpose it is to reduce the
supply of precursor chemicals and manufacturing
devices (such as pill machines) used in the manufac-
ture of drugs. Prior to the law, the United States was
the major supplier of these materials to (primarily)
South America companies, where raw materials were
converted to commercial-grade drugs.
The U.S. Congress passes the Drug Free Workplace
Act, which extends President Ronald Reagan’s 1986
executive order to require all contractors and grant-
ees of the federal government to develop programs
for a drug-free workplace.
1990
The U.S. Congress passes legislation banning smok-
ing on all U.S. commercial airline ﬂights.
1992
President George H. W. Bush discontinues the Food and
Drug Administration’s Compassionate Investigational
134
Chronology

New Drug program because it conﬂicts with his admin-
istration’s drug use policies.
1993
The U.S. Congress passes the Native American Free
Exercise of Religion Act, which conﬁrms, clariﬁes,
and expands the American Indian Religious Freedom
Act of 1978. In particular, it speciﬁcally allows the use
of peyote, a drug banned by the Controlled Substance
Act of 1970.
1994
China passes the nation’s ﬁrst laws requiring health
warnings on cigarette packages, limiting tobacco
advertising, and initiating anti-smoking programs.
Mississippi becomes the ﬁrst state to sue the tobacco
industry to recover costs for tobacco-related illnesses.
The Omnibus Crime Bill, introduced by then-Senator
Joseph Biden (D–DE) introduces the death penalty for
anyone convicted to operating large-scale drug distri-
bution programs, one of the ﬁrst times the death pen-
alty is permitted for crimes in which a death is not
involved.
1995
The U.S. Sentencing Commission issues a report to the
U.S. Congress conﬁrming that serious racial imbalan-
ces exist in sentencing for powder cocaine and ‘‘crack’’
cocaine and recommending the Congress act to
ameliorate these disparities. Congress declines to do
so, one of the very few times in history it refuses to fol-
low the commission’s recommendations.
In the case of Vernonia School District 47J, Petitioner V.
Wayne Acton, et ux., the U.S. Supreme Court rules, in
a vote of 6 to 3, that a school district may impose sus-
picionless drug tests on students who wish to engage
in extracurricular activities.
1996
Arizona voters pass Proposition 200, otherwise known
as the Drug, Medicalization, Prevention and Punish-
ment Act, which requires that a person convicted of
Chronology
135

1996
(cont.)
possession or use of an illegal drug receive drug treat-
ment for the ﬁrst and second offense, and a prison
term only after the third such conviction. Physicians
in the state are also authorized to write prescriptions
for Schedule I drugs when federal law permits such
actions.
The U.S. Congress passes the Drug-Induced Rape
Prevention and Punishment Act, which provides for
penalties of up to 20 years in prison for supplying a
drug to another person with the intent of committing
a crime, such as rape, against that person. The pri-
mary motivation for the act is the spread of so-called
‘‘date rape,’’ in which one person provides a second
person with a psychoactive drug—most commonly
ketamine, gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB), gamma
butyrolactone (GBL), or Rohypnol—without that sec-
ond person’s knowledge or approval.
California voters pass Proposition 215, the Compas-
sionate Use Act of 1996, which allows individuals
with a doctor’s prescription to grow small amounts
of marijuana for their own personal medical use.
The U.S. Congress passes the Comprehensive Meth-
amphetamine Control Act, which further restricts
the sale of precursors used in the production of meth-
amphetamine, such as pseudoephedrine, iodine, red
phosphorus, and hydrochloric acid.
1997
The tobacco industry reaches a settlement with 46
state attorneys general to pay $360 billion over a
period of 25 years to fund anti-smoking campaigns,
to add health warnings to cigarette packages, and to
pay substantial ﬁnes if the number of teenage smok-
ers is not reduced.
For the ﬁrst time in history, a major tobacco exe-
cutive, Bennett LeBow, CEO of Liggett, admits
during public testimony that cigarette smoking
causes cancer.
136
Chronology

1998
The U.S. Congress passes the Controlled Substances
Trafﬁcking Prohibition Act, which limits the amount
of certain controlled substances that a person can bring
into the United States for personal use to 50 pills or
less or a two-week supply. The law is designed to
remove a loophole which previously allowed individ-
uals to bring back unlimited quantities of Schedule II
drugs, supposedly for their own personal medical
needs but, in reality, for resale in the United States.
2000
The U.S. Supreme Court rules that the Food and Drug
Administration does not have the authority to regu-
late tobacco products.
The Drug Addiction Treatment Act of 2000 allows
certain qualifying physicians to treat patients with
opioid addictions using substances on Schedules III,
IV, and V of the Controlled Substances Act. The only
drug that meets this speciﬁcation is buprenorphine.
President Bill Clinton signs a new federal law requir-
ing all states to pass a law setting a blood alcohol con-
centration (BAC) of 0.08 percent as the legal limit.
States that do not adopt this standard are to be denied
a portion of the federal highway funding normally
due them. Eventually 49 states do adopt such laws,
the only exception being Massachusetts, where a
BAC of 0.08 percent is consider legal proof of impair-
ment, but is not illegal in and out itself.
The U.S. government gives $1.3 billion to Colombia
for the purpose of improving its anti-drug campaign.
The money is designated to be used for aerial spray-
ing of coca and other drug crops, for training of
Colombian troops in anti-drug programs, and for
the purchase of equipment, such as helicopters, to be
used against drug manufacturers and distributors.
2001
In the case of United States v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers’
Cooperative 532 U.S. 483 (2001), the U.S. Supreme Court
unanimously rules that marijuana has no medical
Chronology
137

2001
(cont.)
value and that its sale by the Oakland Cannabis
Buyers’ Cooperative (and similar organizations) is
illegal.
2002
The British government changes its policies on the
use of cannabis products, downgrading the drug
from Class B to Class C. That change leaves the drug
as an illegal substance, although an arrest for posses-
sion is likely to result in conﬁscation of the drug and a
warning, but no prosecution, prison time, or ﬁne.
2003
All forms of advertising for tobacco products in the
United Kingdom is banned.
A ban by the European Union on the use of the terms
‘‘light’’ or ‘‘mild’’ on cigarette packages takes effect.
The same regulations require that health warnings
cover at least 30 percent of the front and 40 percent
of the back of all cigarette packages.
Concerned about the estimated 30,000 deaths annu-
ally caused by smoking, French president Jacques
Chirac announces a ‘‘war on smoking’’ that includes
an investment of more than $500 million for anti-
smoking campaigns, a near doubling of cigarette
taxes, and greater limitations on places that people
may smoke.
2004
All forms of advertising and promotions for tobacco
products are banned in India.
2005
The U.S. Congress passes and President George W.
Bush signs the USA PATRIOT Improvement and
Reauthorization Act which includes, as an unrelated
amendment, a version of the Combat Meth Act, origi-
nally proposed by Senator James Talent (R-MO). One
of the primary features of the act is the imposition of
severe restrictions on the sale of cough and cold prod-
ucts whose ingredients can be used in the manufac-
ture of methamphetamine.
138
Chronology

In the case of Gonzalez v. Raich 545 U.S. 1 (2005), the
U.S. Supreme Court rules, by a vote of 6 to 3, that it is
illegal for medical doctors to write prescriptions for
their patients to use marijuana for medical purposes.
2006
In the case of United States of America v. Philip Morris,
USA, Inc., et al., Civil Action No. 99-CV-02496 (GK)
(2006), Judge Gladys Kessler ﬁnds that U.S. tobacco
companies have engaged in a ‘‘massive 50-year
scheme to defraud the public, including consumers
of cigarettes, in violation of RICO [Racketeer Inﬂu-
enced and Corrupt Organizations Act of 1970].’’ She
imposes a ﬁne of $280 billion on the tobacco
companies.
2009
Congress approves the largest ever increase in the
federal cigarette tax, boosting it 62 cents, to $1.01 a
pack.
The U.S. Congress passes and President Barack
Obama signs the Family Smoking Prevention and
Tobacco Control and Federal Retirement Reform act,
which authorizes the Food and Drug Administration
to regulate cigarettes and other tobacco products.
Chronology
139

This page intentionally left blank

5
Biographical Sketches
A
ny history of drugs, substance abuse, alcoholism, smoking, and
the political, legal, and social issues surrounding these topics
must include a long list of women and men who have had a
signiﬁcant impact on that history. Some individuals have con-
ducted research on these substances; others have advocated for or
against their use; still others have devoted their lives to developing
prevention programs or methods of treatment; and many have
been involved in the development of local, state, national, or
international policy with respect to substance use and abuse. This
chapter provides biographies of a number of individuals, with a
review of their contribution to the history of substance abuse, as
well as a brief biographical sketch of each person.
Richard Alpert (Ram Dass; 1931–)
During the 1960s, Alpert was involved in research on psychoactive
substances at Harvard University, along with his good friend and
colleague Timothy Leary. He later spent time studying spiritualism
in India and devoted the greatest part of his life to studying and
teaching about this subject in the United States.
Richard Alpert was born on April 6, 1931, in Newton,
Massachusetts. His father was a prominent attorney, president of
the New York, New Haven, and Hartford railroad, and a founder
of Brandeis University and the Albert Einstein College of
Medicine in New York City. Alpert received his B.A. from Tufts
University, his M.A. in motivation psychology from Wesleyan
University, and his Ph.D. in human development from Stanford
141

University. He then accepted a teaching and research post in the
Department of Social Relations and the Graduate School of Edu-
cation at Harvard University. While at Harvard, he met Timothy
Leary, from whom he learned about the psychoactive effects of a
number of substances. Between 1960 and 1961, Alpert and Leary
began a series of experiments on psilocybin, using graduate stu-
dents at their subjects. The direction of these experiments was
sufﬁciently troubling to Harvard administrators that both men
were dismissed from their academic positions. That move was
of little concern to Alpert, who later said that he had already
become disillusioned with academics as a ‘‘meaningless pursuit.’’
In 1967, Alpert traveled to India, where he met his spiritual
teacher, Neem Karoli Baba, and received his new name, Ram Dass,
or ‘‘servant of God.’’ He has spent the rest of his life studying a vari-
ety of spiritualistic philosophies, including Hinduism, karma, yoga,
and Suﬁsm. He is probably best known today not for his early stud-
ies of psychoactive substances, but for his 1971 book, Be Here Now.
His other publications include The Psychedelic Experience: A Manual
Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead (with Leary and Ralph Metzner);
Doing Your Own Being (1973); The Only Dance There Is (1974); Journey
of Awakening: A Meditator’s Guidebook (1978); Compassion in Action:
Setting Out on the Path of Service (with Mirabai Bush; 1991); Still
Here: Embracing Aging, Changing and Dying (2000); and Paths to God:
Living The Bhagavad Gita (2004). In 1997, Alpert suffered a stroke
that paralyzed the right side of his body and left him with Broca’s
aphasia, a brain condition that makes speech difﬁcult. Nonetheless,
he continues to write, teach, and lecture, as his condition permits.
Harry J. Anslinger (1892–1975)
Anslinger was appointed the ﬁrst commissioner of the Federal
Bureau of Narcotics when it was established in 1930. He held that
ofﬁce for 32 years, one of the longest tenures of any federal ofﬁcial
in modern history. He was consistently a strong advocate for
severe penalties against the manufacture, distribution, sale, and
use of certain drugs, especially marijuana.
Harry Jacob Anslinger was born in Altoona, Pennsylvania,
on May 20, 1892, to Robert J. and Rosa Christiana Fladt Anslinger,
immigrants from Switzerland and Germany, respectively. Upon
completing high school, Anslinger attended the Altoona Business
College before taking a job with the Pennsylvania Railroad.
142
Biographical Sketches

He received a leave of absence from the railway that allowed him
to matriculate at Pennsylvania State College (now Pennsylvania
State University), where he received his two-year associate degree
in engineering and business management. From 1917 to 1928,
Anslinger worked for a number of private and governmental agen-
cies on problems of illegal drug use, a job that took him to a num-
ber of countries around the world. He has been credited with
helping to shape drug policies both in the United States and in a
number of foreign countries where he worked or consulted.
In 1929, Anslinger was appointed assistant commissioner in
the United States Bureau of Prohibition, a position he held only
brieﬂy before being selected as the ﬁrst commissioner of the newly
created Federal Bureau of Narcotics in 1930. He assumed that post
at a time when state and federal ofﬁcials were debating the need
(or lack of need) for regulations of hemp and marijuana. Both hemp
and marijuana are obtained from plants in the genus Cannabis, the
former with many important industrial applications, and the latter
used almost exclusively as a recreational drug. Historians have
discussed the motivations that may have driven Anslinger’s atti-
tudes about the subject, but his actions eventually demonstrated a
very strong opposition to the growing, processing, distribution,
and use of all products of the Cannabis plant. He was instrumental
in formulating federal policies and laws against such use that
developed during the 1930s.
Anslinger remained in his post until 1970, staying on even after
his seventieth birthday until a replacement was found. He then
served two more years as U.S. representative to the United Nations
Narcotic Convention. By the end of his tenure with the conven-
tion, he was blind and suffered from both angina and an enlarged
prostate. He died in Hollidaysburg, Pennsylvania, on November 14,
1975, of heart failure.
Steve Bechler (1979–2003)
Bechler, a pitcher in the Baltimore Orioles professional baseball
organization, died on February 17, 2003, after using the herbal
supplement ephedra in an ongoing effort to lose weight. He is
only one of many professional and amateur athletes who have
died or suffered permanent physical or mental injury from using
both legal and illegal drugs to achieve an increase in desirable
physical traits, such as strength, speed, or endurance.
Biographical Sketches
143

Steven Scott Bechler was born in Medford, Oregon, on
November 18, 1979. He attended South Medford High School,
from which he graduated in 1998. He was then selected by the
Orioles in the third round of the national baseball draft and
assigned to the Gulf Coast Orioles in the Gulf Coast League. The
following year he played for the Delmarva Shorebirds in the Class
A South Atlantic League, and was then promoted to the Frederick
Keys of the Class A+ Carolina League in 2000 and 2001 and to the
Bowie Baysox in the Class AA Eastern League and the Rochester
Redwings in the Class AAA International League in 2001 and
2002. At the end of 2002, he was called up to the home club and
pitched four and one-third innings, ending with an earned run
average of 13.52. He was given a better than average chance of
making the Orioles for the 2003 season when he died during
spring training for that season.
Weight control had long been a problem for Bechler, and he
tried a number of methods of reducing his weight. During the
2003 spring training season, he apparently used various legal drug
combinations to achieve this goal, one of which contained the
drug ephedrine (also known as ephedra). During a workout after
having taken the drug, Bechler’s temperature rose to 108 degrees,
and he collapsed, suffered multi-organ failure, and died the fol-
lowing day at the Orioles’ training camp in Fort Lauderdale,
Florida. Ephedrine had previously been banned by the Interna-
tional Olympic Committee, the National Football League, and
the National Collegiate Athletic Association, but not by Major
League Baseball (MLB). It has since been placed on the MLB list
of banned substances.
William Bennett (1943–)
Bennett was named the ﬁrst director of the Ofﬁce of National
Drug Control Policy in 1989 by President George H. W. Bush. That
ofﬁce had been created by the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988.
William John Bennett was born in Brooklyn, New York, on
July 31, 1943, but later moved to Washington, D.C. He graduated
from Gonzaga High School in Washington and attended Williams
College in Williamstown, Massachusetts, from which he earned
his B.A. in philosophy in 1965. He then continued his education
at the University of Texas, from which he received his Ph.D. in
philosophy in 1970, and at Harvard Law School, which granted
144
Biographical Sketches

him a J.D. in 1971. He has held teaching posts at Boston Univer-
sity, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and North
Carolina State University, although he is probably best known
as a conservative writer, speaker, commentator, and political
theorist.
Bennett’s political career began in 1981 when President
Ronald Reagan appointed him to the post of president of the
National Endowment for the Humanities. He remained there until
1985, when Reagan appointed him Secretary of the Department of
Education (DOE), a post he held for three years. After leaving the
DOE, Bennett was appointed the ﬁrst director of the White House
Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy, where he remained until
the end of President Bush’s term in 1991. Throughout his public
and private careers, Bennett has taken strong stances against sub-
stance abuse, abortion, and other activities to which he is opposed.
In an appearance on the Larry King Live radio show on June 15,
1989, for example, he said in response to a caller’s suggestion that
drug dealers be beheaded that ‘‘Morally, I don’t have a problem
with that at all.’’
In addition to his many speaking appearances before public
audiences and on television and radio, Bennett has been a proliﬁc
author with more than a dozen books to his credit, including The
Book of Virtues: A Treasury of Great Moral Stories, The Children’s Book
of Virtues, The Death of Outrage: Bill Clinton and the Assault on
American Ideals, The American Patriot’s Almanac: Daily Readings on
America (with John Cribb), Why We Fight: Moral Clarity and the
War on Terrorism, The Broken Hearth: Reversing the Moral Collapse
of the American Family, and Body Count: Moral Poverty . . . and How
to Win America’s War Against Crime and Drugs. Bennett has some-
times been criticized for leading a life that is sometimes at odds
with the moral principles he espouses in public. In 2003, for exam-
ple, he was widely criticized when it became public knowledge
that he was addicted to gambling and had lost $8 million over the
preceding years at the gaming tables in Las Vegas.
Bill W. (1895–1971)
Bill W. was cofounder with Dr. Bob of Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA), an organization devoted to helping alcoholics attain sobriety.
He had his last alcoholic drink on December 11, 1934, shortly after
cofounding AA, and maintained his sobriety ever after that time.
Biographical Sketches
145

Bill W. is the name much preferred by William Grifﬁth Wilson
because it reﬂects and emphasizes the anonymity that AA asks of
and offers to its members as they ﬁght their battle against alcohol
addiction. He was born on November 26, 1895, in East Dorset,
Vermont, to Gilman Barrows Wilson, a womanizer and heavy
drinker, and Emily Grifﬁth Wilson, a strong-willed and abusive
mother. His father abandoned the family in 1905, and his mother
decided to do the same, choosing to study for a career in osteo-
pathic medicine. Bill W. then became the ward of his maternal
grandparents, with whom he spent the rest of his childhood.
After graduating from high school, Bill entered Norwich
University, but remained for only a short time, partly because of
his shyness and lack of social skills, and partly because of his
own misconduct and that of other classmates. It was during these
years that he had his ﬁrst drink, before rapidly becoming an alco-
holic with many ‘‘lost weekends’’ in his life. He eventually was
readmitted to Norwich, from which he graduated with a degree
in electric engineering in 1917. He then served as a second lieu-
tenant in the U.S. Army, a time during which his drinking became
even more of a problem. When he returned at the end of the war,
he took a job in the insurance department of the New York Cen-
tral Railroad, while attending the Brooklyn Law School at night.
He earned his law degree in 1920, but is said to have been too
drunk to pick up his diploma. Over the next decade, Bill worked
as a ﬁeld investigator for a number of ﬁnancial ﬁrms, traveling over
most of the United States to complete his assignments. Eventually,
his drinking problem became so severe that he was unable to hold
a job and he was admitted to the Charles B. Towns Hospital for
Drug and Alcohol Addictions in New York City.
Bill experienced his ﬁrst, short-lived recovery in 1934 when
he met an old drinking friend, Ebby Thacher, and learned that
he (Thacher) had become sober largely through the efforts of an
evangelical Christian organization known as the Oxford Group.
Bill’s own efforts to achieve a similar result failed, however, and
he was returned to the Towns Hospital a second time. Finally, in
May 1935, on a business trip to Akron, Ohio, Bill met another
alcoholic who was going through struggles similar to his own,
Robert Holbrook Smith (‘‘Dr. Bob’’), with whom he developed
plans for a new group to help themselves and other alcoholics like
themselves. That organization eventually grew to become the
largest and most successful group for the treatment of alcoholism
in the world. Bill spent the rest of his life serving in one role or
146
Biographical Sketches

another in AA. In 2009, Time magazine named Bill one of the 100
most important people of the twentieth century.
Thomas de Quincey (1785–1859)
De Quincey was an English author best known for his autobio-
graphical work, Confessions of an Opium Eater. He also wrote a
number of other works, including novels, essays, critical reviews,
and additional autobiographical sketches.
Thomas de Quincey was born on August 15, 1785, in
Manchester, England. After his father died in 1796, de Quincy’s
mother moved the family to Bath, where he was enrolled in King
Edward’s School. He was an outstanding scholar, able to read
Greek and compose poems in the language as a teenager. His home
life was difﬁcult, however, and he ran away to Wales at the age of
17, with the blessings and minimal ﬁnancial support of his mother
and uncle. Eventually he found his way to London, where he
nearly died of starvation and survived only because of the kind-
ness of a 15-year-old prostitute whom we now know of only as
‘‘Anne of Oxford Street.’’
In 1804, he was found by friends in London and returned to
his family, who arranged for him to enroll at Worcester College,
Oxford. It was at Oxford that he ﬁrst took opium, in the form of
laudanum, for a painful and persistent toothache. He soon became
addicted to the drug, an addiction that persisted to a greater or
lesser degree for the rest of his life. He describes his years of addic-
tion in Confessions, as well as its effects on his life and writing and
his efforts to overcome his addiction. From time to time, he was
able to withdraw from use of the drug but, a point noted by some
of his biographers, the quantity and quality of his literary work
suffered signiﬁcantly during these periods of abstinence.
In 1816, de Quincey married Margaret Simpson, who was
eventually to bear him eight children. She has been described
as the ‘‘anchor’’ in his life, and, after her death in 1837, de Quincey’s
use of opium increased signiﬁcantly.
De Quincey survived for most of his life after about 1820
partially through the ﬁnancial support of his family and partially
through his own literary efforts. In the early 1820s, he moved to
London where he worked as a novelist, essayist, translator,
reporter, and critic. Publication of Confessions in 1821 essentially
made his career as a writer, although he never again produced a
Biographical Sketches
147

work with such wide popularity. In addition to his opium addic-
tion, de Quincey spent most of his life battling ﬁnancial problems,
and he was convicted and imprisoned on ﬁve occasions for non-
payment of his debts.
Biographers have noted de Quincey’s substantial inﬂuence
on later writers and artists, including Edgar Allan Poe, Charles
Baudelaire, Nikolai Gogol, Aldous Huxley, William Burroughs,
and Hector Berlioz, whose Symphonie Fantastique is reputedly
loosely based on Confessions. The most recent collection of de
Quincey’s works was published in 21 volumes between 2000 and
2003. De Quincey died in Glasgow on December 8, 1859.
Pablo Escobar (1949–1993)
Escobar was a Colombian drug lord who, at the height of his
powers, was said to control more than 80 percent of the world’s
supply of cocaine. He is perhaps the penultimate example of
powerful men who have gained almost unbelievable wealth and
power by trafﬁcking in illegal substances, moving such substances,
in almost all cases, from poor, developing nations to wealthy,
developed nations, such as the United States. At one point, Fortune
magazine listed Escobar as the seventh richest man in the world.
Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria was born in the Medellin sub-
urb of Envigado in 1949 (various biographies give different dates
in that year). He fell into crime early in his life, stealing gravestones
from cemeteries in order to resell them as new stones, according to
one report. In the 1970s, he added drug-running to his criminal
activities, obtaining coca paste from Bolivia and Peru, having it
reﬁned, and then shipping it to the United States. In 1975, he
reached the zenith of his power when a rival, Fabio Restrepo,
was murdered (perhaps at Escobar’s behest), leaving a power vac-
uum into which Escobar stepped. For the next 15 years, he ruled the
trade in cocaine in Colombia virtually without competition. He also
became politically active, achieving election to the Colombian
Congress in 1982. Although he was very popular with the common
people, he stopped at virtually no deed to gain and strengthen his
control over the drug trade. He is said to have been responsible
for a bomb attack on the Colombian Supreme Court in which 11 of
the 25 justices on the court were killed. He was also implicated in
the bombing of Avianca airlines ﬂight 203 in 1989, an apparent
effort to kill one of his political opponents.
148
Biographical Sketches

As national and international efforts to bring Escobar under
control increased, he withdrew from public attention and retired
to his private homes throughout the country. Then, in 1991, Escobar
surrendered to the Colombian government, fearing that he would
be captured and extradited to the United States. Colombian ofﬁ-
cials banished Escobar to his own private prison, a palatial home
called La Catedral for a period of ﬁve years, after which he was
to be declared immune from extradition. While ensconced at
La Catedral, Escobar apparently continued his ruthless campaign
against opponents and is thought to have been responsible for
the deaths of a number of ‘‘visitors’’ to his ‘‘prison.’’ Finally, the
Colombian government decided to move him to other facilities
in July 1992. During the moving process, Escobar escaped. After
more than a year of intense searching by Colombian and American
forces, Escobar was found and killed on December 2, 1993.
Francis B. Harrison (1873–1957)
Harrison is probably best known today as author of the Harrison
Narcotics Tax Act of 1914, an act that was passed, somewhat
ironically, only after Harrison himself had left ofﬁce. The act did
not speciﬁcally prohibit any illegal substance, but it provided for
the registration and taxation of ‘‘all persons who produce, import,
manufacture, compound, deal in, dispense, sell, distribute, or
give away opium or coca leaves, their salts, derivatives, or prepa-
rations, and for other purposes.’’ Law enforcement ofﬁcers and
the courts immediately began to interpret the law as restricting
physicians from writing prescriptions for the nonmedical use of
opiates, and they began arresting, prosecuting, and convicting
individuals for such activities. To a signiﬁcant extent, then, the
Harrison Act marked the beginning of a national campaign against
the use of certain substances for other than medical uses.
Francis Burton Harrison was born in New York City on
December 18, 1873, to Burton Harrison, an attorney and private
secretary to Jefferson Davis, president of the Confederate States,
and Constance Cary Harrison, a novelist and social activist.
He attended the Cutler School in New York City, and Yale Univer-
sity, from which he received his B.A. in 1895. He then earned his
L.L.B. at New York Law School in 1897. Harrison was elected to the
U.S. Congress from New York’s 13th District, but resigned after one
term to run (unsuccessfully) for lieutenant governor of New York.
Biographical Sketches
149

After a brief hiatus in the private practice of law, he ran for
Congress again in 1907, this time from New York’s 20th district,
and was elected. He served for three terms in the Congress before
accepting an appointment as Governor General of the Philippine
Islands, where he remained until 1921. Following his service in
the Philippines, Harrison essentially retired from public life, spend-
ing extended periods of time in Scotland and Spain. He returned to
the Philippines on a number of occasions, however, as consultant
and advisor, especially when the islands were granted their
independence in 1934. Harrison was married six times, with ﬁve
of those marriages ending in divorce. He died in Flemington,
New Jersey, on November 21, 1957.
Albert Hoffman (1906–2008)
Hoffman discovered the psychedelic compound lysergic acid
diethylamide (LSD) and experienced its hallucinogenic effects in
1943. He later studied chemicals present in so-called ‘‘magic
mushrooms’’ also responsible for hallucinogenic effects and syn-
thesized the most important of these, psilocybin.
Albert Hoffman was born in Baden, Switzerland, on Janu-
ary 11, 1906, to Adolf Hoffman, a toolmaker, and Elisabeth Schenk
Hoffman. He attended Zu¨rich University, from which he received
his bachelor’s degree in chemistry in 1929 and his doctorate in the
same subject in 1930. He then accepted an appointment as research
chemist at Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, a company with which he
remained for the rest of his professional career.
The event in Hoffman’s life for which he is best known and
that has now been recounted endlessly occurred on April 16, 1943.
At the time, Hoffman was involved in a long-term study of some
naturally occurring psychedelic plants, including the fungus
ergot and the herb squill. He was working in particular with a
chemical found in a number of these plants, known in German as
Lysergsa¨ure-diethylamid, and in English as lysergic acid diethyla-
mide (LSD). In particular, he was studying LSD-25, that is, the
twenty-ﬁfth preparation of the substance. During his research,
Hoffman spilled a small amount of LSD-25 on his hands and, before
long, began to feel mentally disoriented. After a period of time, he
found he could no longer continue working and jumped on his
bicycle to ride home. That bicycle ride, as Hoffman has recounted
the event on a number of occasions, was such a bizarre experience
150
Biographical Sketches

that he thought for some time that he had perhaps lost his mind.
After about six hours of ‘‘extremely stimulated imagination . . . a
dreamlike state . . . and an uninterrupted stream of fantastic pic-
tures, extraordinary shapes with intense, kaleidoscopic play of
colors’’ (as he later described the experience), Hoffman returned
to normal, but with a desire to learn more about the compound he
had discovered.
Much of Hoffman’s career was devoted to further studies
of LSD and other psychedelic compounds, research that was
supported and encouraged by Sandoz because of its potential for
application in the treatment of psychological disorders. In 1962,
for example, Hoffman and his wife traveled to Mexico to collect
the psychoactive herb Ska Maria Pastora (Salvia divinorum) for
study and analysis. He also identiﬁed the most important active
agent in another psychedelic plant, the Mexican morning glory
(Rivea corymbosa), a close relative of LSD, lysergic acid amide.
Hoffman retired from Sandoz in 1971 but continued a career of
writing, public speaking, and participation in a variety of profes-
sional organizations. Perhaps his most popular book is his own
account of his research on LSD and its psychedelic effects, LSD:
My Problem Child (1980). Hoffman died on April 29, 2008, in the vil-
lage of Burg im Leimental, near Basel, Switzerland, at the age of 102.
Aldous Huxley (1894–1963)
Huxley is probably best known as the author of Brave New World,
which describes a world in which the state takes control of every
aspect of a person’s individual life. He is perhaps somewhat less
well known among the general public as an enthusiastic advocate
of the use of psychedelic drugs, arguing that all of the world’s
great beliefs arise out of hallucinogenic experiences of their
founders and early disciples.
Aldous Leonard Huxley was born in Godalming, Surrey,
England, on July 26, 1894. The Huxley family was then one of
the most famous in Great Britain. Huxley’s brother, Julian, was
an eminent biologist, his father was a successful author, and his
grandfather, T. H. Huxley, had been a great defender of Charles
Darwin’s theory of evolution, earning himself the accolade of
‘‘Darwin’s Bulldog.’’ After an early period of home schooling,
Huxley attended the Hillside School before enrolling at Eton
College. In 1911, he developed a case of keratitis punctata, an eye
Biographical Sketches
151

condition that left him essentially blind for more than two years
and which, incidentally, disqualiﬁed him for service in World
War I. When he recovered, Huxley enrolled at Balliol College,
Oxford, from which he graduated in 1916.
After leaving Oxford, Huxley taught brieﬂy at Eton and
worked for a short time at a chemical plant in Billingham, but he
was not very successful or happy in either job. It gradually became
clear that his real career was in the arts, speciﬁcally, as a writer.
He produced his ﬁrst book of poems in 1916 (Burning Wheels),
his ﬁrst book of short stories in 1920 (Limbo), and his ﬁrst novel
in 1921 (Chrome Yellow). He was eventually to produce many more
novels, books of poetry, travel writings, essays, short story collec-
tions, magazine articles, biographies, and plays.
Huxley may have been introduced to psychedelic drugs as
early as 1930, although his ﬁrst real experimentation dates to the
1950s. He is said to have taken his ﬁrst dose of mescaline in 1950
and his ﬁrst dose of LSD in 1953, after which he became a ﬁrm
advocate of psychedelics as a key to out-of-body experiences that
could be of enormous value to a person. He described and dis-
cussed these experiences in his collection of essays, Doors of Percep-
tion (1954), which was named after a book by William Blake and
which served as an inspiration for the name of a rock band of the
time, The Doors. He is said to have been a favorite writer of many
hippies of the 1960s and a spiritual guide for other researchers in
psychedelic substances, including Timothy Leary and Richard
Alpert. Huxley is said to have requested an intramuscular injection
of LSD on his deathbed, a believer in the psychedelic experience to
the very end. He died in Los Angeles on November 22, 1963, which
was also the date on which John F. Kennedy was assassinated and
C. S. Lewis died.
C. Everett Koop (1916–)
Koop served as U.S. Surgeon General under President Ronald
Reagan from 1982 to 1989. During his tenure, he was a vigorous
advocate for a number of public health programs, perhaps the best
known of which was his campaign against smoking.
Charles Everett Koop was born in Brooklyn, New York, on
October 14, 1916. He earned his B.A. from Dartmouth College
in 1937 and his M.D. from Cornell Medical College in 1941. He then
took a position at the University of Pennsylvania, where he held a
152
Biographical Sketches

number of posts over the next 35 years, including surgeon-in-chief
at the university’s Children’s Hospital (1948–1981) and professor
of pediatric surgery (1959–1989). In 1981, President Reagan asked
Koop to become Deputy Assistant Secretary for Health in the
U.S. Public Health Service, with the understanding that he would
be eventually be promoted to surgeon general, a promise that was
kept in January 1982. Koop remained in that position until almost
the end of Reagan’s second term of ofﬁce, leaving his post in
October 1989.
Koop’s term of service as surgeon general was marked by
aggressive campaigns on a number of public health fronts, smoking
perhaps being the most notable. His ﬁrst public action as surgeon
general, in fact, was to issue a report, Report on Smoking and Health,
that summarized the association between smoking and cancer
of the lung, oral cavity, larynx, esophagus, stomach, bladder, pan-
creas, and kidneys. He used that report as the basis for a national
program that he called the Campaign for a Smoke-Free America
by the Year 2000. As an integral part of the campaign, Koop called
for legislation requiring very speciﬁc notices about the health
effects of smoking on all cigarette packages, legislation that was
adopted by the U.S. Congress in 1984. In spite of pressure from
tobacco-state legislators, Koop continued his antismoking crusade
throughout his term of ofﬁce. In 1986, he issued an important report
on the effects of secondhand smoke, The Health Consequences of
Involuntary Smoking, which demonstrated that secondhand smoke
was not simply an inconvenience, but a quantiﬁable health risk.
After leaving federal service, Koop became president of the
National Safe Kids Campaign, a post he held until 2003. He also
accepted an offer to return to Dartmouth College, where he is now
Elizabeth DeCamp McInerny Professor of Surgery at Dartmouth
Medical School and senior scholar at the C. Everett Koop Institute
at Dartmouth College. He continues to write and speak on a variety
of medical and health topics and is the author of more than 200
books and articles of such topics.
Timothy Leary (1920–1996)
In his New York Times obituary, Leary was remembered as the man
who ‘‘effectively introduced many Americans to the psychedelic
1960s.’’ He is perhaps best remembered for having coined the
phrase ‘‘turn on, tune in, drop out.’’
Biographical Sketches
153

Timothy Francis Leary was born in Springﬁeld, Massachusetts,
on October 22, 1920. After graduating from Springﬁeld Classical
High School, he entered the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester,
Massachusetts, where he spent two years. He then transferred to
the University of Alabama, where he also remained only brieﬂy.
He is reputed to have had disciplinary problems at both institu-
tions, and did not receive his bachelor’s degree (in psychology)
from Alabama until 1943. During World War II he served in the
Medical Corps. After completing his studies at Alabama, he studied
for his master’s degree at Washington State University, which he
received in 1946, and then continued with his doctoral studies at
the University of California at Berkeley, which awarded him his
Ph.D. in psychology in 1950. Over the next decade, Leary followed
a somewhat traditional academic pathway, serving as assistant
professor at Berkeley from 1950 to 1955, director of psychiatric
research at the Kaiser Family Foundation, in Menlo Park, California,
from 1955 to 1958, and lecturer in psychology at Harvard University
from 1958 to 1963.
The turning point in Leary’s life came in August 1960 when he
ﬁrst consumed psilocybin mushrooms on a visit to Cuernavaca,
Mexico. He later said that, as a result of this experience, he ‘‘learned
more about . . . (his) brain and its possibilities . . . (and) more about
psychology in the ﬁve hours after taking these mushrooms than . . .
(he) had in the preceding ﬁfteen years of studying doing research in
psychology.’’ For the rest of his life, Leary devoted his energies to
learning more about psychedelic substances and spreading the
word about his discoveries to the world.
After his return from Mexico in 1960, Leary decided to incor-
porate his new passion into his research and teaching at Harvard.
Along with his colleague Richard Alpert, Leary enlisted prison
inmates and graduate students in a series of experiments using
psychedelic substances to determine how they might be used in
the treatment of psychological and psychiatric disorders. The uni-
versity was somewhat less than enthusiastic about Leary’s research
and out-of-classroom activities, and it eventually terminated his
contract on May 6, 1963, for failing to show up for his scheduled
classes. Harvard also terminated Alpert at about the same time
for providing psychedelic substances to an undergraduate in an
off-campus setting.
After leaving Harvard, Leary and Alpert moved to an estate
furnished them by a wealthy admirer at Millbrook, New York.
Although planned as a research institute, the facility soon became
154
Biographical Sketches

better known as a ‘‘hippie hangout’’ where all types of drugs were
used. Over the next two decades, Leary fell afoul of the law a num-
ber of times, sometimes spending time in prison, and, on occasion,
having to ﬂee the country to escape prosecution and further
imprisonment. During the last two decades of his life, Leary spent
his time writing and lecturing. He was the author of more than a
dozen books, including Interpersonal Diagnosis of Personality; a Func-
tional Theory and Methodology for Personality Evaluation; Design for
Dying; Flashbacks: An Autobiography; The Politics of Ecstasy; High
Priest; Confessions of a Hope Fiend; and Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out.
Otto Loewi (1873–1961)
Loewi was a German physician and pharmacologist who discov-
ered that nerve messages are transmitted between neurons by
means of speciﬁc chemicals, now known as neurotransmitters.
Loewi gave to the ﬁrst of the chemicals of this type that he discov-
ered the name Vagusstoff (‘‘vagus material’’). The substance was
later shown to be acetylcholine, one of the most important of all
neurotransmitters. An understanding of the function of neuro-
transmitters is absolutely fundamental to an interpretation of the
way drugs work in the human body. For his work on neurotrans-
mitters, Loewi was awarded a share of the 1936 Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine.
Otto Loewi was born at Frankfurt-am-Main on June 3, 1873.
He attended the University of Strasbourg, from which he received
his medical degree in 1896. He then worked for a period of time at
University College in London, the University of Vienna, and the
University of Graz (Austria), where he remained for nearly three
decades. It was at Graz that Loewi conducted the work on neuro-
transmitters for which he is best known.
Like many prominent Jewish scientists of the time, Loewi was
increasingly at professional and personal risk as the Nazi Party
came to power in Germany and, later, Austria. In fact, he was the
only Jewish professor hired at Graz between 1903 and the end of
World War II. On the evening of March 11, 1938, Loewi and two
sons were arrested by Nazi authorities and were allowed to leave
the country only under the condition that they give up all of their
personal property and possessions. Loewi moved to Belgium,
where he served as professor of pharmacology for one year at the
University of Brussels. He then moved on to the University of
Biographical Sketches
155

Leeds in England, before accepting an appointment in 1940 as pro-
fessor of pharmacology at New York University (NYU). He served
at NYU until 1955, when he retired. Loewi died in New York City
on December 25, 1961.
Albert Niemann (1834–1861)
During his short life, Niemann made two important discoveries.
The ﬁrst was the active ingredient in coca leaves responsible for
their psychoactive properties, a compound that he named cocaine.
The second was a powerful gas produced by reacting ethylene
(C2H4) with sulfur dichloride (SCl2). The product became known
as mustard gas, a chemical agent used widely during World War I.
During the late 1850s, Niemann was studying for his doctoral
degree in chemistry at the University of Go¨ttingen under the great
chemist Friedrich Wo¨hler. For some years, Wo¨hler had been inter-
ested in the chemical composition of coca leaves brought back
to Germany from South America, but had been unable to ﬁnd
the active ingredient for the plant’s extraordinary psychoactive
properties. When he received a shipment of fresh leaves in 1859,
he assigned to Niemann the task of analyzing the natural product.
Niemann responded successfully to this assignment, extracting
from the leaves a white powder which he described as having a
bitter taste (like other alkaloids, of which this compound was an
example), promoting the ﬂow of saliva, and having a numbing
effect on the tongue. Niemann gave the name of cocaine to the new
substance, a combination of the plant name from which it came
(‘‘coca’’) and the traditional sufﬁx used by chemists for all alkaloids
(‘‘-ine’’). Niemann’s research on cocaine earned him his Ph.D.
from Go¨ttingen in 1860. In the same year, Niemann described his
research on mustard gas (chemically, 1,1’-thiobis[2-chloroethane];
also known as sulfur mustard). He said that the gas caused terrible
burns that festered for a long period of time and were very painful.
Following his research on mustard gas, Niemann’s health
deteriorated rapidly, and he returned to his home in Goslar,
Germany, where he died on January 19, 1861, at the age of 26.
Although some uncertainty surrounds the circumstances of his
death, some historians believe that his exposure to mustard gas
may have been a contributing factor. Two years after his death, a
colleague at Go¨ttingen, Wilhelm Lossen, determined the chemical
formula for cocaine.
156
Biographical Sketches

Quanah Parker (ca. 1845–1911)
Parker was the last chief of the Quahadi Comanche Indian tribe
and a leading proponent of the melding of Christian and Native
American Church movements, in which peyote is incorporated into
traditional forms of worship. His most famous commentary is prob-
ably is comment that ‘‘The White Man goes into his church and talks
about Jesus. The Indian goes into his Tipi and talks with Jesus.’’
The details of Quanah Parker’s birth, as well as some other
aspects of his life, are somewhat unclear. He is thought to have
been born in the mid-1840s somewhere in the present state of
Oklahoma. He himself claimed to have been born on Elk Creek,
south of the Wichita Mountains, although other places have also
been mentioned as a probable birthplace. His parents were
Comanche warrior Noconie, (also known by the Indian name of
Tah-con-ne-ah-pe-ah and called Peta Nocona by the whites) and
Cynthia Ann Parker (later given the Indian name of Nadua, or
‘‘the found’’), who had been captured by the Comanche during
a raid on Fort Parker in Texas. Parker apparently grew up in a tra-
ditional Native American community, replete with tribal customs.
After his father was killed in 1860, Parker took shelter with a sub-
group of the Comanches, the Quahadi tribe. Over time, he grew in
respect and responsibility within the tribe and became its leader.
From the mid-1860s to the mid-1870s, Parker fought against sur-
render to or assimilation by whites who were committed to taking
over Native American lands and property. He eventually lost that
ﬁght at the battle of Adobe Walls, and was resigned to retiring to
the reservation to which his tribe had been assigned.
Parker’s connection with peyote is reputed to stem from
1884, when he fell very ill from an infection. Although he had, by
then, become thoroughly absorbed by white culture, the medicines
available to him from white practitioners were of no use. Only
when he was provided with a concoction of peyote did he recover.
The experience proved to be life-changing for him, convincing him
of the value of native traditions (and native drugs) even in the
modern world of the reservation. He spent much of the rest of his
life in developing and promoting the National American Indian
church movement, which incorporates elements of both white
Christianity and traditional Native American beliefs and practices.
Largely through his efforts, the modern Native American church
still includes the use of peyote in its rituals.
Biographical Sketches
157

Nancy Reagan (1921–)
Reagan is the widow of former President Ronald Reagan. She was
First Lady during the Reagan presidential administration, from
1981 to 1989. Among the accomplishments for which she is most
famous is her ‘‘Just Say No’’ anti-drug campaign, initiated in 1982.
Reagan was born in New York City on July 6, 1921, as Anne
Francis Robbins. Her father was a car salesman, Kenneth Seymour
Robbins, and her mother, Edith Luckett, an actress. After her parents
were divorced shortly after her birth, she was raised for six years
by an aunt and uncle in Bethesda, Maryland. When her mother
remarried in 1929, the family moved to Chicago, where Nancy
attended the Girls’ Latin School of Chicago. After graduation, she
enrolled at Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts, where
she majored in drama and English. She was awarded her bachelor’s
degree from Smith in 1943 and returned to Chicago, where she held
a series of jobs in retail. Partially through her mother’s inﬂuence, she
was able to ﬁnd work in the entertainment industry, with roles on
Broadway, in traveling shows, and, eventually, in Hollywood ﬁlms.
In November 1949, she met Ronald Reagan, then president of the
Screen Actors’ Guild. They were married in March 1952.
As First Lady, Reagan was the subject of considerable admi-
ration and disdain, both for her political views and her personal
beliefs and actions. She was widely criticized in 1988, for example,
when President Reagan wrote about his wife’s use of astrologers to
make public and private decisions. She was also widely applauded
and criticized for her ‘‘Just Say No’’ campaign against drug abuse.
The campaign had its beginnings when Nancy Reagan visited
the Longfellow Elementary School in Oakland, California, in 1982.
When a girl in the classroom she was visiting asked what she
should do if she were offered drugs, Reagan responded by saying,
‘‘Just say no.’’ That phrase soon became a slogan for a national, and
eventually, international, campaign to combat drug abuse. Reagan
appeared on a number of television programs, spoke widely across
the country, worked with a number of national organizations, and
visited many drug treatment and prevention programs to spread
her message. Experts disagree as to the effectiveness of the cam-
paign. Some point to an apparent decline in drug use during the
Reagan administration and suggest that ‘‘Just Say No’’ was an
important contributor to that trend. Others believe that sloganeer-
ing had only a limited effect on substance abuse patterns.
158
Biographical Sketches

Since President Reagan’s death in 2004, Nancy Reagan has
remained visible and active on the national scene. Perhaps her
most important efforts have been on behalf of stem-cell research,
attempting to convince then-President George W. Bush to change
his mind and extend opportunities for research in this ﬁeld, an
effort in which she was not successful.
Friedrich Sertu¨rner (1783–1841)
While still a young pharmacist’s apprentice, Sertu¨rner isolated the
psychoactive agent morphine from the opium plant. His accom-
plishment is especially important because it was not only the ﬁrst
such agent extracted from opium, but also the ﬁrst alkaloid
obtained from any plant. Sertu¨rner named his new discovery after
the Greek god of dreams, Morpheus, for its powerful analgesic and
sedative properties.
Friedrich Wilhelm Adam Ferdinand Sertu¨ rner was born in
Neuhaus, Prussia, on June 19, 1783. His parents were in service
to Prince Friedrich Wilhelm, who was also his godfather. When
both his father and the prince died in 1794, he was left without
means of support and, therefore, was apprenticed to a court
apothecary by the name of Cramer. One of the topics in which he
became interested in his new job was the chemical composition of
opium, a plant that had long been known for its powerful analgesic
and sedative properties. By 1803, he had extracted from opium
seeds a white crystalline powder clearly responsible for the phar-
macological properties of the plant. He named the new substance
morphine and proceeded to test its properties, ﬁrst on stray animals
available at the castle, and later on his friends and himself. His
friends soon withdrew from the experiments because, while pleas-
urable enough in its initial moderate doses, the compound ulti-
mately caused unpleasant physical effects, including nausea and
vomiting. Sertu¨rner continued, however, to test the drug on him-
self, unaware of its ultimate addictive properties.
Sertu¨ rner was awarded his apothecary license in 1806 and
established his own pharmacy in the Prussian town of Einbeck.
In addition to operating his business, he continued to study the
chemical and pharmacological properties of morphine for a num-
ber of years. His work drew little attention from professional
scientists, however, and he eventually turned his attention to
other topics, including the development of improved ﬁrearms
Biographical Sketches
159

and ammunition. During the last few years of his life, he became
increasingly depressed about his failure to interest the scientiﬁc
community in his research on opium. He withdrew into his own
world and turned to morphine for comfort against his disillusion-
ment with what he saw as the failure of his life. He did receive
some comfort in 1831 when he was awarded a Montyon Prize by
the Acade´mie Franc¸aise, sometimes described as the forerunner
of the Nobel Prizes, with its cash award of 2,000 francs. By the time
of his death in Hamelin, Prussia, on February 20, 1841, however,
the scientiﬁc world in general had still not appreciated the enor-
mous signiﬁcance of his research on morphine.
Alexander ‘‘Sasha’’ Shulgin (1925–)
Shulgin is arguably the best known and most highly regarded
advocate of so-called designer drugs within the scientiﬁc commu-
nity. He is thought to have synthesized and tested more than 200
psychoactive compounds in his life and has written a number of
important books and articles on the properties and potential ben-
eﬁts of such substances.
Alexander Shulgin, widely known as ‘‘Sasha,’’ was born in
Berkeley, California, on June 17, 1925. He graduated from high
school at the age of 16 and received a full scholarship to Harvard
University. His tenure at Harvard was cut short, however, with
the beginning of World War II, during which he served with the
U.S. Navy in both the North Atlantic and the Paciﬁc campaigns.
After the war, he returned to Berkeley, where he eventually earned
his B.A. in chemistry at the University of California in 1949 and his
Ph.D. in biochemistry at 1954. He completed his postdoctoral stud-
ies at the University of California at San Francisco (UCSF) in phar-
macology and psychiatry. After working for a year at the BioRad
Laboratories company, he took a position with Dow Chemical,
where he was a research scientist from 1955 to 1961 and senior
research chemist from 1961 to 1966.
Shulgin’s most signiﬁcant accomplishment at Dow was to
develop a pesticide known as physostigmine, a substance that was
to become one of Dow’s best selling products. In appreciation of
Shulgin’s work, Dow provided him with a laboratory of his own
where he was allowed to work on projects that were of special inter-
est to him. One of those projects turned out to be the synthesis and
study of psychedelic compounds. Shulgin later reported that his
160
Biographical Sketches

interest in psychedelics was prompted by his ﬁrst experience in
taking mescaline in 1960. As a result of that experience, he told an
interviewer from Playboy magazine in 2004, he had found his
‘‘learning path,’’ the direction he wanted the rest of his career to go.
In 1965, Shulgin decided to leave Dow in order to enter medi-
cal school at UCSF. He left that program after only two years,
however, to pursue his interest in psychedelics. That decision
posed a problem for both Shulgin and the U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), the federal agency responsible for control
of illegal drug use in the United States. Although its primary func-
tion is to discourage the development and use of illegal drugs, the
DEA apparently saw some beneﬁt in Shulgin’s work, and they
agreed to a special dispensation that allowed him to synthesize
and study a number of otherwise illegal substances. That relation-
ship eventually worked out well for both partners, as it permitted
Shulgin to pursue the studies in which he was most interested
and provided the DEA with invaluable information on substances
about which it might otherwise have little or no information. In
1988, for example, he wrote Controlled Substances: Chemical & Legal
Guide to Federal Drug Laws, a book that has become a standard refer-
ence for DEA employees.
Shulgin’s special relationship with the DEA ended in 1994
when the agency raided his Berkeley laboratory and withdrew
his license to conduct research on illegal substances, claiming that
he had failed to keep proper records. Some observers believe,
however, that the agency’s actions were prompted by a book that
Shulgin and his wife Ann had written a few years earlier, PiHKAL:
A Chemical Love Story. (The PiHKAL of the title stands for ‘‘phenyl-
ethylamines I have known and loved.’’) The Shulgins later wrote a
second book about another group of psychedelic substances,
TiKHAL: The Continuation. In this case, the title word TiKHAL
stands for ‘‘tryptamines I have known and loved.’’ Shulgin’s most
recent book is somewhat more technically oriented, The Simple
Plant Isoquinolines (with Wendy E. Perry). In 2008, his ﬁrst two lab-
oratory books were scanned and placed online.
Luther L. Terry (1911–1985)
Terry was the ninth Surgeon General of the United States. He was
appointed to the ofﬁce by President John F. Kennedy, and he
served through Kennedy’s incomplete ﬁrst term in ofﬁce and the
Biographical Sketches
161

ﬁrst year of Lyndon B. Johnson’s ﬁrst term. He is probably best
known today for the ﬁrst report issued by the U.S. Public Health
Service on the health effects of smoking, Smoking and Health:
Report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General, released in
1964. Among the many ﬁndings in that report, some of the most
outstanding were that the mortality rate was 70 percent higher
for smokers than for nonsmokers of a comparable age, that mod-
erate smokers were 9 to 10 times more likely (and heavy smokers
20 times more likely) to develop cancer than nonsmokers, and
that health risks rose and fell consistently with increases and
decreases, respectively, in the amount of smoking.
Luther Leonidas Terry was born in Red Level, Alabama, on
September 15, 1911, to James Edward and Lula M. (Durham) Terry.
He attended Birmingham Southern College, from which he
received his B.A. degree in 1931, and the Tulane Medical School,
which awarded his M.D. in 1935. Terry completed his internship
at the Hillman Hospital in Birmingham and his residency at City
Hospitals in Cleveland. In 1938, he served an additional internship
in pathology at Washington University, in St. Louis. In 1940, he
accepted an appointment as instructor at the University of Texas,
Galveston, where he remained for four years. He then moved to
the Johns Hopkins University Medical School in Baltimore, while
also holding an appointment at the Public Health Service Hospital
in Baltimore. In 1950, he accepted an appointment as Chief of
General Medicine and Experimental Therapeutics at the National
Heart Institute in Bethesda in 1950. The position was, at ﬁrst, a
part-time appointment, but it became a full time post three years
later when his division was transferred to the newly established
National Institutes of Health Clinical Center. In 1958, Terry was
appointed assistant director of the National Heart Institute, and,
three years later, became Surgeon General of the United States.
Shortly after assuming his post as Surgeon General, Terry
appointed a committee to study the health effects of smoking. His
action was motivated to a large extent by a similar study that had
just been completed and announced by the Royal College of Physi-
cians in Great Britain, in which strong evidence for somewhat
dramatic health effects as a result of smoking had been reported.
Terry decided that a similar report for the United States was needed,
although it would almost certainly be controversial and economi-
cally risky. The ﬁnal report, issued on January 11, 1964, summarized
the ﬁndings of more than 7,000 scientiﬁc articles and the expert
testimony of more than 130 witnesses before Terry’s committee.
162
Biographical Sketches

After his retirement as Surgeon General in 1965, Terry took a
post as vice-president for medical affairs and professor of medi-
cine and community medicine at the University of Pennsylvania.
He maintained his afﬁliation with Pennsylvania until 1982, and
then accepted a position as corporate vice president for medical
affairs and, later, as consultant to ARA Services, Inc. Terry died
in Philadelphia on April 29, 1985.
R. Gordon Wasson (1898–1986)
Wasson was a wealthy New York City banker with a lifelong
intense interest in mushrooms. He conducted a number of original
studies on all varieties of mushrooms, put forth an attempt to prove
that psychedelic mushrooms were integrally involved in the devel-
opment of many religions, and provided ﬁnancial assistance to a
number of researchers in the ﬁeld of psychoactive studies, includ-
ing Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert.
Robert Gordon Wasson was born in Great Falls, Montana, on
September 22, 1898. His father was an Episcopalian priest with a
strong interest in languages, being ﬂuent in Latin and Greek and
conversant in Icelandic, Hebrew, and Sanskrit. His mother has
been described as a ‘‘vivacious woman,’’ who was also learned
and one of six women selected to organize the Columbia University
Library. When the senior Wasson accepted an appointment at a
small parish in Newark, New Jersey, the family reestablished its
home on the East Coast. During his childhood, Gordon was appa-
rently subjected to serious instruction in language, the arts, and
theology. Biographers note that he and his brother had each read
the Bible completely through three times before the age of 13.
After three years of high school, Gordon joined his older
brother Thomas Campbell Wasson, and the two young man spent
the early war years traveling through Europe. Gordon then enlisted
in the U.S. Army in 1917, serving in France as a radio operator.
After the war, he enrolled at Columbia University, from which
he received his bachelor’s degree in literature in 1920. After work-
ing as a reporter and an editor for various newspapers and maga-
zines, including the New Haven Register, the New York Herald
Tribune, and Current Opinion, for eight years, he decided to pursue
a career in ﬁnance. He joined the Guaranty Company of New York
in 1928, where he was given a number of international assign-
ments, before moving to the J. P. Morgan Company in 1934.
Biographical Sketches
163

He remained afﬁliated with Morgan for the rest of his career,
retiring in 1963.
Wasson’s interest in mushrooms can be traced to a honey-
moon trip to the Catskill Mountains that he and his wife took in
1925. On that trip, the couple found a number of species of mush-
rooms that Mrs. Wasson (the former Valentina Pavlovna Guercken)
recognized from her native Russia. Over the years, the couple con-
tinued their research not only on the scientiﬁc aspects of mush-
rooms, but also on their involvement in other ﬁelds, including
literature, history, theology, mythology, art, and archaeology.
In 1953, Wasson visited Mexico, where he was introduced to the
so-called magic mushrooms widely used in religious ceremonies
there. He is credited with having brought back the ﬁrst herbarium
samples of those mushrooms, and having made his experience
famous by means of an article in the May 17, 1957, edition of Life
magazine, entitled ‘‘The Discovery of Mushrooms That Cause
Strange Visions.’’ Wasson was the author or coauthor of a number
of scholarly articles and 11 books on psychedelic mushrooms,
including Persephone’s Quest: Entheogens and the Origins of Religion
(1986), The Wondrous Mushroom: Mycolatry in Mesoamerica (1980),
The Road to Eleusis: Unveiling the Secret of the Mysteries (1978),
Maria Sabina and Her Mazatec Mushroom Velada (1976), and Soma:
Divine Mushroom of Immortality (1968). Wasson died in Danbury,
Connecticut, on December 23, 1986.
Hamilton Wright (1867–1917)
Wright has been described as the Father of Drug Laws in the
United States because of his strong objections to the use of illegal
drugs and his vigorous efforts to have laws passed against the
manufacture, transport, sale, and consumption of illegal substan-
ces. Although he was not a member of Congress at the time, he is
generally regarded as the author of the Harrison Narcotics Tax
Act of 1914, which instituted taxes on opiates for the ﬁrst time in
U.S. history.
Hamilton Wright was born in Cleveland, Ohio, on August 2,
1867. After graduating from high school in Boston, he enlisted in
the U.S. Army, where he served in the 7th Fusiliers in the Reale
Rebellion, earning a medal for his valor during the war. He then
attended McGill University in Montre´al, Canada, from which he
received his M.D. in 1895. From 1895 to 1908, he was engaged in
164
Biographical Sketches

a variety of research projects at a number of sites around
the world, studying tropical diseases such as beri-beri, plague,
and malaria. His work took him to China, Japan, Malaya, Great
Britain, Germany, and France. In 1908, President Teddy Roosevelt
appointed Wright the nation’s ﬁrst commissioner on international
opium, a capacity in which he represented the United States at
the International Opium Conference held at The Hague, The
Netherlands, in 1911. He spent the rest of his life campaigning
against opium use in the United States, which, as he wrote in a
1911 article for the New York Times, had the highest proportion of
opium users of any country in the world.
Wright is known today for his willingness to use inﬂamma-
tory, often inaccurate statements about the dangers posed by
opium. He was especially critical of Blacks and Chinese Americans
for their use of the drug, suggesting at one point that ‘‘one of the
most unfortunate phases of the habit of smoking opium in this
country is the large number of women who have become involved
and are living as common-law wives or cohabiting with Chinese in
the Chinatowns of our various cities.’’ He also railed against
cocaine use, suggesting at one time that ‘‘cocaine is often the direct
incentive to the crime of rape by the Negroes of the South and
other sections of the country.’’
Wright was very successful in pushing his anti-opium
agenda both domestically and internationally. At home, his great-
est achievement was the adoption of the Harrison Act in 1914;
overseas, it was the adoption of the International Opium Conven-
tion in 1912. In both cases, Wright had pushed for even broader,
more comprehensive control over drugs other than opium, espe-
cially marijuana, but without success. Wright died at his home
in Washington, D.C., on January 9, 1917 as the result of complica-
tions resulting from an automobile accident in France two years
earlier. He was assisting in U.S. relief efforts in that country
following the conclusion of World War II.
Biographical Sketches
165

This page intentionally left blank

6
Data and Documents
A
n overview of the way in which the United States and other
nations have tried to deal with substance abuse problems
can be found by reviewing important documents related to
the issue. This chapter contains examples of laws, treaties,
reports, court cases, and other documents associated with one or
another aspect of substance abuse. The chapter also provides data
and statistics on the extent and effects of substance abuse.
Documents
Laws and Treaties
Harrison Narcotic Act (1914)
Probably the ﬁrst effort by the U.S. government to exert some control
over the production, distribution, and consumption of recreational
drugs was the Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914. Although this act did not
make the drugs with which it dealt—opiates—illegal, it did place a tax
on their production, distribution, and sale. In retrospect, the Harrison
Act was a weak effort to control substance abuse, but it is historically
signiﬁcant because of its being the ﬁrst attempt to interrupt substance
abuse in any way whatsoever by the federal government. The core of the
act is expressed in its ﬁrst section, reproduced here.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, that on and after the
ﬁrst day of March, nineteen hundred and ﬁfteen, every person who
produces, imports, manufactures, compounds, deals in, dispenses,
distributes, or gives away opium or coca leaves or any compound,
167

manufacture, salt, derivative, or preparation thereof, shall register with
the collector of internal revenue of the district, his name or style, place of
business, and place or places where such business is to be carried on:
Provided, that the ofﬁce, or if none, then the residence of any person shall
be considered for purposes of this Act to be his place of business. At the
time of such registry and on or before the ﬁrst of July annually thereafter,
every person who produces, imports, manufactures, compounds, deals
in, dispenses, distributes, or gives away any of the aforesaid drugs
shall pay to the said collector a special tax at the rate of $1 per annum:
Provided, that no employee of any person who produces, imports,
manufactures, compounds, deals in, dispenses, distributes, or gives away
any of the aforesaid drugs, acting within the scope of his employment,
shall be required to register or to pay the special tax provided by this
section: Provided further, That ofﬁcers of the United States Government
who are lawfully engaged in making purchases of the above-named
drugs for the various departments of the Army and Navy, the Public
Health Service, and for Government hospitals and prisons, and ofﬁcers of
State governments or any municipality therein, who are lawfully
engaged in making purchases of the above-named drugs for State,
county, or municipal hospitals or prisons, and ofﬁcials of any Territory or
insular possession, or the District of Columbia or of the United States
who are lawfully engaged in making purchases of the above-named
drugs for hospitals or prisons therein shall not be required to register and
pay the special tax as herein required.
Source: 63rd Congress. Public Law 223. 38 Stat. 785.
Eighteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution (1919)
On December 17, 1917, the U.S. House of Representatives took the ﬁrst
step in amending the U.S. Constitution to prohibit the use of alcoholic
beverages in the United States. The U.S. Senate approved the same act
the following day. The proposed amendment was then submitted to the
separate states, where it was ﬁnally approved by the required number of
states (36) on January 16, 1919. Ultimately, only two states defeated the
proposed amendment, Connecticut and Rhode Island. On January 26,
1919, acting secretary of state Frank L. Polk certiﬁed adoption of the
amendment. The amendment did not speciﬁcally prohibit the use
of alcohol beverages in the United States, although it made it very
difﬁcult to obtain such beverages legally. The text of the amendment is
as follows:
Amendment XVIII
Section 1. After one year from the ratiﬁcation of this article the
manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors within, the
168
Data and Documents

importation thereof into, or the exportation thereof from the United
States and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof for beverage
purposes is hereby prohibited.
Section 2. The Congress and the several states shall have concurrent
power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Section 3. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been
ratiﬁed as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of the
several states, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from
the date of the submission hereof to the states by the Congress.
Source: National Archives. United States Constitution. http://www
.archives.gov/exhibits/charters/constitution_amendments_11-27.html.
Accessed on August 23, 2009.
Twenty-First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution (1933)
After more than a decade of Prohibition in the United States, many
people were convinced that the great experiment to control the use of
alcohol in this country was a failure. In response to that feeling, the U.S.
Congress on February 20, 1933, adopted an act initiating the repeal of
the Eighteenth Amendment by the adoption of a new amendment to the
Constitution, the Twenty-First Amendment, which abrogated the earlier
amendment. On December 5, 1933, the thirty-sixth state, Utah, ratiﬁed
the amendment, and it was certiﬁed on the same date. Only one state,
South Carolina, rejected the proposed amendment, although eight other
states never took action on the amendment. The text of the amendment
is as follows.
Amendment XXI
Section 1. The eighteenth article of amendment to the Constitution of
the United States is hereby repealed.
Section 2. The transportation or importation into any state, territory, or
possession of the United States for delivery or use therein of
intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is hereby
prohibited.
Section 3. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been
ratiﬁed as an amendment to the Constitution by conventions in the
several states, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from
the date of the submission hereof to the states by the Congress.
Source: National Archives. United States Constitution. http://www
.archives.gov/exhibits/charters/constitution_amendments_11-27.html.
Accessed on August 23, 2009.
Documents
169

Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (1965)
The ﬁrst signiﬁcant government report on the health effects of smoking—
‘‘Smoking and Health: Report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon
General of the Public Health Service’’—was issued in 1965. The report
had a signiﬁcant impact on the general public, on advocacy groups
opposed to smoking, and on lawmakers. One direct result of the report
was the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act of 1965, which
was later amended a number of times. The provisions of the original law
and later amendments are now part of the U.S. Code, at Title 15, Chapter
36. A note about the 1984 amendment is included in the following excerpt.
§ 1331. Congressional declaration of policy and purpose
It is the policy of the Congress, and the purpose of this chapter, to
establish a comprehensive Federal Program to deal with cigarette
labeling and advertising with respect to any relationship between
smoking and health, whereby—
(1) the public may be adequately informed about any adverse health
effects of cigarette smoking by inclusion of warning notices on each
package of cigarettes and in each advertisement of cigarettes; and
(2) commerce and the national economy may be
(A) protected to the maximum extent consistent with this declared
policy and
(B) not impeded by diverse, nonuniform, and confusing cigarette
labeling and advertising regulations with respect to any relationship
between smoking and health.
Section 1332 provides deﬁnitions for a number of terms used in the act.
The core of the bill is found in Section 1333 which provides, in part, that:
§ 1333. Labeling; requirements; conspicuous statement
(a) Required warnings; packages; advertisements; billboards
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, package, or
import for sale or distribution within the United States any cigarettes
the package of which fails to bear, in accordance with the
requirements of this section, one of the following labels:
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung Cancer,
Heart Disease, Emphysema, And May Complicate Pregnancy.
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains
Carbon Monoxide.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer or importer of
cigarettes to advertise or cause to be advertised (other than through
170
Data and Documents

the use of outdoor billboards) within the United States any cigarette
unless the advertising bears, in accordance with the requirements of
this section, one of the following labels:
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung Cancer,
Heart Disease, Emphysema, And May Complicate Pregnancy.
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains
Carbon Monoxide.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer or importer of
cigarettes to advertise or cause to be advertised within the United
States through the use of outdoor billboards any cigarette unless the
advertising bears, in accordance with the requirements of this
section, one of the following labels:
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains
Carbon Monoxide.
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung Cancer,
Heart Disease, And Emphysema.
(b) Conspicuous statement; label statement format; outdoor billboard
statement format
(1) Each label statement required by paragraph (1) of subsection (a)
of this section shall be located in the place label statements were
placed on cigarette packages as of October 12, 1984. The phrase
‘‘Surgeon General’s Warning’’ shall appear in capital letters and the
size of all other letters in the label shall be the same as the size of
such letters as of October 12, 1984. All the letters in the label shall
appear in conspicuous and legible type in contrast by typography,
layout, or color with all other printed material on the package.
This section continues with more detailed instructions about the precise nature
of the labeling to be used.
In 1984, the original act was amended to change the wording required on all
cigarette packages. The new ruling required the use of one of the four following
statements:
•
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung
Cancer, Heart Disease, Emphysema, And May Complicate
Pregnancy.
•
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now
Greatly Reduces Serious Risks to Your Health.
•
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Smoking By Pregnant
Women May Result in Fetal Injury, Premature Birth, and Low
Birth Weight.
•
SURGEON GENERAL’S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains
Carbon Monoxide.
Documents
171

The remaining sections of Title 15, Chapter 36, dealing with cigarette labels
deals with issues such as preemption of state law by federal law (§1334),
unlawful advertising on electronic communications (§1335), annual required
listing of cigarette ingredients to the Secretary and Health and Human
Services (§1336), and similar issues.
Source: GPO Access. U.S. Code, Title 15, Chapter 36, Sections 1331 and
1333. Available online at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/
usc.cgi?ACTION=RETRIEVE&FILE=$$xa$$busc15.wais&start=7382061
&SIZE=4518&TYPE=PDF and http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/
usc.cgi?ACTION=RETRIEVE&FILE=$$xa$$busc15.wais&start
=7390608&SIZE=11181&TYPE=PDF. Accessed on August 25, 2009.
Controlled Substances Act (1970)
The cornerstone of the U.S. government’s efforts to control substance
abuse is the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, now a part of the U.S.
Code, Title 21, Chapter 13. That act established the system of ‘‘schedules’’
for various categories of drugs that is still used by agencies of the U.S.
government today. It also provides extensive background information
about the domestic and international status of drug abuse efforts. Some
of the most relevant sections for the domestic portion of the act are
reprinted here.
Section 801 of the act presents Congress’s ﬁndings and declarations about
controlled substances, with special mention in Section 801a of psychotropic
drugs.
§ 801. Congressional ﬁndings and declarations:
controlled substances
The Congress makes the following ﬁndings and declarations:
(1) Many of the drugs included within this subchapter have a useful
and legitimate medical purpose and are necessary to maintain the
health and general welfare of the American people.
(2) The illegal importation, manufacture, distribution, and possession
and improper use of controlled substances have a substantial and
detrimental effect on the health and general welfare of the American
people.
. . .
(7) The United States is a party to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, and other international conventions designed to establish
effective control over international and domestic trafﬁc in controlled
substances.
172
Data and Documents

§ 801a. Congressional ﬁndings and declarations:
psychotropic substances
The Congress makes the following ﬁndings and declarations:
(1) The Congress has long recognized the danger involved in the
manufacture, distribution, and use of certain psychotropic substances
for nonscientiﬁc and nonmedical purposes, and has provided strong
and effective legislation to control illicit trafﬁcking and to regulate
legitimate uses of psychotropic substances in this country. Abuse of
psychotropic substances has become a phenomenon common to many
countries, however, and is not conﬁned to national borders. It is,
therefore, essential that the United States cooperate with other nations
in establishing effective controls over international trafﬁc in such
substances.
(2) The United States has joined with other countries in executing an
international treaty, entitled the Convention on Psycho-tropic
Substances and signed at Vienna, Austria, on February 21, 1971,
which is designed to establish suitable controls over the manufacture,
distribution, transfer, and use of certain psychotropic substances.
The Convention is not self-executing, and the obligations of the
United States thereunder may only be performed pursuant to
appropriate legislation. It is the intent of the Congress that the
amendments made by this Act, together with existing law, will enable
the United States to meet all of its obligations under the Convention
and that no further legislation will be necessary for that purpose.
. . .
Section 802 deals with deﬁnitions used in the act, and section 803 deals with
a minor housekeeping issue of ﬁnancing for the act. Section 811 deals with the
Attorney General’s authority for classifying and declassifying drugs and the
manner in which these steps are to be taken. In general:
§ 811. Authority and criteria for classiﬁcation of substances
(a) Rules and regulations of Attorney General; hearing
The Attorney General shall apply the provisions of this subchapter to the
controlled substances listed in the schedules established by section 812
of this title and to any other drug or other substance added to such
schedules under this subchapter. Except as provided in subsections (d)
and (e) of this section, the Attorney General may by rule—
(1) add to such a schedule or transfer between such schedules any
drug or other substance if he—
(A) ﬁnds that such drug or other substance has a potential for
abuse, and
Documents
173

(B) makes with respect to such drug or other substance the
ﬁndings prescribed by subsection (b) of section 812 of this title
for the schedule in which such drug is to be placed; or
(2) remove any drug or other substance from the schedules if he
ﬁnds that the drug or other substance does not meet the
requirements for inclusion in any schedule.
. . .
Section (b) provides guidelines for the evaluation of drugs and other
substances. The next section, (c), is a key element of the act.
(c) Factors determinative of control or removal from schedules
In making any ﬁnding under subsection (a) of this section or under
subsection (b) of section 812 of this title, the Attorney General shall
consider the following factors with respect to each drug or other
substance proposed to be controlled or removed from the schedules:
(1) Its actual or relative potential for abuse.
(2) Scientiﬁc evidence of its pharmacological effect, if known.
(3) The state of current scientiﬁc knowledge regarding the drug
or other substance.
(4) Its history and current pattern of abuse.
(5) The scope, duration, and signiﬁcance of abuse.
(6) What, if any, risk there is to the public health.
(7) Its psychic or physiological dependence liability.
(8) Whether the substance is an immediate precursor of a substance
already controlled under this subchapter.
Section (d) is a lengthy discussion of international aspects of the nation’s
efforts to control substance abuse. Sections (e) through (h) deal with related,
but less important, issues of the control of substance abuse. Section 812 is
perhaps of greatest interest to the general reader in that it establishes the
system of classifying drugs still used in the United States, along with the
criteria for classiﬁcation and the original list of drugs to be included in each
schedule (since greatly expanded):
§ 812. Schedules of controlled substances
(a) Establishment
There are established ﬁve schedules of controlled substances, to be
known as schedules I, II, III, IV, and V. Such schedules shall initially
consist of the substances listed in this section. The schedules
established by this section shall be updated and republished on
174
Data and Documents

a semiannual basis during the two-year period beginning one year
after October 27, 1970, and shall be updated and republished on an
annual basis thereafter.
(b) Placement on schedules; ﬁndings required
Except where control is required by United States obligations under an
international treaty, convention, or protocol, in effect on October 27,
1970, and except in the case of an immediate precursor, a drug or other
substance may not be placed in any schedule unless the ﬁndings
required for such schedule are made with respect to such drug or other
substance. The ﬁndings required for each of the schedules are as
follows:
(1) Schedule I.—
(A) The drug or other substance has a high potential for abuse.
(B) The drug or other substance has no currently accepted
medical use in treatment in the United States.
(C) There is a lack of accepted safety for use of the drug or other
substance under medical supervision.
(2) Schedule II.—
(A) The drug or other substance has a high potential for abuse.
(B) The drug or other substance has a currently accepted medical
use in treatment in the United States or a currently accepted
medical use with severe restrictions.
(C) Abuse of the drug or other substances may lead to severe
psychological or physical dependence.
(3) Schedule III.—
(A) The drug or other substance has a potential for abuse less
than the drugs or other substances in schedules I and II.
(B) The drug or other substance has a currently accepted medical
use in treatment in the United States.
(C) Abuse of the drug or other substance may lead to moderate
or low physical dependence or high psychological dependence.
(4) Schedule IV.—
(A) The drug or other substance has a low potential for abuse
relative to the drugs or other substances in schedule III.
(B) The drug or other substance has a currently accepted medical
use in treatment in the United States.
(C) Abuse of the drug or other substance may lead to limited
physical dependence or psychological dependence relative to the
drugs or other substances in schedule III.
Documents
175

(5) Schedule V.—
(A) The drug or other substance has a low potential for abuse
relative to the drugs or other substances in schedule IV.
(B) The drug or other substance has a currently accepted medical
use in treatment in the United States.
(C) Abuse of the drug or other substance may lead to limited
physical dependence or psychological dependence relative to the
drugs or other substances in schedule IV.
(c) Initial schedules of controlled substances
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V shall, unless and until amended [1]
pursuant to section 811 of this title, consist of the following drugs or
other substances, by whatever ofﬁcial name, common or usual name,
chemical name, or brand name designated: The initial list of drugs under
each schedule follows.
Source: GPO Access. U.S. Code, Title 21, Chapter 13. Available online at
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/usc.cgi?ACTION=RETRIEVE
&FILE=$$xa$$busc21.wais&start=2565831&SIZE=62758&TYPE=PDF;
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/usc.cgi?ACTION=RETRIEVE
&FILE=$$xa$$busc21.wais&start=2628595&SIZE=5461&TYPE=PDF;
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/usc.cgi?ACTION=RETRIEVE
&FILE=$$xa$$busc21.wais&start=2691987&SIZE=25833&TYPE=PDF;
and http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/usc.cgi?ACTION
=RETRIEVE&FILE=$$xa$$busc21.wais&start=2717826&SIZE
=24600&TYPE=PDF. Accessed on August 24, 2009.
Combat Meth Act (2005)
By the mid-2000s, one of the most serious substance abuse problems
in the United States involved the manufacture, sale, and use of
methamphetamine, also known by a number of common names, such as
‘‘meth,’’ ‘‘ice,’’ ‘‘crystal,’’ and ‘‘crank.’’ One of the problems in dealing
with the methamphetamine epidemic was the ready availability of the
raw materials needed to produce the drug in a simple home-based
laboratory. In order to deal with this problem, and issues related to the
misuse of the drug, Senator James Talent (R-MO) introduced Senate
Bill S 103 in the 109th Congress. The bill was referred to committee, but
never acted on in its original form. Instead, it was incorporated into the
USA PATRIOT Improvement and Reauthorization Act of 2005, which
was passed by Congress and signed by President George W. Bush on
March 9, 2006. Perhaps the most important part of the methamphetamine
control portion of the bill was the limitations it placed on the sale of a
number of widely used cough and cold products whose ingredients
included raw materials from which meth can be made. The core
176
Data and Documents

provisions of the act in this respect are to be found in Section (b) of
Section 711 of Title VII of the main act, as follows:
(b) Restrictions on Sales Quantity; Behind-the-Counter Access; Logbook
Requirement; Training of Sales Personnel; Privacy Protections—
(1) IN GENERAL-Section 310 of the Controlled Substances Act (21
U.S.C. 830) is amended by adding at the end the following subsections:
Section (c) is absent from the ﬁnal version of the bill.
(d) Scheduled Listed Chemicals; Restrictions on Sales Quantity;
Requirements Regarding Nonliquid Forms—With respect to ephedrine
base, pseudoephedrine base, or phenylpropanolamine base in a
scheduled listed chemical product—
(1) the quantity of such base sold at retail in such a product by a
regulated seller, or a distributor required to submit reports by
subsection (b)(3) may not, for any purchaser, exceed a daily amount
of 3.6 grams, without regard to the number of transactions; and
(2) such a seller or distributor may not sell such a product in
nonliquid form (including gel caps) at retail unless the product is
packaged in blister packs, each blister containing not more than
2 dosage units, or where the use of blister packs is technically
infeasible, the product is packaged in unit dose packets or pouches.
(e) Scheduled Listed Chemicals; Behind-the-Counter Access; Logbook
Requirement; Training of Sales Personnel; Privacy Protections—
(1) REQUIREMENTS REGARDING RETAIL TRANSACTIONS—
(A) IN GENERAL—Each regulated seller shall ensure that, subject to
subparagraph (F), sales by such seller of a scheduled listed chemical
product at retail are made in accordance with the following:
(i) In offering the product for sale, the seller places the
product such that customers do not have direct access to the
product before the sale is made (in this paragraph referred to
as ‘behind-the-counter’ placement). For purposes of this
paragraph, a behind-the-counter placement of a product
includes circumstances in which the product is stored in a
locked cabinet that is located in an area of the facility involved
to which customers do have direct access.
(ii) The seller delivers the product directly into the custody of
the purchaser.
(iii) The seller maintains, in accordance with criteria issued by
the Attorney General, a written or electronic list of such sales that
identiﬁes the products by name, the quantity sold, the names
Documents
177

and addresses of purchasers, and the dates and times of the sales
(which list is referred to in this subsection as the ‘logbook’),
except that such requirement does not apply to any purchase by
an individual of a single sales package if that package contains
not more than 60 milligrams of pseudoephedrine.
(iii) applies, the seller does not sell such a product unless
(iv) In the case of a sale to which the requirement of clause
(I) the prospective purchaser—
(aa) presents an identiﬁcation card that provides a photograph and is
issued by a State or the Federal Government, or a document that, with
respect to identiﬁcation, is considered acceptable for purposes of
sections 274a.2(b)(1)(v)(A) and 274a.2(b)(1)(v)(B) of title 8, Code of
Federal Regulations (as in effect on or after the date of the enactment of
the Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic Act of 2005); and
(bb) signs the logbook and enters in the logbook his or her name,
address, and the date and time of the sale; and
(II) the seller—
(aa) determines that the name entered in the logbook corresponds to the
name provided on such identiﬁcation and that the date and time
entered are correct; and
(bb) enters in the logbook the name of the product and the quantity sold.
(v) The logbook includes, in accordance with criteria of the
Attorney General, a notice to purchasers that entering false
statements or misrepresentations in the logbook may subject the
purchasers to criminal penalties under section 1001 of title 18,
United States Code, which notice speciﬁes the maximum ﬁne
and term of imprisonment under such section.
(vi) The seller maintains each entry in the logbook for not
fewer than two years after the date on which the entry is made.
(vii) In the case of individuals who are responsible for delivering
such products into the custody of purchasers or who deal directly
with purchasers by obtaining payments for the products, the seller
has submitted to the Attorney General a self-certiﬁcation that all
such individuals have, in accordance with criteria under
subparagraph (B)(ii), undergone training provided by the seller to
ensure that the individuals understand the requirements that
apply under this subsection and subsection (d).
(viii) The seller maintains a copy of such certiﬁcation and records
demonstrating that individuals referred to in clause (vii) have
undergone the training.
(ix) If the seller is a mobile retail vendor:
178
Data and Documents

(I) The seller complies with clause (i) by placing the product in a
locked cabinet.
(II) The seller does not sell more than 7.5 grams of ephedrine base,
pseudoephedrine base, or phenylpropanolamine base in such products
per customer during a 30-day period.
(B) ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS REGARDING
CERTIFICATIONS AND TRAINING—
(i) IN GENERAL-A regulated seller may not sell any scheduled
listed chemical product at retail unless the seller has submitted to
the Attorney General the self-certiﬁcation referred to in
subparagraph (A)(vii). The certiﬁcation is not effective for
purposes of the preceding sentence unless, in addition to
provisions regarding the training of individuals referred to in
such subparagraph, the certiﬁcation includes a statement that the
seller understands each of the requirements that apply under this
paragraph and under subsection (d) and agrees to comply with
the requirements.
The remainder of this long section describes in detail the process by which a
retailer obtains a certiﬁcate of the kind described above.
Remaining sections of Title 7 deal with topics such as certain types of
regulated transactions (§712), authority to sell production quotas (§713),
penalties (§714), importation and legal uses of otherwise restricted products
(§715), importation and exportation of restricted materials (§716), and a
variety of ‘‘housekeeping’’ issues.
Source: USA Patriot Improvement and Reauthorization Act of 2005.
Available online at http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/cpquery/T?
&report=hr333&dbname=109&. Accessed on August 24, 2009.
Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control and Federal
Retirement Reform (2009)
The question as to whether the federal government should have any
control over the use of tobacco has been an issue in the United States for
many years. Since tobacco use is not prohibited by any federal law, some
people have argued that the federal government has no authority, legal or
moral, to control the use of tobacco products. Other observers disagree.
They point out that tobacco products contain substances that are harmful
to a person’s health and that some agency in the U.S. government—
presumably the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)—should have
some authority to regulate the use of tobacco products. In 2009, that
issue was resolved to some extent when the U.S. Congress passed
legislation to give the FDA authority to regulate the use of tobacco
products. The legislation was originally introduced in the House of
Documents
179

Representatives by Representative Henry Waxman (D–CA) on
March 22, 2009, as H.R.1256, while matching legislation was
introduced in the U.S. Senate by Senator Edward Kennedy (D–MA) on
May 5, 2009. In a somewhat surprising turn of events, the bills moved
quickly through the Congress, were approved on June 12, 2009, and
signed by President Barack Obama on June 22, 2009. The bill is 84
pages in length in the U.S. Code, but the fundamental rationale of the
act is expressed in its ﬁrst few sections, which are reprinted below.
Public Law 111-31
111th Congress
The act consists of ﬁve main sections: Table of Contents, Authority of the Food
and Drug Administration, Tobacco Product Warnings, Constituent and Smoke
Constituent Disclosure, and Prevention of Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products. The
ﬁrst part of the act outlines its rationale in its ‘‘Findings’’ section, which consists
of 49 statements about tobacco, its health effects, its marketing, and other related
issues. Among these ﬁndings are the following:
(1) The use of tobacco products by the Nation’s children is a pediatric
disease of considerable proportions that results in new generations of
tobacco-dependent children and adults.
(2) A consensus exists within the scientiﬁc and medical communities
that tobacco products are inherently dangerous and cause cancer, heart
disease, and other serious adverse health effects.
(3) Nicotine is an addictive drug.
(4) Virtually all new users of tobacco products are under the minimum
legal age to purchase such products.
(5) Tobacco advertising and marketing contribute signiﬁcantly to the
use of nicotine-containing tobacco products by adolescents.
(6) Because past efforts to restrict advertising and marketing of tobacco
products have failed adequately to curb tobacco use by adolescents,
comprehensive restrictions on the sale, promotion, and distribution of
such products are needed.
(7) Federal and State governments have lacked the legal and regulatory
authority and resources they need to address comprehensively the public
health and societal problems caused by the use of tobacco products.
(8) Federal and State public health ofﬁcials, the public health
community, and the public at large recognize that the tobacco industry
should be subject to ongoing oversight.
. . .
(12) It is in the public interest for Congress to enact legislation that
provides the Food and Drug Administration with the authority to
180
Data and Documents

regulate tobacco products and the advertising and promotion of such
products. The beneﬁts to the American people from enacting such
legislation would be signiﬁcant in human and economic terms.
. . .
(15) Advertising, marketing, and promotion of tobacco products have
been especially directed to attract young persons to use tobacco
products, and these efforts have resulted in increased use of such
products by youth. Past efforts to oversee these activities have not been
successful in adequately preventing such increased use.
. . .
(26) Restrictions on advertising are necessary to prevent unrestricted
tobacco advertising from undermining legislation prohibiting access to
young people and providing for education about tobacco use.
. . .
(30) The ﬁnal regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Health and
Human Services in the August 28, 1996, issue of the Federal Register
(61 Fed. Reg. 44615–44618) for inclusion as part 897 of title 21, Code of
Federal Regulations, are consistent with the ﬁrst amendment to the
United States Constitution and with the standards set forth in the
amendments made by this subtitle for the regulation of tobacco products
by the Food and Drug Administration, and the restriction on the sale and
distribution of, including access to and the advertising and promotion of,
tobacco products contained in such regulations are substantially related
to accomplishing the public health goals of this division.
(31) The regulations described in paragraph (30) will directly and
materially advance the Federal Government’s substantial interest in
reducing the number of children and adolescents who use cigarettes
and smokeless tobacco and in preventing the life-threatening health
consequences associated with tobacco use. . . .
(32) The regulations described in paragraph (30) impose no more
extensive restrictions on communication by tobacco manufacturers and
sellers than are necessary to reduce the number of children and
adolescents who use cigarettes and smokeless tobacco and to prevent
the life-threatening health consequences associated with tobacco use.
Such regulations are narrowly tailored to restrict those advertising and
promotional practices which are most likely to be seen or heard by
youth and most likely to entice them into tobacco use, while affording
tobacco manufacturers and sellers ample opportunity to convey
information about their products to adult consumers.
. . .
(36) It is essential that the Food and Drug Administration review
products sold or distributed for use to reduce risks or exposures
Documents
181

associated with tobacco products and that it be empowered to review
any advertising and labeling for such products. It is also essential that
manufacturers, prior to marketing such products, be required to
demonstrate that such products will meet a series of rigorous criteria,
and will beneﬁt the health of the population as a whole, taking into
account both users of tobacco products and persons who do not
currently use tobacco products.
. . .
(44) The Food and Drug Administration is a regulatory agency with the
scientiﬁc expertise to identify harmful substances in products to which
consumers are exposed, to design standards to limit exposure to those
substances, to evaluate scientiﬁc studies supporting claims about the
safety of products, and to evaluate the impact of labels, labeling, and
advertising on consumer behavior in order to reduce the risk of harm
and promote understanding of the impact of the product on health.
In connection with its mandate to promote health and reduce the risk of
harm, the Food and Drug Administration routinely makes decisions
about whether and how products may be marketed in the United States.
Source: Public Law 111–31—June 22, 2009. http://frwebgate.access
.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=111_cong_public_laws&docid
=f:publ031.111.pdf. Accessed on August 23, 2009.
Reports and Recommendations
The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse:
Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding (1972)
After at least a half century of relatively severe attitudes and policies
about the use of illegal substances, the attitudes of at least some
Americans about the use of marijuana (and, to a much lesser extent,
other illegal drugs) began to change as a result of broader cultural
changes during the 1960s. At the end of that decade, government
ofﬁcials and policymakers began to rethink the stand that the federal
government ought to take about the control of all types of drugs. One
consequence of this atmosphere was the adoption by the U.S. Congress of
an act that was to become Public Law 91-153, establishing a commission
conduct a study of marijuana that would include ‘‘(1) the extent of use of
marihuana [sic] in the United States to include number of users, number
of arrests, number of convictions, amount of marihuana seized, type of
user, nature of use; (2) an evaluation of the efﬁcacy of existing marihuana
laws: (3) a study of the pharmacology of marihuana and its immediate
and long-term effects both physiological and psychological; (4) the
relationship of marihuana use to aggressive behavior and crime; and
(5) the relationship between marihuana and the use of other drugs.’’
182
Data and Documents

In a quite remarkable result, the commission suggested that criminal
penalties for the possession of small amounts of marijuana be abolished
and that distinctions between legal and illegal drugs also be abolished.
Some of its conclusions are as follows.
Drugs and Social Responsibility
A constant tension exists in our society between individual liberties and
the need for reasonable societal restraints. It is easy to go too far in
either direction, and this tendency is particularly evident where drugs
are concerned.
. . .
Drugs in a Free Society
A free society seeks to provide conditions in which each of its members
may develop his or her potentialities to the fullest extent. A premium is
placed on individual choice in seeking self-fulﬁllment. This priority
depends upon the capacity of free citizens not to abuse their freedom,
and upon their willingness to act responsibly toward others and toward
the society as a whole. Responsible behavior, through individual choice,
is both the guarantor and the objective of a free society.
DRUGS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
The use of drugs is not in itself an irresponsible act. Medical and scientiﬁc
uses serve important individual and social needs and are often essential
to our physical and mental well-being. Further, the use of drugs for
pleasure or other non-medical purposes is not inherently irresponsible;
alcohol is widely used as an acceptable part of social activities.
. . .
1. Application of the Criminal Law to Private Possession
Is Philosophically Inappropriate
With possession and use of marihuana, we are dealing with a form of
behavior which occurs generally in private where a person possesses the
drug for his own use. The social impact of this conduct is indirect, arising
primarily in cases of heavy or otherwise irresponsible use and from the
drugs symbolic aspects. We do not take the absolutist position that society
is philosophically forbidden from criminalizing any kind of ‘‘private’’
behavior. The phrase ‘‘victimless crimes,’’ like ‘‘public, health hazard,’’
has become a rhetorical excuse for avoiding basic social policy issues.
We have chosen a discouragement policy on the basis of our evaluation of
the actual and potential individual and social impact of marihuana use.
Only now that we have done so can we accord appropriate weight to the
nation’s philosophical preference for individual privacy.
On the basis of this evaluation we believe that the criminal law is too
harsh a tool to apply to personal possession even in the effort to
Documents
183

discourage use. It implies an overwhelming indictment of the behavior
which we believe is not appropriate. The actual and potential harm of
use of the drug is not great enough to justify intrusion by the criminal
law into private behavior, a step which our society takes only ‘with the
greatest reluctance.
. . .
2. Application of the Criminal Law Is Constitutionally Suspect
The preference for individual privacy reﬂected in the debate over the
philosophical limitations on the criminal law is also manifested in our
constitutional jurisprudence. Although no court, to our knowledge, has
held that government may not prohibit private possession of
marihuana, two overlapping constitutional traditions do have
important public policy implications in this area.
The ﬁrst revolves around the concept that in a free society, the
legislature may act only for public purposes. The ‘‘police powers’’
of the states extend only to the ‘‘public health, safety and morals.’’
. . .
As a matter of constitutional history, a second tradition, the application
of speciﬁc provisions in the Bill of Rights, has generally replaced the
notion of ‘‘inherent’’ limitations. The ultimate effect is virtually the
same, however. The Fourth Amendment’s proscription of
‘‘unreasonable searches and seizures’’ reﬂects a constitutional
commitment to the value of individual privacy.
. . .
While the judiciary is the governmental institution most directly
concerned with the protection of individual liberties, all policy-makers
have a responsibility to consider our constitutional heritage when
framing public policy. Regardless of whether or not the courts would
overturn a prohibition of possession of marihuana for personal use in
the home, we are necessarily inﬂuenced by the high place traditionally
occupied by the value of privacy in our constitutional scheme.
Accordingly, we believe that government must show a compelling
reason to justify invasion of the home in order to prevent personal use
of marihuana. We ﬁnd little in marihuana’s effects or in its social impact
to support such a determination. Legislators enacting Prohibition did
not ﬁnd such a compelling reason 40 years ago; and we do not ﬁnd the
situation any more compelling for marihuana today.
. . .
3. Total Prohibition Is Functionally Inappropriate
Apart from the philosophical and constitutional constraints outlined
above, a total prohibition scheme carries with it signiﬁcant institutional
184
Data and Documents

costs. Yet it contributes very little to the achievement of our social
policy. In some ways it actually inhibits the success of that policy.
The primary goals of a prudent marihuana social control policy include
preventing irresponsible use of the drug, attending to the consequences
of such use, and deemphasizing use in general. Yet an absolute
prohibition of possession and use inhibits the ability of other
institutions to contribute actively to these objectives. For example, the
possibility of criminal prosecution deters users who are experiencing
medical problems from seeking assistance for fear of bring attention to
themselves. In addition, the illegality of possession and use creates
difﬁculties in achieving an open, honest educational program, both in
the schools and in the home.
In terms of the social policy objective of discouraging use of the drug,
the legal system can assist that objective in three ways: ﬁrst, by
deterring people from use; second, by symbolizing social opposition to
use; and ﬁnally, by cutting off supply of the drug.
Source: National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse.
Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding. Available online at http://
www.druglibrary.org/Schaffer/library/studies/nc/ncrec1.htm and
http://www.druglibrary.org/Schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncrec1_9
.htm. Accessed on September 2, 2009.
National Institute of Drug Abuse Reports
The National Institute of Drug Abuse is a division of the U.S. National
Institutes of Health with the twofold responsibility of carrying out
research on drug abuse and addiction and transmitting information
gained from this research to the general public. One of the tools by
which the institute carries out the latter charge is a series of research
reports on individual drugs and on problems of drug abuse and
addiction in general. Currently, reports are available in English and
Spanish on about a dozen topics. The selections below summarize
current information on the incidence and prevalence of the abuse for
certain speciﬁc substances in the United States. Citations that have
been omitted are designated with ellipses.
Tobacco (2009)
This report discusses a number of aspects of tobacco use, including the
extent and impact of tobacco use, the addictive properties of nicotine,
the medical consequences of tobacco use, smoking and pregnancy,
treatments for nicotine addiction, information on current research on
tobacco use, and sources of additional information about tobacco and
nicotine.
Documents
185

What Are the Extent and Impact of Tobacco Use?
According to the 2007 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, an
estimated 70.9 million Americans aged 12 or older reported current use
of tobacco—60.1 million (24.2 percent of the population) were current
cigarette smokers, 13.3 million (5.4 percent) smoked cigars, 8.1 million
(3.2 percent) used smokeless tobacco, and 2 million (0.8 percent)
smoked pipes, conﬁrming that tobacco is one of the most widely abused
substances in the United States. Although the numbers of people who
smoke are still unacceptably high, according to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention there has been a decline of almost 50 percent
since 1965.
NIDA’s 2008 Monitoring the Future survey of 8th-, 10th-, and 12th-
graders, which is used to track drug use patterns and attitudes, has also
shown a striking decrease in smoking trends among the Nation’s youth.
The latest results indicate that about 7 percent of 8th-graders, 12 percent
of 10th-graders, and 20 percent of 12th-graders had used cigarettes in the
30 days prior to the survey—the lowest levels in the history of the survey.
The declining prevalence of cigarette smoking among the general U.S.
population, however, is not reﬂected in patients with mental illnesses.
The rate of smoking in patients suffering from post-traumatic stress
disorder, bipolar disorder, major depression, and other mental illness is
two- to fourfold higher than in the general population; and among
people with schizophrenia, smoking rates as high as 90 percent have
been reported.
Tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of death in the United
States. The impact of tobacco use in terms of morbidity and mortality to
society is staggering.
Economically, more than $96 billion of total U.S. health care costs each
year are attributable directly to smoking. However, this is well below
the total cost to society because it does not include burn care from
smoking-related ﬁres, perinatal care for low-birthweight infants of
mothers who smoke, and medical care costs associated with disease
caused by secondhand smoke. In addition to health care costs, the costs
of lost productivity due to smoking effects are estimated at $97 billion
per year, bringing a conservative estimate of the economic burden of
smoking to more than $193 billion per year.
Source: Tobacco Addiction. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services. National Institutes of Health. National Institute of
Drug Abuse. Revised June 2009, 1–2.
Marijuana (2005)
This report discusses a number of aspects of marijuana use, including
the extent of marijuana use, the effects of marijuana on the brain, the
186
Data and Documents

effects of marijuana on physical health, the effects of marijuana use on
one’s social life, the addictive properties of mairjuana and marijuana
and and pregnancy.
What Is the Scope of Marijuana Use in the United States?
Marijuana is the Nation’s most commonly used illicit drug. More than
94 million Americans (40 percent) age 12 and older have tried
marijuana at least once, according to the 2003 National Survey on Drug
Use and Health. . . .
Marijuana use is widespread among adolescents and young adults.
The percentage of middle-school students who reported using
marijuana increased throughout the early 1990s. . . . In the past few
years, according to the 2004 Monitoring the Future Survey, an annual
survey of drug use among the Nation’s middle and high school
students, illicit drug use by 8th-, 10th-, and 12th-graders has leveled
off. . . . Still, in 2004, 16 percent of 8th-graders reported that they
had tried marijuana, and 6 percent were current users (deﬁned as
having used the drug in the 30 days preceding the survey). . . . Among
10th-graders, 35 percent had tried marijuana sometime in their
lives, and 16 percent were current users. . . . As would be expected,
rates of use among 12th-graders were higher still. Forty-six percent
had tried marijuana at some time, and 20 percent were current
users. . . .
The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN), a system for monitoring
the health impact of drugs, estimated that, in 2002, marijuana was a
contributing factor in over 119,000 emergency department (ED) visits in
the United States, with about 15 percent of the patients between the
ages of 12 and 17, and almost two-thirds male. . . .
In 2002, the National Institute of Justice’s Arrestee Drug Abuse
Monitoring (ADAM) Program, which collects data on the number of
adult arrestees testing positive for various drugs, found that, on
average, 41 percent of adult male arrestees and 27 percent of adult
female arrestees tested positive for marijuana. . . . On average,
57 percent of juvenile male and 32 percent of juvenile female arrestees
tested positive for marijuana.
NIDA’s Community Epidemiology Work Group (CEWG), a network of
researchers that tracks trends in the nature and patterns of drug use in
major U.S. cities, consistently reports that marijuana frequently is
combined with other drugs, such as crack cocaine, PCP, formaldehyde,
and codeine cough syrup, sometimes without the user being aware of
it. . . . Thus, the risks associated with marijuana use may be
compounded by the risks of added drugs, as well.
Documents
187

Source: Marijuana Abuse. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services. National Institutes of Health. National Institute of
Drug Abuse, 1–2.
Cocaine (2009)
This report discusses a number of issues related to the use of cocaine,
including the scope of cocaine use in the United States, the short- and
long-term effects of cocaine use, the addictive properties of cocaine,
treatments for cocaine use and addiction, and additional sources of
information about cocaine.
What Is the Scope of Cocaine Use in the United States?
The National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) estimates that
in 2007 there were 2.1 million current (past-month) cocaine users, of
which approximately 610,000 were current crack users. Adults aged 18
to 25 years have a higher rate of current cocaine use than any other age
group, with 1.7 percent of young adults reporting past month cocaine
use. Overall, men report higher rates of current cocaine use than
women. Ethnic/ racial differences also occur—with the highest rates in
those reporting two or more races (1.1 percent), followed by Hispanics
(1.0 percent), Whites (0.9 percent), and African-Americans (0.8 percent).
The 2008 Monitoring the Future survey, which annually surveys teen
attitudes and drug use, reports that while there has been a signiﬁcant
decline in the 30-day prevalence of powder cocaine use among 8th-, 10th-,
and 12th-graders from its peak use in the late 1990s, there was no signiﬁcant
change in current cocaine use from 2001 to 2008; however, crack use
declined signiﬁcantly during this timeframe among 8th- and 12th-graders.
Repeated cocaine use can produce addiction and other adverse health
consequences. In 2007, according to the NSDUH, nearly 1.6 million
Americans met Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
criteria for dependence or abuse of cocaine (in any form) in the past
12 months. Further, data from the 2005 Drug Abuse Warning Network
(DAWN) report showed that cocaine was involved in 448,481 of the
total 1,449,154 visits to emergency departments for drug misuse or
abuse. This translates to almost one in three drug misuse or abuse
emergency department visits (31 percent) that involved cocaine.
Source: Cocaine: Abuse and Addiction. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services. National Institutes of Health. National
Institute of Drug Abuse. Revised May 2009, 3.
Prescription Drugs (2005)
This report discusses a number of issues about the abuse of prescription
drugs, including the nature and effects of opioids, CNS depressants,
188
Data and Documents

and stimulants; trends in the illegal use of prescription drugs among
different age groups; prevention and treatment of prescription drug
abuse; and the types of prescription drugs most commonly abused.
Trends in Prescription Drug Abuse
Although prescription drug abuse affects many Americans, some
concerning trends can be seen among older adults, adolescents, and
women. Several indicators suggest that prescription drug abuse is on
the rise in the United States. According to the 2003 National Survey on
Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), an estimated 4.7 million Americans
used prescription drugs nonmedically for the ﬁrst time in 2002-
2.5 million used pain relievers
1.2 million used tranquilizers
761,000 used stimulants
225,000 used sedatives
Pain reliever incidence increased-from 573,000 initiates in 1990 to
2.5 million initiates in 2000-and has remained stable through 2003.
In 2002, more than half (55 percent) of the new users were females,
and more than half (56 percent) were ages 18 or older.
The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN), which monitors
medications and illicit drugs reported in emergency departments (EDs)
across the Nation, recently found that two of the most frequently
reported prescription medications in drug abuse-related cases are
benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam, alprazolam, clonazepam, and
lorazepam) and opioid pain relievers (e.g., oxycodone, hydrocodone,
morphine, methadone, and combinations that include these drugs).
In 2002, benzodiazepines accounted for 100,784 mentions that were
classiﬁed as drug abuse cases, and opioid pain relievers accounted for
more than 119,000 ED mentions. From 1994 to 2002, ED mentions of
hydrocodone and oxycodone increased by 170 percent and 450 percent,
respectively. While ED visits attributed to drug addiction and drug-
taking for psychoactive effects have been increasing, intentional
overdose visits have remained stable since 1995.
Older Adults
Persons 65 years of age and above comprise only 13 percent of the
population, yet account for approximately one-third of all medications
prescribed in the United States. Older patients are more likely to be
prescribed long-term and multiple prescriptions, which could lead to
unintentional misuse.
Documents
189

The elderly also are at risk for prescription drug abuse, in which they
intentionally take medications that are not medically necessary. In
addition to prescription medications, a large percentage of older adults
also use OTC medicines and dietary supplements. Because of their high
rates of comorbid illnesses, changes in drug metabolism with age, and
the potential for drug interactions, prescription and OTC drug abuse and
misuse can have more adverse health consequences among the elderly
than are likely to be seen in a younger population. Elderly persons who
take benzodiazepines are at increased risk for cognitive impairment
associated with benzodiazepine use, leading to possible falls (causing hip
and thigh fractures), as well as vehicle accidents. However, cognitive
impairment may be reversible once the drug is discontinued.
Adolescents and Young Adults
Data from the 2003 NSDUH indicate that 4.0 percent of youth ages 12 to
17 reported nonmedical use of prescription medications in the past
month. Rates of abuse were highest among the 18–25 age group
(6.0 percent). Among the youngest group surveyed, ages 12–13, a higher
percentage reported using psychotherapeutics (1.8 percent) than
marijuana (1.0 percent).
The NIDA Monitoring the Future survey of 8th-, 10th-, and 12th-
graders found that the nonmedical use of opioids, tranquilizers,
sedatives/barbiturates, and amphetamines was unchanged between
2003 and 2004. Speciﬁcally, the survey found that 5.0 percent of
12th-graders reported using OxyContin without a prescription in the
past year, and 9.3 percent reported using Vicodin, making Vicodin one
of the most commonly abused licit drugs in this population. Past year,
nonmedical use of tranquilizers (e.g., Valium, Xanax) in 2004 was
2.5 percent for 8th-graders, 5.1 percent for 10th-graders, and 7.3 percent
for 12th-graders. Also within the past year, 6.5 percent of 12th-graders
used sedatives/ barbiturates (e.g., Amytal, Nembutal) nonmedically,
and 10.0 percent used amphetamines (e.g., Ritalin, Benzedrine).
Youth who use other drugs are more likely to abuse prescription
medications. According to the 2001 National Household Survey on
Drug Abuse (now the NSDUH), 63 percent of youth who had used
prescription drugs nonmedically in the past year had also used
marijuana in the past year, compared with 17 percent of youth who
had not used prescription drugs nonmedically in the past year.
Gender Differences
Studies suggest that women are more likely than men to be prescribed
an abusable prescription drug, particularly narcotics and antianxiety
drugs—in some cases, 55 percent more likely.
190
Data and Documents

Overall, men and women have roughly similar rates of nonmedical use
of prescription drugs. An exception is found among 12- to 17-year-olds.
In this age group, young women are more likely than young men to use
psychotherapeutic drugs nonmedically. In addition, research has shown
that women are at increased risk for nonmedical use of narcotic
analgesics and tranquilizers (e.g., benzodiazepines).
Source: Prescription Drugs: Abuse and Addiction. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. National Institutes of
Health. National Institute of Drug Abuse. Revised August 2005, 5–7.
Court Cases
Vernonia v. Acton, 515 U.S. 646 (1995)
As noted above, the U.S. Supreme Court has acted on a number of cases
involving drug testing in a variety of situations. Its ﬁrst decision in a
school-related setting came in 1995 in the case of Vernonia School
District 47J, Petitioner V. Wayne Acton, et ux. In that case, the
school board of the Vernonia (Oregon) school district decided that any
student wishing to participate in athletics at the school had to sign an
agreement to take a drug test. One student who declined to do so,
James Acton, declined to agree to such a test, and was prohibited from
joining the school’s seventh grade football team. Ultimately, his parents
brought suit against the school district on his behalf, claiming that
suspicionless drug testing was unconstitutional. The case worked its
way through the courts, with each side recording at least one favorable
ruling along the way, until it reached the U.S. Supreme Court in 1995,
at which time the court ruled for the school district by a vote of 6 to 3.
The main arguments of the court, as provided in Justice Scalia’s
decision, were as follows (citations omitted, as indicated by ellipsis):
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides that
the Federal Government shall not violate ‘‘[t]he right of the people to be
secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against
unreasonable searches and seizures. . . . ’’ We have held that the
Fourteenth Amendment extends this constitutional guarantee to
searches and seizures by state ofﬁcers, . . . including public school
ofﬁcials. . . . In Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives’ Assn., . . . , we held
that state compelled collection and testing of urine, such as that
required by the Student Athlete Drug Policy, constitutes a ‘‘search’’
subject to the demands of the Fourth Amendment. . . .
As the text of the Fourth Amendment indicates, the ultimate measure
of the constitutionality of a governmental search is ‘‘reasonableness.’’
Court Cases
191

At least in a case such as this, where there was no clear practice, either
approving or disapproving the type of search at issue, at the time the
constitutional provision was enacted, . . . whether a particular search
meets the reasonableness standard’’ ‘is judged by balancing its
intrusion on the individual’s Fourth Amendment interests against its
promotion of legitimate governmental interests.’ ‘‘ . . . Where a search is
undertaken by law enforcement ofﬁcials to discover evidence of
criminal wrongdoing, this Court has said that reasonableness generally
requires the obtaining of a judicial warrant. . . . Warrants cannot be
issued, of course, without the showing of probable cause required by
the Warrant Clause. But a warrant is not required to establish the
reasonableness of all government searches; and when a warrant is not
required (and the Warrant Clause therefore not applicable), probable
cause is not invariably required either. A search unsupported by
probable cause can be constitutional, we have said, ‘‘when special
needs, beyond the normal need for law enforcement, make the warrant
and probable cause requirement impracticable.’’ . . .
We have found such ‘‘special needs’’ to exist in the public school
context. There, the warrant requirement ‘‘would unduly interfere with
the maintenance of the swift and informal disciplinary procedures [that
are] needed,’’ and ‘‘strict adherence to the requirement that searches be
based upon probable cause’’ would undercut ‘‘the substantial need of
teachers and administrators for freedom to maintain order in the
schools.’’ . . . The school search we approved in T. L. O., while not based
on probable cause, was based on individualized suspicion of
wrongdoing. As we explicitly acknowledged, however, ‘‘ ‘the Fourth
Amendment imposes no irreducible requirement of such suspicion,’ ’’
‘‘ . . . We have upheld suspicionless searches and seizures to conduct
drug testing of railroad personnel involved in train accidents, . . . ; to
conduct random drug testing of federal customs ofﬁcers who carry
arms or are involved in drug interdiction. . . .
. . .
Fourth Amendment rights, no less than First and Fourteenth Amendment
rights, are different in public schools than elsewhere; the ‘‘reasonableness’’
inquiry cannot disregard the schools’ custodial and tutelary responsibility
for children. For their own good and that of their classmates, public
school children are routinely required to submit to various physical
examinations, and to be vaccinated against various diseases. . . .
Legitimate privacy expectations are even less with regard to student
athletes. School sports are not for the bashful. They require ‘‘suiting up’’
before each practice or event, and showering and changing
afterwards. . . .
There is an additional respect in which school athletes have a reduced
expectation of privacy. By choosing to ‘‘go out for the team,’’ they
192
Data and Documents

voluntarily subject themselves to a degree of regulation even higher
than that imposed on students generally. In Vernonia’s public schools,
they must submit to a preseason physical exam (James testiﬁed that his
included the giving of a urine sample, App. 17), they must acquire
adequate insurance coverage or sign an insurance waiver, maintain a
minimum grade point average, and comply with any ‘‘rules of conduct,
dress, training hours and related matters as may be established for each
sport by the head coach and athletic director with the principal’s
approval.’’ . . . Somewhat like adults who choose to participate in a
‘‘closely regulated industry,’’ students who voluntarily participate in
school athletics have reason to expect intrusions upon normal rights
and privileges, including privacy.
Having considered the scope of the legitimate expectation of privacy at
issue here, we turn next to the character of the intrusion that is
complained of. We recognized in Skinner that collecting the samples for
urinalysis intrudes upon ‘‘an excretory function traditionally shielded
by great privacy.’’ . . . We noted, however, that the degree of intrusion
depends upon the manner in which production of the urine sample is
monitored. . . . Under the District’s Policy, male students produce
samples at a urinal along a wall. They remain fully clothed and are only
observed from behind, if at all. Female students produce samples in an
enclosed stall, with a female monitor standing outside listening only for
sounds of tampering. These conditions are nearly identical to those
typically encountered in public restrooms, which men, women, and
especially school children use daily. Under such conditions, the privacy
interests compromised by the process of obtaining the urine sample are
in our view negligible.
Finally, we turn to consider the nature and immediacy of the
governmental concern at issue here, and the efﬁcacy of this means for
meeting it. In both Skinner and Von Raab, we characterized the
government interest motivating the search as ‘‘compelling.’’ . . .
That the nature of the concern is important-indeed, perhaps compelling-
can hardly be doubted. Deterring drug use by our Nation’s schoolchildren
is at least as important as enhancing efﬁcient enforcement of the Nation’s
laws against the importation of drugs, which was the governmental
concern in Von Raab, . . . , or deterring drug use by engineers and
trainmen, which was the governmental concern in Skinner. . . .
Taking into account all the factors we have considered above-the
decreased expectation of privacy, the relative unobtrusiveness of the
search, and the severity of the need met by the searchwe conclude
Vernonia’s Policy is reasonable and hence constitutional.
Source: Vernonia School District 47J, Petitioner V. Wayne Acton, et ux., etc.
515 U.S. 646 (1995). Available online at http://www.supremecourtus.gov/
opinions/boundvolumes/515bv.pdf. Accessed on August 23, 2009.
Court Cases
193

Gonzalez v. Raich, 545 U.S. 1 (2005)
One of the most contentious issues related to the use of illegal drugs
concerns the use of marijuana to treat a wide variety of medical
conditions, such as alcohol abuse, Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD or AD/HD), various forms of arthritis, asthma,
atherosclerosis, autism, bipolar disorder, colorectal cancer, depression,
epilepsy, digestive diseases, hepatitis C, hypertension, leukemia, and skin
tumors, to name just a few. The drug has also been recommended for the
treatment of side effects of various diseases and of treatments used
against those diseases, side effects such as nausea, vomiting, loss of
appetite, and weight loss. While many medical professionals, laypersons,
and government ofﬁcials support the legalization of marijuana for use in
such situations, many others argue that marijuana is still an illegal drug
in the United States, and its use should be prohibited even for such
‘‘compassionate’’ situations as those listed above. Local, state, and federal
courts have had to decide a number of cases with regard to the
‘‘compassionate use’’ versus ‘‘illegal drug’’ controversy over the past two
decades. More and more of these cases have arisen as individual states
have adopted laws that permit the use of marijuana in certain medical
situations. As of early 2010, 13 states in the United States, as well as a
number of foreign countries, including Austria, Canada, Finland,
Germany, Israel, Portugal, Spain, and the Netherlands have adopted
such laws. A decision in the most recent medical marijuana case by
the U.S. Supreme Court was announced on June 6, 2005. In that case,
the court was asked to decide whether the federal government had the
authority under the U.S. Constitution to prohibit the local cultivation
and use of marijuana that was approved by the state of California. The
court decided in favor of the U.S. government in this case by a vote of
6 to 3. That decision did not end the controversy over the medical use
of marijuana, however, as four years later the court, in an unsigned
statement, rejected appeals from San Bernardino and San Diego counties
in California to have the California state medical marijuana law
overturned because it violated federal restrictions on the use of the drug
for any purpose whatsoever. The main points in the Gonzalez v. Raich
case are cited here (citations omitted, as indicated by ellipsis).
In the introduction to his ruling for the majority, Justice John Paul Stevens
lays out the fundamental Constitutional issue and the basis for the court’s
decision:
The case is made difﬁcult by respondents’ strong arguments that they
will suffer irreparable harm because, despite a congressional ﬁnding
to the contrary, marijuana does have valid therapeutic purposes.
194
Data and Documents

The question before us, however, is not whether it is wise to enforce the
statute in these circumstances; rather, it is whether Congress’ power to
regulate interstate markets for medicinal substances encompasses the
portions of those markets that are supplied with drugs produced and
consumed locally. Well-settled law controls our answer. The CSA
[Controlled Substances Act] is a valid exercise of federal power, even as
applied to the troubling facts of this case. We accordingly vacate the
judgment of the Court of Appeals.
Later in his statement, Justice Stevens highlights two essential points about
the case:
First, the fact that marijuana is used ‘‘for personal medical purposes
on the advice of a physician’’ cannot itself serve as a distinguishing
factor. . . . The CSA designates marijuana as contraband for any
purpose; in fact, by characterizing marijuana as a Schedule I drug,
Congress expressly found that the drug has no acceptable medical
uses. Moreover, the CSA is a comprehensive regulatory regime
speciﬁcally designed to regulate which controlled substances can be
utilized for medicinal purposes, and in what manner. Indeed, most of
the substances classiﬁed in the CSA ‘‘have a useful and legitimate
medical purpose.’’ . . . Thus, even if respondents are correct that
marijuana does have accepted medical uses and thus should be
redesignated as a lesser schedule drug, the CSA would still impose
controls beyond what is required by California law. The CSA requires
manufacturers, physicians, pharmacies, and other handlers of
controlled substances to comply with statutory and regulatory
provisions mandating registration with the DEA, compliance with
speciﬁc production quotas, security controls to guard against
diversion, recordkeeping and reporting obligations, and prescription
requirements. . . . Furthermore, the dispensing of new drugs, even
when doctors approve their use, must await federal approval. . . .
Accordingly, the mere fact that marijuana—like virtually every other
controlled substance regulated by the CSA—is used for medicinal
purposes cannot possibly serve to distinguish it from the core
activities regulated by the CSA.
. . .
Second, limiting the activity to marijuana possession and cultivation
‘‘in accordance with state law’’ cannot serve to place respondents’
activities beyond congressional reach. The Supremacy Clause
unambiguously provides that if there is any conﬂict between federal
and state law, federal law shall prevail. It is beyond peradventure that
federal power over commerce is ‘‘ ‘superior to that of the States to
provide for the welfare or necessities of their inhabitants,’ ‘‘however
legitimate or dire those necessities may be. . . . Just as state acquiescence
to federal regulation cannot expand the bounds of the Commerce
Court Cases
195

Clause, . . . so too state action cannot circumscribe Congress’ plenary
commerce power.
Justice Stevens concludes with a brief statement about one way in which those
in favor of medical marijuana can achieve their objectives:
We do note, however, the presence of another avenue of relief.
As the Solicitor General conﬁrmed during oral argument, the statute
authorizes procedures for the reclassiﬁcation of Schedule I drugs.
But perhaps even more important than these legal avenues is the
democratic process, in which the voices of voters allied with these
respondents may one day be heard in the halls of Congress.
Source: Gonzales v. Raich (03-1454) 545 U.S. 1 (2005). Available online at
http://www.supremecourtus.gov/opinions/boundvolumes/545bv.pdf.
Accessed on August 24, 2009.
United States of America v. Philip Morris,
USA, Inc., et al. Civil Action No. 99-CV-02496
(GK) (2006)
On September 22, 1999, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) ﬁled
a lawsuit against nine cigarette manufacturing companies and two
related industry organizations under the Racketeer Inﬂuenced and
Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) of 1970. The purpose of the lawsuit
was ‘‘to recover health care costs paid for and furnished, and to be paid
for and furnished, by the federal government for lung cancer, heart
disease, emphysema, and other tobacco-related illnesses caused by the
fraudulent and tortious conduct of defendants, and to restrain
defendants and their co-conspirators from engaging in fraud and other
unlawful conduct in the future, and to compel defendants to disgorge the
proceeds of their unlawful conduct.’’ The case was to become one
of the longest, most complex, and most signiﬁcant legal actions taken in
the ﬁeld of substance abuse in U.S. history. Trial began almost six years
later, on September 21, 2005, before Judge Gladys Kessler (who had been
involved in the case from its outset) in the U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia. On August 17, 2006, Judge Kessler found in favor
of the government, ruling that ‘‘substantial evidence establishes that
Defendants have engaged in and executed—and continue to engage in
and execute—a massive 50-year scheme to defraud the public, including
consumers of cigarettes, in violation of RICO. Moreover, Defendants’
past and ongoing conduct indicates a reasonable likelihood of future
violations.’’ On May 22, 2009, a three-judge panel for the U.S. Circuit
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia circuit upheld virtually all
196
Data and Documents

of Judge Kessler’s rulings in the case. The core of Kessler’s ﬁndings (which
constituted a 1683-page decision) are as follows (citations omitted, as
indicated by ellipsis):
The following voluminous Findings of Fact demonstrate that
there is overwhelming evidence to support most of the Government’s
allegations. As the Conclusions of Law explain in great detail, the
Government has established that Defendants (1) have conspired
together to violate the substantive provisions of RICO, pursuant to
18 U.S.C. § 1962 (d), and (2) have in fact violated those provisions of
the statute, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1962 (c). Accordingly, the Court is
entering a Final Judgment and Remedial Order which seeks to
prevent and restrain any such violations of RICO in the future.
In particular, the Court is enjoining Defendants from further use of
deceptive brand descriptors which implicitly or explicitly convey to
the smoker and potential smoker that they are less hazardous to
health than full ﬂavor cigarettes, including the popular descriptors
‘‘low tar,’’ ‘‘light,’’ ‘‘ultra light,’’ ‘‘mild,’’ and ‘‘natural.’’ The Court is
also ordering Defendants to issue corrective statements in major
newspapers, on the three leading television networks, on cigarette
‘‘onserts,’’ and in retail displays, regarding (1) the adverse health
effects of smoking; (2) the addictiveness of smoking and nicotine;
(3) the lack of any signiﬁcant health beneﬁt from smoking ‘‘low tar,’’
‘‘light,’’ ‘‘ultra light,’’ ‘‘mild,’’ and ‘‘natural’’ cigarettes; (4) Defendants’
manipulation of cigarette design and composition to ensure optimum
nicotine delivery; and (5) the adverse health effects of exposure to
secondhand smoke.
Finally, the Court is ordering Defendants to disclose their
disaggregated marketing data to the Government in the same form
and on the same schedule which they now follow in disclosing this
material to the Federal Trade Commission. All such data shall be
deemed ‘‘conﬁdential’’ and ‘‘highly sensitive trade secret information’’
subject to the protective Orders which have long been in place in this
litigation.
Unfortunately, a number of signiﬁcant remedies proposed by
the Government could not be considered by the Court because of a
ruling by the Court of Appeals in United States v. Philip Morris,
USA, Inc., et al., 396 F.3d 1196 (D.C. Cir. 2005). In that opinion, the
Court held that, because the RICO statute allows only forward-looking
remedies to prevent and restrain violations of the Act, and does not
allow backward-looking remedies, disgorgement (i.e., forfeiture of
ill-gotten gains from past conduct) is not a permissible remedy.
Applying this same legal standard, as it is bound to do, this Court
was also precluded from considering other remedies proposed by the
Government, such as a comprehensive smoker cessation program to
Court Cases
197

help those addicted to nicotine ﬁght their habit, a counter marketing
program run by an independent entity to combat Defendants’ seductive
appeals to the youth market; and a schedule of monetary penalties for
failing to meet pre-set goals for reducing the incidence of youth
smoking.
The seven-year history of this extraordinarily complex case
involved the exchange of millions of documents, the entry of more
than 1,000 Orders, and a trial which lasted approximately nine
months with 84 witnesses testifying in open court. Those statistics,
and the mountains of paper and millions of dollars of billable lawyer
hours they reﬂect, should not, however, obscure what this case is
really about. It is about an industry, and in particular these
Defendants, that survives, and proﬁts, from selling a highly addictive
product which causes diseases that lead to a staggering number of
deaths per year, an immeasurable amount of human suffering and
economic loss, and a profound burden on our national health care
system. Defendants have known many of these facts for at least
50 years or more. Despite that knowledge, they have consistently,
repeatedly, and with enormous skill and sophistication, denied these
facts to the public, to the Government, and to the public health
community. Moreover, in order to sustain the economic viability of
their companies, Defendants have denied that they marketed and
advertised their products to children under the age of eighteen and to
young people between the ages of eighteen and twenty-one in order
to ensure an adequate supply of ‘‘replacement smokers,’’ as older
ones fall by the wayside through death, illness, or cessation of
smoking. In short, Defendants have marketed and sold their lethal
product with zeal, with deception, with a single-minded focus on
their ﬁnancial success, and without regard for the human tragedy or
social costs that success exacted.
Finally, a word must be said about the role of lawyers in this ﬁfty-
year history of deceiving smokers, potential smokers, and the
American public about the hazards of smoking and second hand
smoke, and the addictiveness of nicotine. At every stage, lawyers
played an absolutely central role in the creation and perpetuation of
the Enterprise and the implementation of its fraudulent schemes. They
devised and coordinated both national and international strategy; they
directed scientists as to what research they should and should not
undertake; they vetted scientiﬁc research papers and reports as well
as public relations materials to ensure that the interests of the
Enterprise would be protected; they identiﬁed ‘‘friendly’’ scientiﬁc
witnesses, subsidized them with grants from the Center for Tobacco
Research and the Center for Indoor Air Research, paid them
enormous fees, and often hid the relationship between those witnesses
and the industry; and they devised and carried out document
198
Data and Documents

destruction policies and took shelter behind baseless assertions of the
attorney client privilege.*
What a sad and disquieting chapter in the history of an honorable
and often courageous profession.
Toward the end of her decision, Judge Kessler added a note about the probable
future behavior of the cigarette companies.
The evidence in this case clearly establishes that Defendants
have not ceased engaging in unlawful activity. Even after the
Complaint in this action was ﬁled in September 1999, Defendants
continued to engage in conduct that is materially indistinguishable
from their previous actions, activity that continues to this day. For
example, most Defendants continue to fraudulently deny the adverse
health effects of secondhand smoke which they recognize internally;
all Defendants continue to market ‘‘low tar’’ cigarettes to consumers
seeking to reduce their health risks or quit; all Defendants continue to
fraudulently deny that they manipulate the nicotine delivery of their
cigarettes in order to create and sustain addiction; some Defendants
continue to deny that they market to youth in publications with
signiﬁcant youth readership and with imagery that targets youth;
and some Defendants continue to suppress and conceal information
which might undermine their public or litigation positions. See
generally Findings of Fact Section V. Signiﬁcantly, their conduct
continues to further the objectives of the overarching scheme to
defraud, which began by at least 1953. Their continuing conduct
misleads consumers in order to maximize Defendants’ revenues by
recruiting new smokers (the majority of whom are under the age
of 18), preventing current smokers from quitting, and thereby
sustaining the industry.
As Defendants’ senior executives took the witness stand at trial,
one after another, it became exceedingly clear that these Defendants
have not, as they claim, ceased their wrongdoing or, as they argued
throughout the trial, undertaken fundamental or permanent
institutional change. For example, during live testimony in
January 2005, more than forty years after the 1964 Surgeon General’s
Report, Reynolds American Executive Chairman Andrew Schindler
refused to admit that smoking causes disease. . . . Nevertheless,
Joint Defendants assert in their post-trial Proposed Findings of Fact
Court Cases
199
*It would appear this situation continues even to the present. For example, in this
very litigation, a former long-time career government lawyer was so intent on rep-
resenting a company aligned with the defendants that he grossly misrepresented
in his pleadings and declaration to the Court the degree and substance of his ear-
lier participation as government counsel in related litigation involving the Food
and Drug Administration. As a result, he was disqualiﬁed from representing
Defendant-Intervenor BATAS.

that ‘‘Reynolds Concedes That Cigarette Smoking Causes
Disease.’’ . . . In reality, the RJR Web site on which Joint Defendants
rely in making that statement is only a half-hearted concession
with the same two conditions that Schindler made in open court:
‘‘R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (R. J. Reynolds) believes that
smoking, in combination with other factors, causes disease in some
individuals.’’ March 18, 2005 RJR Web site printout . . . ‘‘The Web site
minimizes smoking as being merely ‘‘a risk factor for many chronic
diseases,’’ and states that ‘‘[m]ost, if not all, chronic diseases result
from the interaction of many risk factors including genetics, diet and
lifestyle choices.’’
RJR is not alone. Lorillard’s CEO, Martin Orlowsky, likewise
refused at trial to admit to the full extent of smoking’s harm. He was
asked, ‘‘Why hasn’t Lorillard speciﬁcally stated publicly that smoking
causes any diseases other than smoking emphysema, COPD or heart
disease?’’ He responded: ‘‘We have—in certain instances, we do not
know if in fact the evidence, the scientiﬁc evidence is such that it
warrants saying it does cause. However, Lorillard’s longstanding
position, as long as I’ve been with the company, is that certainly
smoking can, and is a risk factor for those diseases.’’ . . . Lorillard’s
Web site includes a July 28, 2003 press release, in which its general
counsel Ronald Milstein falsely stated that, ‘‘Research has shown time
and time again that willpower is the only smoking cessation aid that
always works.’’ . . . At trial, Milstein speciﬁcally refused to remove his
statement from the Web site. . . . He made those statements
notwithstanding the fact that Defendants’ internal documents indicate
that they recognize that it is simply false that ‘‘willpower . . . always
works.’’ Clearly, then, any claim the Defendants have changed their
behavior must be rejected.
Source: United States of America, et al. v. Philip Morris USA, et al.
Civil Action No. 99-2496 (GK). Available online at http://www
.usdoj.gov/civil/cases/tobacco2/amended%20opinion.pdf, 2–5;
1604–1605.
Data
Scheduled Drugs
Currently, more than 350 substances are classiﬁed by the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) and the Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) under provisions of the Controlled Substances Act
200
Data and Documents

of 1970. Table 6.1 shows examples of substances presently listed in each
of the ﬁve categories available to the DEA and FDA.
Nonmedical Use of Prescription-type
Psychotherapeutics in Lifetime, Past Year,
and Past Month among Persons
Aged 12 or Older, 2002–2004
One aspect of substance abuse that is sometimes neglected is the misuse of
prescription drugs for purposes other than those for which a prescription is
written. For example, a son may use drugs from a prescription written for
his mother to treat his own medical problem or just ‘‘to get high’’ or to have
some other psychoactive experience. The Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) conducts regular surveys
on this issue, the most recent of which was published in 2006. That
survey reported on the number of individuals who used a prescription
drug ‘‘simply for the experience or feeling the drug caused’’ during the
month preceding the survey, the year preceding the survey, or at any
time in his or her lifetime. The data collected by SAMHSA is segregated
in its report by age, ethnicity, sex, and other factors; only the general
summary for the report is listed in Table 6.2.
Data
201
TABLE 6.1
Schedules of Drugs, as Defined by the Controlled Substances Act of 1970
Schedule
Examples
I
heroin, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), marijuana, mescaline, methaqualone, morphine,
peyote, psilocybin
II
amphetamine, cocaine, codeine, fentanyl, hydrocodone, meperidine, methadone,
methamphetamine, morphine, opium and its extracts, phencyclidine (PCP)
III
anabolic steroids (including testosterone and derivatives), barbituric acid derivatives
(‘‘barbiturates’’), some codeine and hydrocodone products, ketamine, lysergic acid
IV
alprazolam (Xanax), chlordiazepoxide (e.g., Librium), chloral hydrate, diazepam
(e.g., Valium), mepromabate (e.g., Miltown), phenobarbital (e.g., Luminal), zolpidem
(e.g., Ambien), zopiclone (e.g., Lunesta)
V
codeine and derivatives preparations, diphenoxylate preparations (e.g., Lomotil), opium
preparations (e.g., Parapectolin)
Source: Ofﬁce of Diversion Control, Drug Enforcement Administration, U. S. Department of Justice. ‘‘Controlled
Substances Schedule.’’ Available online. http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/schedules/schedules.htm. Accessed on
August 23, 2009.

TABLE 6.2
Nonmedical Use of Prescription-type Psychotherapeutics in Lifetime, Past Year,
and Past Month among Persons Aged 12 or Older, 2002–2004
2002
Lifetime
Past Year
Past Month
Drug
Number1
Percent
Number1
Percent
Number1
Percent
Prescription psychotherapeutics
46,558
19.8
14,680
6.2
6,210
2.6
Pain relievers
29,6113
12.6
10,992
4.7
4,377
1.9
OxyContin®
1,9244
0.84
–2
–2
–2
–2
Tranquilizers
19,267
8.2
4,849
2.1
1,804
0.8
Stimulants
21,072
9.03
3.181
1.4
1,218
0.5
Methamphetamine
12,383
5.3
1,541
0.7
597
0.3
Sedatives
9,960
4.2
981
0.4
4363
0.23
2003
Lifetime
Past Year
Past Month
Drug
Number1
Percent
Number1
Percent
Number1
Percent
Prescription psychotherapeutics
47,882
20.1
14,986
6.3
6,336
2.7
Pain relievers
31,207
13.1
11,671
4.9
4,693
2.0
OxyContin®
2,832
1.2
–2
–2
–2
–2
Tranquilizers
20,220
8.5
5,051
2.1
1,830
0.8
Stimulants
20,798
8.8
2,751
1.2
1,191
0.5
Methamphetamine
12,303
5.2
1,315
0.6
607
0.3
Sedatives
9,510
4.0
831
0.3
294
0.1
2004
Lifetime
Past Year
Past Month
Drug
Number1
Percent
Number1
Percent
Number1
Percent
Prescription psychotherapeutics
48,013
20.0
14,643
6.1
6,007
2.5
Pain relievers
31,768
13.2
11.256
4.7
4,404
1.8
OxyContin®
3,072
1.3
1,213
0.5
325
0.1
Tranquilizers
19,852
8.3
5,068
2.1
1,616
0.7
Stimulants
19,982
8.3
2,751
1.2
1,189
0.5
Methamphetamine
11,726
4.9
1,440
0.6
583
0.2
Sedatives
9,891
4.1
737
0.3
265
0.1
1Number in thousands
2Data not available
3Signiﬁcantly different from 2004 data at the 0.5 level
4Signiﬁcantly different from 2004 data at the 0.1 level
Source: Colliver, James D., et al. Misuse of Prescription Drugs: Data from the 2002, 2003, and 2004. National
Surveys on Drug Use and Health. Washington, D.C.: Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, September 2006, Appendix D, Table 2.1AB.

Illicit Drug Use in the Lifetime, Past Year,
and Past Month among Persons Aged 12
or Older: Percentages, 2006 and 2007
The Ofﬁce of Applied Statistics of SAMHSA periodically conducts very
detailed surveys about the use and abuse of legal and illegal drugs of all
types, covering a range of demographic characteristics, such as age, sex,
and ethnicity. The most recent general survey of this kind was published
in September 2008. The most general ﬁndings of that study are
reproduced in Table 6.3.
Data
203
TABLE 6.3
Illicit Drug Use in the Lifetime, Past Year, and Past Month among Persons
Aged 12 or Older: Percentages, 2006 and 2007
Time Period/Demographic
Illicit Drugs
Illicit Drugs other than Marijuana
characteristic
2006
2007
2006
2007
LIFETIME
45.43
46.11
29.63
29.65
Age
12–17
27.60
26.23
19.49
18.37
18–25
58.98
57.42
39.52
38.36
26 and older
45.48
46.80
29.28
29.65
Gender
Male
50.29
50.65
33.47
33.46
Female
40.86
41.83
26.02
26.07
PAST YEAR
14.54
14.40
8.64
8.53
Age
12–17
19.58
18.72
12.39
11.55
18–25
34.37
33.19
20.24
19.46
26 and older
10.41
10.59
6.11
6.25
Gender
Male
17.40
17.38
10.01
9.87
Female
11.85
11.59
7.35
7.27
PAST MONTH
8.27
8.01
3.91
3.74
Age
12–17
9.77
9.54
4.93
4.68
18–25
19.80
19.75
8.87
8.07
26 and older
6.06
5.78
2.91
2.87
Gender
Male
10.51
10.40
4.69
4.60
Female
6.17
5.76
3.17
2.93
Source: Results from the 2007 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings. Washington, D.C.:
Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and MentalHealth Services Administration Ofﬁce of
Applied Studies, September 2008, Table B11.

Prevalence of Illegal Drug Use
in the United States, 2002–2007
A number of the many questions asked in the 2007 National Survey on
Drug Use and Health was the frequency with which respondents used
illegal drugs. Table 6.4 summarizes the major ﬁndings obtained by
asking that question.
204
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.4
Prevalence of Illegal Drug Use in the United States, Percentages, 2002–2007
Substance/Time Period
Ages 12–17
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Marijuana
Lifetime
20.6
19.6
19.0
17.4
17.3
16.2
Past Year
15.8
15.0
14.5
13.3
13.2
12.5
Past Month
8.2
7.9
8/7
6.8
6.7
6.7
Cocaine
Lifetime
2.7
2.6
2.4
2.3
2.2
2.1
Past Year
2.1
1.8
1.6
1.7
1.6
1.5
Past Month
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.6
0.4
0.4
Ecstasy
Lifetime
3.3
2.4
2.1
1.6
1.9
1.8
Past Year
2.2
1.3
1.2
1.0
1.2
1.3
Past Month
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.3
LSD
Lifetime
2.7
1.6
1.2
1.1
0.9
0.8
Past Year
1.3
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.5
Past Month
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
Inhalants
Lifetime
10.5
10.7
11.0
10.5
10.1
9.6
Past Year
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.5
4.4
3.9
Past Month
1.2
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.2
Alcohol
Lifetime
43.4
42.9
42.0
40.6
40.4
39.4
Past Year
34.6
34.3
33.9
33.3
32.9
31.8
Past Month
17.6
17.7
17.6
16.5
16.6
15.9
Cigarettes
Lifetime
33.3
31.0
29.2
26.7
25.8
23.7
Past Year
20.3
19.0
18.4
17.3
17.0
15.7
Past Month
13.0
12.2
11.9
10.8
10.4
9.8

Cigarette Consumption in the
United States, 1900–2007
The pattern in cigarette consumption in the United States over the past
century has been remarkably consistent. Between 1900 and the 1960s,
consumption rose slowly, but steadily, in almost every year.
Consumption then leveled off until the mid-1970s, when it began to
decline, which it has continued to do ever since. This trend is reﬂected
in Table 6.5.
Data
205
Substance/Time Period
Ages 18–25
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Marijuana
Lifetime
53.8
53.9
52.8
52.4
54.4
50.8
Past Year
29.8
28.5
27.8
28.0
28.0
27.5
Past Month
17.3
17.0
16.1
16.6
16.3
16.4
Cocaine
Lifetime
15.4
15.0
15.2
15.1
15.7
15.0
Past Year
6.7
6.6
6.6
6.9
6.9
6.4
Past Month
2.0
2.2
2.1
2.6
2.2
1.7
Ecstasy
Lifetime
15.1
14.8
13.8
13.7
13.4
12.8
Past Year
5.8
3.7
3.1
3.1
3.8
3.5
Past Month
1.1
0.7
0.7
0.8
1.0
0.7
LSD
Lifetime
15.9
14.0
12.1
10.5
8.9
7.3
Past Year
1.8
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.2
1.1
Past Month
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
Inhalants
Lifetime
15.7
14.9
14.0
13.3
12.5
11.3
Past Year
2.2
2.1
2.1
2.1
1.8
1.6
Past Month
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.4
Alcohol
Lifetime
86.7
87.1
86.2
85.7
86.5
85.2
Past Year
77.9
78.1
78.0
77.9
78.8
77.9
Past Month
60.5
61.4
60.5
60.9
61.9
61.2
Cigarettes
Lifetime
71.2
70.2
68.7
67.3
66.6
64.7
Past Year
49.0
47.6
47.5
47.2
47.0
45.1
Past Month
40.8
40.2
39.5
39.0
38.4
36.2
Source: Results from the 2007 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings. Washington, D.C.:
Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Ofﬁce of
Applied Studies, September 2008, Tables 9.1 and 9.2.

TABLE 6.5
Cigarette Consumption, in Billions, in the United States, 1900–2007
Year
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
Total cigarettes
2.5
2.5
2.8
3.1
3.3
3.6
4.5
5.3
5.7
7.0
Cigarettes per capita
54
53
60
64
66
70
86
99
105
125
Year
1910
1911
1912
1913
1914
1915
1916
1917
1918
1919
Total cigarettes
8.6
10.1
13.2
15.8
16.5
17.9
25.2
35.7
45.6
48.0
Cigarettes per capita
151
173
223
260
267
285
395
551
697
727
Year
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
Total cigarettes
44.6
50.7
53.4
64.4
71.0
79.8
89.1
97.5
106.0
118.6
Cigarettes per capita
665
742
770
911
982
1,085
1,191
1,279
1,366
1,504
Year
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
Total cigarettes
119.3
114.0
102.8
111.6
125.7
134.4
152.7
162.8
163.4
172.1
Cigarettes per capita
1,485
1,399
1,245
1,334
1,483
1,564
1,754
1,847
1,830
1,900
Year
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
Total cigarettes
181.9
208.9
245.0
284.3
296.3
340.6
344.3
345.4
358.9
360.9
Cigarettes per capita
1,976
2,236
2,585
2,956
3,039
3,449
3,446
3,416
3,505
3,480
Year
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
Total cigarettes
369.8
397.1
416.0
408.2
387.0
396.4
406.5
422.5
448.9
467.5
Cigarettes per capita
3,552
3,744
3,886
3,778
3,546
3,597
3,650
3,755
3,953
4,073
Year
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
Total cigarettes
484.4
502.5
508.4
523.9
511.3
528.8
541.3
549.3
545.6
528.9
Cigarettes per capita
4,171
4,266
4,266
4,345
4,194
4,258
4,287
4,280
4,186
3,993
Year
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
Total cigarettes
536.5
555.1
566.8
589.7
599.0
607.2
613.5
617.0
616.0
621.5
Cigarettes per capita
3,985
4,037
4,043
4,148
4,141
4,122
4,091
4,043
3,970
3,861
Year
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
Total cigarettes
631.5
640.0
634.0
600.0
600.4
594.0
583.8
575.0
562.5
540.0
Cigarettes per capita
3,849
3,836
3,739
3,488
3,446
3,370
3,274
3,197
3,096
2,926

Alcohol-related Vehicular Accident Fatalities,
United States, 1982–2004
Alcohol abuse is a profound problem for individuals, whose physical, mental,
and emotional health is likely to suffer from overuse or misuse of alcohol. It is
also a serious problem, however, for innocent individuals who suffer from
another person’s misuse of alcohol. One ongoing problem in this regard is
the number of vehicular accidents caused by people who have consumed
more alcohol than will allow them to drive safely. Table 6.6 summarizes the
number and percentage of alcohol-related deaths over the 20-year period
from 1984 to 2004.
Data
207
Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Total cigarettes
525.0
510.0
500.0
485.0
486.0
487.0
487.0
480.0
465.0
435.0
Cigarettes per capita
2,834
2,727
2,647
2,543
2,524
2,474
2,445
2,422
2,275
2,101
Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Total cigarettes
430.0
425.0
415.0
400.0
388.0
Cigarettes per capita
2,049
2,051
1,982
1,890
1,814
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ‘‘Smoking and Tobacco Use: Consumption Data.’’ Available
online at http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/tables/economics/consumption/index.htm. Accessed on
August 26, 2009.
TABLE 6.6
Alcohol-related Vehicular Accident Fatalities, United States, 1982–2004
Year
Trafﬁc Crashes
Trafﬁc Fatalities
Alcohol-related Trafﬁc
Crash Fatalities
Percent Alcohol-related
Trafﬁc Crash Fatalities
1982
39,092
43,945
26,172
59.6
1983
37,976
42,589
24,634
57.8
1984
39,631
44,257
24,761
55.9
1985
39,195
43,825
23,166
52.9
1986
41,090
46,087
25,017
54.3
1987
41,438
46,390
24,093
51.9
1988
42,130
47,087
23,833
50.6
1989
40,741
45,582
22,423
49.2

Emergency Room Visits Involving Nonmedical
Use of Selected Pharmaceuticals
While there may be some reason for cautious optimism about a reduction
in the use of illegal substances in the United States in recent years, one
trend is in the opposite direction: the abuse of legal prescription
medicines. A number of surveys have suggested that both adolescents
and adults are increasingly using prescription medicines, such as
stimulants and depressants, for purposes other than those intended. In
June 2009, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration issued an update on its 2004 publication summarizing
the number of emergency room admissions for the nonmedical use of
certain pharmaceuticals. The summary data for that report is reprinted
in Table 6.7.
208
Data and Documents
Year
Trafﬁc Crashes
Trafﬁc Fatalities
Alcohol-related Trafﬁc
Crash Fatalities
Percent Alcohol-related
Trafﬁc Crash Fatalities
1990
39,836
44,599
22,587
50.6
1991
36,937
41,508
20,159
48.6
1992
34,942
39,250
18,290
46.6
1993
35,780
40,150
17,908
44.6
1994
36,254
40,716
17,308
42.5
1995
37,241
41,817
17,732
42.4
1996
37,494
42,065
17,749
42.2
1997
37,324
42,013
16,711
39.8
1998
37,107
41,501
16,673
40.2
1999
37,140
41,717
16,572
39.7
2000
37,526
41,945
17,380
41.4
2001
37,862
42,196
17,400
41.2
2002
38,491
43,005
17,524
40.7
2003
38,477
42,884
17,105
39.9
2004
38,444
42,836
16,919
39.5
A crash is considered alcohol-related if either a driver or a nonoccupant (pedestrian or pedalcyclist) had a blood
alcohol concentration (BAC) of 0.01 g/dl or greater. When alcohol tests were not done or test results are
unknown, imputed BAC data provided by NHTSA are used.
Source: Yi, Hsiao-ye Yi, Chiung M. Chen, and Gerald D. Williams. Surveillance Report #76: Trends in Alcohol-related
Fatal Trafﬁc Crashes, United States, 1982–2004. Washington, D.C.: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, Division of Epidemiology and Prevention Research, Alcohol Epidemiologic Data System, August 2006,
30, Table 8.

Treatment Admissions for Substance
Abuse (2007)
Each year, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) collects data on the number of admissions
to health and treatment facilities in the United States for various legal
and illegal drugs. These data are reported by state health departments
to SAMHSA, who collates and disseminates the information. Selected
data from the most recent report available are provided in Table 6.8.
Data
209
TABLE 6.7
ED Visits Involving Nonmedical Use of Selected Pharmaceuticals
Drug
Estimated Visits
Percent of All Visits1
Opiates/opioids
172,726
32.2
Oxycodone and combinations
41,701
7.8
Hydrocodone and combinations
39,844
7.4
Methadone
38,806
7.2
Benzodiazepines
143,546
26.8
Alprazolam
46,526
8.7
Clonazepam
28,178
5.2
Muscle relaxants
25,934
4.8
Carisoprodol
14,736
2.7
Cyclobenzaprine
6,183
1.2
All ED visits involving nonmedical use
of pharmaceuticals
536,247
100
1Percentages for subcategories calculated by author; not present in original report.
Source: Emergency Department Visits Involving Nonmedical Use of Selected Pharmaceuticals. Washington, D.C.:
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, July 2006; Revised June 2009, 3 (Table 1).
TABLE 6.8
Treatment Admissions for Substance Abuse (2007)
Substance
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
Total
1,607,957
1,725,885
1,780,239
1,867,796
1,885,507
1,817,577
Alcohol
796,674
824,641
788,259
776,091
741,987
732,925
Alcohol only
455,699
461,532
433,620
430,990
408,422
406,038
Alcohol with secondary drug
350,975
363,109
354,639
345,101
333,565
326,887
Opiates
251,417
280,145
315,869
326,836
329,730
337,387
Heroin
235,143
257,508
277,653
273,996
259,462
246,871
Other opiates/synthetics
16,274
22,637
38,216
52,840
70,268
90,516

210
Data and Documents
Substance
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
Non-RX methadone
1,209
1,606
2,050
2,719
4,070
5,094
Other opiates/synthetics
15,065
21,031
36,166
50,121
66,198
85,422
Cocaine
236,770
242,143
230,870
254,687
266,420
234,772
Smoked cocaine
174,900
176,507
168,890
184,846
191,973
167,914
Non-smoked cocaine
61,870
65,636
61,980
69,841
74,447
66,858
Marijuana/hashish
197,840
232,105
265,975
291,470
301,263
287,933
Stimulants
68,166
73,568
97,358
135,063
173,081
143,921
Methamphetamine
53,694
58,801
78,390
114,451
154,447
137,154
Other amphetamines
13,737
13,890
17,527
19,327
17,667
5,870
Other stimulants
735
877
1,441
1,285
967
897
Other drugs
18,942
26,702
33,324
29,821
28,167
25,823
Tranquilizers
4,796
5,913
7,447
8,164
8,458
9,949
Benzodiazepine
3,835
5,048
6,497
7,402
7,928
9,491
Other tranquilizers
961
865
950
762
530
458
Sedatives/hypnotics
3,240
3,459
3,998
4,277
4,456
4,210
Barbiturates
1,278
1,148
1,274
1,337
1,380
1,013
Other sedatives/hypnotics
1,962
2,311
2,724
2,940
3,076
3,197
Hallucinogens
2,672
2,789
3,149
2,236
2,006
1,502
PCP
1,896
2,321
3,193
4,177
2,861
3,124
Inhalants
1,819
1,423
1,259
1,217
1,372
992
Over-the-counter
506
1,091
624
708
768
802
Other
4,013
9,706
13,654
9,042
8,246
5,244
None reported
38,148
46,581
48,584
53,828
44,859
54,816
Source: Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS) Highlights-2007. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, February 2009, 5, Table 1a.

7
Directory of Organizations
A
large number of local, regional, state, national, and inter-
national organizations are interested in the subject of sub-
stance abuse and addiction. For some of these organizations,
that topic is the sole reason for their existence, while other organ-
izations have more general missions, in which substance abuse is
one of many concerns. The organizations listed in this chapter are
only a sample of the many groups concerned with the issue of
substance abuse. They have been categorized in the chapter
according to their sponsorship: governmental, professional, aca-
demic, or private.
Governmental
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
Web site: http://www.usdoj.gov/dea
The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration was established as a
division of the U.S. Department of Justice in July 1973 by an exec-
utive order issued by President Richard M. Nixon. Nixon con-
ceived of the DEA as a single, uniﬁed organization to deal with
the ‘‘war on drugs’’ that he had recently declared. At its found-
ing, the DEA had 1,470 agents in 43 ofﬁces in 31 countries and a
budget of less than $75 million. Today, it has 5,235 agents in
87 ofﬁces in 63 countries, with a budget of $2.3 billion. The agency’s
primary mission is to enforce the nation’s drug laws and bring to
justice any individual who is involved in the illegal manufacture,
transportation, or distribution of illicit drugs. DEA has a wide-
ranging group of programs and activities that involve topics
211

and problems such as money-laundering, asset forfeiture,
cannabis education, demand reduction, diversion control, foren-
sic sciences, high intensity drug trafﬁcking areas, organized
crime drug enforcement forces, and the Southwest border initia-
tive. The agency’s Web site is a valuable resource of information
on a number of topics, such as drug abuse prevention, drug policy,
diversion control, legislative resources, and law enforcement.
Publications: ‘‘Checklist for Veterans and Reservists Called To
Active Military Duty’’ (pamphlet); A Tradition of Excellence
(history of the DEA; book); Drugs of Abuse (book); Get It Straight
(book); Guidelines for Law Enforcement for the Cleanup of Clandestine
Drug Laboratories-2005 Edition (manual); Microgram Bulletin (news-
letter); Microgram Journal (journal); ‘‘Speaking Out’’ (pamphlet);
What Americans Need to Know about Marijuana (booklet).
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction
(EMCDDA)
Web site: http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction
was established in 1993 to provide member state of the European
Union with a comprehensive and coordinated system for collect-
ing, organizing, and distributing information about substance
abuse issues within the EU. Prior to that time, various countries
had different methods of collecting and analyzing these data—
and a poorly developed system for exchanging information with
each other. Today, EMCDDA employs 90 specialists in the ﬁeld
of drug information and analysis, with the responsibility of pro-
viding member states with the scientiﬁc information they need
for the development of sound drug policies. As of early 2010,
the agency has organized its work under ﬁve primary rubrics:
drugs and driving, neuroscience, research, women, and young
people. It has announced additional organizational themes for
the future, such as cannabis, cocaine, crime, death and mortality,
infectious diseases, country-by-country, opioids, prison, recrea-
tional settings, synthetic drugs, and trafﬁcking.
Publications: Reports, booklets, brochures, and other print
publications categorized by type, such as thematic papers, risk
assessments, work programs, methodological studies, mono-
graphs, and joint publications. Examples include ‘‘Methampheta-
mine: A European Union Perspective in the Global Context,’’
212
Directory of Organizations

‘‘Internet-based Drug Treatment Interventions,’’ ‘‘Neurobiological
Research on Drugs: Ethical and Policy Implications,’’ ‘‘Addiction
Neurobiology: Ethical and Social Implications,’’ ‘‘2009 Annual
Report: The State of the Drugs Problem in Europe,’’ ‘‘Women’s
Voices—Experiences and Perceptions of Women Facing Drug
Problems,’’ ‘‘EMCDDA Overview Brochure,’’ and ‘‘Drug Use:
An Overview of General Population Surveys in Europe.’’
Health Canada
Web site: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/
Health Canada is the Canadian government’s department
responsible for helping Canadian citizens to maintain and
improve their health. The agency’s Web site provides a host of
valuable information about substance abuse on a variety of pages.
A good beginning point is the page on Drug Prevention and
Treatment, at http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hc-ps/drugs-drogues/
index-eng.php. The department’s major emphasis on the control
of drug abuse in the country is currently outlined in the nation’s
National Anti-Drug Strategy, adopted by the federal government
in 2007. The purpose of this program is to reduce both supply
and demand for illegal drugs in Canada. Detailed information
about the initiative is available online at http://www.national
antidrugstrategy.gc.ca/.
Publications: Health Canada provides a wide array of publica-
tions on a variety of health-related topics under the general head-
ings of Assisted Human Reproduction, Children, It’s Your Health, Sun
Safety, and Women’s Health. Some excellent online publications on
substance abuse can be found at http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hc-ps/
drugs-drogues/learn-renseigne/index-eng.php.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA)
Web site: http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism was
established in 1970 as a provision of the Comprehensive Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation
Act of 1970 (P.L. 91-616). The new organization was charged in
the act with developing and conducting health, education, train-
ing, research, and planning programs for the prevention and
treatment of alcohol abuse and alcoholism. NIAAA supports
Governmental
213

extramural research on alcoholism and alcohol abuse and con-
ducts its own intramural research on the same topics, providing
about 90 percent of all research in the ﬁeld in the United States.
Much of its work is currently subsumed within ﬁve sponsored
programs: Health Disparities Initiatives 2005; Leadership to Keep
Children Alcohol Free; College Drinking Prevention; Initiative on
Underage Drinking; and Interagency Coordinating Committee on
FAS [Fetal Alcohol Syndrome].
Publications: NIAAA Newsletter; NIAAA Alcohol Alert (quarterly
bulletin); Alcohol Research and Health (journal); Helping Patients
Who Drink Too Much: A Clinician’s Guide; manuals, monographs,
reports, pamphlets, brochures, fact sheets, and posters on a vari-
ety of topics related to alcoholism and alcohol abuse.
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
Web site: http://www.nida.nih.gov/
The National Institute on Drug Abuse was established in 1974
as the leading federal agency for research on drug abuse and
addiction. The agency was transferred to the National Insti-
tutes of Health in 1992. NIDA has two primary functions:
(1) sponsoring of basic research on drug use and abuse, and
(2) dissemination of new information on these topics to profes-
sionals and the general public. It carries out its functions
through four research centers (Epidemiology, Services and Pre-
vention Research, Basic Neuroscience and Behavioral Research,
Clinical Neuroscience and Behavioral Research, and Pharmaco-
therapies and Medical Consequences of Drug Abuse), the
Center for Clinical Trials Network, three major programs (AIDS
Research Program, International Program, and Intramural
Research), and a number of workgroups, dealing with topics
such as genetics, neuroscience, research training, minority con-
cerns, health disparities, children and adolescents, and women
and sex/gender differences.
Publications: NIDA Notes (newsletter); Research Reports; Topics in
Brief (newsletter); NIDA InfoFacts (fact sheets); NIDA Addiction
Science & Clinical Practice (journal); Drugs, Brains, and Behavior–
The Science of Addiction (booklet); Principles of Drug Addiction
Treatment: A Research Based Guide, Second Edition (booklet); and
Principles of Drug Abuse Treatment for Criminal Justice Populations
(booklet).
214
Directory of Organizations

National Women’s Health Information Center (NWHIC)
Web site: http://womenshealth.gov/
The National Women’s Health Information Center is a service of
the Ofﬁce on Women’s Health of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services. In was established in 1991 for the purpose
of providing leadership to bringing about equity in health pro-
grams with gender-speciﬁc activities. It provides information on
a host of issues of special interest to women and girls as well as
men, such as body image, breast cancer, breastfeeding, ﬁtness
and nutrition, girls’ health, healthy aging, heart health and stroke,
HIV/AIDS, men’s health, menopause, mental health, minority
women’s health, pregnancy, preventive health, smoking and
how to quit, and violence against women. The agency sponsors
a variety of special programs, which change from time to time.
They currently include topics such as ‘‘BodyWorks—A Toolkit
for Healthy Girls and Strong Women,’’ ‘‘For Your Heart,’’ ‘‘The
Heart Truth,’’ ‘‘Could I Have Lupus?,’’ ‘‘Powerful Girls have
Powerful Bones,’’ and ‘‘Woman Activity Tracker.’’
Publications: The Healthy Woman: A Complete Guide for All Ages
(book); A Lifetime of Good Health: Your Guide to Staying Healthy
(booklet); An Easy Guide to Breastfeeding (booklet); BodyWise
Handbook; many fact sheets, pamphlets, and brochures on topics
such as ‘‘Common Screening and Diagnostic Tests,’’ ‘‘How to
Get a Second Opinion,’’ ‘‘How to Talk to Your Doctor or Nurse,’’
‘‘Symptoms of Serious Health Conditions,’’ ‘‘Screening Tests and
Immunizations Guidelines for Women,’’ ‘‘Menopause Resource
Guide,’’ and ‘‘State Domestic Violence Resources.’’
Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP)
Web site: http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/
The Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy was established in
1988 as one provision of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988. It is
the primary agency in the Executive department for developing
and executing policy on the use and abuse of illegal drugs in the
United States. It is responsible for developing the National Drug
Control Strategy, which outlines national policy on drug control,
establishes a budget for this effort, and coordinates the work of
federal, state, and local authorities in the ﬁght against substance
abuse. The ofﬁce uses a three-prong attack on drug abuse that
focuses on prevention, treatment, and interdiction of drug sources.
Governmental
215

Publications: Over 1,000 pamphlets, brochures, reports, and other
publications dealing with virtually every aspect of the substance
abuse problem in the United States and other parts of the world,
such as ‘‘2007 National Money Laundering Strategy’’; ‘‘ADAM
[Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring] II Report Fact Sheet 2008’’;
‘‘Afghanistan Opium Winter Rapid Assessment Survey 2008’’;
‘‘The DASIS [Drug and Alcohol Services Information System]
Report: Adolescent Admissions Reporting Inhalants, 2006’’;
‘‘The NSDUH [National Survey on Drug Use and Health] Report:
Risk & Protective Factors for Substance Use among American
Indian or Alaska Native Youths’’; and ‘‘The War on Meth in
Indian Country.’’
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA)
Web site: http://www.samhsa.gov/
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
was created in 1992 during the reorganization of the federal gov-
ernment’s agencies responsible for mental health services.
It assumed most of the responsibilities of the Alcohol, Drug
Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA), which
was disbanded in the reorganization. The organization is charged
with developing and supporting programs that improve the qual-
ity and availability of prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation
for abusers of both legal and illegal drugs. Its work is divided
among four major divisions, the Center for Mental Health Service,
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention, Center for Substance
Abuse Treatment, and Ofﬁce of Applied Studies. Some of the pro-
grams the agency has recently funded include conferences for the
dissemination of new knowledge about substance abuse, campus
suicide prevention programs, community mental health services
programs for children and their parents, jail diversion and trauma
recovery programs (with special preference for veterans), support-
ive housing services, drug-free community programs, offender
reentry programs, and state and community prevention programs.
Publications: Many reports on a variety of substance-abuse
related topics, such as Characteristics of Substance Abuse Treatment
Facilities Offering Acupuncture, Treatment for Substance Abuse and
Depression among Adults by Race/Ethnicity, and Fiscal Year 2008
Annual SYNAR Reports: Youth Tobacco Sales; SAMHSA Newsletter;
216
Directory of Organizations

informational brochures, pamphlets, ﬂyers, and posters, such as
those in the ‘‘Tips for Teens’’ series (about marijuana, metham-
phetamines, inhalants, heroin, steroids, club drugs, etc.) as well
as ‘‘Keeping Your Teens Drug-Free: A Family Guide,’’ ‘‘Get the
Facts on Drugs,’’ and ‘‘Good Mental Health is Ageless.’’
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
Web site: http://www.unodc.org/
The United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime was established
in 1997 through the merger of the United Nations Drug Control
Programme and the Centre for International Crime Prevention.
The agency’s mission is to assist member states in their battles
against illegal substance abuse, crime, and terrorism. The three
primary components of UNODC’s work are providing technical
assistance to member states in dealing with drug abuse, crime,
and terrorism; conducting research to collect up-to-date infor-
mation on these topics; and assisting member states in the ratiﬁ-
cation and implementation of various regional and international
treaties dealing with drug use and crime. The agency currently
conduct four major campaigns dealing with illegal substance
abuse and crime: World Drug Day, International Anti-Corruption
Day, World AIDS Day, and the Blue Heart Campaign against
human trafﬁcking. Much of the agency’s work is carried out
through two commissions. The Commission on Narcotic Drugs
is the primary policymaking agency for the United Nations in
the area of illegal substance abuse. The Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice provides the United Nations
with guidance on policies and practices in these two ﬁelds.
Publications: World Drug Report, an annual survey of the status of
substance abuse throughout the world; periodic reports on the
status of drug abuse and crime worldwide, such as United Nations
Surveys on Crime Trends and the Operations of Criminal Justice
Systems and International Homicide Statistics; a periodic journal,
Bulletin on Narcotics; a popular magazine, Perspectives; an annual
report of the agency’s activities in the preceding year; and reports
on a variety of speciﬁc topics, such as ‘‘Addiction Crime and
Insurgency’’ (the threat posed by opium from Afghanistan),
‘‘Colombia Coca Survey,’’ ‘‘Handbook for Parliamentarians on
Combating Trafﬁcking in Persons,’’ ‘‘Handbook on Prisoners with
Special Needs,’’ and ‘‘HIV and AIDS in Places of Detention.’’
Governmental
217

Working Partners for an Alcohol- and Drug-Free Workplace
Web site: http://www.dol.gov/workingpartners/
Working Partners for an Alcohol- and Drug-Free Workplace is an
initiative of the U.S. Department of Labor whose purpose it is to
raise awareness among employers and employees about the
impact that alcohol and drugs can have on working conditions
and to provide information about ways in which workplaces can
be kept free of these substances. Some elements of the programs
efforts are training of supervisors and employees, drug testing
resources, provision of resources for employers and employees,
and crisis management tools for workplaces that do not have
alcohol- and drug-free policies.
Publications: Email updates; ‘‘Working Partners for an Alcohol and
Drug-Free Workplace’’ (brochure); ‘‘Steps to a Drug-Free Work-
place’’ (brochure); ‘‘Methamphetamine in the Workplace’’ (Power-
Point presentation); ‘‘Top 12 Reasons Why a Good Drug-Free
Workplace Program Goes Bad’’ (PowerPoint presentation); fact
sheets on Symptoms and Intervention Techniques, General Work-
place Impact, Construction Industry, General Services Industry,
Health Care Industry, Hospitality Industry, High-Tech Indus-
try, Manufacturing Industry, Retail Industry, Transportation
Industry, and Wholesale Industry.
World Health Organization (WHO)
Web site: http://www.who.int/en/
The World Health Organization was founded on April 7, 1948, a
day now observed as World Health Day, as an agency of the United
Nations. The agency’s current efforts are guided by a six-point
agenda that focuses on promoting development to improve the
health status of people in developing countries; fostering health
security against epidemics and other outbreaks of disease; strength-
ening health systems; promoting research to gain better informa-
tion on health issues on which policies can be based; enhancing
partnerships among WHO, other international, national, and
regional agencies and private organizations; and improving the
efﬁciency of existing health agencies throughout the world.
Publications: Many books, reports, articles, and other publica-
tions on a large variety of issues related to substance abuse,
such as Global Status Report on Alcohol 2004 (book), Global Status
218
Directory of Organizations

Report: Alcohol Policy (book), Neuroscience of Psychoactive Substance
Use and Dependence (book), International Guidelines for Estimating
the Costs of Substance Abuse (book), ‘‘What Do People Think They
Know about Substance Dependence’’ (leaﬂet), Evaluation of
Psychoactive Substance Use Disorder Treatment (series of work-
books), Costs and Effects of Treatment for Psychoactive Substance Use
Disorders: a Framework for Evaluation (report), and Brief Intervention
for Hazardous and Harmful Drinking (manual).
Academic Organizations
Many state colleges and universities both in the United States and
other nations have departments, centers, or other entities that
conduct research, training, and education on the subject of sub-
stance abuse. The list below contains a sampling of such agencies.
Center for Education and Drug Abuse Research (CEDAR)
University of Pittsburgh
Web site: http://www.pitt.edu/~cedar/
The Center for Education and Drug Abuse Research was founded
in 1989 with a grant from the National Institute for Drug Abuse.
Its mission is to study the factors involved in the process by which
an individual transitions from being a non-user to demonstrating
the characteristics of substance abuse disorder (SUD). The results of
this research will provide suggestions for prevention methodolo-
gies that can be instituted to reduce the risk of a person converting
from substance non-use to substance use. As of early 2010, CEDAR
has identiﬁed more than two dozen factors involved in the conver-
sion process, all of which are listed on the center’s Web site.
Publications: Many scholarly papers for refereed journals report-
ing the results of speciﬁc research studies by CEDAR members.
Center for Substance Abuse Research (CESAR)
University of Maryland
Web site: http://www.cesar.umd.edu/cesar/about.asp
The Center for Substance Abuse Research was established at the
University of Maryland in 1990 upon recommendation of the
Governor’s Alcohol and Drug Abuse Commission. As a division
Academic Organizations
219

of the College of Behavioral and Social Sciences, CESAR conducts
basic research on substance abuse, collects statistical data on the
topic, and trains students in the ﬁelds of criminal justice, public
health, psychology, and sociology. The center also does research
and collects data that can be used in the development of public
policies on substance abuse prevention, treatment, and education.
Publications: Many publications, such as Need for Substance Abuse
Treatment in Maryland (report); CESAR Fax (weekly newsletter);
DEWS Fax (bimonthly newsletter); Incidence and Persistence of Can-
nabis Dependence Among College Students (report); Youth and Drugs
in Washington, D.C., 1999–2006 (report); Heavy Drinking and Poly-
drug Use in College Students (report); and Social Context of Drinking
and Alcohol Problems Among College Students (report).
Division of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse
New York University Medical Center/New York
University School of Medicine
Web site: http://www.med.nyu.edu/substanceabuse/
The NYU Division of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse is located
within the Department of Psychiatry at the NYU Medical Center
and School of Medicine. Its purpose is to draw on research, some
of which is conducted at the division, to develop new ideas for
training, research, and clinical care in substance abuse and to
develop new models that can be implemented nationwide.
National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse
at Columbia University
Web site: http://www.casacolumbia.org/
The National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at
Columbia University (CASA) was founded in 1992 by former
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, Joseph Califano, Jr.,
for the purpose of informing the American public about the social
and economic costs of substance abuse. CASA claims to be ‘‘the
only nation-wide organization that brings together under one
roof all the professional disciplines needed to study and combat
abuse of all substances—alcohol, nicotine as well as illegal, pre-
scription and performance enhancing drugs—in all sectors of
society.’’ The center’s work is organized into ﬁve separate areas:
health and treatment, policy research and analysis, youth pro-
grams, policy to practice, and Join Together, a program designed
220
Directory of Organizations

to help community leaders to make the best possible use of recent
research advances to prevent and treat substance abuse.
Publications: Three books, Women under the Inﬂuence, High Society:
How Substance Abuse Ravages America and What to Do About It, and
How to Raise a Drug-Free Kid: The Straight Dope for Parents; a num-
ber of reports, such as National Survey of American Attitudes on Sub-
stance Abuse (conducted and issued annually), Shoveling Up: The
Impact of Substance Abuse on Federal, State and Local Budgets, CASA-
SARDsm: Intensive Case Management for Substance-Dependent
Women Receiving Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, Non-
Medical Marijuana: Rite of Passage or Russian Roulette?, Tobacco:
The Smoking Gun, and The Importance of Family Dinners; CASAIn-
side (newsletter).
Tobacco Control Legal Consortium (TCLC)
Web site: http://tclconline.org/
The Tobacco Control Legal Consortium has its headquarters at the
Tobacco Law Center (TLC) at the William Mitchell College of Law
at St. Paul, Minnesota. TLC was founded in 2000 as a consequence
of the massive legal settlement between the nation’s largest tobacco
companies and the attorneys general of nearly all 50 states. At its
founding, the center consisted of a single attorney working at
Mitchell. Today, it consists of seven full-time attorneys who also
coordinate the efforts of the Tobacco Control Legal Consortium,
which consists of attorneys from a number of states involved in
the original 2000 lawsuit decision. TCLC is involved in a wide vari-
ety of activities involved in providing smoke-free environments,
including the drafting of model smoke-free legislation, legal actions
to enforce existing smoke-free laws and regulations, responding to
challenges to smoke-free laws and other clean air legislation, writ-
ing amicus curiae briefs in smoking and clean air cases, and con-
ducting legal research on tobacco and smoking issues.
Publications: Tobacco Law and Policy: A Database of Law Review and
Journal Articles (online database); The Verdict Is In: Findings from
United States v. Philip Morris (booklet containing selected quotes
from 2006 tobacco decision); Going Too Far? Exploring the Limits
of Tobacco Regulation (symposium proceedings); many law synop-
ses, such as Regulating Cigarettes for Fire Safety, Secondhand Smoke
and Casinos, There Is No Constitutional Right to Smoke, and The
Americans with Disabilities Act: Effective Legal Protection Against
Academic Organizations
221

Secondhand Smoke Exposure; Legal Resources for Tobacco Control;
many PowerPoint presentations; Legal Update (newsletter).
UCLA Integrated Substance Abuse Programs (ISAP)
Web site: http://www.uclaisap.org/
The UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles] Integrated
Substance Abuse Programs was established in 1999 as a way of
coordinating the efforts of a number of different programs for
research on substance abuse at the university. It is currently
located within the Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral
Sciences at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. The
program currently has four major objectives: (1) developing and
evaluating new approaches for the treatment of substance abuse;
(2) transferring newly developed treatments into mainstream
applications; (3) promoting the empirical understanding of sub-
stance abuse and supporting efforts to deal with related problems;
and (4) investigating the epidemiology, neurobiology, consequen-
ces, treatment, and prevention of substance abuse. Some current
programs at ISAP include Clinical Trial Networks, Center for
Advancing Longitudinal Drug Abuse Research (CALDAR),
Criminal Justice Drug Abuse Treatment Studies, Los Angeles
County Evaluation System (LACES), and Friends LaBrea.
Publications: A large number of papers, book chapters, and
reports describing the work and ﬁndings of ISAP staff and
researchers; Methamphetamine Treatment: A Practitioner’s Reference
2007 (manual): Treating Addicted Offenders: A Continuum of Effective
Practices (manual); Once In A Blue Moon: Toward a Better Under-
standing of Hetero-sexually Identiﬁed Men who have Sex with Men
and/or Preoperative Transgender Women (report); Getting Off:
A Behavioral Treatment Intervention For Gay and Bi-sexual Male
Methamphetamine Users (manual); and Evaluation of the Substance
Abuse and Crime Prevention Act 2004 (report).
Private
Addiction Technology Transfer Center (ATTC)
Web site: http://www.attcnetwork.org/
The Addiction Technology Transfer Center is a network of a
national ofﬁce and 14 regional ofﬁces that serve all 50 states, the
222
Directory of Organizations

District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the
Paciﬁc Islands of Guam, American Samoa, Palau, the Marshal
Islands, Micronesia, and the Mariana Islands. ATTC was estab-
lished in 1993 by a grant from the U.S. Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) for the pur-
pose of translating the results of basic research into practical rec-
ommendations for prevention and treatment services. The center
achieves this objective in a three-step program that includes dis-
semination of recent advances in research on substance abuse,
training of workers to put new knowledge into practice, and
incorporating new knowledge and technology into everyday use
in treatment centers and recovery programs. ATTC is still funded
by SAMHSA, who most recently extended the program to 2012
in 2007.
Publications: Many books, book chapters, pamphlets, brochures,
and educational materials, such as Building Resilience, Wellness and
Recovery: A Shift from an Acute Care to a Sustained Care Recovery (book,
electronic book); Clinical Supervision I-Building Chemical Dependency
Counselor Skills (book); Clinical Supervision II: Addressing Supervisory
Problems in Addictions Treatment (book); Healing the Stigma of Addic-
tion: A Guide for Treatment Practitioners (book); ‘‘Toolbox Training:
A Substance Abuse Educational Series for Helping Professionals’’
(pamphlet); ‘‘Buprenorphine’’ (pamphlet); ‘‘Addictions Recovery:
When Knowing the Facts Can Help’’ (brochure); ‘‘How to Set Up
an Effective Mobile Outreach Prevention Program’’ (brochure);
‘‘Native American Curriculum for Non-Tribal Substance Abuse
Programs’’ (brochure); and Adolescent Treatment Issues: Understand-
ing & Managing Youth Training of the Trainers (TOT) Manual (curricu-
lum).
Al-Anon/Alateen
Web site: http://www.al-anon.alateen.org/
Al-Anon was founded in 1951 by Lois W., wife of Bill W., founder of
Alcoholics Anonymous, and Anne B. The organization grew rapidly
and was incorporated in 1954 under the name of Al-Anon Family
Group Headquarters, Inc. The purpose of the organization was to
assist family members in dealing with the problems they faced as
loved ones of alcoholics. A year later, the group published its ﬁrst
book, The Al-Anon Family Groups, A Guide for the Families of Problem
Drinkers. In 1957, a similar support group was formed for and by
Private
223

the children of men and women with alcohol problems, a group that
was given the name Alateen. Ayear later, the board of directors of Al-
Anon decided to establish an Alateen Committee and in 1964, a spe-
cial staff person was hired to work with Alateen groups. As of early
2010, there are more than 24,000 Al-Anon/Alateen groups in 130
countries around the world, with an average membership of about
13 individuals per group. The organization’s publications have been
printed in more than 30 different languages.
Publications: Many books, booklets, kits, and other publications,
such as Discovering Choices (book); Dilemma of the Alcoholic
Marriage (book); The Al-Anon Family Groups (book); One Day at a
Time in Al-Anon (book); Lois Remembers (book); Blueprint for
Progress (booklet); Al-Anon/Alateen Service Manual (booklet); When
I Got Busy, I Got Better (booklet); The Best of Public Outreach (book-
let); ‘‘Al-Anon is for Men’’ (pamphlet); ‘‘Alcoholism: The Family
Disease’’ (pamphlet); ‘‘So You Love an Alcoholic’’ (pamphlet);
‘‘The Twelve Steps and Tradition’’ (pamphlet); ‘‘Alateen Newcomer
Packet’’ (kit); ‘‘Courage to Change’’ (CD-ROM).
Alcoholics Anonymous
Web site: http://www.aa.org/
Alcoholics Anonymous was founded by two men attempting to
deal with their alcoholism, William Grifﬁth (‘‘Bill’’) Wilson and
Robert Holbrook (‘‘Bob’’) Smith. The traditional date for the
founding of the organization is set at June 10, 1935, the date on
which Smith had his last drink. Although the organization keeps
no formal records, it estimated that as of January 1, 2007, it had
at least 1,248,000 members in over 55,000 groups in the United
States, and an almost equal number of groups overseas, with just
over 700,000 members. The total number of groups worldwide
was estimated at 116,773. The organization is very simple in con-
cept, with no membership dues or requirements, other than the
desire to quit drinking. It is perhaps best known for its twelve-
step program for dealing with problems of alcoholism.
Publications: More than 150 books, pamphlets, guides, and other
materials, including Alcoholics Anonymous (book); Experience,
Strength, and Hope (book); Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions
(book); As Bill Sees It (book); Living Sober (book); Young People
and A.A. (book); ‘‘44 Questions’’ (pamphlet); ‘‘Do You Think
You’re Different?’’ (pamphlet); ‘‘A.A. and the Armed Services’’
224
Directory of Organizations

(pamphlet); ‘‘A Newcomer Asks’’ (pamphlet); ‘‘A.A. and the
Gay/Lesbian Alcoholic’’ (pamphlet); and Box 4-5-9 (newsletter).
American Council for Drug Education (ACDE)
Web site: http://www.acde.org/
The American Council for Drug Education was founded in 1977
in response to the growing problem of substance abuse in the
United States. The organization’s primary mission is to ensure
that accurate, scientiﬁcally-based information about drug abuse
prevention programs is easily available to the general public.
In 1995, ACDE became an afﬁliate of the Phoenix House Founda-
tion, which calls itself ‘‘the largest, private, non-proﬁt drug abuse
service agency in the country.’’ ACDE operates the Web site,
www.drughelp.com, which provides information on drugs,
drugs abuse, drug abuse prevention, and drug abuse treatment,
with referrals to public and private treatment facilities, self-help
resources, crisis centers, and family assistance groups throughout
the nation.
Publications: Working it Out: Adult Children of Alcoholics in the
Workplace (user’s guide, video, and handouts); Support Groups that
Work (manual); The Feel Better Book (workbook); Faces of Addiction
Kit for Schools (video and ancillary materials); ‘‘Know Your
Strengths, Know Your Risks’’ (pamphlet); and ‘‘Ties that Bind’’
(fact sheets).
Americans for Nonsmokers’ Rights (ANR)
Web site: http://www.no-smoke.org/
Americans for Nonsmokers’ Rights was founded in 1976 for the
purpose of protecting nonsmokers from the hazards posed by
secondhand cigarette smoke, to prevent young people from
becoming addicted to tobacco products, and to act as a counter
force to the tobacco industry in efforts to reduce the use of tobacco
products in the United States. The organization is primarily
member-supported and works to support all types of regulation
of secondhand smoke, including voluntary, legislative, and regu-
latory policies. It also works to support legislative and regulatory
efforts to limit the inﬂuence of the tobacco industry in the devel-
opment of national policies on smoking and tobacco use. ANR’s
sister organization, the American Nonsmokers’ Rights Founda-
tion (ANRF) was founded in 1982 to develop programs for
Private
225

school-age youth on the importance of smoke-free spaces in
American society.
Publications: A quarterly newsletter, UPDATE!; numerous elec-
tronic fact sheets on topics such as secondhand smoke, economic
impact of secondhand smoke, ventilation, preemption by the
tobacco industry, going smoke-free at home, work, and in the com-
munity; smoke-free travel; legal issues; and target populations.
Americans for Safe Access (ASA)
Web site: http://www.safeaccessnow.org/
Americans for Safe Access calls itself the ‘‘largest national
member-based organization of patients, medical professionals,
scientists and concerned citizens promoting safe and legal access
to cannabis for therapeutic use and research.’’ The organization
has more than 30,000 members and chapters in 40 states. Founded
in 2002, ASA lists a number of important accomplishments in its
brief history, including organizing legal support for more than
30 individuals being accused of illegal marijuana use, conducting
training tours on individual rights in the ﬁeld of medical mari-
juana, organizing protest rallies against state and local actions
against the medical uses of marijuana, ﬁling suit against laws pro-
hibiting the cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, and
working on the sponsorship of legislation to protect the rights of
individuals who use marijuana for medical purposes.
Publications: ‘‘Condition’’ books on topics such as aging, arthritis,
cancer, chronic pain, and HIV/AIDS; a legal manual speciﬁcally
for the state of California; and Know Your Rights cards.
Association for Medical Education and Research
in Substance Abuse (AMERSA)
Web site: http://www.amersa.org/
The Association for Medical Education and Research in Substance
Abuse has more than 300 physician members from a number of
specialty areas, along with nurses, social workers, psychologists,
pharmacologists, dentists, and other professionals. The organiza-
tion was founded in 1976 by members of the Career Teachers
Program, which was then funded by the National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism and the National Institute on
Drug Abuse for the purpose of developing faculty members with
226
Directory of Organizations

special training in the area of substance abuse. Members of
AMERSA have developed, implemented, and evaluated cur-
ricula, educational programs, and faculty development programs
and clinical and research measures for substance abuse services
and professional education and have conducted research related
to substance abuse education, clinical service, and prevention.
AMERSA sponsors an annual conference on substance abuse
education, provides a speakers’ bureau on the topic, and cur-
rently has a task force on physician education in the ﬁeld of
substance abuse.
Publications: Substance Abuse (journal); About AMERSA (news-
letter).
Center on Addiction and the Family (COAF)
Phoenix House
Web site: http://www.coaf.org/
The Center on Addiction and the Family was founded in 1982 as
the Children of Alcoholics Foundation. It became part of Phoenix
House in 1997 and expanded its mission to include all forms of
substance abuse. The organization’s mission is to help children
of substance abusers to escape from the model established by
their parents and reach their own full potential in life. COAF
attempts to achieve this goal by developing curricula and other
educational materials, writing reports about substance abuse,
promoting research on the topic, and providing information to
professionals and the general public about substance abuse
issues. The center currently carries out much of its work through
eight major programs: Collaborations (involving work with other
substance abuse agencies); Transitions (a prevention program for
older adolescents); Facts on Tap (an alcohol and other drug edu-
cation program for college campuses); Building Bridges (a pro-
gram designed to help parents in treatment cope with family
issues); Ties That Bind (helping individuals deal with issues of
kinship care and parental substance abuse); Pandora’s Box
(an online educational program for professionals dealing with
children of substance abusers); Changing Our View (revamping
Phoenix House protocols to strengthen its outreach efforts); and
Trainings, Consultation and Technical Assistance (working with
organizations to provide customized staff development programs
on issues).
Private
227

Publications: Same as those listed for American Council for Drug
Education; see above.
Drug Policy Alliance Network (DPAN)
Web site: http://www.drugpolicy.org/
The Drug Policy Alliance was formed in 2000 when The Linde-
smith Center merged with the Drug Policy Foundation. DPAN is
committed to searching for alternatives to current drug policies
in the United States, an effort that is based on the belief that the
present ‘‘war on drugs’’ is ineffective and actually does more
harm than good. The core of DPAN activities is organized within
seven major initiatives: Safety First, a ‘‘reality-based’’ program to
provide parents and students with education about drugs that
promotes their safety and health; Marijuana Law Reform, an
effort to change the attitudes of policymakers and legislators
about the legal status of marijuana; National Policy, an initiative
by the organization’s national ofﬁce to educate legislators and
policymakers about the need for new ways of thinking about sub-
stance abuse policy in the United States; Legal Affairs, operated
out of the DPAN Berkeley (California) ofﬁce, which writes model
legislation, assists in litigation, and trains legal professionals;
Organizing and Policy Project, which attempts to make national
drug policy a part of community-based organization agendas;
Health Policy Project, based in Sacramento, California, which
works to reduce the health effects and other damage caused by
substance abuse; and International Efforts, the organization’s
campaign to change drug policy and laws in other parts of the
world.
Publications: Many books, booklets, pamphlets, and electronic
publications, including ‘‘About Methadone and Buprenorphine’’
(booklet); ‘‘Beyond Zero Tolerance’’ (pamphlet); Cocaine: Global
Histories (book); Just4Teens (DVD); How To Legalize Drugs (booklet);
‘‘Making Sense of Student Drug Testing’’ (pamphlet); Marijuana
Myths; Marijuana Facts (booklet); and On Liberty and Drugs: Essays
on the Free Market and Prohibition (booklet).
Harm Reduction Coalition (HRC)
Web site: http://www.harmreduction.org/
Harm Reduction Coalition was founded in 1993 by a coalition
of drug users, advocates, and needle exchange providers.
228
Directory of Organizations

The organization’s goal is to challenge the persistent stigma on
users of illegal substances and to work for reform of national,
state, and local drug laws. HRC accepts as a reality that substance
abuse is and always will be a part of human society, and that
rather than working to completely eliminate this problem, gov-
ernments should work to reduce the harm produced by substance
abuse. The organization conducts most of its work through about
a dozen speciﬁc programs, including the California Syringe
Access Project, which promotes efforts to expand syringe
exchange programs in the state; opiate overdose prevention proj-
ects, which provides educational programs in shelters, jails, treat-
ment programs, and other facilities designed to serve substance
abusers; Harm Reduction Training Institute, which offers training
programs in Oakland and New York City for professionals and
volunteers who work with substance abusers; and the Brick
Rebuilding Project, which focuses on educating at-risk youth
about the risks and dangers of substance abuse.
Publications: Brochures, booklets, pamphlets, videos, and posters
in English and Spanish, such as ‘‘H Is for Heroin,’’ ‘‘Hepatitis
ABC,’’ ‘‘Overdose: Prevention and Survival,’’ ‘‘HRC Hepatitis C
Reader,’’ ‘‘9 Tips for Treating Hepatitis C in Current and Former
Substance Users.’’ and ‘‘To Do No Harm.’’
International Council on Alcohol and Addictions (ICAA)
Web site: http://www.icaa.ch/
The International Council on Alcohol and Addictions is one of the
oldest—if not the oldest—international nongovernmental organi-
zation devoted to issues of alcoholism and substance abuse.
It was organized in 1907 during the 11th International Conference
Against Alcoholism in Stockholm, Sweden. It was originally
called the International Bureau Against Alcoholism (IBAA), and
was formed because attendees at the conference realized that
there was a need for a formal, ongoing, international resource of
reliable information about the dangers of alcoholism. In 1964,
the organization changed its name to the International Council
on Alcohol and Alcoholism (ICAA), and four years later, it
changed its name again, this time to recognize its interest in issues
of substance abuse and addiction, to the International Council on
Alcohol and Addictions. ICAA’s main activity is its annual
international conference, at which a wide variety of papers and
sessions on alcohol and substance abuse are offered. It also offers
Private
229

training sessions for specialists working in the ﬁeld. The council is
also joint sponsor with the German Archive for Temperance and
Abstinence Literature of the Archer Tongue Collection for cultural
studies on alcohol, currently located at the University of Applied
Sciences Magdeburg–Stendal, at Magdeburg, Germany.
Publications: None
International Harm Reduction Association (IHRA)
Web site: http://www.ihra.net/
The International Harm Reduction Association is the inter-
national counterpart of the Harm Reduction Coalition (see
above), which works to reduce the harm caused to individuals
by substance abuse and by the stigmatization that such individ-
uals experience in the general society. The ﬁrst meeting to deal
with this issue was held in Liverpool, England, in 1990, and the
IHRA itself was formed ﬁve years later to provide a means of
continuing the dialogue among professionals interested in harm
reduction between regular meetings on the topic. Today, the
organization sponsors conferences around the world on harm
reduction, acts as an advocate for the concept of harm reduction
before legislative bodies and the general public, coordinates activ-
ities of regional harm reduction groups, and develops and dis-
seminates information in particular about harm reduction for
individuals addicted to alcohol or troubled with alcoholism.
Publications: International Journal of Drug Policy, presentations and
articles by IHRA staff, ‘‘50 Best’’ collections of the best articles on
harm reduction each year, ‘‘HR2 Reports’’ on developments in
harm reduction research, and media releases.
Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD)
Web site: http://www.madd.org/
Mothers Against Drunk Driving was founded in 1980 by Irving,
Texas, resident Candace (‘‘Candy’’) Lightner after her 13-year-
old daughter was killed in a hit-and-run accident by a man who
already had previously been convicted of drunk driving. The
organization went through a period of internal debate in the
mid-1980s over the question as to whether drunk driving or
the consumption of alcohol itself was the core issue with which
it was concerned. At that point, in 1984, the organization changed
230
Directory of Organizations

its name from Mothers Against Drunk Drivers to Mothers
Against Drunk Driving to reﬂect its broader concerns. (In dis-
agreement with this revised view, Lightner resigned from the
organization she had founded.) Over the years, MADD has spon-
sored a number of campaigns to reduce drunk driving, including
an effort to change the drinking age to 21 in all states, a recom-
mendation for widespread use of random roadblocks to catch
drinking drivers, and the creation of a victim/survivor help line.
Its current emphasis is on a Campaign to Eliminate Drunk Driving
that consists of four basic elements: high-visibility law enforce-
ment, ignition interlocks for convicted drunk drivers, advanced
automotive technologies to prevent drunk driving, and expanded
grassroots support for the organization and its programs.
Publications: Press kits on topics such as the 2008 National
Impaired Driving Crackdown campaign, Pennsylvania lobby
day for H.B. 2019, and State Progress Report for 2008; fact sheets
on topics such as the alcohol ignition interlock system, the Cam-
paign to Eliminate Drunk Driving, and emerging technology;
MADDvocate magazine; grief brochures; legal brochures; ﬁnancial
brochures; children’s brochures; adolescent brochures; interven-
tion brochures; and DRIVEN magazine.
National Asian Pacific American Families Against Substance
Abuse (NAPAFASA)
Web site: http://www.napafasa.org/
The National Asian Paciﬁc American Families Against Substance
Abuse was formed in 1987 to deal with the growing problem of
substance abuse in Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and other
Paciﬁc Islander populations. NAPAFASA works with its own
members, with service providers, and with the general public to
provide information, referrals, research results, advocacy pro-
grams, technical assistance, policy analysis, and other services
for dealing with substance abuse issues. It is part of a network of
more than 200 Asian and Paciﬁc Islander service organizations.
Some current and past programs offered by the organization are
the Asian and Paciﬁc Islander Substance Abuse Technical Assis-
tance and Training Project for the State of California; Problem
Gambling Prevention Technical Assistance and Training Project
for the State of California; Recovery Month; Asian American and
Paciﬁc Islander Impaired Driving Prevention Project for the State
Private
231

of California; Parent Corps; and the Paciﬁc Island Initiative
Project.
Publications: NAPAFASA Newsletter (electronic newsletter; avail-
able to members only).
National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence
(NCADD)
Web site: http://www.ncadd.org/
The National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence was
formed in 1944 as the National Committee for Education on Alco-
holism by Marty Mann, reputed to be the ﬁrst woman to stay sober
under the Alcoholics Anonymous program. Mann’s primary objec-
tive was to publicize the message that alcoholism is not a moral
failing but a disease. There is no more stigma to being an alcoholic,
she believed, than to having cancer. For this reason, she urged that
medical facilities and treatments, rather than prison terms and
ﬁnes, be provided for alcoholics. The organization’s current logo
reﬂects this mission; it consists of the caduceus symbol that repre-
sents medical science with a key, symbolizing the gateway to
knowledge and understanding. NCADD organizes its efforts
around three major programs and services: awareness activities
such as press releases, public service announcements, and commu-
nity activities; prevention and treatment programs; and Registry of
Addiction Recovery (ROAR), a program by which recovering alco-
holics can ‘‘go public’’ about their alcoholism and recovery.
Publications: Booklets, brochures, pamphlets, fact sheets, videos,
DVDs, kits, and other materials, including Ask Dr. Bob: Questions
and Answers on Alcoholism (booklet); ‘‘Alcohol-Related Birth
Defects’’ (fact sheet); ‘‘Youth and Alcohol’’ (fact sheet); ‘‘Under-
age Drinking’’ (fact sheet); I Ran Out of People to Blame (brochure);
I Wasn’t Having Fun Anymore (brochure); ‘‘Past These Walls’’
(DVD); What Should I Tell My Children about Drinking? (video);
and ‘‘Drinking Too Much Too Fast Can Kill You’’ (poster).
National Inhalant Prevention Coalition (NIPC)
Web site: http://www.inhalants.org/
The National Inhalant Prevention Coalition was founded in 1992
by Synergies, a nonproﬁt corporation based in Austin, Texas.
The organization began two years earlier as a statewide
232
Directory of Organizations

program called Texas Prevention Partnership, as an effort to
educate school children in Texas about the dangers of inhalant
abuse. Today, NIPC is operated by a branch of Synergies in
Chattanooga, Tennessee. Currently, the organization sponsors
the National Inhalants & Poisons Awareness Week during the
third week in March to better educate students and the general
public about the dangers of using inhalants for the purpose of
recreation. NIPC also provides an array of information about
the medical, social, economic, and other risks of using inhalants
on its Web site.
Publications: None
NORML (National Organization for the Reform
of Marijuana Laws)
Web site: http://norml.org/
NORML is one of the relatively few organizations much better
known by its acronym than by its full and ofﬁcial name, the
National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws. The
group was formed in 1970 with an original grant of $5,000 from
the Playboy Foundation. Founder of the organization was Keith
Stroup, an attorney and a strong advocate of the legalization of
marijuana, the cause for which NORML has worked for almost
40 years. Stroup served as executive director of the organization
until 1979, a period during which 11 states decriminalized the
use of marijuana and other states signiﬁcantly reduced penalties
for its use. NORML currently claims to have 135 chapters
throughout the country and a legal staff of more than 500 attor-
neys to assist with the writing of legislation and legal action on
behalf of its primary mission, the decriminalization of marijuana
use nationwide. In addition to providing information about mari-
juana and its legalization to the general public, the organization
lobbies state and federal legislators, sponsors an annual national
conference, and has spawned a nonproﬁt foundation, the
NORML Foundation, which is committed to educating the gen-
eral public about marijuana and its legalization.
Publications: Reviews of surveys and polls; a compilation of
domestic and international laws; many reports on topics such as
hemp, medical marijuana, marijuana crop reports, driving and
marijuana, and arrest records; and Legislative Alerts, News &
Analysis from NORML, an online newsletter.
Private
233

Partnership for a Drug-Free America®
Web site: http://www.drugfree.org/
The Partnership for a Drug-Free America® was formed in 1986
with a grant provided by the American Association of Advertis-
ing Agencies (AAAA). The plan originally was to conduct a
three-year effort to deal with the growing problem of substance
abuse and addiction in the United States by way of an aggressive
and sophisticated advertising campaign. At the end of that
three-year period, however, a decision was made to continue the
program. Perhaps the most famous element of the Partnership
advertising program was its now-famous ‘‘fried egg’’ ad, which
showed an egg before and during frying with the message ‘‘This
is your brain; This is your brain on drugs.’’ The centerpiece of
the Partnership’s current efforts is a Web site, drugfree.org, which
attempts to translate the latest and most reliable information pro-
duced by research into tips and suggestions for teenagers about
the risks posed by substance abuse. The organization also oper-
ates a number of speciﬁc educational campaigns, such as the
Parent Campaign; Check Yourself, for teenagers; Get Help for
Drug Problems; RX/OTC Abuse; Meth; Inhalants; Cough Medi-
cine Abuse; and Steroids. Detailed information about all of these
programs is available on the organization’s Web site.
Publications: An online guide to drugs.
The RAND Corporation
Web site: http://www.rand.org/
The RAND Corporation was founded in 1945 as a freestanding
division within the Douglas Aircraft Corporation for research
and development (from which it got its name) on issues of inter-
est not only to the U.S. Air Force, one of its original sponsors,
but also on topics of interest to scientists and engineers on the
RAND staff. The organization was created in order to continue a
lively tradition of interest in a variety of intellectual issues that
had arisen as a result of the needs of World War II. Today, the
institution carries on a very wide variety of research topics for the
U.S. government, foreign governments, state and local govern-
ments, colleges and universities, foundations, industries, profes-
sional organizations, and other nonproﬁt groups. It has produced
well over 300 publications dating to 1981 on a variety of issues
related to substance abuse.
234
Directory of Organizations

Publications: Many research reports on topics such as the afford-
ability of alcoholic beverages in the European Union, changes in
global drug problems, the costs of amphetamine use in the United
States, the effects of substance abuse on workplace injuries, the
unintended consequences of drug use policies, inpatient costs
associated with marijuana comorbidity, and reducing alcohol
harm from an international perspective.
Substance Abuse Librarians and Information
Specialists (SALIS)
Web site: http://www.salis.org/
Substance Abuse Librarians and Information Specialists was
formed in 1978 with the assistance of the U.S. National Institute
on Drug Abuse and the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism. SALIS merged with its Canadian counterpart, Librari-
ans and Information Specialists in Addictions, in 1986. The organi-
zation’s goals are to disseminate accurate information about the
use and misuse of drugs; to provide a communications network
for specialists working in the ﬁeld of alcohol, tobacco, and other
drug use and abuse; to serve as an advocate for members on issues
of common interest; and to support programs for professional
development. SALIS sponsors an annual national convention and
provides a small number of scholarships for students in the ﬁeld.
Publications: SALIS News (quarterly newsletter); ATOD Serials
Database (online database); How To Organize and Operate an ATOD
Information Center: A Guide (manual); New Books List (online data-
base); Alcohol, Tobacco and Other Drug Databases (United States
and non-U.S. lists; online databases).
Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU)
Web site: http://www.wctu.org/
The Women’s Christian Temperance Union was founded in 1874
by a group of women concerned about the destructive effects of
alcoholism and alcohol abuse in their own families and those of
friends and neighbors. These women initially devoted their
efforts in 1873 to congregating at taverns, praying against the
abuse of alcohol, and urging tavern owners to close their busi-
nesses. After about a year of such effort, these women decided
that a more formal organization was needed to achieve the goals
for which they worked, that organization being the WCTU.
Private
235

Today, the organization has expanded its concerns to include—in
addition to alcohol)—tobacco, illegal drugs, pornography, and
gambling. One of the WCTU’s current campaigns is opposition
to the so-called Amethyst Initiative, an effort by a number of
prominent Americans to have the drinking age reduced to 18.
Publications: The Union Signal, the ofﬁcial journal of the WCTU;
National Happenings, a quarterly newsletter; Signal Press Catalog
(Signal Press is the publishing arm of the WCTU), which contains
about 600 items, including books, booklets, brochures, leaﬂets, ﬂyers,
posters, activity sheets, ‘‘think and do’’ sheets, pictures to color, les-
son sheets, story and puzzle pages, and a wide variety of supplies.
Professional Organizations
American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP)
Web site: http://www.aafp.org/
The American Academy of Family Physicians was founded in 1947
as the American Academy of General Practice. It changed its name
to its current form in 1971 to more accurately represent the nature
of the primary health care function of practitioners. The original
purpose of the organization, and still one of its main missions, is to
promote and encourage high standards among primary physicians
in the United States. It also has a number of other objectives, includ-
ing promoting cost-effective health care, preserving the right of
family physicians to engage in medical and surgical practices for
which they are trained, to serve as advocates for family medicine,
and to ensure an optimal supply of family physicians. Substance
abuse is an issue of signiﬁcant concern to AAFP, which has issued
position papers on topics such as marijuana, tobacco and smoking,
alcohol advertising and youth, and drug use by physicians.
Publications: A number of articles in the organization’s journal,
American Family Physician, which can be accessed on its Web site
at http://www.aafp.org/online/en/home/publications.html.
American Psychological Association (APA)
Web site: http://www.apa.org/
The American Psychological Association was founded in 1892
at Clark University by a group of 26 professionals in the ﬁeld.
236
Directory of Organizations

The organization today has a membership of about 150,000 indi-
viduals who specialize in ﬁelds such as evaluation, measurement,
and statistics, behavioral neuroscience, social psychology, devel-
opmental psychology, clinical psychology, education psychology,
industrial and organizational psychology, military psychology,
adult development and aging, child psychology, rehabilitation
psychology, consumer psychology, behavior analysis, trauma psy-
chology, addictions, and psychopharmacology and substance
abuse. The section most interested in issues of substance abuse is
Division 28, Psychopharmacology and Substance Abuse. Members
of the division are especially interested in the interaction of drugs,
behavior, and other environmental factors in humans and other
animals. The group promotes teaching and research about the
effects of psychoactive substances on animal behavior. The home
page for the division is http://www.apa.org/divisions/div28/.
Publications: Psychopharmacology and Substance Abuse News, news-
letter published three times a year. APA itself has published a
very large collection of books, pamphlets, booklets, and other
print materials and many journals, ranging from American
Psychologist and Asian American Journal of Psychology to Journal of
Counseling Psychology and Journal of Family Psychology to Review
of General Psychology and School Psychology Quarterly.
American Public Health Association (APHA)
Web site: http://www.apha.org/
The American Public Health Association was founded in 1872
during a period when researchers were ﬁrst discovering the
causes of many infectious diseases, causes that could be controlled
by the development of an enlightened approach to public health
issues. The two guiding principles of the early association are
essentially the same as those that guide it today: an understanding
that governmental decisions about public health policy need to be
guided by the latest information on prevention and treatment of
disease, and that an aggressive program of public education about
such issues is needed. Today, APHA conducts much of its work
through 25 special sections on topics such as Alcohol, Tobacco,
and Other Drugs, Community Health Planning and Policy Devel-
opment, Disability, Environment, Epidemiology, Food and Nutri-
tion, Gerontological Health, Health Administration, HIV/AIDS,
Injury Control and Emergency Health Services, International
Professional Organizations
237

Health, and Maternal and Child Health. The association also
makes available certain special interest groups which members
may join. Currently there are groups for alternative and comple-
mentary health practices, community health workers, ethics,
health informatics information technology, health law, laboratory,
physical activity, and veterinary public health.
Publications: The Nation’s Health (newspaper); American Journal of
Public Health; Inside Public Health (monthly newsletter); many
books, such as Health Issues in the Black Community, Ethics in Epi-
demiology for Public Health Practice, Disability and Public Health,
and Case Studies in Public Health Ethics; and reports and issues
briefs on topics such as ‘‘Creating a Safe Food System for
America,’’ ‘‘The Role of Community-Based Programs in Ensuring
Access to Care Under Universal Coverage,’’ ‘‘Shifting the Course
of Our Nation’s Health: Prevention and Wellness as National Pol-
icy,’’ ‘‘Holes in the Net: Surveying the Impact of the Current Eco-
nomic Recession on the Health Care Safety Net,’’ ‘‘America
Breathing Easier: Working Together, We Can Alleviate the Burden
of Asthma and Keep America Breathing Easier,’’ and ‘‘Evaluating
the Economic Causes and Consequences of Racial and Ethnic
Health Disparities.’’
American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM)
Web site: http://www.asam.org/
The American Society of Addiction Medicine was ﬁrst accepted
by the American Medical Association in 1988 as a national medi-
cal specialist society. ASAM grew out of earlier state organiza-
tions, beginning with the New York City Medical Committee on
Alcoholism in 1951. The organization has a ﬁvefold mission that
includes improving information about and access to addiction
treatment; educating physicians and other medical professionals
about addictions; supporting research and prevention programs;
promoting the appropriate role of the physician in the care of
patients with addiction; and establishing addiction medicine as
a well-recognized medical specialty among professionals,
government ofﬁcials, purchasers and consumers of health care
services, and the general public. ASAM offers courses and spon-
sors conferences and other meetings on addiction medicine.
Publications: Principles of Addiction Medicine (textbook); Patient
Placement Criteria (guidelines); ASAM News (newsletter); Journal
238
Directory of Organizations

of Addiction Medicine (journal); Review Course CD-ROM
(study guide).
Association for Addiction Professionals (NAADAC)
Web site: http://www.naadac.org/
The National Association for Addiction Professionals was
founded in 1972 as the National Association of Alcoholism Coun-
selors and Trainers (NAACT). A decade later, the organization
changed its name to reﬂect its broader range of concerns, to the
National Association for Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors
(NAADAC). It changed its name once more in 2001 to the Associ-
ation for Addiction Professionals, while keeping its earlier acro-
nym. The association currently has more than 10,000 members in
43 states, consisting of substance abuse counselors, educators,
health care professionals, and others interested in the ﬁeld. NAA-
DAC’s mission is ‘‘to achieve excellence through education, advo-
cacy, knowledge, standards of practice, ethics, professional
development and research.’’ To this end, the organization spon-
sors an annual conference, other seminars and meetings, and a
program for the certiﬁcation of professionals in addiction treat-
ment and education.
Publications: Books and pamphlets on a variety of topics, such as
Buprenorphine’s Role in Opiate Treatment, Conﬂict Resolution Kit,
Counseling Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Clients, Critical Incidents,
How to Advocate: A Call to Action, and Medication Management for
Addiction Professionals.
Professional Organizations
239

This page intentionally left blank

8
Resources
T
he use and misuse of alcohol, tobacco, prescription drugs,
marijuana, cocaine, heroin, and other legal and illegal drugs
have been the subject of a vast quantity of literature over the
past century. Literally thousands of books, articles, reports, pam-
phlets, brochures, and electronic commentaries have been pro-
duced on the subject. This chapter can list only a sample of those
resources. The items shown here are classiﬁed ﬁrst as print or
nonprint resources, with the former including books, articles,
and reports, and the latter consisting of Web sites dealing with
substance abuse. The items have also been classiﬁed as those
dealing with substance abuse in general, with legal drugs
(tobacco, alcohol, and prescription drugs primarily), and with
illegal drugs (such as marijuana, cocaine, heroin, amphetamines,
and the like). Some overlap among topics does occur, however,
since many resources listed may mention more than one topic.
Print
General
Books
Abadinsky, Howard. Drug Use and Abuse: A Comprehensive
Introduction, 6th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 2007.
The author, an expert in criminology, discusses the issue of sub-
stance abuse from the standpoint of law enforcement, with chap-
ters on the impact of drugs on society, the history of drug use
241

and abuse, the pharmacological impact of drugs on the human
body, drug policy considerations, drug abuse as a law enforce-
ment issue, the treatment and prevention of drug abuse, theories
of substance abuse, and the drug business.
Connors, Gerard J., Dennis M. Donovan, and Carlo C. DiClemente.
Substance Abuse Treatment and the Stages of Change: Selecting and
Planning Interventions. New York: Guilford Press, 2004.
This text is intended for specialists in the ﬁeld and for students
preparing for careers in which substance abuse is an important
topic. The book focuses on methods of treatment; issues with spe-
cial populations; individual, couple, and group treatment; and
relapse issues.
Fisher, Gary L., and Thomas C. Harrison. Substance Abuse:
Information for School Counselors, Social Workers, Therapists,
and Counselors, 4th ed. Boston: Pearson, 2009.
This book is designed for the general reader as well as for use in
educational settings. It covers the complete range of substance
abuse issues with which professionals named in the title are likely
to deal. It presents useful background information, as well as sug-
gestions for diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of substance
abuse issues.
Gahlinger, Paul. Illegal Drugs: A Complete Guide to their His-
tory, Chemistry, Use, and Abuse. New York: Plume, 2004.
This superb overview of virtually all aspects of substance abuse
includes chapters on the history of speciﬁc drugs, such as opium,
marijuana, and heroin; a history of legal efforts to control substance
abuse; drug testing; the pharmacological effects of drugs; the busi-
ness of illegal drugs; and a review of legal psychoactive drugs.
Hanson, Glen, Peter Venturelli, and Annette Fleckenstein.
Drugs and Society, 10th ed. Boston: Jones and Bartlett, 2008.
This widely used textbook opens with a general discussion of sub-
stance abuse issues, along with an explanation of the way drugs
affect the nervous system. The main body of the book is then
devoted to detailed discussions of the major drugs of concern,
including alcohol, narcotics, stimulants, hallucinogens, inhalants,
marijuana, and over-the-counter and prescription drugs.
242
Resources

Inaba, Darryl, and William E. Cohen. Uppers, Downers, All
Arounders: Physical and Mental Effects of Psychoactive Drugs,
6th ed. Ashland, OR: CNS Publications, 2007.
This book covers in detail almost every legal and illegal drug of
interest to the general public, from whom it receives generally
very positive reviews. Chapters deal with topics such as the his-
tory of drug use and abuse, classiﬁcation of drugs, the pharmacol-
ogy of drugs, stimulants, depressants, alcohol, hallucinogens,
drug treatment, and drug use and mental health.
Johnson, Jerry L., and George Grant. Casebook: Substance
Abuse. Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2004.
As with other casebooks in this series, Substance Abuse opens with
a general introduction to the topic, followed by four detailed case
studies to which students are expected to develop responses.
Julien, Robert M. A Primer of Drug Action: A Concise, Non-
Technical Guide to the Actions, Uses, and Side Effects of Psycho-
active Drugs. New York: Holt Paperbacks, 2001.
This book is designed for the general reader. It provides a techni-
cal and detailed description of the biochemistry and pharmacol-
ogy of drug action, beginning with a description of the nervous
system and its response to psychoactive substances, followed by
detailed explanations of the actions of speciﬁc drugs and drug
classes, including alcohol and inhalants of abuse; barbiturates;
benzodiazepines; cocaine, amphetamines, and other stimulants;
caffeine and nicotine; opioids; and hallucinogenics.
Karch, Steven B. Drug Abuse Handbook, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 2006.
This book includes the contributions of more than 80 specialists on
substance abuse in a wide variety of ﬁelds. Individual chapters deal
with a number of drug-related issues, many of which do not appear
in standard substance or drug abuse books, such as medical compli-
cations of drug abuse, drug abuse in sports, drug testing, post-
mortem toxicology, and criminalistics and controlled substances.
Kuhn, Cynthia, Scott Swartzwelder, and Wilkie Wilson. Buzzed:
The Straight Facts About the Most Used and Abused Drugs from
Alcohol to Ecstasy, 3rd ed. New York: W. W. Norton, 2008.
Print
243

The title somewhat misrepresents the content of the book, which
is less ‘‘streetwise’’ than it is technical and academic, although
still easily accessible to the general reader. Part I of the book con-
tains chapters on individual drugs and drug groups, ranging
from herbal concoctions and coffee and tea to ecstasy and halluci-
nogens of all types. Part II of the book deals with more general
topics, such as the nature of addiction, the neurological effects of
drugs, legal issues, and drug treatment and recovery.
Lynch, Timothy, ed. After Prohibition: An Adult Approach to Drug
Policies in the 21st Century. Washington, D.C.: The Cato Institute,
2000.
Eleven of the twelve papers in this volume present reasons that
drugs that are currently illegal should be legalized, while the ﬁnal
paper argues against this position. The arguments presented for
legalizing drugs are economic, legal, social, political, and ethical.
Maisto, Stephen A., Mark Galizio, and Gerard J. Connors. Drug
Use and Abuse, 5th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 2007.
This textbook takes a broad-range view of the issue of drug use
and abuse, drawing on information from biology, medicine, his-
tory, psychology, and sociology. Introductory chapters deal with
pharmacology and psychopharmacology, while middle chapters
focus on speciﬁc drugs, such as heroin, cocaine, caffeine, alcohol,
and opiates. The ﬁnal two chapters discuss prevention and treat-
ment of substance abuse.
Miller, William R., and Kathleen M. Carroll, eds. Rethinking
Substance Abuse: What the Science Shows, and What We Should
Do about It. New York: Guilford Press, 2006.
The editors argue that the practice of substance abuse counseling
has lagged signiﬁcantly behind new information obtained from
research. They consider in this book what counseling programs
would actually look like if they were based on our use of the best
research results currently available.
Musto, David. Drugs in America: A Documentary History. New
York: New York University Press, 2002.
This fascinating book collects speeches, sermons, policy state-
ments, laws, personal letters, and other documents that describe
all facets of the use and abuse of drugs in the United States.
244
Resources

Newton, David E. Chemistry of Drugs. New York: Facts On File,
2007.
The author presents factual information on a variety of drug
types, including natural products, designer drugs, and rationale-
design drugs, with a consideration of social, political, and ethical
issues related to drug use and abuse.
Perrine, Daniel M. The Chemistry of Mind-Altering Drugs: His-
tory, Pharmacology, and Cultural Context. Washington, D.C.:
American Chemical Society, 1996.
The primary focus of this book is on the pharmacological and
biochemical effects of drugs on the human nervous system, with
some mention made of almost every legal and illegal drug of
interest. The author also places the issue of substance abuse in
a broader perspective, however, reviewing the history of drug
use and its impact on the general culture, for example, in
literature.
Rotgers, Frederick, Jonathan Morgenstern, and Scott T. Walters,
eds. Treating Substance Abuse: Theory and Technique, 2nd ed.
New York: Guilford Press, 2006.
This book is a revised edition of a widely popular textbook in the
ﬁeld of substance abuse that deals with topics such as twelve-step
programs for recovery, a psychoanalytic theory of substance abuse,
family therapy techniques, behavioral treatments for drug abusers,
and contingency management in dealing with substance abuse.
Savelli, Lou. Street Drugs. Flushing, NY: Looseleaf Law Publica-
tions, Inc., 2007.
Written by a New York drug division ofﬁcer, this book provides
basic, down-to-earth information about illegal drugs sold and
used on the streets, including their technical names, street names,
risk for addiction, symptoms of abuse, physical appearance,
related paraphernalia, effects of use, methods of ingestion, pack-
aging, and price. The book covers not only the most common ille-
gal drugs, such as cocaine, ecstasy, and heroin, but also
prescription drugs.
Schuckit, Marc A. Drug and Alcohol Abuse: A Clinical Guide to
Diagnosis and Treatment, 6th ed. New York: Springer, 2005.
Print
245

For three decades, this book has been a standard reference for
clinicians working with substance abusers. The latest edition has
14 chapters on major drugs and drug groups, such as alcohol,
stimulants, cannabinols, inhalants, over-the-counter drugs, and
xanthines and nicotines, as well as multidrug abuse and depen-
dence, emergency problems, and rehabilitation.
Stevens, Patricia, and Robert L. Smith. Substance Abuse Coun-
seling: Theory and Practice, 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 2008.
This book is widely used in courses for counseling students, with
extensive use of case studies and a review of recent research and
developments in the ﬁeld.
Velasquez, Mary, Gaylyn Gaddy Maurer, Cathy Crouch, and Carlo
C. DiClemente. Group Treatment for Substance Abuse: A Stages-of-
Change Therapy Manual. New York: Guilford Press, 2001.
This book is designed for practitioners who are dealing with
patients having substance abuse and addiction problems.
It includes a theoretical introduction to the topic along with a
variety of handouts and exercises that counselors can use in
working with such individuals.
Journals and Periodicals
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment. ISSN: 0740–5472.
Published eight times a year, this journal is concerned with sub-
stance abuse treatment speciﬁcally.
Substance Abuse. ISSN: 0889–7077.
This quarterly journal is one of the premier publications for the
most recent research and opinion on substance abuse issues.
Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy. ISSN: 1747–
597X.
This journal is especially important to students of substance
abuse issues because many of its articles are available though its
Open Access policy, which allows readers the right to copy, dis-
tribute, and display articles; to make derivative works from an
article; and to use an article for commercial purposes.
246
Resources

Articles
Backett-Milburn, Kathryn, et al. ‘‘Challenging Childhoods:
Young People’s Accounts of ‘Getting By’ in Families with Sub-
stance Use Problems.’’ Childhood 15 (4): 461–479.
A number of studies have attempted to discover and interpret the
health, social, and other issues faced by substance abusers. Much
less attention has been paid to the children of adult substance
abusers. In this review, researchers explore the methods that such
individuals develop to survive in the real world with parents who
are often incapable of taking care of themselves, let alone their
children. They discuss a number of survival strategies that those
children develop and use in their everyday lives.
Bullington, Bruce. ‘‘Drug Policy Reform and its Detractors: The
United States as the Elephant in the Closet.’’ Journal of Drug
Issues 34 (3): 687–721.
This excellent article reviews some signiﬁcant changes that have
been taking place in national drug policies in Central and Western
Europe since the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century. It suggests
that the growth of a centralized European community may lead to
even greater changes in the policies of individual nations, but that
drug policies in the United States will still have a signiﬁcant inﬂu-
ence over such policies in Europe.
Council on School Health and Committee on Substance Abuse.
‘‘The Role of Schools in Combating Illicit Substance Abuse.’’
Pediatrics 120 (6; December 2007): 1379–1384.
The American Academy of Pediatrics has issued this policy state-
ment about the role of schools in working with families to identify
individuals who may be at risk for substance abuse and for devel-
oping practices that will help prevent such developments.
Dunn, Michael S. ‘‘The Relationship Between Religiosity,
Employment, and Political Beliefs on Substance Use among
High School Seniors.’’ Journal of Alcohol and Drug Education
49 (1; March 2005): 73–88.
One might expect that a number of personal, social, cultural, reli-
gious, and other factors are involved in the tendency of an adoles-
cent to become involved in illegal substance use. This study
Print
247

attempts to determine how a number of those factors are related
to alcohol, cigarette, marijuana, and cocaine use among a group
of high school seniors. The author summarizes those factors
which appear to be related to the use of each drug, and the
strength with which each factor operates.
Haggerty, Kevin P., et al. ‘‘Long-term Effects of the Focus on Fam-
ilies Project on Substance Use Disorders Among Children of
Parents in Methadone Treatment.’’ Addiction 103 (12; Decem-
ber 2008): 2008–2016.
The authors report on an experimental study designed to assist
parents in a methadone treatment program in improving their
parenting skills, with the objective of reducing the risk of their
children also developing substance abuse problems. The study
found that the experimental treatment, now called the Families
Facing the Future project, was signiﬁcantly more effective for pre-
venting substance abuse among male children than among
female children.
Hornik, Robert, et al. ‘‘Effects of the National Youth Anti-Drug
Media Campaign on Youths.’’ American Journal of Public Health
98 (12; December 2008): 2229–2236.
In 1998, U.S. Congress created the National Youth Anti-Drug
Media Campaign in an effort to reduce drug abuse by young
Americans. This study attempted to determine the effect of that
campaign on the target audience in the period between 1999 and
2004. Researchers concluded that ‘‘[m]ost analyses showed no
effects from the campaign.’’
Kendler, Kenneth S., et al. ‘‘Genetic and Environmental Inﬂu-
ences on Alcohol, Caffeine, Cannabis, and Nicotine Use from
Early Adolescence to Middle Adulthood.’’ Archives of General
Psychiatry 65 (6; June 2008): 674–682.
There is evidence that both heredity and environment are
involved in a person’s tendency to begin or not begin the use of
psychoactive drugs, such as alcohol, nicotine, and cannabis. The
extent to which each factor is important at various stages has
not, however, been well studied. In this research, Kendler and
his colleagues found that environmental factors, such as family
inﬂuences and peer pressure, were especially inﬂuential during
248
Resources

the early years of adolescence in leading (or not leading) one to
begin using psychoactive drugs, while genetics was a more
important factor in such decisions later in adolescence and in
early adulthood.
Kilpatrick, Dean G., et al. ‘‘Risk Factors for Adolescent Substance
Abuse and Dependence: Data from a National Sample.’’ Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 68 (1; February 2000): 19–30.
The authors of this article attempted to isolate factors which
predispose a person to become addicted to legal and/or illegal
substances, such as alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine. They found
that adolescents who witnessed or were involved in family
violence of almost any kind and those who had experienced some
other form of post-traumatic stress disorder were most inclined
to develop a dependence on ‘‘hard’’ drugs. This pattern was
signiﬁcantly less apparent among African Americans, but
not among Hispanics and Native Americans, than among
Caucasians.
King, Ryan S., and Marc Mauer. ‘‘The War on Marijuana: the
Transformation of the War on Drugs in the 1990s.’’ Harm Reduc-
tion Journal 3 (6; February 2006): 3–6.
The authors review U.S. policy and practices with regard to mari-
juana use in the 1990s and ﬁnd that 82 percent of the increase of
450,000 drug arrests made between 1900 and 2002 were for mari-
juana use, and, of that number, 79 percent were for possession
alone. They also found that an estimated $4 billion is spent annu-
ally for the arrest, prosecution, and incarceration of marijuana
offenders. They argue that the effort and expense devoted to the
control of marijuana could be more efﬁciently spent on other
types of drug enforcement.
Lubman, Dan I., et al. ‘‘Intervening Early to Reduce Developmen-
tally Harmful Substance Use among Youth Populations.’’ MJA
[Medical Journal of Australia] 187 (7 Suppl.; October 2007): S22–S25.
The authors discuss the growing risk of substance abuse and
addiction among adolescents and point out that a number of pol-
icies and practices are need to prevent at-risk individuals from
becoming involved in the use of legal and illegal substances early
in their lives.
Print
249

Nadelman, Ethan A., and Courtwright, David T. ‘‘Should We
Legalize Drugs? History Answers.’’ American Heritage 44 (1;
February/March 1993): 41–56.
Nadelman and Courtwright debate one of the oldest and most
fundamental questions in the ﬁeld of substance abuse: how and
to what extent would legalization of drugs affect this social prob-
lem? Although somewhat dated, the arguments presented on
both sides are still cogent and relevant to the present day.
Nighswonger, Todd. ‘‘Just Say Yes to Preventing Substance
Abuse.’’ Occupational Hazards 62 (April 2000): 39–42.
The author points out the importance of having a workforce that
is entirely drug-free to guarantee the safety and efﬁciency of busi-
ness operations. He recommends a ﬁve-part program for adop-
tion by a company.
Steiker, Lori K. Holleran. ‘‘Making Drug and Alcohol Prevention
Relevant: Adapting Evidence-based Curricula to Unique Ado-
lescent Cultures.’’ Family and Community Health 31 (1 Suppl.;
January/March 2008): S52–S60.
The author argues for drug prevention programs that are more
relevant to the real everyday lives of adolescents and that take into
consideration their cultural backgrounds. She describes experi-
mental programs that have been developed to achieve these aims,
and cites data that suggest that such programs are more effective
at preventing substance abuse among adolescents than other, more
traditional but less relevant programs.
Wittchen, H. U., et al. ‘‘What Are the High Risk Periods for Inci-
dent Substance Use and Transitions to Abuse and Dependence?
Implications for Early Intervention and Prevention.’’ Inter-
national Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 17 (Special
Issue 1; 2008): S16–S29.
This team of researchers attempted to discover the time period
during which individuals transitioned from ﬁrst exposure to a drug
to becoming addicted to that drug for a number of substances,
including alcohol, nicotine, cannabis, and other illicit drugs. They
found that, except for alcohol, that transition occurs quite rapidly
and, as a result, ‘‘the time windows for targeted intervention to pre-
vent progression to malignant patterns in adolescence are critically
250
Resources

small, leaving little time for targeted intervention to prevent
transition.’’
Reports
2008 Florida Youth Substance Abuse Survey. Tallahassee, FL: Exec-
utive Ofﬁce of the Governor. Florida Department of Education.
Florida Department of Children and Families. Florida Depart-
ment of Health. Florida Department of Juvenile Justice. Florida
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Association, Inc., December 2008.
Many cities, states, and regions conduct surveys and studies of
substance abuse issues in their own geographic region. This study
is included here as an example of such studies. The extensive report
deals with topics such as the survey methodology; ﬁndings on
alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use; other antisocial behaviors
(such as carrying a handgun or attempting to steal a vehicle);
risk and protective factors; special topics; and extensive tables
and charts.
Caulkins, Jonathan P., et al. How Goes the War on Drugs? An
Assessment of U.S. Drug Programs and Policy. Santa Monica,
CA: RAND Drug Policy Research Center, 2005.
For more than 15 years, the RAND Corporation has been study-
ing the U.S. ‘‘war on drugs.’’ This report is an effort to ‘‘stand
back’’ and take an overview of the progress (or lack of it) during
that period of time. The main topics considered in the report are
how effective the war on drugs has been thus far (the answer:
not very); why the ‘‘war’’ has not been more successful; what side
effects there have been from the ‘‘war’’; why there has been no
course correction in programs with such modest successes; and
an alternative view of how drug policy might evolve.
Epidemiological Trends in Drug Abuse. Bethesda, MD: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. National Institutes
of Health. Division of Epidemiology, Services and Prevention
Research. National Institute on Drug Abuse, January 2009.
The Community Epidemiology Work Group consists of 21 research-
ers from around the nation who meet on a regular basis to report on
and discuss problems of drug abuse in their respective regions. This
publication consists primarily of the reports of these researchers,
with additional input from experts in Canada and Mexico, and
Print
251

additional information from forensic laboratories and other sources
about characteristics of a number of illegal substances.
Morrall, Andrew R., et al. The Relative Effectiveness of 10 Adoles-
cent Substance Abuse Treatment Programs in the United States.
Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Corporation, 2006.
This report was prepared at the request of the Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Administration and other agencies to deter-
mine the effectiveness of various possible methods of treating
adolescent substance abusers in the United States, of whom
there are about 150,000 under the age of 18 each year. Research-
ers compared the effectiveness of three long-term care facilities,
four short-term facilities, and three outpatient programs. They
found relatively modest differences among the programs they
studied and considered some reasons for this possibly surpris-
ing result.
National Survey of American Attitudes on Substance Abuse XIV:
Teens and Parents. New York: National Center on Addiction and
Substance Abuse at Columbia University, August 2009.
The National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at
Columbia University conducts an annual survey to determine
attitudes of adolescents and their parents toward substance
abuse, with the goal of providing data that will allow teachers,
counselors, and other professionals concerned about substance
abuse to develop better programs for preventing the illegal use
of drugs among teenagers.
Results from the 2007 National Survey on Drug Use and Health:
National Findings. Washington, D.C.: Ofﬁce of Applied Studies,
Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services Administration,
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, September 2008.
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Admini-
stration annually conducts an exhaustive survey of the civilian,
noninstitutionalized population of the United States to gather
data on substance abuse in the United States. This report covers
data collected in 2007 through interviews with 67,500 individ-
uals. It contains information on virtually any topic in the ﬁeld
of substance abuse in the United States in which a person might
be interested.
252
Resources

Trends in Substance Use, Dependence or Abuse, and Treatment
among Adolescents: 2002 to 2007. Washington, D.C.: Ofﬁce of
Applied Studies, Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services
Administration, U.S. Department of Health & Human Services,
December 4, 2008.
This report is one of a series published as part of the National
Survey on Drug Use and Health. It summarizes trends in the use
of alcohol, cigarettes, and illicit drugs by adolescents in the
United States between 2002 and 2007.
Van Gundy, Karen. Substance Abuse in Rural and Small Town
America. Durham, NH: Carsey Institute, 2006.
This report is an effort to learn more about and report on the sta-
tus of substance abuse in rural areas and small towns of the
United States. It begins by reviewing and summarizing the results
of previous studies and reporting current trends nationally and
by state and region. It then discusses patterns of substance abuse
by various groups, such as age, sex, race, income, education, and
employment status. It then focuses on the special problem of
methamphetamine production and consumption in rural areas
and small towns before concluding with a number of recommen-
dations for dealing with substance abuse in such regions.
World Drug Report. Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations
Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime, 2007 (issued annually).
This report purports to review the state of drug use and control
throughout the world and is issued annually by the United Nations
Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime. The 2007 report, which runs 282 pages,
contains a vast amount of information on production, trafﬁcking,
and abuse of opium, cocaine, cannabis, and amphetamines.
This report is an invaluable resource for anyone interested in a
comprehensive overview of the status of illegal drugs throughout
the world.
Legal Substances
Books
AA Services. Alcoholics Anonymous: The Big Book, 4th ed.
Akron, OH: Alcoholics Anonymous, 2001.
Print
253

First published in 1939, the ‘‘Big Book’’ has long been regarded as
the gold standard of reference materials for alcoholics and recov-
ering alcoholics. It provides a fundamental introduction to the
problem of alcoholism, with special messages to the alcoholic
and his or her family, friends, neighbors, employers, and cowork-
ers. A key feature of the book has always been a number of per-
sonal success stories from men and women who have begun to
overcome the disorder and have moved from being alcoholic to
a recovering alcoholic.
Burroughs, Augusten. Dry: A Memoir. New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 2003.
Burroughs is author of the best-selling memoir, Running with Scis-
sors, describing his difﬁcult childhood. This follow-up book dis-
cusses the alcoholism into which he has descended, outlining
the day-to-day existence of an otherwise apparently successful
businessman.
Carr, Allen. The Easy Way to Stop Drinking. New York: Sterling
Publications, 2005.
This book is typical of a host of books currently available for alco-
holics, in which an author offers a seemingly simple and straight-
forward approach to overcoming the problem of alcoholism. The
system he recommends is called the Easyway method.
Colvin, Rod. Overcoming Prescription Drug Addiction: A Guide
to Coping and Understanding. Omaha, NE: Addicus Books, 2008.
Abuse of and addiction to legal prescription drugs is a topic that
is sometimes ignored in discussions of substance abuse. This
book considers principles and methods of coping with such
addictions, methods by which fraudulent prescriptions are
obtained, and legal methods that have been developed to monitor
and control the illegal use of prescription drugs.
Hester, Reid K., and William R. Miller. Handbook of Alcoholism
Treatment Approaches, 3rd ed. Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2002.
This scholarly work reviews a number of models that have been
developed to explain alcoholism and then chosen those strategies
which appear to have been most effective, based on those
models.
254
Resources

Jay, Jeff, and Debra Jay. Love First: A Family’s Guide to Interven-
tion, 2nd ed. Center City, MN: Hazelden, 2008.
Just as there are dozens of books aimed at helping alcoholics
overcome their addiction, so there are many books designed
to help family, friends, and colleagues to overcome their loved
one’s addiction. This book is an example of such books.
The authors recommend a host of procedures, including develop-
ing a plan, building a team, and writing an intervention letter,
seeking a treatment center as essential elements in a plan of
recovery.
Ketcham, Katherine, and William F. Asbury. Beyond the Inﬂuence:
Understanding and Defeating Alcoholism. New York: Bantam
Books, 2000.
The authors present the case for alcoholism as a ‘‘genetically
transmitted neurological disease’’ rather than a personality disor-
der or character ﬂaw. They suggest a program of recovery based
on this principle, drawing on the latest research available at the
time the book was written.
Mu¨ller, Richard, and Harald Klingemann, eds. From Science to
Action? 100 Years Later—Alcohol Policies Revisited. Dordrecht,
Netherlands; Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004.
This collection of essays focuses on alcohol policy in the states
of the European Union during the twentieth century. It was
issued to commemorate the hundredth anniversary of the
founding of the Swiss Institute for the Prevention of Alcohol and
Other Drug Problems. Papers in the collection deal with the
history of alcohol policy in Western Europe, policies and
practices in speciﬁc nations, and the ethics and politics of alcohol
policies.
Olson, Nancy. With a Lot of Help from Our Friends: The Politics
of Alcoholism. New York: Writers Club Press, 2003.
The author, a recovering alcoholic, served on the staff of Senator
Harold Hughes (D–IA), also a recovering alcoholic, with special
responsibility for alcohol-related problems. She wrote this book
at Senator Hughes’ suggestion, shortly before his death in 1996.
The book discusses the politics of alcohol-related issues in the
United States during the period between 1970 and 1980, one in
Print
255

which such issues were probably of greater concern than at any
time since Prohibition.
Plant, Martin, and Moira Plant. Binge Britain. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2006.
As the title suggests, this book focuses on current drinking
problems in Great Britain, but it also offers a broader perspective
on the history of alcohol-related issues over an extended period
of time. The authors also discuss current British policies on
drinking, and the possible direction of their evolution in the
future.
Rotskoff, Lori. Love on the Rocks: Men, Women, and Alcohol in
Post-World War II America. Chapel Hill: The University of
North Carolina Press, 2001.
The author presents a fascinating review and analysis of the role
of alcohol in the American family in the years following World
War II, with chapters on the growth of problem drinking among
returning war veterans, the growth of Alcoholics Anonymous as
a major service for dealing with alcoholism, the ‘‘dilemma of the
alcoholic marriage,’’ and alcoholism and consumerism in the
postwar period.
Royce, James E., and David Scratchley. Alcoholism and Other
Drug Problems. New York: The Free Press, 2002.
This book is an updated and revised version of Royce’s original
1996 work that focuses on the physiology, pharmacology, and
social aspects of addiction to alcohol and other drugs (although
the focus is on alcohol). Part 2 of the book deals with some spe-
cialized issues of alcohol addition, including its causality, its sta-
tus as a disease, and its effects on other family members and
other concerned individuals. Part 3 of the book focuses on pre-
vention and treatment of the condition.
Thoburn, Doug. Alcoholism Myths and Realities: Removing the
Stigma of Society’s Most Destructive Disease. Northridge, CA:
Galt Publishers, 2005.
The author attempts to dispel more than 100 myths about alcohol-
ism and help readers understand the true nature of the condition,
256
Resources

thereby allowing for a more informed and rational plan for recov-
ery for those troubled with the problem.
Tracy, Sarah W. Alcoholism in America: From Reconstruction to
Prohibition, rev. ed. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2007.
The author limits her story to the history of alcohol consumption
in the United States for the 50-year period between 1870
(the founding of the American Society for the Cure of Inebriates)
to 1920 (the beginning of Prohibition). She considers the story of
alcoholism at least in part as a personal and community issue,
but also on the much larger scale as a national social, economic,
political, and ethical issue.
Tracy, Sarah W., and Caroline Jean Acker, eds. Altering American
Consciousness: The History of Alcohol and Drug Use in the United
States, 1800–2000. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press,
2004.
This work is an extension of the ﬁrst editor’s original book on
alcoholism in the United States in the period of 1870–1920 (see
above), consisting of 14 papers dealing with the way alcoholism
in particular and drug addiction in general have been deﬁned
and treated over a period of two centuries.
Zernig, Gerald, et al., eds. Handbook of Alcoholism. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 2000.
This important standard reference on alcoholism deals with all
major aspects of the subject, including screening and diagnosis,
acute treatment, treatment of alcohol abuse and dependence,
treatment of non-psychiatric alcohol-related disorders, research,
and useful data and deﬁnitions.
Articles
Bailey, J. Elise, Elizabeth Campagna, and Richard C. Dart. ‘‘The
Underrecognized Toll of Prescription Opioid Abuse on Young
Children.’’ Annals of Emergency Medicine 53 (4; April 2009):
419–424.
The authors argue that the accidental poisoning of children by
prescription opioids is a poorly recognized and underreported
problem in the United States. Their research suggests that
Print
257

9,179 children in their study, conducted between January 2003
and June 2006, were exposed to such prescriptions, resulting in 8
deaths and 43 ‘‘major effects.’’ The drug most frequently respon-
sible for such accidents was naloxone, obtained from a parent
supply of the drug in more than 99 percent of all cases.
Blanke, D. Douglas, and Kerry Cork. ‘‘Exploring the Limits
of Smoking Regulation.’’ William Mitchell Law Review 34
(4; May 2008): 1587–1593.
This paper reviews a discussion held at the William Mitchell Law
School on October 23, 2007, with regard to recent regulation on
smoking in a number of venues. The question raised at this meet-
ing was whether and to what extent recent laws had ‘‘crossed the
line’’ in attempting to restrict the use of a legal product by the
general product. The meeting was sponsored by the Tobacco
Control Legal Consortium.
Blocker, Jack S. ‘‘Did Prohibition Really Work? Alcohol
Prohibition as a Public Health Innovation.’’ American Journal
of Public Health 96 (2; February 2006): 233–243.
The author presents a somewhat different view of the campaign
for Prohibition in the United States and its ultimate effects on
problems of alcoholism and on the population in general.
Culberson, John W., and Martin Ziska. ‘‘Prescription Drug
Misuse/Abuse in the Elderly.’’ Geriatrics 63 (9; September 2008):
22–31.
The authors review current evidence on the misuse of prescrip-
tion drugs by the elderly and ﬁnd that the rate of misuse may be
as high as 11 percent among this group. Major factors associated
with the abuse of prescription drugs among the elderly are gen-
der (elderly women are more likely to abuse prescription drugs
than men ), social isolation, depression, and history of substance
abuse.
Denisco, Richard A., Redonna K. Chandler, and Wilson M.
Compton. ‘‘Addressing the Intersecting Problems of Opioid
Misuse and Chronic Pain Treatment.’’ Experimental and Clinical
Psychopharmacology. 16 (5; October 2008): 417–428.
258
Resources

The authors note the signiﬁcant increase in the misuse of pre-
scription drugs over the past decade or so and attribute this
change to the conﬂuence of two factors: the increase in misuse
per capita in the United States and the increase in the number of
prescriptions being written for pain-relievers. The best available
evidence suggests that the latter factor may be the more impor-
tant of the two in the growth of this problem.
Ford, Jason A. ‘‘Nonmedical Prescription Drug Use Among
Adolescents: The Inﬂuence of Bonds to Family and School.’’
Youth and Society 40 (3; March 2009): 336–352.
Prescription drug abuse has now become the second most impor-
tant substance abuse problem among adolescents, following the
use of marijuana. The author explores this issue in some detail
and concludes from data in the 2005 National Survey on Drug
Use and Health that social bonds to the family is one of the
strongest indicators as to an adolescent’s tendency (or lack of it)
to misuse prescription drugs.
Herring, Rachel, Virginia Berridge, and Betsy Thom. ‘‘Binge
Drinking Today: Learning Lessons from the Past.’’ Drugs: Edu-
cation, Prevention, and Policy 15 (5; October 2008): 475–486.
The authors point out that binge drinking is a serious social prob-
lem in the United States, but that it is not a new problem. They
review the literature on binge drinking in the past and explore
possible lessons for the present epidemic of binge drinking.
Ibrahim, Jennifer K., and Stanton A. Glantz. ‘‘The Rise and Fall
of Tobacco Control Media Campaigns, 1967–2006.’’ American
Journal of Public Health 97 (8; August 2007): 1383–1396.
Research has shown that public media campaigns to limit smok-
ing have been very successful. The tobacco industry, however,
has contested these campaigns in a number of ways, by prevent-
ing their creation, limiting or eliminating their funding, con-
testing their content, or preventing their existence by legal
action. The authors have documented the existence of these
efforts and have pointed out their effectiveness in the continu-
ation of public media campaigns against smoking. They conclude
that ‘‘[t]obacco control advocates must learn from the past and
Print
259

continue to confront the tobacco industry and its third-party allies
to defend antitobacco media campaigns or, despite evidence of
their effectiveness, they will be eliminated.’’
McCabe, Sean Esteban, James A. Cranford, and Brady T. West.
‘‘Trends in Prescription Drug Abuse and Dependence,
Co-occurrence with Other Substance Use Disorders, and Treat-
ment Utilization: Results from Two National Surveys.’’ Addic-
tive Behaviors 33 (10; June 2008): 1297–1305.
The authors use data from two large national surveys, the 1991–
1992 National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic Survey and
the 2001–2002 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions to explore patterns of prescription drug abuse
and co-occurrence of such use with abuse of other substances
among adolescents. They conclude that further research is needed
in this ﬁeld, and that existing treatment services are not being suf-
ﬁciently used to help adolescents with co-occurrent dependence.
O¨ sterberg, Esa L., and Salme K. Ahlstro¨m. ‘‘International Per-
spectives on Adolescent and Young Adult Drinking.’’ Alcohol
Research and Health 28 (4; 2004/2005): 258–268.
The authors report on an extensive study of patterns of alcohol
consumption among adolescents and young adults in a number
of countries. They ﬁnd, not surprisingly, that patterns of behavior
and factors related to the use and abuse of alcohol vary widely
from nation to nation.
Spiller, Henry, et al. ‘‘Epidemiological Trends in Abuse and
Misuse of Prescription Opioids.’’ Journal of Addictive Diseases
28 (2): 130–136.
The authors explore a number of possible factors that may be cor-
related with increasing misuse of prescription drugs and ﬁnd that
two in particular are correlated with the problem: poverty and
unemployment. They suggest that their ﬁnding may assist in
directing limited funds for the treatment of substance abusers
who ﬁt these categories.
Stolberg, Victor B. ‘‘A Review of Perspectives on Alcohol and
Alcoholism in the History of American Health and Medicine.’’
Journal of Ethnicity in Substance Abuse 5 (4): 39–106.
260
Resources

The author provides an extended review of the way Americans
have viewed alcohol—in both positive and negative terms, as it
turns out—throughout the nation’s history. He pays special atten-
tion to the conﬂicted attitudes of the medical profession toward
alcohol and alcohol abuse.
‘‘Towards a Europe Free from Tobacco Smoke: Policy Options at
EU Level.’’ n.p.: European Commission, Health & Consumer
Protection Directorate-General, 2007.
The risks posed to public health of secondhand smoke are being
increasingly recognized in various European countries, many of
which have responded with legislation speciﬁc to their own situa-
tion. This Green Paper explores the possibility of developing a
European Union-wide policy built on scientiﬁc evidence regard-
ing the health risks of environmental smoke.
Wakeﬁeld, Melanie, et al. ‘‘Impact of Tobacco Control Policies
and Mass Media Campaigns on Monthly Adult Smoking Prev-
alence.’’American Journal of Public Health 98 (8; August 2008):
1443–1450.
The authors studied the effects of a variety of smoking cessation
initiatives for the period of 1995 to 2006. These initiatives
included increasing the price of cigarettes, media campaigns pro-
moting reduction in smoking, antismoking laws in public places,
and increased availability of nicotine replacement therapies. They
found that only the ﬁrst two initiatives were effective and con-
cluded that ‘‘[i]ncreases in the real price of cigarettes and tobacco
control mass media campaigns broadcast at sufﬁcient exposure
levels and at regular intervals are critical for reducing population
smoking prevalence.’’
Zajdow, Grazyna. ‘‘Alcoholism’s Unnatural History: Alcohol-
ism Is Not a ‘Health’ Issue, but One of Personal and Existential
Pain. Recognising this Would Force Us to Acknowledge One of
the Most Successful Methods of Dealing with Alcohol Addic-
tion.’’Arena 70 (April 2004): 41–43.
The author discusses the implications of thinking about alcohol
addiction as a health problem versus a very personal psychologi-
cal problem, and how these two different models have vastly dif-
ferent implications for treatment of the condition.
Print
261

Reports
Emergency Department Visits Involving Nonmedical Use of Selected
Pharmaceuticals. Washington, D.C.: Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration, July 2006; Revised June 2009.
This report is part of the SAMHSA’s Drug Abuse Warning
Network (DAWN) series on trends in the use of legal and illegal
substances in the United States. This report summarizes trends
in the reporting of nonmedical uses of prescription drugs as the
reason for emergency room visits in 2004, updated to 2008.
According to the report, there were 536,247 such visits in 2008,
of which the use of opiates and benzodiazepines were the most
common drugs mentioned, accounting for 32.2 percent and
26.8 percent of all visits respectively.
Prescription and Over-the-Counter Medications. Washington,
D.C.: National Institute on Drug Abuse, June 2009.
This report is a part of the National Institute on Drug Abuse’s
NIDA InfoFacts series. It provides a general overview of the issue
of prescription drug abuse, the drugs involved, current trends of
abuse among adolescents and adults, and methods for preventing
and treating the problem.
Teens and Prescription Drugs. Washington, D.C.: Ofﬁce of
National Drug Control Policy, February 2007.
This report provides a general overview of the problem of pre-
scription drug abuse by adolescents in the United States. It con-
siders issues such as prevalence and incidence of the problem,
availability and accessibility of prescription drugs to adolescents,
gender differences for the problem, type of drugs used by teen-
agers, and dependence and treatment programs.
Trends in Nonmedical Use of Prescription Pain Relievers: 2002 to
2007. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration. Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, February 5, 2009.
This report is part of the National Survey on Drug Use and
Health. It provides data and statistics on the trends in the non-
medical use of prescription drugs among the general population
and specialized groups in the United States.
262
Resources

Illegal Substances
Books
Brick, John, ed. Handbook of the Medical Consequences of Alcohol
and Drug Abuse, 2nd ed. New York: Haworth Medical Press,
2008.
This book is intended for professionals in the ﬁeld of substance
abuse, with detailed technical information on some major drugs
of abuse, including alcohol, marijuana, opiates, cocaine, and inha-
lants. The authors of individual chapters consider issues such as
the effects of these drugs on the nervous system, acute and
chronic toxic effects, direct and indirect medical effects, and
effects on pregnant women and the fetus.
Bulter, Carol A. 100 Interactive Activities for Mental Health and
Substance Abuse Recovery. Plainview, NY: Wellness Reproduc-
tions, 2001.
This spiral-bound activity book is designed to help recovering
addicts and abusers from ages eight and up to deal with issues
such as self-esteem, anger management, assertion, stress manage-
ment, and problem solving.
Conyers, Beverly. Addict in the Family: Stories of Loss, Hope,
and Recovery. Center City, MN: Hazelden, 2003.
The author, a mother of three, writes of her family’s experiences
in dealing with their youngest son, a heroin addict.
Dasqupta, Amitava. Drugs of Abuse Testing. Boston: Jones &
Barlett, 2009.
Drug testing has become an issue of some controversy in the
United States today. This book provides a general background to
the problems posed by substance abuse and the role of testing in
dealing with those issues. The author begins with a brief histori-
cal review of substance abuse in the United States and legal
efforts to deal with the problem, as well as the pharmacology of
major drugs. He then discusses the evolution of workplace drug
testing, legal issues related to the practice, methodologies of test-
ing protocols, and attempts by individuals to ‘‘beat’’ testing
practices.
Print
263

Dorsman, Jerry. How to Quit Drugs for Good: A Complete Self-
Help Guide. New York: Three Rivers Press, 1998.
The author outlines a method by which someone addicted to
drugs can develop his or her own program for withdrawal and
recovery. In the section on ‘‘Planning your own personal
approach to quitting,’’ he discusses methods for breaking a habit,
the importance of changes in diet, and ‘‘30 additional ways to
renew yourself.’’
Huggins, Laura E., ed. Drug War Deadlock: The Policy Battle
Continues. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 2005.
This book consists of six major sections, dealing with background
to the U.S. ‘‘war’’ over drug policy; philosophical and historical
bases for this conﬂict; perspectives of various individuals about
the status of the conﬂict; points of view about speciﬁc features of
the drug war; the special situation of marijuana; a review of the
situation in Europe and its signiﬁcance for American drug policy;
and a conclusion that includes a ‘‘blueprint for peace’’ that would
end the war over drugs.
Lookadoo, Justin. The Dirt on Drugs. Grand Rapids, MI: Revell:
Hungry Planet, 2005.
This book is intended for children and teenagers and takes an
aggressive approach to pointing out the serious problems associ-
ated with substance abuse. It focuses on 10 speciﬁc drugs and
drug groups, including alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, cocaine,
inhalants, and steroids.
McGinnis, Sheryl Letzgus, and Heiko Ganzer. I Am Your Disease:
The Many Faces of Addiction. Denver, CO: Outskirts Press, 2006.
This book is intended as a cautionary statement for teenagers who
are considering the abuse of drugs, or who are already involved in
such activities. The authors present a number of true-life stories
about children and adolescents, and their families, as they fact the
consequences of becoming addicted to one or another illegal drugs.
Robinson, Matthew B., and Renee G. Scherlen. Lies, Damned
Lies, and Drug War Statistics: A Critical Analysis of Claims
Made by the Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy. Albany:
State University of New York, 2007.
264
Resources

The White House Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP) annually issues a report reviewing national drug policy
and its effects on drug use in the United States. Robinson and
Scherlen review reports of the ONDCP for 2000 through 2005
and conclude that the agency consistently misrepresents the status
of substance abuse in the United States and on the government’s
ability to exert control over the problem. They suggest that
government programs have thus far had little or no effect on the
production and consumption of illegal drugs in the United States.
Salant, James. Leaving Dirty Jersey: A Crystal Meth Memoir.
New York: Simon Spotlight Entertainment, 2007.
The author writes of his efforts—and those of his parents—to free
himself from his crystal meth addiction, ﬁrst in a rehabilitation
center in California, and later, on his own on the streets. The book
does not present an academic, dispassionate analysis of the sub-
stance abuse problem in the United States, but it does give an
intense review of the problems faced by one individual drug addict.
Storm, Jennifer. Blackout Girl: Growing Up and Drying Out in
America. Center City, MN: Hazelden, 2008.
This memoir was written by a young woman who regularly expe-
rienced ‘‘blackouts’’ because of alcohol abuse beginning at the age
of 12, after which she moved on to other drugs. She was fortunate
to recover from her addictions and told of her history in this
moving book.
Toner, Patricia Rizzo. Substance Abuse Prevention Activities.
Just for the Health of It!, Unit 6. West Nyack, NY: Center for
Applied Research in Education, 1993.
This set of puzzles, worksheets, skits, and other activities is
designed for students in grades 7 through 12 who are dealing
with substance abuse issues, either in an academic setting or in
their own lives.
Vigna, Judith. My Big Sister Takes Drugs. Niles, IL: Albert
Whitman & Company, 1995.
This illustrated book is intended for children ages four through
eight and tells the story of a young boy who learns that his older
sister is taking drugs and reports her to his family. The daughter
Print
265

is then placed in a rehabilitation center, which has its own effects
on the life and relationships of the storyteller.
Articles
Bretteville-Jensen, Anne Line. ‘‘To Legalize or Not To Legalize?
Economic Approaches to the Decriminalization of Drugs.’’
Substance Use and Misuse 41 (4; April 2006): 555–565.
Discussion about decriminalizing the use of certain currently ille-
gal substances often focuses on ethical and social issues. In this
paper, the author considers the economic implications of legaliz-
ing drugs such as marijuana, cocaine, and heroin, the ﬁrst and
primary effect probably being a signiﬁcant decrease in prices.
In this event, the number of drug users may increase.
Committee on Substance Abuse and Committee on Adoles-
cence. ‘‘Policy Statement: Legalization of Marijuana: Potential
Impact on Youth.’’ Pediatrics 113 (6; June 2004): 1825–1826.
This brief report concludes with two recommendations. First, the
American Academy of Pediatrics opposes the legalization of
marijuana. Second, the organization supports further research
into the use of cannabis-containing products for the alleviation
of medical problems not amenable to treatment by other means.
Costa Dias, Andre´a, et al. ‘‘Follow-Up Study of Crack Cocaine
Users: Situation of the Patients After 2, 5, and 12 Years.’’ Sub-
stance Abuse 29 (3; August 2008): 71–79.
This study is of particular interest because it follows a cohort
of 131 crack cocaine users over a period of 12 years to determine
their status as drug users and their general health. Researchers
found that the largest group of individuals had become abstinent
and had been very successful in remaining so in succeeding
years. The death rate among the original sample, however, was
very high, amounting to 27 individuals at the 12-year point.
Researchers noted, however, that it was not drug use, but general
socioeconomic factors that were more likely to be responsible for
these mortalities.
Denton, J. Scott, et al. ‘‘An Epidemic of Illicit Fentanyl Deaths
in Cook County, Illinois: September 2005 through April 2007.’’
Journal of Forensic Sciences 53 (2; March 2008): 452–454.
266
Resources

Fentanyl is probably not one of the most widely known illegal
drugs to most individuals in the United States, but it has been
implicated in a number of serious cases of abuse resulting in
severe medical disorders and death in some cases. This article
describes an epidemic that struck Cook County, Illinois between
September 2005 and April 2007 and resulted in the death of 350
individuals. It discusses the forensic issues involved in tracing
the laboratory responsible for the epidemic and its ultimate
closure.
Fazey, Cindy. ‘‘International Policy on Illicit Drug Trafﬁcking:
the Formal and Informal Mechanisms.’’ Journal of Drug Issues 37
(4; September 2007): 755–779.
Over the last decade, a number of nations around the world have
developed new ofﬁcial, semi-ofﬁcial, and unofﬁcial policies and
practices for dealing with international trafﬁcking in illegal
drugs. The need for this change has arisen because of the prob-
lems in getting more formal agencies, such as those within the
United Nations, to adopt policies and practices that are accepted
to large numbers of states with differing viewpoints and objec-
tives. The author reviews some of the new policies and practices
being used to control the international ﬂow of illegal substances.
Hendricksen, Lisa, et al. ‘‘Receptivity to Alcohol Marketing
Predicts Initiation of Alcohol Use.’’ Journal of Adolescent Health
42 (1; January 2008): 28–35.
One of the methods commonly recommended for reducing the
tendency of children and adolescents to begin drinking and
smoking is limiting or eliminating advertising on television, in
newspapers and magazines, and in other media. Hendricksen
and her colleagues asked whether research supported the notion
that such efforts do have measurable effects on an individual’s
tendency to begin drinking. They found that it did, and suggested
that limitations on advertising could help reduce the number of
adolescents who begin drinking alcohol.
Khatapoush, Shereen, and Denise Hallfors. ‘‘Sending the Wrong
Message’’: Did Medical Marijuana Legalization in California
Change Attitudes about and Use of Marijuana?’’ Journal of Drug
Issues 34 (4; October 2004): 751–770.
Print
267

Some critics of the legalization of marijuana use for medical pur-
poses proposed by California’s Proposition 215 in 1996 argued
that passage of the proposition would increase the use of mari-
juana in the general public. The authors of this study test that
argument by surveying a sample of California residents before
and after the vote on the proposition (which passed) and ﬁnd that
its enactment appears to have had no measurable effect on mari-
juana use among the general public.
Kritikos, P. G., and S. P. Papadaki. ‘‘The History of the Poppy
and of Opium and Their Expansion in Antiquity in the Eastern
Mediterranean Area.’’ Bulletin on Narcotics 19 (3; 1967): 17–38.
This article provides a detailed history of the use of opium from
the earliest known times (about 3500 BCE) to the ﬁrst century CE.
It is nicely illustrated with a number of depictions of the way the
poppy and opium were included in the arts and crafts of ancient
peoples. The article originally appeared in Greek in the Journal of
the Archœological Society of Athens, but was later reprinted in the
UN Bulletin on Narcotics. It is also available on the Internet in
English at http://www.poppies.org/news/99502023966018
.shtml#bf127.
Maag, Verena. ‘‘Decriminalisation of Cannabis Use in Switzerland
from an International Perspective: European, American and
Australian Experiences.’’ International Journal of Drug Policy 14
(3; June 2003): 279–281.
The Swiss government commissioned a study of the possible
effects of decriminalizing marijuana use, using as its basis three
national studies previously conducted in the United States,
Australia, and Italy. Those studies found no consistent relation-
ship between government policy and marijuana use, but that
legalization does have some measurable and positive beneﬁts to
the general society in terms of reduced law enforcement costs
and negative effects on those arrested for the crime.
McNeese, C. Aaron. ‘‘After the War on Drugs Is Over: Implica-
tions for Social Work Education.’’ Journal of Social Work Educa-
tion 39 (2; Summer–Spring 2003): 193–212.
The author considers a proposal for ‘‘a free market for drugs
unfettered by government intervention’’ and considers the impact
268
Resources

such a program would have for the harm currently produced by
government policies on drug users. He suggests that such a
change would have signiﬁcant implications for social policy and
practice.
Rasmussen, Nicolas. ‘‘America’s First Amphetamine Epidemic
1929–1971: A Quantitative and Qualitative Retrospective with
Implications for the Present.’’ American Journal of Public Health
98 (6; June 2008): 974–985.
The author reviews an amphetamine epidemic that swept the
United States in the 1940s through the 1960s and concludes that
current amphetamine abuse patterns are similar to those of the
earlier period. He suggests that lessons can be learned about the
control of the present-day epidemic from the earlier experience.
Reports
Bachman, Jerald G., Lloyd D. Johnston, and Patrick M. O’Malley.
Monitoring the Future: Questionnaire Responses from the Nation’s
High School Seniors. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan
Institute for Social Research, Survey Research Center, 2008.
Since 1975, the Survey Research Center at the University of
Michigan has been conducting an annual survey of practices of
and attitudes about substance abuse among seniors at about
130 selected high schools throughout the United States. This
volume is the latest in that series, which provides an invaluable
overview of changing opinions about drug use among high
school students in the country. With more than 200 pages of data,
these reports are arguably the most complete picture available of
the status of substance abuse among American teenagers
currently available.
Club Drugs—2002 Update. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration. Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, July 2004.
This report is part of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration’s Drug Abuse Warning Network Series.
It summarizes the status of so-called ‘‘club drugs’’ in the United
States, a term that includes (for this report) GHB (gamma-
hydroxy-butyrate), ketamine, LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide),
and MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphetamine, also known as
Print
269

Ecstasy). The report notes that the four drugs together accounted
for about 8,100 emergency room visits in 2002, about one percent
of the total number of visits for all forms of legal and illegal drug
abuse.
Heroin and Other Opiate Admissions to Substance Abuse Treat-
ment. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Admini-
stration. Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, August 27, 2009.
This report is part of the Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS)
series of the Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, which assesses the current
status of various legal and illegal substances monitored by the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
The report notes that heroin is by far the opiate most likely to be
responsible for hospital admissions, accounting for about one-
ﬁfth of all substance abuse admissions in 2007.
The Partnership Attitude Tracking Study (PATS). New York: Part-
nership for a Drug-Free America, May 16, 2006.
Since 1987, the Partnership for a Drug-Free America has been con-
ducting annual surveys about attitudes of adolescents and their
parents about the use of a variety of legal and illegal substances,
ranging from tobacco and cough medicine to ketamine and crack
cocaine. In the latest study, data suggest that the use of drugs by
teenagers has continued to decline in the country for all drugs
except prescription medicines and inhalants. The most common
reason for adolescents’ use of prescription drugs was that they
are readily available from medicine cabinets at home and from
other sources, they are not illegal, and they are easy to get by
using someone else’s prescription.
Robinson, Jeffrey. Who’s Really in Prison for Marijuana?
Washington, D.C.: Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy, 2005.
This report was issued by the Ofﬁce for National Drug Control
Policy in response to claims from supporters of the legalization
of marijuana that U.S. prisons are ﬁlled with individuals con-
victed of minor drug offenses, such as possession of small
amounts of marijuana. The report concludes that ‘‘the vast major-
ity of drug prisoners are violent criminals, repeat offenders, traf-
ﬁckers, or all of the above.’’
270
Resources

Senate Special Committee on Illegal Drugs. Cannabis: Our
Position for a Canadian Public Policy. Ottawa, September 2002.
The Special Committee on Illegal Drugs of the Canadian Senate
conducted an extensive study of the problem of cannabis use in
the nation, whose results are summarized in this report. The com-
mittee concluded the government’s existing policies and practices
with regard to cannabis use have been an expensive failure and
that drastic revisions in those policies and practices were needed.
Speciﬁcally, they recommend the development of a system by
which individuals over the age of 16 would be able to procure
legally small amounts of marijuana for personal use through
licensed facilities. The report concludes with 11 recommendations
for changing the fundamental approach to dealing with cannabis
in the nation.
Nonprint
Web Sites
Literally hundreds of Web sites provide information, advice, and/
or opinions about substance abuse. Some of these sites are main-
tained by governmental agencies or private organizations that are
well known and highly respected. Other sites bear no mention of
their sponsors or are operated by individuals or groups about
whom little information is available. Users are cautioned to conﬁrm
the legitimacy of sites for which sponsorship is unlisted or ques-
tionable. The list below provides a sample of some of the many
apparently reliable resources available on the Internet.
AddictionSearch.com. ‘‘Welcome to AddictionSearch.com.’’
http://addictionsearch.com. Accessed on August 30, 2009.
This Web site is operated by a group of private professionals
with background in substance abuse and interest in providing
assistance to those faced with related problems. The site con-
tains general information on addictions, statistics on adult and
adolescent substance abuse, special information on speciﬁc
topics (age, sex, ethnicity, etc.), treatment methods, articles on
various aspects of substance abuse, treatment centers, preven-
tion methods, social issues, and organizations interested in sub-
stance abuse.
Nonprint
271

Borio, Gene. ‘‘The Tobacco Timeline.’’ http://www.tobacco.org/
History/Tobacco_History.html. Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This outstanding review of the history of the use and regulation
of tobacco products begins in the prehistory era and continues
through 2007. It is a superb review of the role of tobacco in human
society.
Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids. ‘‘Smoking and Other Drug
Use.’’ http://www.tobaccofreekids.org/research/factsheets/pdf/
0106.pdf. Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This brief leaﬂet outlines the association between smoking and
other types of drug use, abuse, and addiction.
Canadian Institute of Neurosciences. ‘‘The Brain from Top to
Bottom.’’ http://thebrain.mcgill.ca/ﬂash/index_i.html. Accessed
on September 17, 2009.
This Web site is one of the best sources of information on the
mechanisms by which drugs produce their effects on the brain.
The site is an interactive page that allows users to see precisely
the events that occur in the central nervous system with and with-
out the presence of drugs.
Christie, Alice, Ph.D. ‘‘EMC 675 Class Web Quest: Substance
Abuse.’’ http://www.west.asu.edu/achristie/675wq2.html.
Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This online learning activity presents an interesting and useful
way for students to think through the issues involved in sub-
stance abuse, with an excellent (if somewhat outdated) list of
links to web pages with more information on the topic.
Clinco Communications, Inc. Addiction Treatment Forum. http://
www.atforum.com/index.php. Accessed on August 30, 2009.
This Web site is by Clinco Communications, Inc., an independent
medical communications agency, and is supported by a grant
from the Covidien Mallinckrodt company of St. Louis, Missouri.
It provides a variety of sources of information, including a quar-
terly newsletter, Addiction Treatment Forum; news and updates;
links to a number of resources with information on substance
abuse; special information on methadone (manufactured by
272
Resources

Covidien Mallinckrodt); frequently asked questions about sub-
stance abuse; patient brochures on a number of topics, available
for downloading from the Web site; a list of conferences, meet-
ings, and other events; and a locator for methadone clinics.
DMOZ Open Directory Project. ‘‘Substance Abuse.’’ http://www
.dmoz.org/Health/Addictions/Substance_Abuse/. Accessed on
August 31, 2009.
The Open Directory Project describes itself as ‘‘the largest, most
comprehensive human-edited directory of the Web.’’ On the
‘‘Substance Abuse’’ page, it lists 2,300 links to Web pages with
information about this topic, subdivided into categories such as
alcohol, centers and counseling services, drugs, support groups,
tobacco, books, organizations, prevention, resources, treatment,
and methadone maintenance.
eMedicineHealth.com. ‘‘Substance Abuse.’’ http://www.emedi
cinehealth.com/substance_abuse/article_em.htm. Accessed on
August 30, 2009.
This excellent health resource provides a broad and accurate
review of the general topic of substance abuse with links to many
specialized topics, including speciﬁc drugs, health disorders,
medical terms, and links to other organizations.
Film Ideas. ‘‘Smoking and Substance Abuse.’’ http://www
.ﬁlmideas.com/substance.html. Accessed on August 30, 2009.
Film Ideas is a private company that develops ﬁlms for educational
institutions, libraries, and other non-theatrical settings on a number
of topics of interest, substance abuse being one of them. This Web
site contains brief descriptions of the ﬁlms available on this topic.
Focus Adolescent Services. ‘‘Drug and Teen Substance Abuse.’’
http://www.focusas.com/SubstanceAbuse.html. Accessed on
August 30, 2009.
This Web site claims to be the ‘‘largest and most comprehensive
Internet site of information and resources on teen and family
issues.’’ It provides online information on a number of important
features of substance abuse, including drugs that teens abuse,
warning signs, drug treatment and recovery, counseling and
therapy, and self-help and support groups.
Nonprint
273

Healthﬁnder.gov. ‘‘Substance Abuse.’’ http://www.healthﬁnder
.gov/scripts/SearchContext.asp?topic=827&reﬁne=1. Accessed
on August 31, 2009.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services maintains
this superb Web site, which summarizes government publications
and Web sites on a host of health topics. The ‘‘Substance Abuse’’
page lists advisories, alerts, and bulletins; databases; decision
support tools; disease management; educational games;
frequently asked questions; general information; grants; media
campaigns; newsletters; online checkups; policies; practice guide-
lines; quick tips; regulations; research; risk factors; self-help;
statistics; support groups; and treatments and procedures.
HelpGuide.org. ‘‘Abuse and Addictions.’’ http://www.helpguide
.org/mental/drug_substance_abuse_addiction_signs_effects
_treatment.htm. Accessed on August 31, 2009.
HelpGuide is a privately operated Web site designed to help
people understand, prevent, and resolve ‘‘life’s challenges,’’
which include issues such as anxiety, bipolar disorder, eating
disorders, grief and loss, as well as drug and alcohol abuse.
The section on the last of these topics includes information on
alcoholism and alcohol abuse and treatment, drug abuse and
drug addiction and treatment, and substance abuse and mental
health.
Maxwell, Jane Carlisle. ‘‘Trends in the Abuse of Prescription
Drugs.’’ http://www.utexas.edu/research/cswr/gcattc/documents/
PrescriptionTrends_Web.pdf. Accessed on August 28, 2009.
This excellent article reviews 10 of the most recent studies on
the illegal use of prescription drugs and concludes with some
general observation about the extent and seriousness of the
problem.
Medline Plus. ‘‘Pregnancy and Substance Abuse.’’ http://
www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/pregnancyandsubstanceabuse
.html. Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This Medline page focuses on one important aspect of substance
abuse, the health effects it may have on pregnant women and
the fetuses they are carrying.
274
Resources

Medline Plus. ‘‘Substance Abuse Problems.’’ http://www.nlm
.nih.gov/medlineplus/substanceabuseproblems.html. Accessed
on August 30, 2009.
This Web page is a service of the U.S. National Library of Medi-
cine and the National Institutes of Health. It provides an index
to more than 50 topics in the general area of substance abuse, such
as alcohol, anabolic steroids, cocaine, drug abuse, inhalants, mari-
juana, methamphetamine, prescription drug abuse, and prescrip-
tion drug abuse. The page is also available directly from the
National Institutes of Health at ‘‘Substance Abuse,’’ http://health
.nih.gov/category/SubstanceAbuse.
MentalHelp. net. ‘‘Addictions: Alcohol and Substance Abuse.’’
http://www.mentalhelp.net/poc/view_doc.php?type=doc&id
=28899&w=5&cn=14. Accessed on August 30, 2009.
This Web site, maintained by Dr. Allan Scwartz, contains more
than two dozen articles on a number of drug- and alcohol-
related issues, such as introduction to alcohol and substance
abuse, important diagnostic concepts regarding alcohol and sub-
stance abuse, abused drug categories, central nervous system
stimulants, opiates, cannabinols, hallucinogens, solvents, symp-
toms of alcohol or substance abuse, alcohol and substance abuse
treatment overview, medications for alcohol and substance abuse
symptom and relapse reduction, and psychotherapy overview for
alcohol and substance abuse.
National Clearing House for Alcohol and Drug Information.
‘‘Straight Facts about Drugs and Alcohol.’’ http://ncadi.samhsa
.gov/govpubs/rpo884/. Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This audio program provides extensive information on the problem
of substance abuse in general, along with detailed information about
the abuse of a number of speciﬁc drugs, including marijuana, meth-
amphetamine, cocaine, alcohol, and cigarette smoking.
National Inhalant Prevention Coalition. ‘‘Frequently Asked Ques-
tions.’’ http://www.inhalants.org/. Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This Web site is an excellent source of information on all aspects
of the abuse of inhalants, with sections on general information
on inhalants, frequently asked questions about inhalants, the
Inhalant Prevention Campaign, and news about inhalant abuse.
Nonprint
275

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. ‘‘FAQs
for the Public.’’ http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/FAQs/General
-English/default.htm. Accessed on August 31, 2009.
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism offers
this web page with answers to frequently asked questions about
alcoholism and alcohol abuse, such as ‘‘Is alcoholism a disease?’’,
‘‘Is alcoholism inherited?’’, ‘‘Can alcoholism be cured?’’, ‘‘What
medications treat alcoholism?’’, ‘‘Is alcohol good for your heart?’’,
and ‘‘Is it safe to drink during pregnancy?’’.
New York Times. ‘‘Drug Abuse.’’ http://health.nytimes.com/
health/guides/specialtopic/drug-abuse/overview.html. Accessed
on August 30, 2009.
As part of its online Health Guide, The New York Times offers a col-
lection of articles it has published on a variety of substance abuse
topics, such as alternative names of drugs; marijuana; phencycli-
dine; hallucinogens; stimulants; amphetamines; inhalants; opi-
ates, opioids, and narcotics; stages of juvenile drug use; and
treatment overview.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, U.S. Department
of Labor. ‘‘Workplace Substance Abuse.’’ http://www.osha.gov/
SLTC/substanceabuse/index.html. Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This web page deals with the special issues of substance abuse in
the workplace and deals with questions such as OSHA standards
that apply; materials available for the training of supervisors and
workers; relevant state and federal laws about substance abuse in
the workplace; and basic information about substance abuse, pre-
vention, and treatment.
‘‘Pathology of Drug Abuse.’’ http://library.med.utah.edu/
WebPath/TUTORIAL/DRUG/DRUG.html.AccessedonAugust31,
2009.
This tutorial from the University of Utah Medical School contains
many photographs of the effects of tobacco, alcohol, and other
drugs on the human body.
PreventionNet. ‘‘Prevention Highlights.’’ http://www.preventionnet
.com/. Accessed on November 15, 2009.
276
Resources

PreventionNet is a program supported by a grant from the
National Institute on Drug Abuse for disseminating information
about drug abuse prevention programs that have been found to
work. Currently, the it includes 11 programs in its database,
including Life Skills Training, Project Star, Seattle Social Develop-
ment Project, Project Family, Focus on Family, and Adolescent
Transitions Program. The Web site also provides links to research
centers, professional organizations, prevention Web sites and
newsletters, and print resources.
Project CORK. http://www.projectcork.org/database_search/.
Accessed on August 29, 2009.
Project CORK was founded at the Dartmouth Medical School in
1977 through a grant from Operation Cork, an arm of the Kroc
Foundation. The purpose of the project is to provide up-to-date
information on a host of drug-related issues for users of the
Internet. The project’s database currently contains more than
90,000 items in a searchable format on its Web site. It is very
user-friendly, with an extensive listing of more than 200 topics that
are continually updated.
Schaffer Library of Drug Policy. http://www.druglibrary.org/
schaffer/. Accessed on September 2, 2009.
The documents in this web page originally appeared in an exhibit
at the Pelletier Library of Allegheny College, Pennsylvania, from
October 15, 1999 through March 1, 2000. They deal with virtually
every issue related to the use and abuse of all kinds of drugs.
It may well be the largest single source of articles of substance
abuse available to the general public.
School Mental Health Project, University of California at Los
Angeles Department of Psychology. ‘‘Substance Abuse.’’ http://
smhp.psych.ucla.edu/pdfdocs/Substance/substance.pdf.
Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This ‘‘tool kit’’ is designed for use by professionals for use in staff
training and for student/family interventions. It includes basic
fact sheets on substance abuse; a guide to assessment tools; infor-
mation on prevention; treatment strategies; and print, electronic,
and organizations resources.
Nonprint
277

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
‘‘SAMHSA Health Information Network (SHIN).’’ http://www
.samhsa.gov/shin/moreaboutshin.aspx. Accessed on August 30,
2009.
This Web site combines the services of two information sources,
the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information
(NCADI) and the National Mental Health Information Center
(NMHIC). It provides four types of services to the general public:
(1) a contact center that operates 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to
provide information on substance abuse and mental health in
English and Spanish by trained professionals in the ﬁeld, (2) access
to more than 1,600 publications on substance abuse and mental
health issues, (3) access via the Web site and email that typically
draws about 1.5 million contacts per month, and (4) outreach and
collaboration resources for conferences, exhibits, meetings, and
other events related to substance abuse and mental health.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
‘‘Substance Abuse Treatment Facility Locator.’’ http://dasis3
.samhsa.gov/. Accessed on August 30, 2009.
This web page is a service of the U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration. It provides a list of facilities avail-
able for treatment of substance abuse problems in all 50 states.
teAchnology. ‘‘Substance Abuse Teaching Plans.’’ http://www
.teach-nology.com/teachers/lesson_plans/health/substance/.
Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This Web site provides access to a number of lesson plans for
teaching about substance abuse at almost all levels. Some topics
are ‘‘Drugs and Alcohol,’’ ‘‘Safe Use of Medicine,’’ ‘‘Steroids and
the Body,’’ ‘‘Tendon Damage from Steroids,’’ and ‘‘Just Say No.’’
TeenDrugAbuse. ‘‘Teen Drug Abuse.’’ http://www.teendrugabuse
.us/index.html. Accessed on August 30, 2009.
The TeenDrugAbuse Web site is sponsored by Teen Help, LLC, to
spread information about drug abuse among adolescents in the
United States. This Web site offers a general overview of the prob-
lem, a review of the relationship between drug abuse and school,
and between drug abuse and the family. Resources for dealing
with substance abuse and addiction are also provided.
278
Resources

TeensHealth. ‘‘Drugs and Alcohol.’’ http://kidshealth.org/teen/
drug_alcohol/. Accessed on August 31, 2009.
This presentation is decided for teenagers and covers basic infor-
mation on smoking, alcohol use, and drug abuse, along with a
section on getting help for an addiction.
Wired In. Daily Dose.net. http://dailydose.net. Accessed on
August 30, 2009.
Daily Dose was created in January 2001 by the parent Web site
Wired In which, in turn, was established to empower people to
deal with their drug and alcohol abuse problems. Daily Dose pro-
vides access to news, research studies and results, blogs, pod-
casts, ﬁlms, and audio resources on substance abuse issues. The
site also has links to more than 150 other Internet resources with
interests similar to its own.
World Health Organization. ‘‘Management of Substance Abuse.’’
http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/en/. Accessed on August 30,
2009.
The World Health Organization (WHO) is a division of the United
Nations, with responsibility for collecting information about sub-
stance abuse in nations around the world and to provide informa-
tion to individuals and groups wishing to know more about
this issue. WHO has three primary responsibilities in this ﬁeld:
(1) preventing and reducing the negative health and social conse-
quences of substance abuse, (2) reducing the demand for non-
medical uses of psychoactive substances, and (3) assessing
psychoactive substances so as to be able to advise the United
Nations on regulation of these substances. This Web site includes
a list of current WHO programs related to substance abuse, termi-
nology and classiﬁcation used in discussions of substance abuse,
facts and ﬁgures, publications, latest research results, and links
to other sites dealing with substance abuse.
Nonprint
279

This page intentionally left blank

Glossary
Discussions of substance abuse often involve terminology which
is unfamiliar to the average person. In some cases, the terms used
are scientiﬁc or medical expressions used most commonly by pro-
fessionals in the ﬁeld. In other cases, the terms may be part of the
so-called ‘‘street slang’’ that users themselves employ in talking
about the drugs they consume, the paraphernalia associated with
drugs, or the kind of experiences that accompany drug use. This
chapter lists and deﬁnes some of the most common terms from
each group.
addiction
A long-lasting and typically recurring psychological and/or
physiological need for one or more substances, such as alcohol or
tobacco, that generally results in permanent or long-lasting changes in
the neurochemistry of the brain.
alcohol
In discussions of substance abuse, a term that refers to the
chemical’s correct chemical name is ethanol or ethyl alcohol. In chemis-
try, the term has a different and more general meaning, referring to a
class of organic compounds that contains the hydroxyl functional
group, –OH.
alcoholism
Physical dependence on alcohol such that discontinuing
the use of alcohol results in withdrawal symptoms. Alcoholism is typi-
cally accompanied by the development of social and/or health problems
serious enough to require professional help.
alkaloid
A naturally occurring organic compound containing one or
more basic nitrogen atoms found in plants often displaying medicinal
properties.
analgesic
A drug capable of relieving pain.
analog
(also analogue) A chemical compound similar in structure to
some other chemical compound.
anorectic
A substance that reduces the appetite.
281

antidepressant
A drug that reduces or moderates depression, resulting
in an elevation in one’s mood.
antitussive
A cough suppressant.
ataxia
Loss of control of muscular movement, manifested in an
unsteady gait, unsteady movements, and clumsiness; a common symp-
tom of mild drug overdose.
BAC
Acronym for blood alcohol content or blood alcohol concentration, a
measure of the amount of alcohol present in a person’s body, usually rep-
resented as percent content or percent concentration, as 0.08 (i.e., 0.08%).
barbiturate
A substance derived from the chemical barbituric acid
(C4H4N2O3). Some examples of barbiturates are barbital (Veronal®),
phenobarbital (Luminal®), pentobarbital (Nembutal®), and sodium
pentothal.
bhang
A concoction or infusion made with leaves and ﬂowers from the
hemp plant, widely used on the Indian subcontinent as a recreational
drug and as a drug for religious and ceremonial purposes.
binge drinking
Excessive consumption of alcohol over a relatively
brief period of time, which typically results in nausea, vomiting, loss of
control over one’s bodily functions and, in extreme cases, more serious
symptoms, such as coma and death.
blackout
Loss of memory about a particular event, such as the taking of
a drug or overconsumption of alcohol.
bronchodilator
A drug that relaxes and dilates the bronchial passages,
allowing for easier breathing.
caffeine
A mildly addictive alkaloid stimulant found in coffee, tea, kola
nuts, and many synthetic beverages, such as soda drinks.
cannabinoid
Any one of the substances found in the cannabis plant,
Cannibis sativa, or, more generally, that has a chemical structure similar
to that of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or that binds to cannabinoid
receptors in the body.
cannabis
The botanical name for the plant from which marijuana
comes. Its correct botanical name is Cannibis sativa.
chemical dependence
A condition that develops when one’s body
undergoes changes that result in a continual physiological need for a par-
ticular drug or other substance.
cirrhosis
A medical condition in which normal tissue in the liver is
replaced by scar tissue; the most serious consequence of alcoholism or
alcohol abuse.
club drug
See designer drug.
cocaine
A powerful stimulant extracted from the leaves of the coca
plant (Erythroxylon coca).
282
Glossary

codeine
An addictive alkaloid narcotic derived from opium, used a and
antitussive and analgesic, and also abused as a recreational drug.
codependency
A relationship in which a non-substance abuser is con-
trolled by the behavior of a second person who is a substance abuser,
generally resulting in devastating consequences for both members of
the partnership.
controlled substance analog
See designer drug, deﬁnition 2.
crack
A highly addictive form of cocaine, made by mixing cocaine with
baking soda and water.
cross-addiction
Addiction to two substances belonging to different
classes, such as alcohol and cocaine.
delirium
A medical condition characterized by severe confusion; rapid
changes in brain function; rambling or incoherent speech; sensory mis-
perceptions; sleep disruption; drowsiness; memory loss; and disorienta-
tion with respect to time, place, or persons.
delirium tremens
A medical condition associated with withdrawal of
alcohol among chronic alcoholics, characterized by uncontrollable trembling,
hallucinations, severe anxiety, excessive sweating, and feelings of terror.
dependence
A condition in which an individual develops a ﬁxation on
or craving for a drug that is not necessarily so severe as to be classiﬁed as
an addiction but that may, nonetheless, require professional help to
overcome.
designer drug
(1) A synthetic chemical compound developed for the
treatment of a speciﬁc disease or group of diseases; (2) A psychoactive
chemical deliberately synthesized to avoid antidrug laws that mimics
the effects of a banned drug. Also known as a controlled substance ana-
log, club drug, or rave drug.
dissociative drug
A substance that produces feelings of analgesia, dis-
connection, and alienation.
drug
A chemical used in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or
prevention of disease or to bring about an alternation in one’s mental or
emotional state.
dysphoria
A condition of unusually severe depression and/or anxiety,
mental and/or physical discomfort, and general malaise.
ecstasy
A street name for 3-4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine (also
known as Adam or MDMA).
empathogen
A drug capable of producing strong emotional features,
such as emotional closeness, love, and affection. The term entactogen has
been suggested as a synonym for the word.
enabling
The act of supporting or contributing to the destructive
behavior of a substance abuser, sometimes based on the enabler’s best
intentions of helping that person.
Glossary
283

endogenous
Produced naturally within the body.
entactogen
See emphathogen.
ﬂashback
Recurring emotional or sensory experiences that take
place independently, and often at much later times, than an initial experi-
ence which, in the case of drugs, was the occasion of having consumed
those drugs.
freebasing
A method of consuming cocaine by mixing it with ether so
that it can be smoked.
hallucinogen
A drug that causes profound distortions in a person’s
perceptions of reality, causing an individual to see images, hear sounds,
and feel sensations that seem real but do not exist.
heroin
An analgesic drug derived from morphine, also known as diacetyl-
morphine, with legitimate medical use as a painkiller, but whose recreational
use may result in feelings of extreme euphoria that can become addictive.
inhalant
A substance of low volatility, such that it can be easily
absorbed through the respiratory system.
intervention
An event in which a group of individuals confront an
alcoholic or a substance abuser with the demand for speciﬁc action by
that person to begin dealing with his or her addiction.
laudanum
A tincture of opium, that is, opium powder dissolved in alcohol.
LSD
See lysergic acid diethylamine.
lysergic acid diethylamine
A semisynthetic chemical compound with
very strong hallucinogenic effects, often known by its common names
of LSD or acid.
mainlining
Taking a drug by injection into a vein.
MAOI
Acronym for monamine oxidase inhibitor, a class of drugs used to treat
cases of severe depression, insomnia, panic attack, and anxiety because they
provide a sense of well-being and euphoria. They are often used as drugs of
last resort, however, because of serious interactions with a number of foods
and, for that reason, pose a special risk when used as recreational drugs.
methamphetamine
A highly addictive psychoactive drug belonging to
the family of phenylethylamines, easily made by amateur chemists,
and known by a variety of common names, depending in part on the
form in which it is consumed, as ‘‘chalk,’’ ‘‘crank,’’ ‘‘crystal,’’ ‘‘ice,’’
glass,’’ ‘‘meth,’’ and ‘‘speed.’’
narcotic
Any drug that, in small doses, produces insensitivity to pain,
dulls the senses, and induces deep sleep, but in larger doses may result
in numbness, convulsions, and coma.
neuron
A nerve cell.
neurotransmitter
A chemical that carries a nerve impulse between two
neurons.
284
Glossary

nicotine
A very addictive alkaloid compound that occurs naturally in
plants belonging to the genus Solanaceae, which includes the tobacco
plant, of which it constitutes about 0.6–3.0 percent by dry weight.
oneirogen
A
substance
that
produces
a
dreamlike
state
of
consciousness.
opiate
Any drug or other substance derived from or chemically related
to opium.
opiate receptor
Specialized receptor cells in neurons that bind to natu-
ral analgesic molecules present in the body.
opium
An addictive narcotic extracted from the seeds of the opium
poppy, Papaver somniferum.
OTC drug
See over-the-counter drug.
over-the-counter drug
A drug that can be purchased without a
prescription.
overdose
(verb) To take an excessive, risky, and potentially fatal quan-
tity of a harmful substance.
paranoia
A psychological disorder characterized by delusions of per-
secution or grandeur.
pharmacopoeia
A catalog of drugs, chemicals, and medicinal
preparations.
phenylethylamines
A class of drugs whose members contain three
functional groups—the phenyl group (–C6H5), ethyl group (–C2H5), and
amine group (–NH2)—that form the basis of a very large number of natu-
ral and synthetic compounds with a variety of psychotropic effects.
Drugs in this class may act as anorectics, antidepressants, bronchodila-
tors, entactogens, hallucinogens, or stimulants.
precursor chemical
A chemical used to make some other substance, for
example, the raw materials used to make illicit drugs.
prescription drug
A drug that can be purchased only with a medical
prescription provided by a registered medical provider, such as a physi-
cian or a physician’s assistant.
psilocybin
A hallucinogenic alkaloid found in many species of Central
American mushrooms.
psychedelic
A substance capable of producing perceptual changes,
such as vivid colors and weird shapes, as well as altered awareness of
one’s mind and body.
psychoactive
See psychotropic.
psychoanaleptic
See psychostimulant.
psychostimulant
A type of stimulant that acts to increase brain activity
speciﬁcally; also known as a psychoanaleptic.
Glossary
285

psychotomimetic
A drug that produces psychotic-like effects that may
include delusions and hallucinations.
psychotropic
Having an effect on the mind.
rave drug
See designer drug.
relapse
The return of a condition, such as addiction to or dependency
on a drug, which had formerly been successfully overcome.
schedule (drug)
A category into which the federal government classi-
ﬁes certain drugs based on their potential medical use and their possibil-
ity of illicit recreational applications.
secondhand smoke
Cigarette smoke inhaled involuntarily by non-
smoking individuals in a closed environment.
serotonin
A neurotransmitter associated with a number of mental and
emotional functions, including appetite, learning, memory, mood, mus-
cular contraction, and sleep. A number of drugs reduce or increase the
amount of serotonin available in the brain, thereby moderating one or
more of these actions.
smokeless tobacco
Tobacco that is consumed by some method other
than smoking, for example, chewing tobacco or snuff.
snuff
Finely ground tobacco which is inhaled rather than smoked.
stimulant
When used in connection with drugs, a substance that tem-
porarily increases physiological activity in the body, with a number of
associated effects, such as increased awareness, interest, physical activity,
wakefulness, endurance, and productivity. Physiological changes include
increased heart rate and blood pressure.
synaptic gap
The space between two neurons.
temporary unrousable unconsciousness
A type of coma that can be
life-threatening.
tetrahydrocannabinol
A primary component of the cannabis plant,
often represented simply as THC.
THC
See tetrahydrocannabinol.
tolerance
Developing immunity to the effects caused by a substance such
that one requires a larger amount of the substance over time to achieve the
same results obtained from smaller amounts earlier on in its use.
twelve-step program
A program for recovery from alcoholism, drug
addiction, and other behavioral problems originally proposed by Alco-
holics Anonymous in its 1939 book Alcoholics Anonymous: The Story of
How More Than One Hundred Men Have Recovered From Alcoholism.
withdrawal symptoms
The physical, mental, and emotional effects that
an individual experiences when he or she discontinues use of a substance
to which he or she has become addicted or dependent.
286
Glossary

Index
Above the Inﬂuence campaign, 68
Abuse. See Substance abuse
Academic organizations, 219–222
Act for the Encouraging of the
Distillation of Brandy and Spirits
from Corn (1690, Britain), 121
Acton, James, 46
Addiction, 124, 132
deﬁnition of, 8–9
gateway drugs to, 25–26
to marijuana, 75
to morphine, 124
treatment programs for, 40–41,
40–42, 137
AddictionSearch.com, 271
Addiction Technology Transfer Center
(ATTC), 222–223
ADHD. See Attention deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder
Africa, 96–97, 101
African Americans, substance abuse
blamed on, 54
African Union Conference of
Ministers, 96–97
Al-Anon, 128, 129, 223–224
Alateen, 128–129, 223–224
Alcohol, 22–24
classiﬁcation of, 11
cocaine in, 26
consumption rates of, 19, 22–23
destructive effects of, 71, 74
drinking age acts, 133
drunk driving laws, 124, 137, 230–231
Grand Rapids Study on, 129
health beneﬁts of, 24
health risks of, 23–24
history of, 120, 121–122, 130–131, 133
in drug testing, 45
international perspectives on, 103–104
Islam on, 90–91, 120
prohibition of, 50–51, 58, 126–127,
143, 168–169
temperance movement, 49–51, 122,
123
in vehicular fatalities, 207–209
Alcohol and Hygiene, 49
Alcoholics Anonymous, 127, 128,
145–147, 224–225
Alles, Gordon, 28–29
Alpert, Richard, 141–142, 154–155, 163
American Academy of Family
Physicians (AAFP), 236
American Association for the Cure of
Inebriates, 123
American Council for Drug
Education, 225
American Indian Religious Freedom
Act (1978), 132
American Management Association
(AMA), 43
American Medical Association
(AMA), 127
American Psychological Association
(APA), 236–237
American Public Health Association
(APHA), 237–238
Americans for Nonsmokers’ Rights
(ANR), 225–226
Americans for Safe Access (ASA), 226
American Society of Addiction
Medicine (ASAM), 238–239
Amobarbital, 12
287

Amphetamine-like substances (ATS), 108
Amphetamines, 28–30
classiﬁcation of, 11
generic names for, 11
history of, 124, 126
medical uses of, 127
on Schedule II, 15
street names for, 10
Anabolic-androgenic steroids (AAS), 48
Anslinger, Harry J., 56, 142–143
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, 63–64,
133, 134
Anti-estrogens, 48
Antihistamines, 11
Antipsychotics, 11, 14
Aspirin, 10
Association for Addiction
Professionals (NAADAC), 239
Association for Medical Education and
Research in Substance Abuse
(AMERSA), 226–227
Athletics, drug testing in, 45–46, 47–49
ATTC. See Addiction Technology
Transfer Center
Attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), 13, 127, 194–196
Axons, 15
Baca, Moses, 57
Barbiturates
classiﬁcation of, 11, 12–13
health risks of, 30
on Schedule II, 15
Bechler, Steve, 143–144
Belgium, 104
Bennett, William, 134, 144–145
Benzedrine, 126
Benzodiazepines, 11
Beta-2 agonists, 48
Bhang, 2–3, 100–101. See also Marijuana
Bhutan, 104
Binge drinking, 23–24
Biographies, 141–165
Alpert, 141–142
Anslinger, 142–143
Bechler, 143–144
Bennett, 144–145
Bill W., 145–147
de Quincey, 147–148
Escobar, 148–149
Hamilton, 164–165
Harrison, 149–150
Hoffman, 150–151
Huxley, 151–152
Leary, 141–142, 153–155
Loewi, 155–156
Niemann, 156
Parker, 157
Reagan, Nancy, 158–159
Sertu¨rner, 159–160
Shulgin, 160–161
Terry, 161–163
Wasson, 163–164
Board of Education of Independent School
District No. 92 of Pottawatomie Cty
v. Earls, 46
Boggs Amendment, 60, 128
Booz rooz, 101
Borio, Gene, 272
Brand names, 11
Buprenorphine, 41
Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs, 130
Burr, C. B., 124
Bush, George H. W., 134–135, 144–145
Bush, George W., 77, 138
Caffeine, 5–7, 13, 16, 123
Caldwell, Samuel, 57
Campaign for a Smoke-Free
America, 153
Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, 272
Canada, 92–93, 213, 271
opiates from, 54–55
Canadian Institute of Neurosciences, 272
Cannabis. See Marijuana
Cannabis
Our Position for a Canadian Public
Policy, 271
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, 98
Carpenter, Christopher S., 44–45
Cartels, 96, 148–149
Cato Institute, 100
CDAPCA. See Comprehensive Drug
Abuse Prevention and Control
Act of 1970
CEDAR. See Center for Education and
Drug Abuse Research
Center for Education and Drug Abuse
Research (CEDAR), 219
288
Index

Center for Substance Abuse Prevention
(CSAP), 37–38
Center for Substance Abuse Research
(CESAR), 219–220
Center on Addiction and the Family
(COAF), 227–228
Central nervous system (CNS) effects,
15–18, 29–30, 155–156, 272
CESAR. See Center for Substance
Abuse Research
Charas, 101
Chemical Diversion and Trafﬁcking
Act (1988), 134
Children’s Health Act of 2000, 66
Chimny-Sweepers or A Warning for
Tabacconists, 90
China
cannabis in, 2, 88
immigrants from, opium use and,
53–54, 58
legislation in, 94–95
Opium Wars, 4–5
tobacco in, 121
Chirac, Jacques, 138
Christie, Alice, 272
Circumstantial use, 8
Civil rights, drug testing and, 44
Clement VIII (Pope), 6
Clinco Communications, Inc., 272–273
Clinton, Bill, 67, 77, 137
COAF. See Center on Addiction and the
Family
Coca, 26. See also Cocaine
history of, 4, 87–88, 120
Niemann on, 156
Coca-Cola, 52
Cocaine, 13, 26–28
consumption rates of, 19, 27–28
crack, 27–28, 63–64, 135
Escobar and, 148–149
freebase, 27
health risks of, 26–27
history of, 4, 87–88, 120, 123, 125
international use of, 87–88, 107–109
Niemann on, 156
on Schedule II, 15
regulation of, 52–53
reports on, 188
sentencing for, 63–64, 135
street names for, 10
Coffee, 5–7, 13, 16, 88, 123
Cole, Jack, 71
Colombia, 137, 148–149
Columbus, Christopher, 120
Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic
Act (2005), 66, 138, 176–179
Committee on the Acquirement of the
Drug Habit, 53–54
Compassionate Investigational New
Drug program, 132, 134–135
Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism Prevention,
Treatment, and Rehabilitation
Act of 1970, 130–131
Comprehensive Crime Control Act of
1984, 64, 66, 133
Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control Act of
1970 (CDAPCA), 61–63, 62, 130
Comprehensive Methamphetamine
Control Act of 1996, 66, 136
Confessions of an Opium Eater
(de Quincey), 147–148
Control efforts
bans, 58–63
cost of, 70
education-based, 49–51, 67–68
effectiveness of, 68–69, 70–71
history of, 120–137
legislation, 58–69
taxation-based, 51–57
tobacco, 78–79
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
of 1996 (Canada), 92–93
Controlled Substances Act (CSA) of
1970, 61–62, 130, 172–176
drug schedules in, 14–15, 62
on marijuana, 76–77
Controlled Substances Analogue
Enforcement Act of 1986,
66, 133
Controlled Substances
Chemical & Legal Guide to Federal
Drug Laws (Shulgin), 161
Controlled Substances Trafﬁcking
Prohibition Act (1998), 137
Convention for Limiting the
Manufacture and Regulating the
Distribution of Narcotic Drugs
(1931), 126
Index
289

Convention for the Suppression of the
Illicit Trafﬁc in Dangerous Drugs
(1936), 127
Crack cocaine, 27–28, 63–64, 135
Crack index, 27–28
Crime, drug-related, 71, 73. See also
Legislation
CSA. See Controlled Substances Act
(CSA) of 1970
CSAP. See Center for Substance Abuse
Prevention, 37–38
Daily Dose, 279
D.A.R.E. (Drug Abuse Resistance
Education), 38, 39–40
Data, 200–210
DATOS. See Drug Abuse Treatment
Outcome Studies, 41–42
DAWN. See Drug Abuse Warning
Network, 187, 188
DEA. See U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA)
Death penalty, 93–94, 97
Decriminalization, 69–79
Europe, 98–100
history of, 132
Latin America, 97–98
of marijuana, 36, 74–77, 101, 103
Deliriants, 14. See also Hallucinogens
Dependence. See Substance dependence
Depressants, 11, 16–18. See also
individual drugs
De Quincey, Thomas, 147–148
De Sahagun, Bernardino, 3
Designer drugs, 64–66, 160–161
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders 4th edition (DSM-IV), 9
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 24
Dissociatives, 14. See also Hallucinogens
Diuretics, 48
DMOZ Open Directory Project, 273
Doors of Perception (Huxley), 152
Downers. See Depressants
DPAN. See Drug Policy Alliance
Network
Draft WHO Framework on Tobacco
Control, 106–107
Drug abuse. See Substance abuse
Drug Abuse Control Amendments of
1965, 61, 129
Drug Abuse Treatment Outcome
Studies (DATOS), 41–42
Drug Abuse Warning Network
(DAWN), 187, 188
Drug Addiction Treatment Act
of 2000, 137
Drug Education Committee, 47–48
Drug Free Workplace Act (1988), 134
Drug Importation Act (1848), 123
Drug-Induced Rape Prevention and
Punishment Act (1996), 136
Drug, Medicalization, Prevention and
Punishment Act (1996), 135–136
Drug Policy Alliance Network
(DPAN), 228
Drug schedules
Canada, 92–93
CSA, 14–15, 62, 133
Single Convention, 92
Drug testing, 42–49
history of, 134, 135
school, 45–47
in sports, 47–49, 143–144
workplace, 42–45
Drug trafﬁcking, 127, 134, 137
Europe, 98–100
in Southeast Asia, 93–94
Near East, 95
Drugs
central nervous system effects of,
15–18
chronology of use, 119–139
classiﬁcations of, 11–15
control efforts on, 49–57
deﬁnition of, 7
designer, 64–66
generic, 9–11
illegal, deﬁnition of, 7–8
legal, deﬁnition of, 7–8
naming, 9–11
street names for, 10, 11
Drunk driving laws, 124, 137, 230–231
Durham-Humphrey Amendment of
1951, 59
Ecstasy and ecstasy-like drugs, 10, 13
consumption rates of, 108
international trends in use of, 108, 110
legislation against, 66
Edeleanu, Laza˘r, 28, 124
290
Index

Education programs, 37–40, 49–51
Eighteenth Amendment (U.S.
Constitution), 50–51, 58, 126–127,
143, 168–169
EMedicineHealth.com, 273
Emergency room visits, 208–209
Entheogens, 9
Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), 21
Ephedra, 119, 143–144
Erythroxylum coca. See Coca
Escobar, Pablo, 148–149
Ethylenedioxymethamphetamine. See
Ecstasy
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs
and Drug Addiction, 99, 212–213
Experimental use, 8
Family Smoking Prevention and
Tobacco Control Act (2009), 1, 79,
139, 179–182
FDA. See Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)
Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 126, 143
Federal Cigarette Labeling and
Advertising Act (1965), 132,
170–172
Federal Sentencing Reform Act
of 1984, 63
Federalist Papers, 51–52
Fentanyl analogs, 65
Film Ideas, 273
Finland, 105
Flunitrazepam, 65
Focus Adolescent Services, 273
Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
1, 129, 132
Compassionate Investigational New
Drug program, 132, 134–135
on medical marijuana use, 26
tobacco regulation by, 79, 137, 139
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
of 1938, 59
Freebase cocaine, 27
GABA, 16–17
Gahlinger, Paul, 8–9
Gateway drugs, 75
Gaviria, Ce´sar, 98
Gender differences in abuse, 190–191
Generic drugs, 9–11
GHB (gamma-hydroxybutyric acid), 65
Gin Acts (Britain), 121–122
Golden Triangle, 93–94
Gonzalez v. Raich, 139, 194–196
Government regulation, 51–57, 78–79,
92. See also Legislation
Governmental organizations, 211–219
‘‘Grand Rapids Study,’’ 129
Grotenhermen, Franjo, 76
Hallucinogens, 13–14, 119
consumption rates of, 19
deﬁnition of, 9
Hoffman on, 150–151
Huxley on, 151–152
Hamilton, Alexander, 51–52
Harm Reduction Coalition (HRC),
228–229
Harrison, Francis Burton, 54, 149–150
Harrison Narcotic Act (1914), 54–55,
60, 125, 126, 167–168
Harrison in creation of, 149–150
Wright in creation of, 164–165
Hashish, 19, 88–89, 90. See also Marijuana
Health Canada, 213
Health Consequences of Involuntary
Smoking, The, 153
Health risks, 30
of alcohol, 23–24
of amphetamines, 30
of cocaine, 26–27
decriminalization and, 72–74
of marijuana, 25–26
of tobacco, 20–22, 78–79, 89–90,
104–107, 162
workplace safety and, 43
Healthﬁnder.gov, 274
HelpGuide.org, 274
Hemp, 55–56, 88–89, 121. See also
Marijuana
Herodotus, 120
Heroin, 54, 60, 61
addiction rates, 75
analogs, 65
consumption rates of, 19, 29
methadone treatment and, 41,
131–132
nervous system effects of, 17–18
street names for, 10
Heroin Act (1924), 125
Index
291

Hierba Panacea, De (Monardes), 89
Hoffman, Albert, 150–151
Hohenheim, Phillip von, 121
Holbrook, Robert, 127
Holder, Jr., Eric H., 77
Hornik, Robert, 68
Hull, Cordell, 126–127
Huxley, Aldous, 151–152
ICAA (International Council on Alcohol
and Addictions), 229–230
Iceland, 105
IHRA (International Harm Reduction
Association), 230
Illegal drugs
consumption rates of, 19, 107–109
data on, 204–205, 206–207
deﬁnition of, 7–8
international perspectives on, 89–90
legalization of, 36, 69–79
resources on, 263–279
street names for, 10
Illegal Drugs (Gahlinger), 8–9
Illinois Medical Journal, 55
India, cannabis in, 2–3, 88, 100–101
Indonesia, 93–94
Inhalants, 19, 232–233, 275
Innocent VIII (Pope), 120
Inquiry into the Effects of Ardent Spirits
Upon the Human Body and Mind,
An (Rush), 122
Institute of Medicine, 75
Integrated Substance Abuse Programs
(ISAP), 41, 222
Inter-American Dialogue Survey, 72
Interdepartmental Committee on
Narcotics, 128
International Council on Alcohol and
Addictions (ICAA), 229–230
International Harm Reduction
Association (IHRA), 230
International Opium Commission,
53, 111
International Opium Convention
(1912), 53, 124
International perspectives, 87–117
Africa, 96–97
Canada, 92–93
China, 94–95
Europe, 98–100
Latin America, 97–98
legal vs. illegal drugs, 89–90
Near East, 95
on alcohol, 103–104
on marijuana, 100–103
on tobacco, 104–107
Southeast Asia, 93–94
spread of drugs and, 87–89
International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), 10
ISAP. See Integrated Substance Abuse
Programs
Islam, 90–91
coffee and, 5, 88
on alcohol, 103–104, 120
qat use in, 101
Israel, 103, 105
IUPAC. See International Union of Pure
and Applied Chemistry, 10
Johnson, Lyndon B., 162
Join Together program, 220–221
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 246
Just Say No program, 67, 133, 158–159
Kefauver hearings, 60
Kennedy, John F., 161
Kessler, Gladys, 139, 198–199
Koop, C. Everett, 152–153
LAAM (levo-acetyl methadol), 41
Latin America, 97–98
Latin American Commission on Drugs
and Democracy, 98
Laudanum, 121
Law Enforcement Against Prohibition
(LEAP), 71
League of Nations, 91
LEAP. See Law Enforcement Against
Prohibition)
Leary, Timothy, 141–142, 153–155, 163
LeBow, Bennett, 136
Legal drugs
abuse rates of, 202
consumption rates of, 19
deﬁnition of, 7–8
in treatment programs, 41
international perspectives on, 89–90
naming, 9–11
reports on, 188–191
292
Index

Legend drugs, 59
Legislation, 167–182,
Africa, 96–97
Canada, 92–93
China, 94–95
chronology of, 119–139
decriminalization and, 69–79
drunk driving laws, 124, 137,
230–231
effectiveness of, 73
Europe, 98–100
international differences in, 90–100
Latin America, 97–98
on marijuana, 101–103
Near East, 95
Southeast Asia, 93–94
U.S., 58–69, 123. See also speciﬁc laws
Leo XIII (Pope), 26
Levine, Harry G., 91
Levo-acetyl methadol (LAAM), 41
Liberia, 96
Lietava, Jan, 2
Lin Tse-hsu¨, 5
Loewi, Otto, 155–156
LSD (lysergic diethylamide), 141–142,
150–151
health risks of, 30
Hoffman on, 150–151
Huxley on, 152
Leary on, 141–142, 153–155
nervous system effects of, 18
Lumholtz, Carl, 4
Lysergic diethylamide. See LSD
(lysergic diethylamide)
MADD (Mothers Against Drunk
Driving), 230–231
Major League Baseball, 48–49
Mandrake, 119
Marihuana Tax Act (1937), 55–57, 127
Marijuana, 24–26
Anslinger on, 143
bans of, 58–59
classiﬁcation of, 11
consumption rates of, 19, 25, 57
control efforts, 55–57
cultivation of, 2–3
decriminalization of, 36, 72, 74–77,
137–138, 233
as gateway drug, 75
health effects of, 25–26
history of, 2–3, 88–89, 119, 120, 122,
126, 131
in Latin America, 98
international perspectives on, 90, 91,
100–103
international use of, 88–89, 107–109
legislation on, 35, 36, 55–57, 127
medical use of, 26, 74–77, 101, 103,
136–139, 194–196, 226
Reefer Madness on, 127
reports on, 182–188, 186–188
street names for, 10
Marijuana and Medicine
The Scientiﬁc Base, 75
Maxwell, Jane Carlisle, 274
McAdoo, William Gibbs, 54
MDMA, 15
legislation against, 66
nervous system effects of, 29–30
street names for, 10
Medline Plus, 274–275
‘‘Men’s Answer to the Women’s
Petition against Coffee,’’ 6–7
MentalHelp.net, 275
Mescaline, 3–4, 30
Methadone, 41, 131–132
Methadone Control Act (1973), 131–132
Methamphetamine, 66
history of, 124
legislation on, 66, 136, 138, 176–179
street names for, 10
Methaqualone, 15, 65
Mexican Revolution (1910–1920), 56, 58
Mexico
decriminalization in, 97–98
marijuana and, 56, 58–59
opiates from, 54–55
Minority groups
Blacks, 54
blamed for substance abuse, 53–54,
56, 58
Chinese, 53–54, 58, 165
in sentencing, 63–64, 135
Mexicans, 56, 58
Native Americans, 132, 135, 157
Misuse of Drugs Act (Singapore), 94
Monardes, Nicola´s Bautista, 89
Mormons, 58
Morphine, 122, 124, 159–160
Index
293

Mothers Against Drunk Driving
(MADD), 230–231
Muhammed, 120
Murad IV, 121
Mushrooms, magic, 119, 150, 154,
163–164, 285
Nagai, Nagayoshi, 124
Naltrexone, 41
Namibia, 96
Narcotic Import and Export Act (1922),
125, 126
Narcotics, deﬁnition of, 9. See also
Opioids
Narcotics Control Act of 1956, 60, 128
National Asian Paciﬁc American
Families Against Substance
Abuse (NAPAFASA), 231–232
National Association of Counties, 29
National Center on Addiction and
Substance Abuse, 220–221
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol
and Drug Information (NCADI),
275, 278
National Collegiate Athletic
Association (NCAA), 47–48
National Commission on Marihuana
and Drug Abuse, 35, 36, 131
National Council on Alcoholism and
Drug Dependence (NCADD), 232
National Development and Research
Institutes, Inc., 41
National Football League (NFL), 48
National Hockey League (NHL), 49
National Inhalant Prevention Coalition
(NIPC), 232–233, 275
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism (NIAAA), 23,
130–131, 213–214, 276
National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA), 25–26, 37, 40–41, 132, 214
reports by, 185–191
National Mental Health Information
Center, 278
National Minimum Drinking Age Act
(1983), 133
National Organization for the Reform of
Marijuana Laws (NORML), 233
National Portal of Bhutan, 104
National Research Council (NRC), 44
National Survey on Drug Use and
Health, 203–204
National Women’s Health Information
Center (NWHIC), 215
National Youth Anti-Drug Media
Campaign Act (1998), 67–68
Native American Free Exercise of
Religion Act (1993), 135
Native Americans, 132, 135, 157
NCADI. See National Clearinghouse
for Alcohol and Drug
Information
Netherlands, 91
Neurons, 16–18
Neurotransmitters, 15–18, 155–156
New York Country Lawyers
Association, 70–71
New York Times, 276
New York University Division of
Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, 220
NIAAA. See National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
Nicotine, 13, 16, 19–20. See also
TobaccoNIDA. See National
Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
NIDA InfoFacts, 40–41
Niemann, Albert, 123, 156
Nixon, Richard M., 36, 42, 70, 131
NORML. See National Organization for
the Reform of Marijuana Laws
Obama, Barack, 1, 77, 79, 139
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, 276
Ofﬁce of Applied Studies (OAS), 40
Ofﬁce of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP), 68, 134, 144–145,
215–216
Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General of the
United States, 38–39, 130
Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
107–108, 110, 217
Omnibus Drug Abuse Act of 1988, 64
ONDCP. See Ofﬁce of National Drug
Control Policy
Open Directory Project, 273
Opioids
as narcotics, 9
classiﬁcation of, 11
conﬂict over, 4–5
294
Index

endogenous, 17
exogenous, 17–18
health risks of, 30
history of, 3
international trends in use of, 108, 110
on Schedule I, 15
nervous system effects of, 17–18
regulation of, 52–53
Opium
bans on, 58, 59, 123
Chinese immigrants and, 53–54, 165
conﬂict over, 4–5
de Quincey on, 147–148
Harrison Act on, 149–150
history of, 3, 120, 121, 124–125, 128
on Schedule II, 15
Sertu¨rner on, 159–160
Opium Poppy Control Act of 1942,
59, 128
Opium Wars, 4–5
Organizations, 211–239
academic, 219–222
governmental, 211–219
private, 222–236
professional, 236–239
OTC drugs. See Over-the-counter
(OTC) drugs
‘‘Other Federal Drug Control
Programs,’’ 68–69
Overdoses, 100
Over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, 8, 29,
59, 95, 177, 201
deﬁnition of, 285
reports on, 262
Paracelsus, 121
Parker, Quanah, 157
Partnership for a Drug-Free
America, 234
‘‘Pathology of Drug Abuse,’’ 276
PATRIOT Act. See USA PATRIOT
Improvement and
Reauthorization Act (2005)
PCP. See Phencyclidine (PCP)
Pemberton, John, 52
Pentobarbital, 13
Peptide hormones, 48
Persian Wars (Herodotus), 120
Peyote, 3–4, 132, 135, 157
Pharmacogenomics, 64
Pharmacy Act (1868, Britain), 123
Phencyclidine (PCP), 10, 15, 30
Phenobarbital, 12
Phenylethylamine analogs, 65
Philippines, 52–53, 94
Phoenix House, 227–228
Pocahontas, 121
Polk, James, 123
Portugal, 99–100
Postsynaptic neuron, 15, 17
Presynaptic neuron, 15, 17
Preventing Drug Use among Children and
Adolescents
A Research-Based Guide for Parents,
Educators, and Community
Leaders, 37
PreventionNet, 276–277
Prevention programs, 36–40
effectiveness of, 38–40, 68–69
Just Say No, 67, 133, 158–159
Privacy rights, drug testing and, 44
Private organizations, 222–236
Professional organizations, 236–239
Prohibition, 50–51, 58, 126–127, 143,
168–169
Project CORK, 277
Protocol Bringing under International
Control Drugs outside the Scope
of the Convention of 13 July 1931
for Limiting the Manufacture and
Regulating the Distribution of
Narcotic Drugs, 128
Psilocybin, 119, 150, 154, 163–164, 285
Psychedelics, 14, 119
Leary on, 153–154
Shulgin on, 160–161
Wasson on, 163–164 see also
Hallucinogens
Psychoactive drugs, 9
Psychotropic drugs, 9
Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act of
1969, 130
Pure Food and Drug Law (1906), 124
Qat, 101
Quaalude, 15, 65
Ram Dass, 141–142
RAND Corporation, 234–235
Reagan, Nancy, 67, 133, 158–159
Index
295

Reagan, Ronald, 67, 134, 145, 153
Receptor sites, 15–18
Recreational use, 8
Reefer Madness, 127
‘‘Report of the National Commission
on Marihuana and Drug Abuse:
Marihuana: A Signal of
Misunderstanding,’’ 182–185
Report on Smoking and Health, 153
Reports and recommendations,
182–191, 251–253, 262, 269–271
Research sources
articles, 247–251, 257–261, 266–269
books, 241–246, 253–257, 263–266
books, general, 241–253
books, on illegal substances, 263–271
journals and periodicals, 246
on legal substances, 253–262
reports, 251–253, 262, 269–271
Web sites, 271–279
Resources. See Research sources
Revised Plan of Action on Drug
Control And Crime Prevention
(African Union), 96–97
Risk prevention programs, 39
Rohypnol, 65, 136
Rolfe, John, 121
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 56
Roosevelt, Theodore, 53
Runge, Friedrich Ferdinand, 123
Rush, Benjamin, 122
Salazar, Antonio, 100
SAMHSA. See Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA)
Saudi Arabia, 95, 104
Scared Straight, 39
Schaffer Library of Drug Policy, 277
Schedule I drugs, 14–15, 62, 64
Schedule II drugs, 15, 62, 64
Schedule III drugs, 62
Schedule IV drugs, 62
Schedule V drugs, 62
School Mental Health Project, 277
Schools, drug testing in, 45–47, 135
Science of Charms, 2–3
‘‘Secret of World-wide Drug
Prohibition, The’’ (Levine), 91
Senegal, 96
Sentencing/penalties: China, 94–95
Europe, 98–100
history of, 121, 134
Latin America, 97–98
Near East, 95
racial imbalances in, 63–64, 135
Southeast Asia, 93–94
U.S., 63–64, 135–136
Serotonin, 18
Sertu¨rner Friedrich, 122, 159–160
Shen Nung, 2
Shulgin, Alexander ‘‘Sasha,’’ 160–161
Singapore, 94
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
of 1961, 91–92, 101, 129
Smith, Robert Holbrook, 146
Smoking and Health
Report of the Advisory Committee to
the Surgeon General, 130, 161–163
Smoking bans, 78–79, 104–107, 134
Smoking Opium Exclusion
Act (1909), 124
Southeast Asia, 93–94
Speaking Out against Drug
Legalization, 74
Sports, drug testing in, 45–46, 47–49,
143–144
State of the Drugs Problem in Europe,
The, 99
Stimulants, 13
drug testing for, 47–48
military use of, 29
nervous system effects of, 16
See also individual drugs
Street names, 10, 11
Substance abuse
age differences in, 190
crime related to, 71, 73
deﬁnition of, 8–9
gender differences in, 190–191
history of, 2–7
hospital admissions for, 208–210
international trends in, 109–111
levels of, 8–9
prevention programs, 36–40
rates of, 200–205
treatment for, 40–42, 201
with prescription drugs, 201
worldwide, 107–111
Substance Abuse (journal), 246
296
Index

Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration
(SAMHSA), 25, 28, 201, 209,
216–217
Ofﬁce of Applied Studies, 40
prevention programs, 37–38
Web site, 278
Substance Abuse Librarians and
Information Specialists
(SALIS), 235
Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention,
and Policy, 246
Substance dependence, 9. See also
Addiction
Supreme Court cases, 135, 191–200
on drug testing, 46
on Harrison Act, 125
on marijuana, 137–138, 139, 194–196
on tobacco regulation, 137, 139,
194–196
Surgeon General of the United States,
38–39, 130, 152–153
Talent, James, 138
Taxation, 51–57
‘‘Taxation of Marihuana,’’ 56–57
TCLC. See Tobacco Control Legal
Consortium
TeAchnology, 278
TeenDrugAbuse, 278
TeensHealth, 279
Temperance movement, 49–51,
122, 123
Terminology, 7–11, 281–286
Terrorism, 71
Terry, Luther L., 161–163
Testing programs, 42–49, 134, 135,
143–144
Texas Institute of Behavioral
Research, 41
Thacher, Ebby, 146
THC, 56
Thomas, Clarence, 46
Tobacco, 19–22
advertising bans, 132, 138
as stimulant, 13
consumption rates of, 19, 22, 78,
205–207
destructive effects of, 71
FDA regulation of, 1
health risks of, 20–22, 78–79, 89–90,
104–107, 162
history of, 89–90, 120, 121, 130
international perspectives on, 89–90,
104–107
Koop on, 152–153
organizations on, 221–222, 225–227
package labels/warnings, 130, 132,
135, 136
reports on, 185–186
secondhand smoke, 21, 153
smoking bans, 78–79, 134
Supreme Court on, 139, 196–200
Terry on, 161–163
Tobacco Control Legal Consortium
(TCLC), 221–222
Tobacco Free Initiative, 106–107
‘‘Tobacco Timeline, The’’ (Borio), 272
Trafﬁcking. See Drug trafﬁcking
‘‘Treatment Approaches for Drug
Addiction,’’ 40–41
Treatment programs, 40–42
Treaty of Nanjing (1842), 5
Truman, Harry S, 128
Twenty-First Amendment
(U.S. Constitution), 169
Uniform Drinking Age Act (1983), 133
Uniform State Narcotics Act (1932), 126
United Arab Emirates, 95
United Nations, 91–92, 128, 129
Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), 107–108, 110, 217
Protocol on Psychotropic
Substances, 131
United States of America v. Philip Morris,
USA, Inc., et al., 139, 194–196
United States v. Jin Fuey Moy, 125
United States v. Oakland Cannabis
Buyers’ Cooperative, 137–138
University of California at Los Angeles
(UCLA)
Integrated Substance Abuse
Programs, 41, 222
School Mental Health Project, 277
UNODC. See United Nations Ofﬁce on
Drugs and Crime
Uppers. See Stimulants
USA PATRIOT Improvement and
Reauthorization Act (2005), 138
Index
297

U.S. Department of Agriculture, 24
U.S. Department of Defense, 42
U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 24, 40
U.S. Department of Justice, 130
U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA), 73, 74, 131, 134, 211–212
on marijuana as gateway drug, 75
on medical marijuana, 76–77
U.S. Sentencing Commission, 135
Vernonia School District 47J, Petitioner v.
Wayne Action, et ux., 135, 191–193
Versailles Peace Treaty (1919), 125
Vietnam, 94
Vietnam War, 42
Vin Mariani, 26
Violence prevention programs, 39
Walters, John, 77
War on drugs, 111, 131, 211
amphetamines in, 29
cost of, 70, 249
effectiveness of, 71, 72, 228, 251
Wasson, R. Gordon, 163–164
WCTU (Women’s Christian Temperance
Union), 49–51, 123, 235–236
Web sites, 271–279
Whiskey Rebellion (1794), 52
Whiskey tax, 51–52, 122
WHO. See World Health Organization
Wilson, William Grifﬁth, 127, 145–147
Wired In, 279
Wo¨hler, Friedrich, 156
Woman’s Crusade, 49–51
Women’s Christian Temperance Union
(WCTU), 49–51, 123, 235–236
‘‘Women’s Petition against
Coffee,’’ 6
Working Partners for an Alcohol-
and Drug-Free Workplace, 218
Workplace drug testing, 42–45
World Drug Report, 107–108,
110–111, 219
World Health Assembly, 106–107
World Health Organization (WHO),
104–105, 106–107, 218–219, 279
Wright, Hamilton, 54, 164–165
Young, Francis L., 134
Youth Violence
A Report of the Surgeon General, 38–40
Zedillo, Ernesto, 98
Zogby Inter-American Dialogue
Survey, 72
298
Index

About the Author
David E. Newton holds an associate’s degree in science from
Grand Rapids (Michigan) Junior College, a B.A. in chemistry (with
high distinction) and an M.A. in education from the University
of Michigan, and an Ed.D. in science education from Harvard
University. He is the author of more than 400 textbooks, encyclope-
dias, resource books, research manuals, laboratory manuals, trade
books, and other educational materials. He taught mathematics,
chemistry, and physical science in Grand Rapids, Michigan, for
13 years; was professor of chemistry and physics at Salem State Col-
lege in Massachusetts for 15 years; and was adjunct professor in the
College of Professional Studies at the University of San Francisco
for 10 years. Previous books for ABC-CLIO include Global Warming
(1993), Gay and Lesbian Rights (1994, 2009), The Ozone Dilemma (1995),
Violence and the Mass Media (1996), Environmental Justice (1996, 2009),
Encyclopedia of Cryptology (1997), Social Issues in Science and Technol-
ogy: An Encyclopedia (1999), DNA Technology (2009), and Sexual
Health (2010). Other recent books include Physics: Oryx Frontiers
of Science Series (2000), Sick! (4 volumes; 2000), Science, Technology,
and Society: The Impact of Science in the 19th Century (2 volumes;
2001), Encyclopedia of Fire (2002), Molecular Nanotechnology: Oryx
Frontiers of Science Series (2002), Encyclopedia of Water (2003), Encyclo-
pedia of Air (2004), The New Chemistry (6 volumes; 2007), Nuclear
Power (2005), Stem Cell Research (2006), Latinos in the Sciences, Math,
and Professions (2007), and DNA Evidence and Forensic Science (2008).
He has also been an updating and consulting editor on a number
of books and reference works, including Chemical Compounds
(2005), Chemical Elements (2006), Encyclopedia of Endangered Species
(2006), World of Mathematics (2006), World of Chemistry (2006), World
of Health (2006), UXL Encyclopedia of Science (2007), Alternative Medi-
cine (2008), Grzimek’s Animal Life Encyclopedia (2009), Community
Health (2009), and Genetic Medicine (2009).

