
BUSINESS ECONOMICS IN A RAPIDLY-CHANGING WORLD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 
 
PRACTICES, APPLICATIONS  
AND CHALLENGES 
 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

BUSINESS ECONOMICS  
IN A RAPIDLY-CHANGING WORLD 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova‘s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova‘s website  
under the e-book tab. 
 

BUSINESS ECONOMICS IN A RAPIDLY-CHANGING WORLD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 
 
PRACTICES, APPLICATIONS  
AND CHALLENGES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MD. MAMUN HABIB 
EDITOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

Copyright © 2016 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in 
any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical photocopying, recording or 
otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
We have partnered with Copyright Clearance Center to make it easy for you to obtain permissions to reuse 
content from this publication. Simply navigate to this publication‘s page on Nova‘s website and locate the 
―Get Permission‖ button below the title description. This button is linked directly to the title‘s permission 
page on copyright.com. Alternatively, you can visit copyright.com and search by title, ISBN, or ISSN.  
  
For further questions about using the service on copyright.com, please contact:  
Copyright Clearance Center 
Phone: +1-(978) 750-8400 
Fax: +1-(978) 750-4470  
E-mail: info@copyright.com. 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or implied 
warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for 
incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information contained in this book. 
The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or 
in part, from the readers‘ use of, or reliance upon, this material. Any parts of this book based on government 
reports are so indicated and copyright is claimed for those parts to the extent applicable to compilations of 
such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in this book. In 
addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property 
arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise contained in this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the subject 
matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering 
legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert assistance is required, the services of a 
competent person should be sought. FROM A DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED 
BY A COMMITTEE OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF 
PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
Names: Habib, Mamun, editor. 
Title: Supply chain management : practices, applications and challenges /  
   editor, Mamun Habib. 
Other titles: Supply chain management (Nova Science Publishers) 
Description: Hauppauge, New York : Nova Science Publishers, Inc., [2015] |  
   Series: Business economics in a rapidly-changing world | Includes index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2015041021 | 
Subjects: LCSH: Business logistics. | Materials management. 
Classification: 
LCC 
HD38.5 
.S896077 
2015 
| 
DDC 
658.7--dc23 
LC 
record 
available 
at 
http://lccn.loc.gov/2015041021 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-097-2 (eBook)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To my beloved father who lies at Jannatul Baqi,  
Late Alhaj Md. Habibur Rahman,  
for his enormous inspiration to achieve excellence. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
ix 
Acknowledgments 
xi 
Chapter 1 
Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management:  
Case Study of Successful Practices 
1 
Alan D. Smith 
Chapter 2 
Quality Sacrificed:  A Look at Quality Issues Experienced  
in Global Outsourcing 
21 
MD Sarder 
Chapter 3 
A Cost Optimization Model for Intra-Shipment in a Supply Chain 
41 
Henry Lau 
Chapter 4 
Location Strategies and Considerations in Supply Chain   
and Operations Management 
59 
Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
Chapter 5 
Balanced Resilience: A Practical Framework for Managing  
Supply Chain Performance 
73 
Michael Reiss 
Chapter 6 
Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid  
System Controller for Street-Lighting Applications,  
Based on Environmental Conditions 
93 
S. E. Sadique 
Chapter 7 
Exploring Traditional and Structural Approaches  
to Outsourcing Functions 
127 
Alan D. Smith and Steven R. Clinton 
Chapter 8 
Role of Green Supply Chain Management in Cement 
Manufacturing Process: An Overview on Indian Industries 
141 
P. Muralidhar and V. Srihari 
Chapter 9 
Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
149 
Michael Reiss 

Contents 
viii
Chapter 10 
Supply Chain Management Used in Industrial Sales  
and Best Business Practices 
173 
Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
Chapter 11 
Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package  
for Supply Chain Inventory Policy Analysis 
187 
Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
Index 
 
209 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
Supply Chain Management (SCM) has been widely researched in numerous application 
domains during the last few decades. Despite the popularity of SCM research and 
applications, there is remains considerable confusion as to the clarity of its meaning. There 
are several attempts made by researchers and practitioners to appropriately define SCM and 
its challenges. This book entitled Supply Chain Management: Practices, Applications and 
Challenges is comprised of eleven chapters. 
Chapter One entails strategic supply chain partnerships which can have dramatic effects 
on a firm‘s financial success. Certainly, the production level can help to shorten the supply 
chain and lower costs on the entire production process of a company. However, at the sales 
level, such partnering can help a company to shorten their supply chain and further reduce 
costs for a company as well as enhance the corporate reputation of its products and services 
bundles.  
Chapter Two highlights global outsourcing—also known as off-shoring—and explains 
the issues of off-shoring. The chapter represents global outsourcing, past and present trends, 
and lessons learned from the US perspective. It also describes various outsourcing issues 
faced by US companies including reduced control, logistics complexities, quality issues, etc.  
In chapter Three, a decision model is developed aiming to optimize the costs related to 
the shipment of goods from one or more suppliers to the wholesaler. That model is able to 
provide expert advice to support the decision to be made by the wholesaler, taking into 
consideration all the expected costs and achieve the minimization of total logistics costs.  
Whether in formation, functioning, or growing, companies must focus on location 
strategy if they want to achieve optimal success. Through the evaluation of location strategies 
for a global steel production company and a Pittsburgh-based restaurant chain, Chapter Four 
allows readers to explore the ways location strategy can contribute to success or struggles.  
In Chapter Five, the balanced resilience framework for the management of supply chain 
performance is introduced based on an outline and an evaluation of the prevalent focused 
frameworks (e.g., agile, resilient, and lean SCM) as well as blended frameworks (i.e., leagile, 
anti-fragile, and sustainable SCM).  
An increasing pressure to invest in renewable energy sources is getting high priority due 
to alarming global warming, pollution and skyrocketing prices of the conventional energy 
sources. In Chapter Six, HOMER software, an implementation of renewable energy sources, 
has been used to perform simulations of hybrid systems for street-lighting applications.  

Md. Mamun Habib 
x
Chapter Seven depicts some of the more common approaches to strategic competitive 
advantage via the successful tools associated with outsourcing. Continued outsourcing 
activities will better their business strategy, even with increasing pressure from both the 
government and unions as difficult decisions and possible job shifts lie ahead in a world of 
increasing income disparity.  
Chapter Eight describes the different stages of the cement manufacturing process in 
India. The strategies of Green Supply Chain Management are defined clearly for evaluating 
cement industrial process analysis. The approaches of and considerations for GSCM 
applications in India are revealed for better understanding.  
An overview of typical multi-conflict constellations reveals that managing conflicts in 
supply networks is not a matter of resolving separate conflicts, but of handling several 
interconnected conflicts simultaneously. Tools and processes of intelligence clarify the 
interconnectedness of conflicts. In Chapter Nine, three frameworks—particularly the ranking, 
the portfolio, and the nexus framework—are outlined for the effective and efficient handling 
of interconnected conflicts.  
Chapter Ten illustrates how an organization has grown at unprecedented rate for the last 
few decades by utilizing the best practices in supply chain management. Embracing global 
measures, green supply chain management, purchasing management for the company and 
customers, and the use of information technology contributed to the success of a company, 
making them a global competitor. 
Finally, Chapter Eleven demonstrates the development of a spreadsheet-based simulation 
package, which supports the analysis of inventory policies in a four-stage serial supply chain. 
An experimental study shows that the proposed package is a user-friendly tool for simulating 
inventory distribution problems in a four-stage serial supply chain. 
I am honored to be editing such a valuable book, which contains contributions of a 
selected group of researchers presenting the best of their works. I would like to thank all the 
authors for their valuable contributions in various aspects of supply chain management. The 
editor truly hopes that this book would be fruitful for researchers, scientists, students, 
academicians and practitioners that are involved in the area of supply chain management. 
I would like to convey the heartiest thanks to my family members, especially my beloved 
parents, wife and two kids for their excellent cooperation. Finally, I express my gratitude to 
the Almighty Allah for the successful completion of this book in the scheduled time. 
 
 
Dr. Md. Mamun Habib 
Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM), Malaysia 
mamunhabib@gmail.com, md.mamun@uum.edu.my 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
 
The editorial book entitled “Supply Chain Management: Practices, Applications and 
Challenges” encompasses eleven chapters. From that point of view, the concept of the 
editorial book solely depends on the contributors of the book chapters. Therefore, special 
thanks and gratitude must go to the book chapters‘ authors. However, review process is also 
very lengthy but significant in order to ensure uniqueness of the book chapters. The jobs of 
reviewers are highly appreciable. In addition, the Editor acknowledges a great debt to NOVA 
Publishers for publishing this book on time. 
On the eve of this publication, the Editor wishes to acknowledge and thank his beloved 
mother, Alhaja Shirin Habib, his spouse, Dr. Farzana Afzal, his two kids, Rafiul Habib and 
Farzeen Habib, and other family members for their tireless inspiration to complete this book.  
Last but not least, I express gratitude to the Almighty for spiritual inspiration and 
guidance in the completion of this publication. 
 
 
Dr. Md. Mamun Habib 
The Editor 
Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM), Malaysia 
mamunhabib@gmail.com, md.mamun@uum.edu.my 
 


In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
EXPLORING STRATEGIC PARTNERING  
IN SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT:  
CASE STUDY OF SUCCESSFUL PRACTICES 
 
 
Alan D. Smith* 
Robert Morris University, Moon, Pennsylvania, US 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Supplier selection and partnering are important decisions faced by operations 
management, as Supply Chain Management (SCM), Supply Chain Collaboration (SCC), 
Supplier Relations Management (SRM), and inventory management are essential for 
efficient operations in a global environment.  
The positive outcomes of collaborative activity that could not have been achieved by 
any firm acting independently of its industrial partners, which is ultimately how supply 
chain collaboration provides advantages to all companies involved in the agreement. 
Through collaboration firms can work as if they are part of a single enterprise, accessing 
and leveraging each other‘s resources and enjoying their associated benefits, ultimately 
increasing collaborative advantage and firm performance.  
It was found that through collaborative relationships between the two Pittsburgh-
based firms, they were able to share risks, access complementary resources, reduce 
transaction costs, and enhance productivity. 
 
Keywords: bullwhip effect, case study, operations strategy, supply chain management, 
supplier collaboration, supplier relationship management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
* Corresponding Author address: Email: smitha@rmu.edu. 

Alan D. Smith 
2
INTRODUCTION 
 
Supply Chain Management as an Essential Discipline  
 
Supply chain management (SCM) may be perceived as part of a strategic approach taken 
for planning, implementing, and controlling the stream of materials, services, and information 
throughout the manufacturing process as raw materials are developed into a finished product 
and eventually delivered to the end user (Basu and Nair 2012; Brito and Botter 2012; Bulcsu 
2011; More and Babu 2012). This practice plays an integral part in ensuring operational 
efficiency within an organization. SCM looks to limit inefficiencies and miscommunications 
both within, and outside, the organization. This includes all interaction with outsourcing 
resources, vendors, separate departments and office locations, and the customer (Bhat 2008; 
Baxter and Hirschhauser 2004; Biswas and Sarker 2008; Hu Wang, Fetch and Bidanda 2008; 
Jain, Benyoucef, and Deshmukh 2008). Providing these components with an understanding 
for what they can expect from you, but more importantly, what is expected of them, is vital in 
terms of the quality and efficiency with which the products are delivered (Carvalho, Cruz-
Machado and Tavares 2012; Hamidi, Farahmand, Sajjadi and Nygard 2012; Kumar, Shankar 
and Yadav 2011; Mathirajan, Manoj and Ramachandran 2011). Cutting the unnecessary 
operations that occur throughout these relationships will directly reduce cost, save time, and 
limit the need for certain resources, allowing an organization to focus their efforts toward 
honing other aspects of the business (Pettersson and Segerstedt 2011; Pradhananga, Hanaoka 
and Sattayaprasert 2011). So why is the management of these processes so important? The 
constant regulation of supply chain operations within an organization has the ability to 
maximize customer value and sustain a competitive advantage over those who supply similar 
goods and services (Brun and Zorzini 2009; Buckley and Ghauri 2004; Camuffo and 
Grandinetti 2011). In optimizing their approach to supply chain, an organization can create a 
domino effect that not only limits any wasteful expenses, but also increases the quality seen 
by their customer and, in turn, heightening the value that their customers can enjoy when 
purchasing their product. Coordinating the organizational operations into a systematic 
approach in order to create value and profit is the ultimate goal. The systematic integration 
and monitoring of organizational processes such as planning, product demand, procedure 
design, quality control, logistics, customer responsiveness, and others, have a huge impact on 
the final product delivered and the way in which it is presented to the customer (Browning 
and Heath 2009; Cavaleri 2008; Grewal 2008. Hence, SCM takes on the task of harmonizing 
all of these processes as well as limiting the risks involved. In all supply chain decisions, 
there are risks, and mitigating those risks can go a long way in maximizing the organization‘s 
success. For example, trust is key to an effective and efficient supply chain operation and any 
organization that allows other to participate in its chain must understand that they will be 
sharing valued information (Chan and Kumar 2009; Drejer and Riis 2000).  
 
 
Purpose of Present Chapter 
 
In this chapter, a discussion of supply chain techniques and strategies, especially the need 
to collaborate and integrate used by one of the local leaders within the dairy industry, namely 

Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management 
3
Turner Dairy Farms, will be followed by additional procedures to implement in order to 
increase SCM success. Certain relevant aspects of the company‘s supply chain will be briefly 
reviewed along with the associated procedures. Furthermore, their collaborative relationships 
with other local businesses will be addressed, showing the distinct advantages that these 
partnerships provide for the company and the members of its supply chain. 
These financial and nonfinancial or logistical/operational connections that are made 
between Turner Dairy and their partners are very important in allowing each party to focus on 
what they do best in terms of supply chain procedures. 
It is hoped that by providing a foundation of SCM from the literature in terms of 
partnering, management or relationships, and collaboration, it will become apparent why the 
supply chain is so important to Turner Dairy, a small to medium-sized enterprise (SME). As 
the exact ownership and responsibility may change in each of Turner Dairy‘s supply chains, 
how management establishes such relationships and how it deals conceptually with variance 
inherent in essential all supply chains will be included in the discussion. The emphasis of this 
chapter will be on the basic principles and concepts of SCM. Lastly, conclusions will include 
a brief review of the process strategies within the Turner Dairy Farms supply chain and a 
brief statement on its effectiveness. 
 
 
DYNAMICS OF SUPPLY CHAIN PARTNERING 
 
Supplier Selection 
 
Supplier selection and ultimate partnering are important decisions faced by management, 
as SCM and inventory management are both integral to efficient operations and the ability to 
compete in the global marketplace. The nature of supplier selection forces managers to 
choose between conflicting criteria, such as quality and cost, in order to evaluate the decision. 
As such, this problem can become increasingly complex as multiple criteria and multiple 
suppliers become involved (Golmohammadi and Mellat-Parast 2012). The following sections 
explore some of these complex relationships. 
 
 
Importance of Networking 
 
Successful SCM implies successful practices in dealing with the many nonfinancial and 
financial effects of supplier relationship management (SRM) on SCM performance. In simple 
terms, SRM is the connection between the firm‘s supply organization and the external 
supplier network (Mann, Kumar, Kumar and Mann 2010; Smith 2014; Smith and Synowka 
2014). Financial measures are more closely related to measures of effectiveness and typically 
include, target costs of material, the quality of materials, and delivery and inventory goals. 
Nonfinancial measures are more closely related to efficiency measures and cannot be as 
easily measured monetarily, they include internal customer satisfaction, retention, and 
positive word-of-mouth or reputation (Kennedy and Widener 2008; Scherrer-Rathje, Boyle 
and Deflorin (2009). If management is successful, if must be able to optimize an 

Alan D. Smith 
4
organization‘s capacity and ability to manage its suppliers and conduct its internal tasks and 
responsibilities related to supplier relations in order to achieve the desired results.  
This successful SRM management raises several concerns with measuring supply 
performance management. As suggested by Kahkonen and Lintukangas (2010), if may be that 
the actual development of an appropriate measure seems to be the most difficult task in SRM 
management. The typical problem revolves around the relationship between short-term price 
winnings and long-term reliable supplier relationships. In general, financial performance 
indicators have been the focus, which means managers will sacrifice the long-term 
relationships in the interest of short-term gains. Kahkonen and Lintukangas explained the 
relationship between SRM capability and financial and nonfinancial measurements is 
examined in the four hypotheses. These hypotheses included SRM capability has a positive 
relationship with nonfinancial performance measures of supply management; SRM capability 
has a positive relationship with financial performance measures of supply management; the 
firm‘s age and size do not influence non-financial performance measurement of supply 
management; and the firm‘s age and size do not influence financial performance 
measurement of supply management. The last two hypotheses were included in the study 
because it is possible that older and larger firms may have more standardized procedures 
which may have impact on the performance monitoring.  
Based on surveys completed by general executives and directors in purchasing and 
supply management, Kahkonen and Lintukangas (2010) tested four hypotheses that measured 
perceptions of SRM capability (e.g., joint investments, supplier development, joint problem 
solving, creating a new supply chain, supply market research). Nonfinancial performance of 
supply management included the topics of service level purchasing, cost effectiveness of 
purchasing, and quality; while financial performance of supply management question focused 
on inventory levels, tied-up capital, and capital turnover rate. The results illustrated that the 
power of SRM capability was stronger when related to nonfinancial as opposed to financial 
measures and that other factors may be involved as well in monitoring financial performance 
(e.g., accounting and legislation). Hence, the stronger power of SRM with nonfinancial 
indicators should increase management‘s ability to develop diversified performance measures 
in order to better clarify the role of supply management in a firm‘s strategic focus. 
 
 
SCM Collaboration 
 
The demand for firms to respond quickly to dynamic market needs in recent years has led 
many firms to collaborate with other companies in order to ensure efficient and responsive 
supply chains. The concept of supply chain collaboration (SCC) is important in any business, 
big or small, as management needs to understand how beneficial collaboration can be for each 
participant involved. In general, number of research efforts have illustrated that both customer 
and supplier firms seek collaborative relationships with each other as a way of improving 
performance (Vinodh, Sundararaj, Devadasan and Maharaja 2008; Wan and Chen 2008). Not 
only should SCC provide firms with cost savings and protect them from risks involved in 
certain investments, collaboration allows companies to obtain supplies and resources that may 
never be available to them while working on their own (Karlsson 2003; Smith and Offodile 
2007; Summers and Scherpereel 2008; Vinodh, Sundararaj, Devadasan and Maharaja 2008; 
Wan and Chen 2008). By working together organizations better themselves and the 

Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management 
5
companies around them, making it seem unrealistic that any firm can survive in the current 
market without multiple collaborations between suppliers and buyers.  
Although collaborative relationships between firms can help share risks, access 
complementary resources, reduce transaction costs, and enhance productivity, many firms 
have yet to truly capitalize on the potential of SCC (Tari and Sabater 2004; Tiwari, Turner 
and Sackett 2007). Optimizing or finding the best fit for a firm‘s supply chain should have a 
positive impact on a firm‘s performance and overall cost structure. Supply chains can be 
optimized in variety of different ways depending on the business model, business strategy, 
and respective product or product lines within an organization. Moreover, it will depend on 
the firm‘s priorities. For example, does the firm compete on price, quality, delivery or 
innovation? Depending on the strategic priority of the firm, optimizing ones supply chain will 
be different. 
As suggested by Cao and Zheng (2011), in the absence of significant empirical work on 
the impact of SCC on collaborative advantage and firm performance, companies have little 
tested foundation proving how beneficial supply chain collaboration can be to their 
organizations.  
Cao and Zheng wanted to provide theoretical insights and empirical findings regarding 
such SCC and collaborative advantage, and the resulting effects on firm performance when 
collaboration takes place.  
They also tested the effect of firm size on the relationships among SCC collaborative 
advantage, and firm performance. SCC aspects that are typically measured include degree of 
information sharing, goal congruence, decision synchronization, incentive alignment, 
resources sharing, collaborative communication, and joint knowledge creation. In terms of 
collaborative advantage, typical metrics inspected include process efficiency, offering 
flexibility, business synergy, quality, and innovation. Effectiveness of SCC on firm 
performance was measured in the study through sales growth, profit margin on sales, return 
on investment (ROI), and growth in return on investment.  
Cao and Zheng (2011) found collaborative advantage has a significant positive effect on 
firm performance as SCC can be beneficial to all partners, especially in reducing risks and 
costs, and SCO has a significant positive effect on firm performance. However, it was not 
clear whether these hypotheses will hold true across small, medium, and large firms. It was 
found that large firms are more effective in jointly creating value with their partners than 
small and medium firms, and smaller firms get more abnormal results from alliances than 
larger firms.  
Wagner, Grosse-Ruyken, and Erhun (2012), in a related study, completed an empirical 
analysis to analyze a potential linkage between supply chain fit and the financial performance 
of a firm.  
Supply chain fit (i.e., strategic consistency between product/service‘s supply and demand 
and supply chain design characteristics) deals with supply and demand uncertainty and supply 
chain responsiveness, and competitive intensity. The authors studied variety of industries 
throughout the U.S. and Western Europe. The results indicated that firms with negative 
misfits or misalignments (i.e., 180 out of the 259 firms) had an average ROA of 5.80%. Firms 
with positive misfits (i.e., 70 out of 259 firms) had an average ROA of 7.73%. Lastly, firms 
with zero misfits showed the strongest financial performance with an average ROA of 
10.57%. Hence, the occurrence of supply chain misfits reduces the financial performance of a 
firm. 

Alan D. Smith 
6
CASE STUDY IN SCM PARTNERING 
 
Turner Dairy Farms 
 
Operational Aspects 
In the following section, the supply chain strategy of a local dairy farm, Turner Dairy 
Farms, will be reviewed and conceptually analyzed for its efficiency. Turner Dairy Farms is a 
family-owned company local to the Pittsburgh, PA area that was founded in 1930 by Charles 
G. Turner. The company specializes in the production, processing, and distribution of 
products within the dairy industry, with its focus weighing heavily on the production and 
processing of milk. Not only does Turner Dairy Farms pride itself on its dairy products, but it 
has also expanded into markets involving iced teas, fruit drinks, juices, and eggs. Since being 
established, Turner Dairy Farms has expanded from a single farm producing its own milk 
with a limited number of cows, to an award-winning company involved in 50 exclusive 
partnerships with local farms across Western Pennsylvania. On a national scale, according to 
some, they produce some of the best tasting milk available (―A trip to turner dairy and lone 
oak farms,‖ 2012). The partnerships that they have formed are pivotal in the success of 
Turner Dairy Farms and this will be discussed further in the coming pages. At present, these 
50 local farms are responsible for providing Turner Dairy Farms with the raw milk necessary 
to make the massive amounts of end product demanded by consumers. Turner Dairy Farms 
processes and distributes roughly 35,000 gallons of milk each and every day, serving 
customer in a 25-county area of Western Pennsylvania, Eastern Ohio, and West Virginia. 
They hold a respectable amount of the local market share. 
Management at Turner Dairy Farms tries to be very selective when it comes to the dairy 
farms that they will accept raw product from. With the goal being to produce some of the 
highest quality milk in the country, the partnerships that they have formed have involved a 
vast amount of correspondence and an understanding on the part of the supplier for what is 
expected. Without their suppliers making a huge commitment to keeping the cows clean, 
healthy, well fed, and even keeping the equipment extremely clean to protect the animals 
from any sort of contaminants, Turner Dairy Farms would not be able to produce the higher 
quality milk that they currently are known to make. SCM, SCC, and SRM techniques are vital 
for the smooth operation and the proficient communication that must occur between these 
parties in order for these standards to be upheld. 
Traditionally, management takes pride in their ability to support local agriculture, as they 
are able to ensure future business for dairy farmers across Western Pennsylvania through the 
use of their exclusive contracts. Supporting local agriculture has additional advantages as 
well: distance and local management of quality controls. Each of these partnerships is with a 
farm within a 70-mile radius of the Turner processing facility. This gives the company the 
comfort of knowing that their raw product is of the utmost freshness when it arrives for the 
beginning stage of processing, one that starts on the same day of these arrivals. This, 
accompanied by the high grade, sophisticated, equipment that Turner has in their processing 
facility, ensures that they cannot possibly make milk any better than it is when it leaves their 
plant. Again, SCM, SRM, and SCC all play a significant role in the effective correspondence 
between Turner Dairy Farms and its suppliers as they set such high expectations for their 
finished products. The company places a large emphasis on the quality of their product and 

Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management 
7
incorporates supply chain procedures that assist in making sure their quality is nationally 
competitive.  
From the beginning in the creating of the firm, Charles G. Turner, the current owner, 
believed in supplying higher levels of products and service, all while upholding his belief in 
treating people right. Over the years, he has developed very meaningful relationships with his 
customers and employees, which enhances a program of keeping everyone involved in the 
supply chain focused on the end goal. His passion for his product and customers could be 
seen on a daily basis and the following equation is one that deserves much credit when 
measuring the success of Turner Dairy farmers (i.e., quantity products + great value = return 
customers). SCM strategies have the potential to assist Turner Dairy Farms in continuing to 
strive for such goals. This can be done by optimizing their planning, limiting any 
wastefulness, and understanding the product demand, thus allowing them to produce very 
high quality products, provide their vendors and suppliers with the resources they need to best 
support Turner Dairy Farms, and deliver the product economically. It is evident that the 
company‘s reliance on the efficient acceptance, processing, and delivery of their goods, how 
dependent management is on the successful operation of their supply chain practices. 
 
Supply Chain Management as a Source of Operating Efficiency 
Proper supply chains alignments are very important aspects of any successful business 
and can often be a downfall for a company that does not take the time to consider how to 
successfully management them. They can be even more impactful with companies that are 
involved in more than one aspect of goods or services, such as Turner Dairy. Turner Dairy 
does not just produce dairy products; they also make other types of non-diary drinks as well, 
like teas and fruit juices. Since the company is involved with products/services other than 
dairy, they must be very careful and manage their supply chain very well in order to maintain 
the highest efficiency possible. Even if they did not sell the other types of products they 
would still have to make sure that their supply chain for their dairy products is incredibly 
efficient because of the time constraints that exist for dairy products. Dairy companies in 
particular have to be very careful and plan their supply chain as efficiently as possible to 
make sure that their products do not go bad before they can even get to the shelves for sale. 
With the simple added pressure of time before expiration for dairy companies, they must be 
much more precise when it comes to planning an efficient supply chain. 
Dairy companies have to keep special watch and control for standards and need to make 
ensure that their products meet the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FFA) specifications, 
which can add more costs and time to the overall production of food products (―Chapter 5 the 
dairy supply chain,‖ 1987). Dairy producers need to make sure that their products are 
produced to meet the standards and that they are delivered within the specifications, otherwise 
they could spoil and would not be eligible for sale and provide a loss for the company. The 
added pressure places by the FDA has to be included into consideration of the supply chain, 
so that means it is a very important aspect of the supply chain and it can have a very large 
impact on how things are done at a company. Even relatively small changes in quality and 
other related industrial standards, which every company has to abide by, can be impactful at 
the company-level and must be taken into consideration when it comes to how a company 
considers planning its supply chain and partnering relationships. 
Another aspect of the supply chain that dairy companies must face is how to deliver 
perishable products in a timely, cost-efficient manner, so that they are received by the sellers 

Alan D. Smith 
8
and ready to be put on the shelves in a profitable manner. The delivery process for smaller 
dairy companies like Turner has to be managed very carefully; otherwise it can become very 
costly for them to deliver their products in a timely and efficient manner while maintaining 
their profit margins on a commodity. One method is to deliver their products in a timely 
fashion, even factoring delivery distances and quality of transportation infrastructures that 
have the potential to seriously impact the planning activities with their supply chain partners. 
Type of delivery methods is a factor that must be considered and can be even more impactful 
on smaller companies, as they do not have the large volume as other companies may have and 
they must be very careful when it comes to the selection of delivery methods. Smaller 
companies like Turner need to pay special attention to delivery method and need to consider 
if a capital investment in trucks or another delivery method is worth it or not, and how much 
money they can save on their supply chain if taken. 
Distance is a very key factor in making a supply chain schedule. SMEs like Turner can 
elect to make partnerships with local farms so they can reduce the distance needed to travel to 
get the product from beginning to seller. When Turner does this they consider that a 
partnership with a local farm will help them in that they do not have to worry about raw 
materials as much and can thus focus more on the bottling and production of the final goods, 
and thus they are able to cut costs and save money on their supply chain. By making these 
partnerships, smaller companies make agreements to make the supply chain more efficient 
and, thus, they are simply working together to find the most efficient way to get something 
done. Partnerships help smaller companies more because they feel that they are much more 
helpful for the smaller volumes, but can offer a way to increase volume and thus they are 
much more helpful to companies that do not have the ability themselves to fully satisfy 
demand. 
Turner chooses to not import or export anything outside of the U.S., thus they are 
ensuring that instabilities associated with the global marketplace have relatively predictable 
influences their operational costs. Unfortunately, instabilities in global marketplaces do have 
ripple effects that are felt by domestic only manufacturers. The local dairy market typically 
ties to deliver fresh products at a short distances, instabilities can still be encountered. For 
example, there may be an instability in fuel costs in other markets around the globe, and that 
would still affect Turner. If a SME chose to go international, even to neighboring Canada or 
Mexico, management would have to make many changes to their supply chain and so the 
choice to stay domestic and local helps them to greatly keep costs manageable within their 
perishable supply chain. This type of decision has a great impact on how a company forms its 
supply chain and runs its day-to-day operations. If a company were to decide to import or 
export its products then it will have to consider the cost implications of it just as much as they 
would have to include the benefits. 
Generally speaking, management at SME need to take into account how they will fit into 
their own supply chain and if they will need to make any special decisions when it comes to 
how they do business. At Turner, for example, does not sell their products directly to the 
consumers, but are deeply involved in the daily management of the supply chain and 
understanding the marketing aspects of their final customers. As the initial aspects of this case 
study suggested, there is a need coordinate activities to focus on the end user. Traditional 
marketing activities involve the four Ps of product, price, place, and promotion. Turner Dairy 
is clearly involved heavily in marketing to final consumers. A visit to their website confirms 
this. They promote their products and are involved in marketing them to consumers. Although 

Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management 
9
they choose to find retailers for their products and they sell the products to them who then sell 
the products to the final consumers, management must cater to the end users of their products 
will not sell. By doing this they shorten their supply chain and, thus, reduce the costs needed 
to sell their products. They create agreements with the retailers to sell their products and thus 
create guaranteed future business, thus not having to worry about how much they will sell or 
need to sell to a retailer. These types of partnerships are greatly helpful in maintaining the 
stability of a supply chain and providing guidance as to how a company needs to adapt for 
their customer, even if it is not the end consumer. 
Partnerships cannot only play a significant role in a company‘s supply chain, but how a 
company does business in general. A partnership on the production level can help to shorten 
the supply chain and lower costs on the entire production process of a company. And 
partnerships on the sales level can help a company to shorten their supply chain and further 
reduce costs a company will have to deal with when it comes to selling their products. Turner 
Dairy utilizes both forms of partnerships and thus they maximize the benefits from each 
without hurting their competive situation within the industry. Management is trying to make 
the best of their situation, being a relatively small company, yet offering financial 
opportunities to its various suppliers. Although these partnerships can create complex 
situations between the parties involved, the matter of ownership will not need to be worried 
about because they are more so on the side of business and not on the side of buying and 
selling a company. These partnerships will generally help much more than they will hurt as 
long as both parties involved know what they are getting into and do not expect much more 
than they should really receive because of the partnership between them. 
Even though Turner Dairy is a relative small company, they still do business with local 
businesses that are much, much larger than they are, like Giant Eagle, for example, a very 
large grocery chain headquartered in Pittsburgh, PA. Turner has a partnership with Giant 
Eagle to sell their products in stores that are in similar areas to which Turner operates and, 
hence, they are willing to work with companies as that have a philosophy of green 
manufacturing and sustainability that may be found in many SME‘s. Even though the two 
companies work together and are a part of each other‘s supply chains, they are not wholly 
dependent on each other, yet still have significant interactions. Turner employs direct store 
delivery for dairy products, although they could ship to Giant Eagle's warehouse, then the 
product would be shipped from there to stores. In either situation, since dairy products are a 
major category for supermarkets, Turner will have frequent interactions with Giant at the 
store or warehouse levels. If their products are promoted in-store, they will have regular 
interactions with Giant‘s headquarters. Turner is responsible for sending the product to Giant 
Eagle and Giant Eagle is responsible for selling the products in their stores, and so they both 
want high-quality products to sell to their customers without having to go too far beyond the 
local region. With the growing trend of supporting local businesses instead of dependent on 
global outsource, both companies can gain significant boosts in their reputation as a supporter 
of the local economy and obtain fresher, high quality food with more control over its 
suppliers. 
Since Turner‘s supply chain is more involved in the front end of the supply chain, while 
Giant Eagle‘s is much more back-end, management of both companies see little problems in 
the relatively seamless strategic fit in terms of SCM. Some companies with more complex 
interdependencies may not readily see the apparent benefits and may not appreciate the 
strategic fit such collaboration may bring to the various participating companies. Management 

Alan D. Smith 
10
at Giant Eagle has to ensure that they have the ability to accept the products from Turners and 
that they have the ability to sell them as part of their local initiative to contribute to the 
community and reduce dependency on heavy fossil-fuel users from outside the Pittsburgh 
area, otherwise both will end up on the negative side of the agreement. Giant Eagle must 
ensure that they have a dependable place in their supply chain for Turner Dairy products; 
otherwise there will be long-term complications in the relationship. Turner has an equally 
good relationship with Eat‘n Park, a large chain restaurant in the Pittsburgh area, and they 
have other types of businesses that they supply and they have other places to sell their 
products, which just goes to show that they have good versatility within their business models 
(‖A trip to turner dairy and lone oak farms,‖ 2012). 
Giant Eagle, on-the-other-hand, has a completely different type of supply chain that is 
more so focused on the handling and storing of products before they go out on the shelves 
ready for the customers to buy. They have recently gone through an overhaul of their supply 
chain and changed how they use warehouse management so that they are much better at 
managing their supply chain and have become much more efficient (―Giant eagle reduces 
costs …‖ 2014). This recent overhaul shows that there is almost always something that can 
either be changed or adapted so that the process becomes much more efficient. Giant Eagle 
used an outside source to do this, which may only be reasonable for a company of their size, 
but even a smaller company can look at how the process changed and adapt their current 
supply chain to try and increase their productivity. For a company like Turner this may not be 
reasonable, but they can still look at their supply chain and decide on at a minimum of a 
yearly basis if everything is being done as efficiently as possible. 
 
Manifestation of a Typical Dairy Supply Chain 
The dairy supply chain is one that is unique to other supply chain from others within the 
perishable food industry. This is due to the fact that within the many steps of the supply chain 
there are additional measures of quality taken to ensure that the product remains sanitary 
along the path of the chain. These measures begin with the first step in the chain, which is the 
farmer (―Our farms,‖ 2014).  
Most farmers that produce milk, especially in the case for Turner Dairy, are under 
contract to produce a certain amount of milk over an agreed period of time. The process for 
the farmer begins with the obvious livelihood of a dairy farmer, the cow. Local farmers have 
a constant concern that the entire herd is safely housed and fed adequately to ensure the well-
being of the animal. Cows that remain in a comfortable environment not only lead to 
nutritious and safe dairy products, but in many instances allow the farmer to run a more 
profitable business. In the case of Turner Dairy, the milk from the farmer enters into a 
sanitation system directly from the cow, and then travels through sanitized hoses and pipes 
into holding tanks. Following this transfer from the cow into the holding tank the FDA 
monitors and tests the milk as it travels from the cow to the holding tank. Different sanitation 
tests are performed among the various stations of transport to ensure the highest quality 
throughout the process. Along with monitoring the milk process, the FDA requires that the 
entire farm facility be checked by a state inspection agency at least two times per year to 
assure that the entire facility are up to date with all dairy safety regulations  
("The dairy supply …," 1999). 
The next step in the supply chain is the process of transferring the dairy products from the 
farm to the processing facility. In the case of Turner Dairy, this process is kept within the 

Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management 
11
company as they have agreements with local farmers to have the farmers transport their milk 
to the Turner production facility. Each specific hauler, in congruence with the FDA, checks 
the temperature of the milk, physically inspects the milk, and takes a random sample of the 
entire quantity that is to be shipped before it is loaded into a stainless steel insulated truck for 
transport. Although there are technologies to keep milk from spoiling in shipment for up to 14 
days, local SMEs promote freshness by utilizing frequent deliveries.  
The next important step in the dairy supply chain is that of the processor. This is the step 
that the management at Turner Dairy is most significantly involved in. This is one of the most 
rigorous steps in regards to FDA regulations. This is due to the fact that there are three 
separate areas of testing for this step. Those areas would be testing, inspection, and sanitation 
and packaging. During this portion of the examination random samples of milk are taken 
from the entire quantity and are tested for bacteria that could be potentially harmful to the 
consumer. If any signs of infectious bacteria are noticed then the milk is immediately 
discarded. 
Processing facilities that produce dairy products undergo multiple inspections throughout 
the production, packaging, and distribution process to ensure that all dairy products are safe to 
consume. Many dairy processing plants have recently adopted the Hazard Analysis and 
Critical Control Point System (HACCP-ISO-2009). Under this system the dairy facility 
chooses to monitor their systems, along with their equipment on a voluntary basis. This 
voluntary basis is in place along with the government oversight that is already in place. 
Companies that produce milk and package it in bottles or convert it to cheese or other 
dairy products must adhere to extensive safety standards. To create products to the high 
standards that consumers generally desire, processers needs to follow multiple and complex 
procedures. These procedures encompass the areas of milk hauling, equipment sanitation, 
pasteurization, labeling, and dairy packaging. With the aid of these processes, specifically in 
the pasteurization department, harmful bacteria are immediately killed upon the entrance into 
the process. This process has contributed to the statistic that less than 1.5% of annual food 
borne illness outbreaks can be linked to the dairy supply chain in the U.S. (―The dairy supply 
…‖ 1999). 
The retailing of its products and services, or course, is the final step in the supply chain 
for dairy products. The main objective for the retailer is that they want to make sure that 
everything they receive from the processor is as fresh as possible. In order to do this step 
well, the retailer constantly monitors the cooling systems in the dairy case in the store. They 
need to monitor the expiration date of the products, and then remove the products that have 
reached their ―sell by‖ date.  
 
 
TYPES OF SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 
 
SCM Models 
 
There are multiple types of SCM models that exist among both manufacturing and 
processing industries. However, for the sake of this case study, the CPFR Model of supply 
chain management is the most pertinent to the dairy industry. 
 

Alan D. Smith 
12
Collaborative Planning, Forecasting and Replenishment (CPFR) Model 
 
The Collaborative Planning, Forecasting and Replenishment (CPFR) model is a concept 
with the idea of enhancing supply chain integration through the support of joint practices 
(Berry 2012). The essential elements of successful CPFR rely heavily on the cooperative 
management of inventory throughout all areas of the supply chain. In this particular case, it 
would stretch from the suppliers of the dairy products, to Turner Dairy, the processor, and 
finally to Giant Eagle, the retailer. This particular business model attempts to combine the 
intelligence of multiple trading partners in planning and fulfilling consumer demand. In order 
to combine these forms of intelligence one must follow the four phases in the CPFR cycle. 
These phases (Berry 2012) are as follows: Strategy and Planning stage, which the supply 
chain will establish regulations for the relationship. These regulations consist of business 
goals, assignment of roles, and checkpoint procedures among other regulations. Supply and 
Demand Management, which is specifically for the task of forecasting. Both sales and order 
forecasting are performed during this phase in order to make the supply chain run as 
efficiently as possible. The Execution stage consists of taking the forecasts that were 
completed in the previous stage and implementing them to fulfill orders in the supply chain. 
The Analysis Stage is one that consists of monitoring of the system as a whole. During this 
process management is constantly monitoring the planning and operations, along with 
evaluating the progress of the supply chain to the goals that were set in the strategy and 
planning phase. 
Another set of standards that must be followed when using the CPFR method is the 9-
step approach that was developed by the Voluntary Inter-industry Commerce Standards 
(VICS) (Berry 2012). These guidelines were established to assist in the development of 
agreements between the various businesses involved in the supply chain. The steps are listed 
as develop the front end agreement, create the joint business plan, create the sales forecast, 
identify exceptions for sales forecast, resolve/collaborate on exception items, create order 
forecast, identify exceptions for order forecast, resolve/collaborate on exception items, and 
order generation. A few of the benefits of CPFR are Improved customer service trough better 
forecasting techniques, Lower Inventories for higher profits, and operational cost reduction 
by decreasing set-up times, effort duplication and variations.  
 
 
Contextual Implications of Forecasting on Supply Chain Management 
 
Supply Chain Partners and Forecasting 
SCM is an integral operations management technique that utilizes a diverse arsenal of 
tools to ensure continued functional relationships between members; the behavior of a single 
chain entity maintains the potential to enact significant consequences on both preceding and 
succeeding members. One of the major methods of managing integrated supply chain 
function includes the selection of demand forecasting models based on the minimization of 
total model variance criteria. The selection of applicable forecasting models minimizing total 
demand volatility is industry specific, as inherent variance in forecasting models can be 
further exacerbated in implemented circumstances. Particular constraints, including presence 

Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management 
13
of trend, limit the pertinent models available to supply chain members, further complicating 
the model selection process. 
In the current literature, there is no consensus as to the model proposed to simultaneously 
mitigate demand variance and optimize forecast validity (Ali and Boylan 2011; Alizadeh 
2012; Ma and Ma 2013). While both quantitative, model selection criteria and qualitative, 
CPFR-based strategies have been studied as potential opportunities to employ downstream 
demand inference techniques, ultimately there is no method of completely accounting for the 
bullwhip effect (Ali and Boylan 2011).  
Popularized as the demand amplification effect, whiplash effect, and Forrester effect, the 
bullwhip effect was first defined as an amplification of the order variance moving up the 
supply chain, from customer to manufacturer (Alizadeh 2012). While each unique supply 
chain may be exposed to the bullwhip effect to a varying degree, demand signal processing, 
nonzero-lead time, order batching, supply shortages, and price fluctuations constituted five 
environmental supply chain markers denoting the presence of the bullwhip effect. 
 
Practical Application: Turner Dairy Supply Chain 
Consider the simplified supply chain containing with Turner Dairy, as a mid-stream 
supply chain member, must mitigate demand variance contributed by downstream, retail 
partners before generating a demand forecast to share with the upstream, independent dairy 
farms. As a distributor of dairy products, Turner Dairy is highly susceptible to inventory 
escalation due to the relatively short shelf life and viable consumption period. Unlike a 
manufacturing firm that may be able to stockpile, general raw material components to be later 
incorporated into work-in-process and finished goods, Turner Dairy‘s raw material, 
unpasteurized, whole milk must be quickly converted into its consumption-ready form.  
Turner Dairy determines the optimal allocation of resources based on the demand 
forecasts generated by downstream, retail partners. Based on the retail forecasts impacting 
order demand, Turner Dairy must then decide how best to distribute incoming deliveries of 
raw milk amongst the distinct product lines through industrial processing. While the incoming 
raw, whole milk can be separated into cream and skim categories, the retail forecasts will 
determine which product lines receive percentage of total yields. For example, cultured dairy 
products with longer shelf lives than uncultured milks and creams may sustain different 
demand patterns and therefore different forecasting techniques. If Turner Dairy and retail 
partners, such as Giant Eagle, are not cognizant of the implications of amplification of 
demand volatility, supply chain functionality can grind to a halt negatively influencing 
performance of all supply chain members. 
As a member of the terminal downstream, retail component of the same supply chain 
containing Turner Dairy, Giant Eagle may not directly feel the impact of downstream demand 
inference-related consequences. However, management still must deal with secondary and 
tertiary repercussions of highly volatile demand forecasts. Outside of merely maintaining an 
orderly supply chain, Giant Eagle relies on consistent shopping experiences and availability 
of preferred brands to develop customer loyalty. High variance from actual demand 
associated with forecasting may leave Giant Eagle susceptible to shortages and stock-outs, 
thereby passing the risk onto consumers. As a staple food item, milk is one of the compulsory 
offerings required by consumers and a negative experience with Giant Eagle may 
connotatively harm the organization‘s image. 
 

Alan D. Smith 
14
Difficulties of Quantifying Total Supply Chain Variance 
Perhaps, the main impediment to truly quantifying the bullwhip effect and its associated 
magnitudes originating from the basic variance principle in relation to multiple random 
variables is volatility in individual demand forecasts. Conceptually speaking, the demand 
from individual retailers with enough geographic separation could be considered as having a 
negligible covariance, thereby simplifying the calculations. Unfortunately, for supply chains 
maintaining competing retailers within close geographic proximity, the calculation of 
covariance between retailers is necessary to quantifying total variance. In addition, if scalar 
coefficients are included to place additional emphasis on particular supply chain members, 
there is a proportional relationship between individual variance and the newly transformed 
scalar coefficient (Ma and Ma 2013). 
For an organization, such as Turner Dairy, with multiple retail outlets, it may become 
increasingly difficult to quantify total demand variance. If one considers each retail demand 
forecast as independent yields a basic approximation; however, then this approximation will 
greatly under represent total demand variance, as it does not include covariance behavior 
between retailers. Ultimately, the decision to approximate demand variance by independent or 
dependent random variables is determined by the supply chain member. Dairy demand is 
relatively constant over the year with slight seasonal spikes for holiday and other demand 
variances, thereby further impacting the calculations. 
 
Alternative Effects Impacting Supply Chain 
Besides the amplification of the bullwhip effect, supply chains can be impacted by related 
phenomena, such as the oscillation effect and the phase lag effect). The oscillation effect 
influences business cycles for all the chain‘s echelons that tend to be leveled in final periods 
(Alizadeh 2012). Phase lag effects are essentially significant increases in size transfers to the 
next member of the chain, with the phase lag equal to the lead time of ordering. Both the 
oscillation effect and the phase lag effect amplify any variance implied by the bullwhip effect 
and act as supplementary sources of volatility in demand forecasting. 
For the oscillation effect, as the business cycle of the retailer serves as an approximation 
for the distributor and suppliers any variances engendered by retail components are magnified 
through the supply chain. In practicality, for Turner Dairy, although dairy consumption is 
rather consistent over the year, short period spikes, such as ice-cream before a summer 
holiday or milk before a severe winter storm, may be felt throughout the supply chain, if only 
temporarily.  
While these seasonal effects may not have significant long-term side effects, if 
continuous oscillation occurs between seasons demand variance could be even more volatile. 
The phase-lag effect, unlike the bullwhip effect or oscillation effect, is easier to quantify 
and a basic application.  
To mitigate the effects, the organization must change the basic principles by which the 
supply chain is managed; this includes such behaviors as altering supply chain member 
interactions to reduce lead-time.  
In an integrated supply chain, supplier relations are essential to the sustained functioning 
of the system. To ensure continued dedication and congenial supplier relationships, periodic 
reviews of governing policies can address any serious issues presented amongst the suppliers, 
such as extended lead-time. 
 

Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management 
15
Opportunities Elicited from Mitigation of Demand Variances 
For organizations, such as Turner Dairy, there are many opportunities to refine and 
improve supply chain management processes to conclusively improve relations with other 
supply chain members; the easiest of these opportunities is the integration of transparency 
into the supply chain.  
By creating a transparent, continuous flow of information between supply chain 
members, Turner Dairy can more adequately meet the needs of retailers, such as Giant Eagle, 
as well as strengthen relationships with suppliers. Upstream supply chain members benefit 
from access to downstream member demand and forecasting procedures, while downstream 
members benefit from a continually functioning supply chain. 
Instead of relying solely on downstream demand inference, upstream supply chain 
members can use supplementary information gained from downstream sources to better refine 
forecasting methods, minimizing overall total process variance. While information shared is 
limited to pertinent statistics regarding demand, upstream suppliers can potentially identify 
downstream inefficiencies that, when remedied, improve the overall flow of goods throughout 
the supply chain. 
A more efficient supply chain with autonomous members, better replicates the ideal 
supply chains presented in the conceptual literature. 
 
 
GENERAL CONCLUSION AND MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS 
 
Managers are increasingly trying to externalize SCM by including quality tool metrics in 
order to explain why many supply chain managers tend to emphasize quality values more 
than traditional management. Partnering and collaboration, along with supplier integration 
techniques are allowing firms to select appropriate metrics that provide useful information. 
One of the major concerns is with the manager‘s ability to identify the benefits and possible 
organizational changes that need/could occur in order to adopt a sustainable supply chain. 
Business strategy implementation must now encompass not only where our supplies and 
products come from, but how they are made and where do they end up? Ignorance of any 
categories of financial and nonfinancial drivers can have a negative effect on customer 
satisfaction, social standing, profits and costs for the firm.  
Fundamentally, there is no best method for addressing inherent supply chain demand 
variance whether from a quantitative model selection viewpoint or a qualitative managerial 
perspective. Until such a method is developed for quantifying and mitigating overall demand 
variance that maintains a lower statistical barrier to entry than its predecessors, the optimal 
solution remains to combine both quantitative and qualitative measures to accurately predict 
demand variances. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The author wishes to thank the valuable contributions by the reviewers for their input into 
the final chapter. Peer reviewing and editing are commonly tedious and thankless tasks. 
 

Alan D. Smith 
16
REFERENCES 
 
A trip to turner dairy & lone oak farms. (2012). Eat'n Park. [Web log message]. Retrieved 
June 23, 2014 from http://blog.eatnpark.com/2012/07/trip-to-turner-dairy-lone-oak-
farms.html. 
About Turner Dairy Farms (2014). [Online]. Retrieved April 28, 2014, from www.turner 
dairy.net. 
Ali, M.M., & Boylan, J.E. (2012). On the effect of non-optimal forecasting methods on 
supply chain downstream demand. IMA Journal of Management Mathematics, 23(1), 81-
98. 
Alizadeh, P. (2012). The role of forecasting parameters in reducing bullwhip effect. Advances 
in Production Engineering & Management, 7(3), 177-186. 
Basu, P., & Nair, S.K. (2012). Supply chain finance enabled early pay: Unlocking trapped 
value in B2B logistics. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 
12(3), 334-353. 
Baxter L.F., & Hirschhauser, C. (2004). Reification and representation in the implementation 
of quality improvement programmes. International Journal of Operations and 
Production Management, 24(2), 207-224. 
Berry, J. (2012). What is collaborative planning, forecasting and replenishment (CPFR)? 
[Online]. Retrieved June 23, 2014 from http://www.socialsupplychains.com/what-is-
collaborative-planning-forecasting-and-replenishment-cpfr/. 
Bhat, S. (2008). The effect of ordering policies for a manufacturing cell changing to lean 
production. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 222(B11), 1551-
1560.  
Biswas, P., & Sarker, B.R. (2008). Optimal batch quantity models for a lean production 
system with in-cycle rework and scrap. International Journal of Production Research, 
46(23), 6585-6610. 
Brito, T.B., & Botter, R.C. (2012). Feasibility analysis of a global logistics hub in Panama. 
International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 12(3), 247-266. 
Browning, T.R., & Heath, R.D. (2009). Reconceptualizing the effects of lean on production 
costs with evidence from the F-22 program. Journal of Operations Management, 27(1), 
23-35. 
Brun, A., & Zorzini, M. (2009). Evaluation of product customization strategies through 
modularization and postponement. International Journal of Production Economics, 
120(1), 205-220. 
Buckley, P.J., & Ghauri, P.N. (2004). Globalisation, economic geography and the strategy of 
multinational enterprises. Journal of International Business Studies, 35(2), 81-98.  
Bulcsu, S. (2011). The process of liberalising the rail freight transport markets in the EU: The 
case of Hungary. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 9(1), 89-
107. 
Camuffo, A., & Grandinetti, R. (2011). Italian industrial districts as cognitive systems: Are 
they still reproducible? Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 23(9-10), 815-852. 
Cao, M., & Zhang, Q. (2011). Supply chain collaboration: Impact on collaborative advantage 
and firm performance. Journal of Operations Management, 29), 163-180.  

Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management 
17
Carvalho, H., Cruz-Machado, V., & Tavares, J.G. (2012). A mapping framework for 
assessing supply chain resilience. International Journal of Logistics Systems and 
Management, 12(3), 354-373. 
Cavaleri, S.A. (2008). Are learning organizations pragmatic? The Learning Organization, 
15(6), 474-481.  
Chan, F.T.S., & Kumar, V. (2009). Performance optimization of a legality inspired supply 
chain model: a CFGTSA algorithm based approach. International Journal of Production 
Research, 47(3), 777-791. 
Chapter 5: The Dairy Supply Chain. (1987). National Agricultural Marketing Council. 
[Online]. Retrieved May 1, 2014 from http://www.namc.co.za/upload/food_price_ 
monitoring/FPM Report 2004_04_05_FoodValueChains_Dairy.pdf. 
Drejer, A., & Riis, J.O. (2000). New dimensions of competence development in industrial 
enterprises. International Journal of Manufacturing Technology and Management, 2, 
No.1/7), 660-882. 
Giant eagle reduces costs and increases customer value with supply chain solutions. (2014). 
[Online]. Retrieved June 23, 2014 from http://www.manh.com/resources/case-
study/giant-eagle-reduces-costs-and-increases-customer-value-supply-chain-solutions. 
Golmohammadi, D., & Mellat-Parast, M. (2012). Developing a grey-based decision making 
model for supplier selection. International Journal of Production Economics, 137(2), 
191–200. 
Grewal, C. (2008). An initiative to implement lean manufacturing using value stream 
mapping in a small company. International Journal of Manufacturing Technology and 
Management, 15, Nos. 3-4), 404-421. 
Hamidi, M., Farahmand, K., Sajjadi, S.R., & Nygard, K.E. (2012). A hybrid GRASP-tabu 
search metaheuristic for a four-layer location-routing problem. International Journal of 
Logistics Systems and Management, 12(3), 267-287. 
Hu, G., Wang, L., Fetch, S., & Bidanda, B. (2008). A multi-objective model for project 
portfolio selection to implement lean and Six Sigma concepts. International Journal of 
Production Research, 46(23), 6611-6648. 
Jain, V., Benyoucef, L., & Deshmukh, S.G. (2008). What's the buzz about moving from 'lean' 
to 'agile' integrated supply chains? A fuzzy intelligent agent-based approach. 
International Journal of Production Research, 46(23), 6649-6678. 
Kahkonen, A., & Lintukangas, K. (2010). The effects of SRM capability on supply 
management performance. International Journal of Business and Management Science, 
3(2), 107-120. 
Karlsson, C. (2003), The development of industrial networks, challenges to operations 
management in an extraprise, International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, 23 No.1),44-61.  
Kennedy, F.A., & Widener, S.K. (2008). A control framework: insights from evidence on 
lean accounting. Management Accounting Research, 19(4), 301-319. 
Kumar, P., Shankar, R., & Yadav, S.S. (2011). Global supplier selection and order allocation 
using FQFD and MOLP. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 
9(1), 43-68. 
Ma, J. & Ma X. (2013). A comparison of bullwhip effect under various forecasting techniques 
in supply chains with two retailers. Abstract and Applied Analysis (Special Issue)), 1-14.  

Alan D. Smith 
18
Mann, H., Kumar, U., Kumar, V., & Mann, I. (2010). Drivers of sustainable supply chain 
management. IUP Journal of Operation Management, 9(4), 52-63. 
Mathirajan, M., Manoj, K., & Ramachandran, V. (2011). A design of distribution network 
and development of efficient distribution policy. International Journal of Logistics 
Systems and Supply Management, 9(1), 108-137. 
More, D., & Babu, A.S. (2012). Benchmarking supply chain flexibility using data 
envelopment analysis. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 
12(3), 288-317. 
Our farms. (2014). Turner Dairy. [Online]. Retrieved April 28, 2014 from www.turnerdairy. 
net. 
Pettersson, A.I., & Segerstedt, A. (2011). Performance measurements in supply chains within 
Swedish industry. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 9(1), 69-
88. 
Pradhananga, R., Hanaoka, S., & Sattayaprasert, W. (2011). Optimisation model for 
hazardous material transport routing in Thailand. International Journal of Logistics 
Systems and Management, 9(1), 22-42. 
Scherrer-Rathje, M., Boyle, T.A., & Deflorin, P. (2009). Lean, take two! Reflections from the 
second attempt at lean implementation. Business Horizons, 52(1), 79-85.  
Smith, A.D. (2011). Component part quality assurance concerns and standards: Comparison 
of world-class manufacturers. Benchmarking: An International Journal. 18(1), 128-148. 
Smith, A.D. (2014). Chapter 1: Case Studies of RFID Practices for Competitive Inventory 
Management Systems. In Management Science, Logistics, and Operations Research: A 
volume in the Advances in Logistics, Operations, and Management Science (ALOMS) 
Book Series, J. Wang (Ed.). pp. 1-25.  
Smith, A.D. and Offodile, O.F. (2007). Exploring forecasting and project management 
characteristics of supply chain management. International Journal of Logistics and 
Supply Management, 3(2), 174-214. 
Smith, A.D., & Synowka, D.P. (2014). Lean operations and SCM practices in manufacturing 
firms: Multi-firm case studies in HRM and visual-based metrics. International Journal of 
Procurement Management, 7(2),183–200. 
Summers, G.J., & Scherpereel, C.M. (2008). Decision making in product development: Are 
you outside-in or inside-out? Management Decision, 46(9), 1299-1314. 
Tari, J.J., & Sabater, V. (2004), Quality tools and techniques: are they necessary for quality 
management? International Journal of Production Economics, 92(), 267-280. 
Tiwari, A., Turner, C., & Sackett, P. (2007). A framework for implementing cost and quality 
practices within manufacturing. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 
18(6), 731-760. 
The dairy supply chain: Dairy mild processing and dairy safety. (1999). [Online]. Retrieved 
June 23, 2014 from https://www.globaldairyinnovation.com/dairy-milk-production/dairy-
milk-processing.aspx. 
Vinodh, S., Sundararaj, G., Devadasan, S.R., & Maharaja, R. (2008). DESSAC: a decision 
support system for quantifying and analyzing agility. International Journal of Production 
Research, 46(23), 6759-6678.  
Wagner, S.M., Grosse-Ruyken, P.T., & Erhun, F. (2012). The link between supply chain fit 
and financial performance of the firm. Journal of Operations Management, 30(4), 340-
353. 

Exploring Strategic Partnering in Supply Chain Management 
19
Wan, H-D., & Chen, F.F. (2008). A leanness measure of manufacturing systems for 
quantifying impacts of lean initiatives. International Journal of Production Research, 
46(23), 6567-6584.  
 
 


In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
QUALITY SACRIFICED:  
A LOOK AT QUALITY ISSUES EXPERIENCED  
IN GLOBAL OUTSOURCING 
 
 
MD Sarder, PhD* 
Industrial Engineering and Technology,  
University of Southern Mississippi, Long Beach, Mississippi, US 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Outsourcing is commonly used by companies to reduce schedule risks, minimize 
manufacturing or operation costs, or to produce goods or services that are outside the 
capabilities of the company. Ultimately the end goal of outsourcing is to provide a 
service or product that increases the company‘s profits. But does the practice of 
outsourcing come at a cost to the business or consumer? And do the benefits outweigh 
the costs? Companies often obtain these services or the labor for manufacturing the 
products at a reduced cost and very often the quality is not satisfactory. In this paper we 
will look at some of the services and products that are being outsourced by American 
companies and the quality issues that the companies and their customers are 
experiencing. In particular we will look at call centers located outside U.S., the quality 
issues associated with them, and the affect they have on the company‘s customers and 
bottom line. We will also look at products that are being manufactured overseas, and their 
associated issues, the steps that companies are taking to overcome the quality setbacks 
and if these steps are improving the end product and their customer satisfaction. 
 
Keywords: global outsourcing, quality enablers, electronic quality management, customer 
satisfaction 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
* Corresponding Author address: Email: md.sarder@usm.edu. 

MD Sarder 
22
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Sometime a company must re-evaluate its supply chain process and determine if they will 
manufacture a good or provide a service through their own facility. This determination is 
usually dependent on the company‘s capabilities or the cost of providing the goods or service 
in-house as opposed to outside of the company. Many companies, including U.S. based 
companies, have found that it is more economical to have some of their services and products 
produced and provided by sources outside of the company, particularly overseas. This is 
mostly due to the cheaper labor and material that can be found overseas. Therefore, the 
companies have adopted outsourcing as part of their supply chain. According to market 
researcher Datamonitor, the outsourcing market is projected to be worth $24 billion by the 
end of 2008 (Ren, Zhou 2006.). The most common types of service or products that are 
globally outsourced are programming, call centers, and manufactured goods such as toys, 
electronics parts, and some foods. When a company chooses an outsourcing company, it 
provides specifications and requirements to that company on how the product should be 
manufactured or how the service should be provided. Product and service quality are very 
important requirements that should be met by the outsourced companies. The quality of the 
product and service is determined by how well the product and service specifications are met 
and how the end customers respond to the end product and service. And the final quality 
measurement is determined by the parent company‘s revenues that are produced from the end 
product and service. Of course the end customer determines the revenues received by the 
parent company. If the customers are not satisfied with the services or goods they receive, 
they will eventually find an alternative source for their need. And eventually, the company‘s 
revenues will suffer and a decision or plan will have to be made to counteract the effects of a 
bad decision. The effect is reversed for a satisfied customer. But what happens when the 
parent company is a major supplier of a good or service and it is more difficult for customers 
to obtain that good or service from another supplier? Sometimes there are enough customers 
that continue using that supplier regardless of numerous quality issues that arise due to the 
use of the outsourced companies. So then the economic return by using the outsourced 
company is a greater impact for the parent company than the setbacks of poor quality. So then 
what drives the company to make a change in its manufacturing process or service 
provisions? Over the next few sections this paper will review issues associated with call 
centers, the setbacks that occurred, and if any steps were taken by the parent companies to 
resolve the issues, including the effectiveness of the steps. We will also look at goods that 
were manufactured or produced overseas, their defects and the associated safety issues, and if 
the necessary steps were taken to resolve the safety hazards. 
 
 
2. OUTSOURCING 
 
Definition 
 
―Outsourcing‖ refers to the transfer of non-core operations from internal employees to an 
external organization and ―offshore outsourcing‖ refers to the external work that is being 
performed in another country (Green 2007). The most common locations of offshoring are 

Quality Sacrificed 
23
located in India, China, the Philippines, Eastern Europe and South America (Green 2007). 
There are many benefits to outsourcing which may drive a company to choose it as part of its 
supply chain. Outsourcing provides a company with a greater access pool to talent which it 
may not be able to find in the U.S. Certain products produced by the company demand 
specialized skills that are not readily available in the U.S. in large numbers. And due to the 
amount of employees available for outsourcing, companies can fill open positions much 
quicker. The labor costs are also incentives to the companies that engage in outsourcing. The 
same work can be performed overseas as opposed to the U.S. at a 30-50% savings to the 
company (Green 2007). Many companies can avoid recruiting issues such as recruiting costs, 
and the time it takes to find and recruit each employee. The responsibility of managing the 
employees in the outsourced company are also removed from the parent company and taken 
care of by the outsourced management. Outsourcing also helps companies achieve an end 
product or service by providing an input that is outside the company‘s present capabilities and 
they help the company meet a schedule constraint if manufacturing the good is outside the 
schedule plan. There are also challenges and shortfalls with outsourcing. First there are 
always the cultural differences when outsourcing the work to overseas companies. This 
includes communication issues that stem from differences in language and just simply the 
processes for accomplishing the same task. Job loss in the U.S. is another side effect to 
outsourcing. Some experts argue that outsourcing takes up the lower-level jobs and that 
allows Americans to perform the higher value jobs (Green 2007). But what that argument 
does not address is the impact it has on the Americans that lose the lower-level jobs or the 
rising unemployment rate in the U.S. Many workers that are laid off do not immediately find 
new employment and if they are unemployed for a lengthy time, they may lose their homes 
and other property they once owned. This can, of course, affect the American economy in a 
negative way. So while the economy may be stimulated by the received company revenues, 
the economy may also take a hit in unemployment and foreclosed homes. Quality, which is 
the topic of this paper‘s discussion, can also be compromised by using outsourced labor. If a 
company does not thoroughly research an outsourced vendor‘s capabilities, they run the risk 
of receiving goods or services that are not to the specifications of the company or the 
customer. These quality issues end up offsetting the cost benefits that should have been 
realized by the company. Quality issues may be associated with a particular vendor and not 
the entire area or region where that vendor is located. For example Dell made the decision to 
close an Indian call center over the continuous amount of customer complaints received 
concerning the quality of service. Not only does Dell continue to use call center in India, it 
has plans to expand the outsourced business in India (Kaka 2006). Dell believes that many of 
the Indian call centers it uses provide excellent customer service. 
 
 
2.1. Integrating Outsourcing into the Supply Chain  
 
While there are definite benefits to outsourcing, a company may not realize them unless 
the outsourced function is properly incorporated into the company‘s supply chain. A company 
must properly choose a vendor that is appropriate for the product or service that needs to be 
provided. A vendor should have the capabilities to perform to the requirements given by the 
company and within the necessary timeline. A timeline must be provided to the vendor by the 
company in order to meet the overall schedule of the final product. The product or service 

MD Sarder 
24
requirements should be developed as part of the company‘s supply chain plan. The main 
company will have to accurately determine the economics of outsourcing the work and those 
economics should be specific to the vendor. This is because the economic factors are variable 
depending on the quality and type of work the vendor provides and at what cost. Developers 
of the supply chain plan will have to determine what revenue return, if any, will occur as a 
result of outsourcing work. A revenue return will be dependant on the type of work that is 
outsourced. How the vendor‘s performance and operation metrics are managed is another 
consideration as part of the supply chain. The vendor‘s performance and operating metrics 
should be reported to the main company to roll up into the overall metrics and to determine if 
the vendor is operating at a satisfactory rate and quality. This gives the company visibility of 
how the vendor is operating, how it impacts the overall schedule and product, and it allows 
the company to take mitigating steps to alleviate any risks that may arise. Companies must 
also plan how the vendor‘s activities will interact with other function within the supply chain. 
This includes material needed for the product, equipment to provide a service, and the 
transportation that may be needed to deliver the product back to the main company or desired 
facility. For example, a shipbuilder may outsource a section of a ship out to another facility. 
The shipbuilder will have to decide who will order the material, where will it be shipped, and 
once the section is completed, where will the final ship be assembled, and how the sections 
get transported to one location for final assembly. Successful integration of outsourcing into 
the supply chain is the beginning of quality being implemented by the vendor.  
 
 
2.2. Potential Quality Risks to Outsourcing 
 
Outsourcing seems be losing luster in the US as the majority (around 70%) of industry 
seems to have had a negative experience with outsourcing, according to a survey of 25 large 
organizations, with a combined $50 billion in outsourcing contracts (Verma 2005). One in 
four companies has brought outsourced functions back in-house and nearly half have failed to 
see the cost savings they anticipated from outsourcing, according to a study by Deloitte 
Consulting. Instead of simplifying operations, many companies have found that outsourcing 
activities can cause problems relating to product quality, added costs and friction into the 
value chain, and requires more senior management attention and deeper management skills 
than anticipated, according to the study (Howells, Jeremy 1999). Due to this negative 
experience, many US companies are taking a cautious approach now. The following sections 
discuss some sources of quality risks from outsourcing. 
 
2.2.1. Reduced Control over Processes 
Transferring activities outside the company by outsourcing also transfers the control and 
accountability of daily activities. This increases the risk that substandard work performed at 
an early stage of production has to be reworked at a later stage. The further along in the 
production process a particular task is performed, the higher the cost of that activity. A task 
that requires one hour to complete at the lowest unit of production may take as much as ten 
hours to complete (Kaka 2006). This requires a substantial quality inspection effort 
throughout the production of the outsourced product. 
Material shortages and interruptions, labor disputes, and production engineering issues 
can all contribute to slippage of schedules that affects the final delivery of the outsourced 

Quality Sacrificed 
25
product. These issues are extremely difficult to control in the company and would be much 
harder to control at a subcontractor‘s facility. When portions of a product are outsourced 
overseas, these issues become even more difficult to identify and control. The probability of 
poor quality increases as control over production process decreases. 
Companies must approach outsourcing with care and ensure contractual stipulations are 
in place that clearly define critical quality indicators. These indicators should identify specific 
activities and events that need monitoring to prevent poor quality work from occurring. The 
contracting company needs to have their quality personnel embedded in the subcontractor‘s 
facility from the start of production to final delivery. This will insure that problems are 
identified early, corrective action taken, and changes to processes are implemented to prevent 
repeated mistakes. The cost of these added quality inspections, onsite quality inspectors, and a 
robust system for tracking the production process remotely must be factored into the cost 
benefit analysis when deciding to outsource. Failure to do so may result in unexpected cost 
increases. A study conducted by AMR Research showed over 50% of manufacturers 
outsourcing production, experienced cost overruns (Upton 2007). 
 
2.2.2. Changes in Global Competitiveness 
Trends show that manufacturing costs are rising globally. As developing countries 
prosper, wages rise and competition increases. The more outsourcing projects that flow into a 
country, the greater the demand for labor. This eventually leads to an imbalance in the supply 
and demand for skilled workers and wages have to increase. This in turn will cause a decrease 
in outsourced work entering the country and a new equilibrium will be reached, but at a 
higher wage level. With lengthy production processes such as shipbuilding, prices need to be 
negotiated and locked in at the beginning, to prevent spiraling labor costs from eroding any 
anticipated savings from outsourcing. The rise in oil prices underscores how quickly global 
commodity markets can affect costs associated with manufacturing ships and other long-term 
projects. 
 
2.2.3. Transportation Complexities 
Transportation costs associated with global outsourcing are high. Not only does the 
finished product have to be shipped back to the parent company, all material that goes into the 
production has to be shipped to the subcontractor‘s facility if the material used in the 
production is unique and tightly controlled by specifications. Hazards during the 
transportation of the assembled units from the subcontractor‘s facility to the company are 
very real. Storms have sunk many vessels and caused much cargo to be lost. Barges used in 
the transportation of large assemblies are not very seaworthy and heavy lift seagoing vessels 
are very expensive to lease. While insurance may cover the loss or damage to an assembly, 
the delay in producing and delivering huge products such as ships would be prohibitively 
expensive. This requires delivery schedules to be coordinated with seasonal weather patterns 
over the course of delivery. For an Atlantic crossing, two or three weeks of fair weather 
would be required to insure a safe delivery. If an East Coast company in the U.S. outsourced 
the units to Asia, more than a month would be needed to insure a safe delivery. The cost of 
this risk has to be factored into the decision to outsource and extensive mitigations steps put 
in place. 
 
 

MD Sarder 
26
2.2.4. Design Changes 
One of the most important aspects of subcontracting out work on a product is the 
necessity of a complete and mature design. Both the company and the subcontractor need to 
know the final configuration of the product to price the production process in an accurate 
manner and to ensure the lowest production costs throughout the process. This situation may 
exist for some products, but products like warships are rarely designed in advance and the 
design is never static. 
One of the reasons for the high cost of warships is the constant change that occurs to the 
design as the ship is built. Production usually starts on the lead ship of a class before the 
design is completely finished. This allows a head start on a very lengthy process but adds 
tremendous risk to the program in the form of potentially added costs to change items that 
have already been built. In addition, changes to the design are constantly being incorporated 
as the ship is being built. All of these changes present obstacles to outsourcing for cost 
savings. Changes to the design after the award of a production contract with an offshore 
subcontractor can quickly drive up the delivered cost of the product. This factor alone may be 
sufficient to prevent the offshoring of portions of warships. 
 
 
2.3. Quality Dimensions in Outsourcing 
 
Quality can be defined in many ways. It can be said that quality is a product or service 
that consistently has zero defects, conforms to particular specifications, and is satisfactorily 
received by the customer (Outsourcing the Quality Function 2008). It can also be stated as the 
thought process sought out by organizations to create an overall drive toward efficiency, the 
reduction of waste, and the continual creation of more streamlined management processes [4]. 
Either way quality is defined by the customer who receives the service or good. At the level 
of strategic operations, many researchers have developed different quality frameworks. For 
example, Garvin (1987) developed a quality framework considering an eight dimension 
product quality, and Parasuraman et al. (1991) derived a five dimension model of service 
quality. Table 1 summarizes quality dimensions for both products and services. 
Quality may sometimes be overlooked when a company chooses outsourcing just to 
reduce cost. That company looks at factors of the outsourced vendor and decides it is much 
more cost effective for that company and its workers to perform the work than to pay current 
workers or hire new workers to do the job. Many of those companies‘ investigations do not 
surpass the cost factor and fail to research the complete capabilities of the vendor. Possibly 
the vendor is not suitable for the work given them and may even lack the skills to perform the 
job according to specifications. This results in unsatisfied internal and external customers. 
The company has to re-evaluate the use of the vendor and what changes will have to be made 
to accommodate the shortcomings of the vendor. These shortcomings can affect material that 
is wasted due to low quality, lost external customers because of bad service, and an impacted 
schedule because the planned date has not been met. If an outsourced company uses its own 
equipment and procures its own material, the parent company runs the risk of outdated 
equipment that is not able to meet the required end result or material that does not meet the 
requirements of the product. Every one of the items spells loss of revenue for the company 
and ultimately the loss of an overall profit. All the work that goes into fixing the problems 

Quality Sacrificed 
27
caused by the outsourced vendor negates the benefits of low labor cost and possibly material 
costs. 
 
Table 1. Quality Dimensions of Products and Services 
 
 
 
Table 2. Quality Dimensions of Global Outsourcing 
 
  

MD Sarder 
28
Bad quality can also affect the safety of a product or service. For example, in 2007 
Americans dealt with many health hazards stemming from products such as chemical tainted 
pet food and lead painted toys, all exported from China (Middler 2007). These safety hazards 
resulted in international food bans and product recalls on items made in China. Defects like 
these can lead to serious illness and even death.  
Outsourcing is no longer an operational cost cutting process but a strategic way to drive 
corporate performance and competitiveness. It is now a process of continuous improvement 
by both the outsourcing organization and the outsourcing vendor to meet the ever changing 
business needs. There are several sectors in outsourcing that can be reviewed for their quality. 
Outsourcing quality can be divided into product quality and service quality. Given the 
differences, it is inappropriate to adopt either of the quality dimensions from product quality 
or service quality as a whole.  
Although existing quality frameworks are not directly appropriate for global outsourcing, 
previous studies on quality measures are useful in developing a more accurate quality 
dimension for global outsourcing industry. Ma et al. (2005) implemented an exploratory 
study on service quality and identified seven factors to measure it: features, availability, 
reliability and assurance, empathy, conformance and security. Hongeyan and Joern (2008) 
identified eight quality dimensions for Business Process Outsourcing. Hongeyan and Joern‘s 
quality dimensions can be considered as the base framework for global outsourcing. Table 2 
shows the dimensions of global outsourcing. 
 
 
3. QUALITY ASSURANCE IN GLOBAL OUTSOURCING  
 
Assuring quality in global outsourcing is very challenging due to the multiple layers 
involved in the supply chain. Supply chain layers include worldwide retailers who outsource 
products or services globally, intermediaries such as 3PL/ 4PL, freight forwarders, brokers, 
overseas manufacturers and their sub contractors, and various levels of vendors. These layers 
are sometime loosely integrated and hence it is hard to maintain quality throughout the chain. 
Some layers have quality assurance, but to truly ensure quality products and services, every 
member of the supply chain‘s layers should be considered quality assurance so that the work 
is done according to specifications. One could say that this creates a culture of quality that is 
ingrained to every layer of the supply chain including an outsourced vendor. Companies may 
actually decide that in order to meet their quality objectives, some services or products must 
be outsourced overseas to more skilled laborers. They feel that they do not have the skills in 
house, and quality is better met by outsourcing the necessary work. A test may be needed on a 
product and the company may not have the facilities, equipment or the skilled manpower to 
perform it and therefore they find a company that is more capable and has the facility to 
perform the test. By that decision, a needed operation is performed and the company‘s 
schedule is not interrupted if accurately planned.  
Steps can be taken to help ensure the vendor provides services and products at quality 
levels that are acceptable to both internal and external customers. As stated before proper 
integration of the outsourced work into the supply chain is paramount. No work can properly 
be accomplished and managed without an integration plan to guide and oversee the vendor‘s 
work. If outsourcing is a strong option for the company, but there is a lack of trained workers, 

Quality Sacrificed 
29
the company should provide training for the vendors to prepare them for the work that needs 
to be accomplished. The company should also work on the cultural differences between them 
and the outsourced vendor. They should not seek to completely change the vendor‘s way of 
accomplishing work, but they should strive to understand the vendor‘s culture. This will assist 
in making decisions on how to define requirements to the group and how to help them meet 
the requirements. U.S. companies should understand that there are different ways at arriving 
to a solution as long as the requirements are met. In realizing the cultural differences, U.S. 
companies should make sure the vendor clearly understands what is expected of them. Words 
that are used in the U.S. may have a totally different meaning to someone in India or China. 
The company may feel they clearly defined their requirements and the vendor may feel they 
clearly accomplished the work according the requirements as they read or understood them. 
Only later, sometimes too late, they find out the product or service did not meet the 
requirements and the vendor did not clearly understand. A liaison from the parent company 
should network with a liaison from the vendor who has a clear understanding of the English 
diction. They will assist in knowing whether the company is effectively providing their 
requirements to the vendor and the vendor clearly understands what is needed of them. The 
company should also set up quality metrics that are understood by the vendor and should 
become a part of the vendor‘s way of business. In order for quality to become a complete part 
of the company‘s supply chain, the outsourced company has to make quality inherit to their 
business as well. The company should be able to provide back to the vendor what work is 
acceptable and what goals are not being met. They should also provide suggestions on how to 
achieve the required goal. Incentives should be provided to the vendors who continuously 
provide quality products and product non-confirming vendors should be addressed 
appropriately, including termination of their services if they continue not to meet the expected 
quality level.  
 
 
3.1. Trends of Technology Use in Outsourcing 
 
As mentioned earlier ensuring the quality of products and services throughout the supply 
chain network is very challenging due to the multiple layers involved and the lack of control 
over those layers. Technology can play an important role in improving quality performance in 
global outsourcing. Use of technology in the Supply Chain Management (SCM) are on rise. 
Aberdeen group published the evolution of SCM technologies for the past few decades as 
shown in Figure 1.  
The use of technologies in the SCM was rising in 1980s and 1990s and expected to rise in 
the next decade. Technology allows the rapid development of various ready-to-use best-
practice templates that suits most needed business processes. It offers ready-to-run user 
interfaces and screens, in addition to the generic built-in out of the box interfaces and 
integration scenarios that are compatible with most business applications and software 
(Hongeyan and Joern 2008). 
Innovative use of technologies in the SCM is the key to assure quality in global 
outsourcing. Companies are investing to develop appropriate technologies in various areas 
including supply chain visibility, inventory optimization, supplier/customer collaboration, 
performance management, etc. Figure 2 shows survey results of application investment areas 
conducted by Aberdeen Group in 2008. 

MD Sarder 
30
 
Figure 1. Evolution of Supply Chain Management Technologies (Aberdeen Group 2008). 
 
 
Figure 2. Top Application Investment Areas (Aberdeen Group 2008). 
 
3.2. Technology Enablers 
 
Companies look to technology to increase and maintain quality levels, decrease costs, and 
ultimately, to grow the bottom line. It is necessary for companies to identify ―Technology 
Enablers‖ – the most appropriate technologies in information, communication and operational 
systems for competitive advantage. Technology enablers are the solution that can be used to 
identify, assess, and ensure the quality of products and services. Although process and 
technology both play key roles in assuring the quality of products and services to an 
outsourcing supply chain network, the companies that most successfully leverage technology 
will significantly differentiate themselves from the competition. In addition to the traditional 
and well-understood outsourcing solutions of planning, execution, coordination, and 

Quality Sacrificed 
31
networking, some of the exciting new technologies – 3D visualization, Radio Frequency 
Identification, agent technology, satellite technology, and Web services – are significant for 
improving and ensuring quality in the global supply chain networks. 
Table 3 shows some key driving forces, actions, capabilities, and technology enablers for 
the global outsourcing companies for their supply chain network. Effective implementation of 
these technology enablers will help companies to improve the quality of outsourced products 
and services. 
 
Table 3. Technology Enablers of Global Outsourcing 
 
 
 
The Technology Enablers must be weighted for the costs and benefits of each possible 
implementation. This task requires companies to not only have an understanding of the 
possible solutions, but also the financial ramifications of each potential component of 
enablers. Technology solutions must be compared on the basis of functionality, cost, benefit 
and ease of maintenance. In considering the range of solutions to a problem, the company 
must also consider whether the solution can be purchased ―off the shelf‖ or developed in-
house. An off-the-shelf solution may be easier and cheaper to implement, but there are times 
when it is more effective to develop an in-house solution as opposed to modifying an existing 
tool. Four major technology enablers for global outsourcing are supply chain visibility, 
information timeliness, data integration, and innovation in technology. All together these 
enablers share real time information related to the quality of products and services, integrate 
information so that appropriate control can be deployed with the innovative uses of 
technologies. The following sections describes these enablers briefly. Once all technology 
enablers are identified, it is necessary to assess their impact on quality dimensions. Figure 4 
shows the impact of technology enablers on global outsourcing quality. 
 
3.2.1. Supply Chain Visibility 
As global outsourcing continues to become complicated, visibility of quality information 
is rapidly becoming the fundamental building block for adaptive supply chain networks. 
Because competition is transitioning from among individual companies to among supply 
networks, visibility to both intra- and inter-organizational information is critical for rapid 
response. Information technology advances now make extended visibility across 
organizations possible. Information visibility of orders, plans, supplies, inventory, and 

MD Sarder 
32
shipments is key to successfully coordinating events across the network and to monitoring 
analytics that track the health of the network and allow for proactive action. 
 
 
Figure 3. Impact of Technology on Global Outsourcing Quality. 
Theoretically, it is possible for an order captured by a retailer to be simultaneously 
propagated to the suppliers across the network and to have inventory checks made against it 
at all points. Distributors, logistics service providers, and all relevant departments across 
different organizations can have full visibility of the order flow, both into the system and back 
to the customer. The customer, in turn, can track the shipment of the order and make changes 
based on predefined rules. Therefore, the goal is to develop a system that provides total 
visibility of the order, automates order management, and monitors product use by customers 
across the network, replenishing when necessary, without having any manual intervention, 
other than exceptions. 
The greatest financial value comes from leveraging visibility information to identify and 
eliminate root causes of delays, and to rapidly respond to changes that could negatively 
impact the business if mismanaged or left unattended. All of this hinges on the ability to 
rapidly analyze data to understand its impact, collaborate, and simulate to understand what 
options exist to solve a given problem and to score each option to ensure that actions are 
aligned with corporate objectives. 

Quality Sacrificed 
33
3.2.2. Information Timeliness 
Once organizations overcome the visibility barrier and can receive accurate information, 
the next step is to increase the velocity of response by accessing and distributing information 
rapidly across the supply network. Velocity of response is rapidly becoming the key 
differentiator in business performance. The success of Dell Computer in the high-tech market, 
Wal-Mart in the retail market, and Toyota in the automobile market is closely linked to their 
access to timely information across their networks. These companies create value far greater 
than the average value created by their peers. That is because of their ability to plan rapidly 
and efficiently move both information and physical assets through the supply network at far 
greater velocities than their competition. This enables them to maintain margin parity with the 
competition and yet create returns on assets and invested capital that far exceed the norm. The 
velocity of value creation is the single most critical differentiator that adaptive supply chain 
networks can help create. 
 
3.2.3. Data Integration 
The discrete, dynamic, and distributed nature of data and applications requires software 
that not only responds to requests for information, but also intelligently anticipates, adapts, 
and supports users. Systems need to have the capability to help coordinate tasks among 
workers and help manage cooperation among distributed programs. In response to these 
requirements, researchers from several fields are banding together around a common broad 
agenda: the development of intelligent software agents. 
Agents are packets of simple software capable of sensing the local environment, 
autonomously executing delegated tasks, and communicating results to designated entities, 
which could be human users, agents, applications, or business workflows. Designed to 
improve the velocity of response, agents are key to providing visibility into real-time 
distributed business processes across the supply network. 
They can execute a wide range of functional tasks, such as searching, comparing, 
learning, negotiating, and collaborating. These capabilities enhance the adaptability of the 
supply network, help to significantly reduce variability and the costs associated with 
exception management, and address some key barriers to widespread collaboration among 
supply network partners. 
Adaptive agents increase the value of business transactions by allowing for real-time, 
active, and predictive monitoring of critical business events and parameters across the 
extended supply network. By detecting relevant conditions faster and formulating an 
optimized response faster through intelligent response, the occurrence of supply chain 
glitches that impact customers is less likely.  
 
3.2.4. Technology Innovation 
The single largest challenge to building adaptive supply chain networks is the issue of 
cross-enterprise collaboration created because of the lack of standards and the prohibitive 
costs of building application integrators. Expected to reduce current integration costs by 70% 
to 80%, Web services technology could be the solution because it allows firms to interconnect 
software.  
Notable 
technology 
innovations 
include 
response 
management 
applications, 
transformation from status tracking to exception-based process management platforms with 

MD Sarder 
34
alerting, escalation policies, resolution advice or workflow. These innovations deliver value 
in terms of inventory and lead time reductions, improved on-time deliveries, improved cross-
company, and cross-department synchronization. 
Information sharing in construction supply chain means key data information such as 
material stock situation, capital arrangement, schedule, transportation situation etc. remain 
open to relevant parties involved. For example, a contractor will improve construction 
planning skills if he knows the material supplier‘s production distribution ability, while the 
supplier will provide materials more reliably to the contractor if he knows the contractor‘s 
scheduled plan. Obviously, managers make decisions with a broader view by sharing 
information, information sharing, which is the basis of considering construction supply chain 
as a whole system but not a part, is a key step for successful construction supply chain 
management.  
 
 
Figure 4. Quality Monitoring and Controlling Over Multi-layered Global Outsourcing. 
Hitachi selected Camstar‘s Electronics Suite for its out-of-the-box functionality designed 
specifically for Electronics manufacturing processes, and for its ability to streamline 
production through electronic management and enforcement of process specifications, and for 
the system‘s unique multi-level work-in-process (WIP) tracking capabilities. Hitachi now 
efficiently collects accurate and timely information on work orders, WIP status, yield, high-
investment production equipment, material usage and defect analysis. As a result, Hitachi 
more accurately controls and manages production planning, work order progress, materials, 
quality, full product build traceability, and equipment certification - all critical business 
requirements. 
 
 
3.3. Modeling Cost of Poor Quality 
 
In global outsourcing there are two major actors, one is the manufacturer and the other 
one is the supplier. As a measure to ensure quality of products, each of these actors should be 
responsible to pick some cost due to the poor quality of their products. This model determines 
the cost of poor quality for both actors. In order to make this model easy and clear to analyze, 

Quality Sacrificed 
35
only one kind of supply is considered, and only decision variables both relevant to the 
manufacturer and their supplier are considered. The manufacturer‘s demand quantity is 
confirmed as
. The material supplier‘s common supply capability is
, as supplier delivers 
material for several manufacturers, so the supplier‘s ability to meet this manufacturer‘s 
demand is
, the supplier‘s enlarged production capability is
. If production 
efficiency is 1, then delivery quantity of supplier 
 is
.  
Cost of Poor Quality Model for Manufacturer 
 
 
 
 
 
means manufacturer‘s total cost, 
means penalty cost of not satisfying retailer‘s 
requirement, 
means unit price of material , 
means unit penalty to supplier if delivery 
delayed, 
means ordering quantity, and 
means delivery quantity.  
Therefore, manufacturer‘s function is as follows: 
 
  
(1) 
 
 
 
Cost of Poor Quality Model for Supplier 
For material suppliers, if penalty cost is very high, they will consider delivering materials 
that meets the manufacturer‘s requirements, on time delivery, and enlarging production 
capacity to meet ordering quantity. If supply is more than ordering quantity, the supplier will 
pay for the left material storage cost, if production is less than ordering quantity, supplier will 
pay for penalty cost. Penalty costs also include late delivery and sub standard material cost.  
So the cost for poor quality model of supplier is: 
 
 
 
 
q
C
,
(0,1)
C


C

d


min
,
C
C q


(
)
(
)
T
C
F q
d
pd
K q
d







min
,
d
C
C q



T
C
F
p
K
q
d






( ,
)
0
( ,
)
1
0
( ,
)
( ,
)
0
( ,
)
0
( ,
)
1
0
( ,
)
(
)
( )
(
) ( )
( )
( )
(
)
( )
(
) ( )
( )
x q
C
T
x q
C
x q
C
x q
C
x q
C
x q
C
x q
C
E C
F
q
C
C
f
d
p
C
C f
d
p
qf
d
K
q
C
C
f
d
F
K
q
C
C
f
d
p
C
C f
d
p
qf
d





























































( ,
)
q
C
x q
C
C







B
P
Pd
h
C
C
q
k C
K q
d













max
,0
C
C
q
C
C
q









MD Sarder 
36
 means supplier‘s total cost, 
 means left material storage cost, and k means other 
penalty cost. Therefore the material supplier‘s cost function is as follows: 
 
  
(2) 
 
Total cost of poor quality for entire Supply Chain Model is as follows: 
 
  
(3) 
 
 
4. CASE ANALYSIS 
 
Call centers are service oriented organizations and are usually used for sales, technical 
support and other customer related calls. These centers are used mainly for communications 
(LAN line phones and cell phones), computers and other electronics. They are also used for 
credit service support. For example, if you must speak with a service representative to resolve 
a bill issue with American Express, you will most likely be routed to a call center overseas. 
Other examples of companies that utilize call centers are Dell, Compaq, and AT&T. Dell 
largely uses outsourcing for its call center applications. The majority of the centers are 
located in India. In 2004, Dell had to move its call centers associated with OptiPlex desktops 
and Latitude laptops back to the U.S. because the center was not able to satisfactorily deal 
with the large volume of calls generated by the rapid growth of those product lines (McCue 
2005). But although Dell has experienced setbacks due to Indian call centers‘ lack of quality, 
the company has plans to further expand its call center base in India and possibly other 
overseas locations (McCue 2005).  
In the beginning, call centers were mainly just telephones and posts. But the centers now 
provide numerous communication services, including phone, letter, email, Web chat, video 
and email [7-differentiator]. This development in the call centers operations requires more 
skilled workers within the vendor‘s company. Most companies begin outsourcing call center 
work to reduce costs for their companies. The companies chose vendors because of their base 
cost and not because of their ability to perform up to the expected level. The companies failed 
to focus on issues that would provide excellent customer satisfaction and ultimately increase 
the companies‘ revenue. This included selecting companies that emphasized quality and had 
the labor skill to manage whatever product or service the company required. Companies 
sometimes fail to realize that the vendor‘s service quality will become an extension of their 
company as far as the external customer is concerned, and so if the vendor‘s service is not up 
to the expectation of the customers calling in, then the parent company will take a hit for not 
meeting the company‘s expectations.  
B
P
h




( ,
)
0
1
1
( ,
)
( ,
)
( ,
)
0
(
)
(
) ( )
( )
( )
(
)
( )
x q
C
B
x q
C
x q
C
x q
C
E P
p
C
C f
d
p
qf
d
h
C
C
q f
d
k C
K
q
C
C
f
d































( ,
)
0
1
( ,
)
(
)
(
)
( )
(
) ( )
x q
C
TB
x q
C
E C
F
q
C
C
f
d
k C
h
C
C
q f
d


















Quality Sacrificed 
37
CONCLUSION 
 
Outsourcing is about letting those with expertise in a particular field perform the service 
or produce a good better than the company who is outsourcing. A strong level of quality 
obtained easier when the vendor is skilled in its field. When a company chooses a vendor not 
based only on cost, but also on its expertise and quality level, then it is sure that the 
appropriate benefits will be realized. These benefits include revenue increase and customer 
satisfaction.  
This study developed the theoretical dimensions of service quality for the BPO industry 
and explored how technology affects these quality factors. Technology is a main enabler of 
BPO and a major factor of its success. The effect of technology in BPO is built upon 
standardization, integration, automation and innovation. These factors not only drive and 
maintain but also improve the reliability, tangible, and conformance, responsiveness and 
flexibility, security along the whole of process activities.  
As the application objective of BPO is shifting towards that of enhancing the 
competitiveness of BPO buyers, the value of the technology driving BPO is increasing. The 
use of standard integration interfaces, best-practice templates and configuration options 
enhance BPO quality. Technology provides the execution platform to enable benefits, like 
speeding up the adoption of best-practices, interfaces and new upgrades, and providing a 
sustainable quality level during maintenance activities. The underlying technology provides 
business value to both the buyers and the service providers. Due to this value, companies 
seeking BPO are actively seeking ways to leverage the advantages by making the most of 
technology. Therefore, this study provides the quality factor and standards driven by 
technology when selecting a BPO service provider.  
However, the quality dimensions and quality enablers discussed above are not exhaustive 
and overlapping exists among them. We hope to provide managerial implications to 
practitioners by this study. Given the boom of BPO applications and the limitations on the 
research of BPO quality theory, it is also expected to invite further study in greater depth and 
width. A broadly recognized quality framework for BPO would be helpful to push BPO 
development forward. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Aberdeen Group 2008. Supply Chain Innovator's Technology Footprint 2008 - Technology 
Enablers for Driving Supply Chain Transformation. 
Boguslauskas V., Kvedaravičienė G., (2008), ―Strategic outsourcing plan and the structure of 
outsourcing process,‖ Engineering Economics, vol. 3, pp 60-66. Available: 
http://www.ktu.lt/lt/mokslas/zurnalai/inzeko/58/1392-2758-2008-3-58-60.pdf. 
BPO Excellence. 2006. How to make BPO sustainable and the role of technology in 
achieving this. SAP Seminar June.  
Cronin, J J, S A Taylor. 1992. Measuring service quality: A reexamination and extension. 
Journal of Marketing 56(3) 55-68.  
Erlanger, L. 2006. Business process outsourcing: putting IT in the director‘s chair. 
InforWorld 27 Feb.  

MD Sarder 
38
Garvin, D A. 1987. Competing on the eight dimensions of quality. Havard Business Review 
Nov-Dec 101-109.  
Green Aaron, ―Part 1- Offshoring basics: definitions, benefits, and challenges,‖ September 
2007. 
Grover, V, M J Cheon, J T C Teng. 1996. The effect of service quality and partnership on the 
outsourcing of information systems function. Journal of Management Information 
Systems 12(4) 89-116.  
Hecker R., ―Other voices: Weigh costs, barriers for offshore moves,‖ Regional Business 
News, vol. 20, p 9, Dec. 2004. 
Industry Leaders Talk Tech at 10th annual FS/TEC Confab., Nation‟s Restaurant News, Nov. 
28th 2005. 
Kaka, Noshir., ―Running a customer service center in India: An interview with the head of 
operations for Dell India‖ 2006. 
Kettinger, W J, C C Lee. 1997. Pragmatic perspectives on the measurement of information 
systems service quality. MIS Quarterly 21(2) 223-240.  
Kouzes James, and Posner Barry Z., (2003) ―Leadership is a Relationship.‖ In Business 
Leadership. John Wiley & Sons, San Francisco, CA.  
Kumar S., et al., ―Application of a process methodology and a strategic decision model for 
business process outsourcing,‖ Information Knowledge Business Management, vol. 6, pp 
323-324, Dec. 2007. 
Li, Hongyan, and Meissner, Joern. 2008. Improving quality in business process outsourcing 
through technology – achieve process and service quality with technology. SAP Insight 
No 50-091-185 August.  
Ma, Q, J M Pearson, S Tadisina. 2005. An exploratory study into factors of service quality for 
application service providers. Information and Management 42 1067-1080.  
McCue, Andy, ―For Dell, Indian call center failure lesson,‖ cnet.com, March 2004. 
Midler, Paul, ―Dealing With China‘s ‗Quality Fade,‘‖ Forbes.com, July 2007. 
Minevich M., Richter F., ―Global Outsourcing Report 2005,‖ Going Global Ventures, Inc, 
New York, NY, and Horasis, Geneva, Switzerland, March 2005. Available: 
http://www.globalequations.com/global%20 outsourcing%20report.pdf. 
Neal H., (2007, August), ―Outsourcing production may be fashionable, but not everyone is 
cashing in on the trend,‖ Manufacturing Business Technology, [Online] Available: 
http://www.mbtmag.com/article/CA6466565.html. 
No Author, ―First Marine International findings for the global shipbuilding industrial base 
benchmarking study: Part I Major companys,‖ First Marine International, London, 
England, 
Aug. 
2005. 
Available: 
http://www.docstoc.com/docs/848424/Global-
Shipbuilding-Industrial-Base-Benchmarking-Study-Part-Major-Companys. 
No Author, ―House committee acts to prevent US tax dollars from subsidizing Asian 
companys,‖ American Shipbuilder, vol. 10, August 2004. Available: http://www.usships. 
org/content/view/140/60/. 
No Author, ―Manufacturing in America: A comprehensive strategy to address the challenges 
to U.S. manufacturers,‖ U.S. Department of Commerce, pp 13-31, Jan. 2004. Available: 
http://www.manufacturing.gov/ report/competing.pdf. 
No Author, ―Report on survey of U.S. shipbuilding and repair facilities,‖ U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Maritime Administration, Office of Ship Production, Division of Production, 

Quality Sacrificed 
39
December 1977. Available: http://www.docstoc.com/docs/DownloadDoc.aspx?doc_id= 
858262. 
No Author, ―Report on survey of U.S. shipbuilding and repair facilities,‖ U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Maritime Administration, Office of Shipbuilding and Marine Technology, 
December 2001. Available: http://74.125.45.132/search?q=cache:m-t5jSMFJZUJ:https:// 
marweb.marad.dot.gov/NMREC/images/2001%2520-%2520Report%2520on%2520 
Survey%2520of%2520US%2520Shipbuilding%2520and%2520Repair%2520Facilities.p
df+%22Report+on+survey+of+U.S.+shipbuilding+and+repair+facilities%22+2007&hl=e
n&ct=clnk&cd=4&gl=us. 
No Author, ―Outsourcing the Quality Function‖, Quality Digest, December 2008. 
Parasuraman, A, L L Berry, V A Zeithaml. 1991. Refinement and reassessment of the 
SERQUAL scale. Journal of Retailing 67(4) 420-450.  
Pollin R., ―Economic prospects: Global outsourcing and the U.S. working class,‖ New Labor 
Forum, vol. 16, pp 122-125, Dec. 2007. 
Prasad A., and Prasad P., ―Moving out: Toward understanding the complexity of outsourcing 
in the age of globalization,‖ The Business Renaissance Quarterly, vol. 2, pp67-91, 
October 2007. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers. 
2002. 
Global 
human 
capital 
survey. 
Available 
at 
http://www.retentionengine.com/pdf/IBM\%20Human\%20Capital\%20Survey.pdf.  
Reeves, C, D Bednar. 1994. Defining quality: alternatives and implications. Academy of 
Management Review 19(3) 419-445.  
Ren, Z. Justin, Zhou, Yong-Pin, ―Call Center Outsourcing: Coordinating Staffing Level and 
Service, July 2006. 
SchankJ, et al., ―Outsourcing and outfitting practices: Implications for the Ministry of 
Defence shipbuilding programmes,‖ RAND Corporation, Arlington, VA 2005. Available: 
http://www.rand.org/pubs/ monographs/2005/RAND_MG198.pdf. 
Supply Chain Innovator's Technology Footprint 2008. 
Upton, Neville, ―Outsourcing: Value, Not Cost, Should be the Differentiator,‖ 
www.callcentermagazine.com, September 2007. 
Vellotti J., ―Give and take: In offshoring, is a job lost a job gained?,‖ Long Island Business 
News, vol. 53, pp 1A, 40A, Mar. 2007. 
Westrate, William,: Tech Strategist, Computerworld, Dec. 12th 2005. 
 


In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
A COST OPTIMIZATION MODEL FOR  
INTRA-SHIPMENT IN A SUPPLY CHAIN 
 
 
Henry Lau 
University of Western Sydney, School of Business,  
Penrith NSW, Australia 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In this research, a decision model is developed aiming to optimize the costs related to 
the shipment of goods from one or more suppliers to the wholesaler which has received 
order placed by customers. The various suppliers have a variety of purchase prices for the 
goods and they also have varying delivery lead times. Moreover, the wholesaler is also 
allowed to consider to purchase the goods from other wholesalers which belong to the 
same organization (known as intra-shipment) and normally with a relatively higher price 
than the suppliers. Due to the immediate availability of goods in store, it is assumed that 
there is zero lead time for delivery. As such, the supplier needs to make a decision based 
on the computation of all the costs involved and identifies and optimum arrangement that 
optimize the costs. The model to be developed in this paper is able to provide expertise 
advice to support the decision to be made by the wholesaler, taking into consideration all 
the expected costs and achieve the minimization of total logistics costs.  
 
Keywords: intra-shipment, replenishment, inventory control, optimization 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
From the wholesalers‘ perspective, it is always the idea that the logistics cost and in 
particular the storage cost needs to be minimized through the streamlining of the flow of 
goods in the entire supply chain network. To achieve this, the approach is to minimize the 
inventory of items especially in the wholesalers‘ section. In today‘s business environment, it 
                                                        
 Email: h.lau@uws.edu.au. 

Henry Lau 
42
is also essential that customers are able to receive the goods on schedule. In order to remain 
competitive, wholesalers need to be ensure a balance between cost of goods and the time of 
delivery. From time to time, wholesalers need to make an important decision as whether they 
should purchase the items from suppliers which agree on certain lead time but not guaranteed 
or they can obtain the goods from their partner wholesalers (from the same company) with a 
relatively higher price through a process known as intra-shipment. As these are partner 
wholesalers have the items in stock and normally not located far away, the lead time can be 
guanranteed and normally goods can be instantly obtainable. This paper proposes a new 
decision rule that computes all expected total costs and identifies the optimum arrangement of 
either to order the quantity needed from the suppliers directly or to replenish the goods from 
other wholesalers through intra-shipment. In many cases, wholesalers face a dilemma with 
their operations. When a sudden request for goods from a retailer exceeds the inventory on 
hand at the wholesaler, a decision has to be made in order to fullfil the demand. The 
wholesaler needs to evaluate whether it is appropriate to admit the loss generated due to the 
backorder (by ordering the goods from the suppliers) or to accept an intra-shipment from 
other wholesalers. The proposed decision rule is based on the computation and comparison of 
the total costs of intra-shipping a certain portion of the demand, and in supplying the 
remaining portion from an external supplier. 
Thomas and Griffin [1] conducted extensive study regarding an integrated planning and 
control approach and concluded that a holistic model is needed to deal with supply chain 
operations. Erenguc et al. [2] has extended the study and came up with the suggestion that 
even the operational network is based on a holistic approach, practitioners still have to deal 
with various levels of planning and control issues, some of which can be relatively 
complicated. While Köchel et al. [3] stressed the importance of organizing shipments of 
resource units between the nodes of the logistics network; Weber [4] provided 
complementarity and substitutability in the shipment related problem. Burton and Banerjee 
[5] examined the cost effects of two lateral transshipment approaches in a two-echelon supply 
chain network and discovered that a lateral shipment approach was considerably superior to a 
policy of no such shipments, albeit at the expense of increased transportation activity. Minner 
and Silver [6] evaluated two simple extreme transshipment strategies and developed an 
analytical approach for estimating the approximate total expected costs. There are many 
papers that deal with goods replenishment issues [7-14]. However, most authors assume a 
decision rule is applied when asking for a shipment from other wholesalers. Axsäter [15] has 
come up with a novel idea that lateral transshipment can be considered when the suppliers are 
not able to deliver the goods in compliance with the request of customers and he proposed a 
decision model to help manager make the important choice regarding inventory 
replenishment. Archibald et al. [16] proposed another approach to deal with lateral 
transshipment based on the fundamental concept suggested by Axsater [15]. Tagaras and 
Cohen [17] evaluated the an qualitative approach to deal with transshipment for achieving 
cost optimization through the use of a simulation software and proved to be useful.  
In this paper, a new decision rule is introduced for intra-shipment. Axsäter [18] worked 
out a solution in a similar area for a warehouse facing a Poisson type of demand for goods. It 
gives a number of alternative decisions for the warehouse to consider. The approach has been 
evaluated and the results are encouraging. Based on such idea, a new approach has been 
developed, which deals with multiple suppliers and variable lead times in delivering goods 
together with the cost of intra-shipment. In this approach the replenishment quantity from the 

A Cost Optimization Model for Intra-Shipment in a Supply Chain 
43
supplier and the intra-shipment quantity from other wholesalers can be computed, 
consequently the most cost effective decision can be obtained.  
 
 
PROBLEM DESCRIPTION 
 
Consider a certain (finite) number of wholesalers that operate independently of each other 
in a certain local area. The wholesalers supply goods to local retailers whose requests for 
orders from the wholesalers are assumed to follow independent compound Poisson 
distributions1 as described by Axsäter [18]. The wholesalers usually replenish their stock 
from a supplier. The lead time of the supplier follows some probability distribution. In 
addition, trans-shipment from other wholesalers (being in the same cost centre) is also a 
convenient and feasible option to partially/fully meet retailer demands. We define such 
transfer of products between wholesalers belonging to the same cost centre as intra-shipment, 
i.e., we call the lateral trans-shipment between two wholesalers of the same cost centre, as 
intra-shipment. Due to the close proximity between the individual wholesalers, compared 
with the normally large distances from their suppliers, intra-shipments are usually assumed to 
have no lead time, but they do incur additional cost.  
We assume that all wholesalers apply a periodic review policy descibed by Rosenshine 
and Obee [19] to replenish from external suppliers. To formulate the periodic review policy, 
we review the unsatisfied demands in the previous period, the inventory position, and the 
expected demand in the current period, and then make the order at the beginning of this 
period. Unsatisfied demands or surplus orders of this period will be regarded as initial 
demands or will be added to inventory position of the next period. If the wholesaler does not 
employ a (R,Q) review policy, its inventory position could be lower than R of (R,Q) policy or 
even near zero, which can decrease the holding costs of the wholesaler. However, the 
wholesaler that uses a periodic policy has the possibility that its inventory position may be 
lower than zero. This potentially increases the back-order cost. One possible solution is to 
make trans-shipment from other wholesaler so as to make the inventory position of the 
wholesaler non-negative as soon as possible.  
A detailed description of the present model is as follows. Let
be M 
wholesalers in a certain local region. Let n be the number of retailers requesting goods from 
wholesaler
in a time interval of length t. It has a Poisson distribution with a 
known arrival intensity
. that is,  
 
， 
 
where
is the retailer arrival intensity at wholesaler i. 
 
                                                        
1 For consistency, we assume the same distribution of retailer demands as Axsäter (18) but we note that our 
mathematical model as well as the decision rule for intra-shipment is also applicable to other discrete retailer 
demand distributions with simple substitution. 
M
W
W
,
,
1 
i
W
)
,
1,
=
(
M
i

i

1,2,
=
,
!
)
(
=
)
(
,
n
n
t
e
n
P
n
i
ti
t
i



i

Henry Lau 
44
Let
represent any supplier of 
 with unit goods prices
; let
be 
delivery lead time of
; let
be the probability mass function of
.
is an upper 
bound on the delivery lead time of supplier
. This assumption of a finite value for
is 
consistent with the fact that no supplier will take an infinite time to deliver its goods. A 
reasonable (finite) value for
always exists for each
. 
 
 
Figure 1. A schematic diagram of the supply chain of wholesalers, retailers and suppliers.  
In our model, the period to update the wholesaler is set to the maximal lead time of the 
given supplier. So all the orders made should be received in the period. Wi therefore there will 
be no outstanding orders from its suppliers at the initial point of a new period, which will 
simplify the total cost model and decision rules for intra-shipment. So the inventory level of 
the wholesaler is equal to its inventory position. 
For reasons related to the efficiency of operations and management, it will also be 
assumed that once wholesaler Wi has taken a decision not to make any trans-shipment, it will 
place an order for goods with one single supplier instead of using a combination of suppliers.  
)
,1
(
i
ij
N
j
S


i
W
ij
p
ij
L
ij
S
)
(t
gij
ij
L
max
ij
L
ij
S
max
ij
L
max
ij
L
ij
S

A Cost Optimization Model for Intra-Shipment in a Supply Chain 
45
Likewise, once wholesaler Wi has taken a decision to make any trans-shipment, it will 
place an order with one single wholesaler instead of using a combination of wholesalers. 
Figure 1 illustrates the relationships of suppliers, wholesalers, and retailers. All the 
wholesalers belong to the same cost centre. The dashed black lines represent the possible 
intra-shipment within the cost centre. 
We shall model the dependence of the total cost of the operation imposed on one 
wholesaler in regard to intra-shipment, i.e., we provide the cost function of one wholesaler 
with respect to the variable, size of intra-shipment, and determine an appropriate order action 
for the wholesaler. Naturally, the cost function provides a useful decision rule for intra-
shipment and the size of intra-shipment by obtaining its minimization.  
In the present model multiple suppliers are allowed to replenish goods for each 
wholesaler.  
This assumption is consistent with the real-life situation in supply chains where each 
wholesaler is serviced by a host of goods suppliers. Secondly, one may consider the general 
case of variable supply lead time. Such consideration is also realistic as goods supplied from 
far-away suppliers are invariably subject to all kinds of unforeseen transport and traffic 
conditions that may either hasten or delay the arrival of the goods.  
By considering the probability mass functions of the lead times of suppliers, the 
variability of the arrival times of goods can be taken into account.  
Another significant advantage of this model is the ease of implementation of the decision 
rule, which stems from the basic available information of the wholesalers and their suppliers. 
All calculations can be done in a straightforward manner using mathematics software by 
simply plugging in the required inputs.  
Note that the lead-time probability mass functions of the suppliers are assumed to be 
known either precisely from information supplied by the suppliers or approximately from past 
experience with the suppliers. 
 
 
COST MODEL FOR THE WHOLESALER WITH INTRA-SHIPMENT 
 
Let x
be the number of goods units that are trans-shipped from 
wholesaler 
 to 
 (
) to partially meet the demand 
 at 
with the initial 
inventory level 
, with the remaining portion 
 being satisfied by one 
of the suppliers. For ease of reference, the notations used in the model are summarized below: 
 
= the total number of wholesalers 
= the ith wholesaler  
= the total number of suppliers to Wi 
= the jth supplier of Wi 
= the unit selling price by Sij to Wi  
= the unit intra-shipment price from Wi to Wk  
))
0
(
(0)
0
(
i
id
x




k
W
i
W
i
k 
(0)
id
i
W
)
0
(
i
x
d
i
i


(0)
(0)

M
i
W
i
N
ij
S
ijP
kq

Henry Lau 
46
= the back-order cost rate at Wi per unit item per unit time  
= the holding cost rate at Wi per unit item per unit time 
= the initial time 
= the tth unit time interval after t0  
= the delivery lead time probability mass function of Sij. 
= the lead time of Sij with duration equal to Lij times unit time interval. 
= the maximal lead time of Sij with duration equal to
times unit time interval. 
= the initial retailer demand appearing at Wi  
= the retailer arrival intensity of the tth time interval at Wi 
= the probability of n retailers at Wi with a total demand of m 
= the expected retailer demand at wholesaler Wi in the tth time interval 
 
= the expected retailer demand at wholesaler
over
 
 
, 
, 
 
 are the purchase cost, the back-order cost, holding 
cost, and the total cost to 
 for trans-shipping x units from 
 and supplying the 
remainder of demands from Sij, respectively. 
Under the consideration of the current supply/intra-shipment model for any time interval, 
such as the tth, and any fixed supplier
, 
 
 
 
Firstly, Given the tth time interval (
) and n retailers, the conditional 
probability that n retailers require m demands is 
 
 
 
Meanwhile, given the th time interval (
), the probability of n retailers 
arriving at Wi follows the Poisson distribution, 
 
. 
 
 
ib
ih
0t
t
)
(t
gij
ij
L
max
ij
L
max
ij
L
(0)
id
)
(t
i
n
m
if ,
)
(
ˆ t
di
ij
Dˆ
i
W
max
ij
L
)
(x
Pijk
)
(x
Bijk
)
(x
Hijk
)
(x
Cijk
i
W
k
W
ij
S
.
!
))
(
(
=
)
(
ˆ
,
1
=
1
=
)
(
n
m
i
n
i
m
n
m
t
i
i
f
n
t
m
e
t
d






max
ij
L
t 

0
.
)
|
(
,
,
n
m
i
d
f
n
m
P
t
i

max
ij
L
t 

0
!
))
(
(
)
(
)
(
,
n
t
e
n
P
n
i
t
d
i
t
i





A Cost Optimization Model for Intra-Shipment in a Supply Chain 
47
The probability of retailer demands at Wi over the tth time interval is thus given by 
 
 
 
Therefore, the expected retailer demand at
by time interval t is given by 
 
 
 
Since there is no infinite demand at wholesaler i in practice, we set 
as the upper 
bound of retailer demands at wholesaler i in the numercial simulation. 
It also follows that the expected retailer demand at Wi over the maximal lead time of Sij 
(i.e.,
 times unit time intervals) is given by the sum of all the expected demands above, 
 
 
 
Furthermore, if the ith wholesaler makes its orders from the jth supplier, the expected 
delivery lead time is  
 
, 
 
Our mathematical model will determine an appropriate course of action for 
 in 
response to the appearance of 
 that would minimize its operation cost, as follows. 
Over one scheduling period (i.e., the maximal lead time), the expected retailer demands 
for the ith wholesaler is
. The purchase cost of the ith wholesaler is therefore composed of 













m
n
n
i
t
n
m
i
m
n
d
n
m
i
m
n
d
d
m
n
i
i
d
n
t
e
f
n
P
f
n
P
n
m
P
W
at
retailers
n
P
W
at
retailers
n
of
condition
under
demands
m
P
m
P
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
1
)
(
,
1
,
1
1
!
))
(
(
)
(
)
(
)
|
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
,
,
,
,


i
W
.
!
))
(
(
=
)
(
=
)
(
ˆ
,
1
=
1
=
)
(
,
1
=
n
m
i
n
i
m
n
m
t
i
t
i
d
m
i
f
n
t
m
e
m
mP
t
d









max
id
max
ij
L
.
!
))
(
(
=
)
(
ˆ
=
ˆ
max
max
1
1
1
,
)
(
1










ij
i
ij
L
k
m
m
n
n
m
i
n
i
k
L
k
i
ij
f
n
k
m
e
k
d
D


)
(
=
)
(
max
1
t
g
t
L
E
ij
L
t
ij
ij


i
W
(0)
id
ij
Dˆ

Henry Lau 
48
the cost to purchase from the supplier, Sij and cost to purchase from the other wholesaler, Wk
2. 
Hence,  
 
 
 
Consider
. In this case, 
 has no backlogged orders. The appearance of 
 at 
 adds to the backlog. If 
, then no intra-shipment is needed. 
On the other hand, if 
, then that the total number of back-ordered units at 
 
at the initial time is 
. Now x units of the required goods have just arrived from 
a nearby wholesaler 
 (
), so the number of back-ordered units at 
is in fact 
. 
The goods by intra-shipment arrive at the wholesaler with zero lead time, which will not 
produce back-order cost, while the remaining goods from the supplier are expected to arrive 
at the wholesaler after the expected lead time, E(Lij), which will generate some back-order 
cost. Among the remainging goods, some goods (
) are demanded at t = 0 
so the back-order time is E(Lij) while the other demands
appear over the whole period. If 
those demands happen before the ordered goods arrive, the wholesaler will suffer from the 
back-order cost; if they happen after the arrival of goods the wholesaler has to carry the 
burden of the holding cost. Consequently, according to the delivery time of ordered goods we 
devide Lij
max into two sub-intervals, [0, E(Lij)] and (E(Lij), Lij
max]. Next, we prove the back-
order cost is due to expected demands. Consider the expected demand over unit time interval, 
such as the hth time interval, the expected demand over this day is
. The back-order 
cost for this demand is given by
, as presented in Figure 2, and then the 
back-order cost for all expected demand over the interval
is calculated by its 
sum. Thus, 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Schematic of the expected demand at the tth day and its lead time. 
                                                        
2 It is assumed that the wholesaler has the stocks on hand but its available stocks, sk may be less or more than
)
0
(
)
0
(
i
id


. The actual number of intra-shipment
)
),
0
(
)
0
(
min((
k
i
i
k
s
d




. 


.
ˆ
(0)
(0)
=
)
(
x
q
p
D
x
d
x
P
k
ij
ij
i
i
ijk




(0)
<
0
i
i
W
(0)
id
0t
(0)
(0)
<
0
i
id


(0)
<
(0)
i
i
d

i
W
(0)
(0)
i
id


k
W
i
k 
i
W
x
d
i
i


(0)
(0)

x
d
i
i


)
0
(
)
0
(

ij
Dˆ
)
(
ˆ h
di
)
)
(
)(
(
h
L
E
h
d
b
ij
i
i

)]
(
,0
[(
ij
L
E


.)
)
(
()
(
ˆ
)
(
(0)
(0)
=
)
(
)
(
0
t
L
E
t
d
b
L
E
x
d
b
x
B
ij
L
E
t
i
i
ij
i
i
i
ijk
ij








A Cost Optimization Model for Intra-Shipment in a Supply Chain 
49
We formularize the holding cost for the demands generated over the sub-interval, 
in the same way, as follows  
 
 
 
Finaly, the total cost of wholesaler i over one review period is 
 
 
 
We state our first decision rule for intra-shipment as a proposition. 
Proposition. 
For 
the 
current 
supply/intra-shipment 
model, 
if 
the 
condition 
 is not satisfied, and then for the given supplier Sij, 
should make an 
intra-shipment from
 (
) to satisfy the demand
only if  
 
(
). 
 
Proof 
Clearly, if the condition
is not satisfied, then the total expected cost of 
Wi for trans-shipping x units from
(
) and supplying the remainder of
from
is
. The result follows by rewriting the expression for
as 
 
 
 
The total cost function of Wi with respect to x is a linear function with the form
. So, if
, the total cost function is decreasing 
function regarding the variable x. The more goods are trans-shipped from the other 
wholesaler, the more costs are saved. However, if 
, the total cost 
function is an increasing function regarding x. Under this condition the intra-shipment from 
the other wholesaler raises the cost of Wi. 
]
),
(
(
max
ij
ij
L
L
E
)).
(
()
(
ˆ
=
)
(
max
)
(
ij
L
L
E
t
i
i
ijk
L
E
t
t
d
h
x
H
ij
ij



.
))
(
)(
(
)
)
(
()
(
ˆ
)
(
)
)
0
(
)
0
(
(
)
ˆ
)
0
(
)
0
(
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
=
)
(
max
)
(
)
(
0


















ij
ij
ij
L
L
E
t
ij
i
i
ij
L
E
t
i
i
ij
i
i
i
k
ij
ij
i
i
ijk
ijk
ijk
ijk
L
E
t
t
d
h
t
L
E
t
d
b
L
E
x
d
b
x
q
p
D
x
d
x
H
x
B
x
P
x
C


(0)
(0)
<
0
i
id


i
W
k
W
i
k 
(0)
id
)
(
<
ij
i
ij
k
L
E
b
p
q

i
k 
(0)
(0)
<
0
i
id


k
W
i
k 
(0)
id
ij
S
)
(x
Cijk
)
(x
Cijk







.
))
(
)(
(
ˆ
)
)
(
)(
(
ˆ
ˆ
)
(
(0)
(0)
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
=
)
(
max
)
(
)
(
0

















ij
ij
ij
L
L
E
t
ij
i
i
L
E
t
ij
i
i
ij
ij
ij
i
ij
i
i
ij
i
ij
k
ijk
ijk
ijk
ijk
L
E
t
t
d
h
t
L
E
t
d
b
p
D
L
E
b
p
d
x
L
E
b
p
q
x
H
x
B
x
P
x
C

B
Ax
y


0
))
(
(



ij
i
ij
k
L
E
b
p
q
0
))
(
(



ij
i
ij
k
L
E
b
p
q

Henry Lau 
50
Given the fixed supplier Sij our decision rule for intra-shipment therefore is
. If this decision rule is not satisfied, then Wi should satisfy the 
demands
by using supplier
. 
Furthermore, we give a corollary to estimate the favorite wholesaler to make trans-
shipment. 
Corollary. It is assumed that the preceding decision rule is valid. For any fixed supplier 
Sij the intra-shipment should be ordered from
, where
(not necessarily unique) is such 
that  
 
 
 
for all the wholesalers exclusive wholesaler i.  
 
Proof 
The cost function above is a linear function about the size of intra-shipment and its slope 
is
. Given the fixed
, if 
 is the 
minimal, Cijk(x) is correspondingly the lowest by intra-shipment from
. 
It is natural that if we decide to make intra-shipment we prefer to intra-ship from the 
wholesaler that provides the lowest price. So our model is consistent with the practical 
considerations.  
As we mentioned, the trans-shipped amount should be
where sk is the available stocks of the kth wholesaler.  
So we have to consider both factors: the selling price of the wholesaler and its available 
stocks, and make the trade-off between them. Let
be the minimal cost of Wi that makes 
partial or full orders from the given Sij. We thus obtain another decision rule for estimation of 
the favorite wholesaler that  
 
. 
 
As the ith wholesaler is allowed to obtain their supplies from a wide choice of available 
suppliers, not limited to the certain supplier, the total cost of Wi achieves the global 
minimization by  
 
, 
 
where the suffix Ni is the number of the suppliers of wholesaler i. 
Consequently, by minimization of both
and
we can determine the optimal 
solution of wholesaler i to satisfy the retailer demands. We will explain our decision rules and 
minimization of the total cost of one wholesaler by simulation study. 
0
))
(
(



ij
i
ij
k
L
E
b
p
q
(0)
id
ij
S
*
k
W
*
k




))
(
(
min
)
(
*
ij
ij
k
ij
i
ij
k
L
bE
p
q
L
E
b
p
q





))
(
(
ij
i
ij
k
L
E
b
p
q


)
0
( 
x
x
))
(
(
*
ij
i
ij
k
L
E
b
p
q


*
k
W
)
),
(0)
(0)
min((
=
k
i
i
k
s
d



ij
C
)}
(
{
min
min
1
x
C
C
ijk
x
i
k
ij
k





}
,
,
min{
1
i
iN
ij
i
i
C
C
C
C



)
(x
Cijk
ij
C

A Cost Optimization Model for Intra-Shipment in a Supply Chain 
51
NUMERICAL RESULTS 
 
In this section, the developed model is illustrated with three examples. For simplicity, 
only identical wholesalers are considered and retailer arrival intensity at different unit time 
intervals is assumed to be the same, i.e., 
for any t. Also, in the absence 
of specific information about retailer ordering patterns, it is reasonable to assume that the 
probability mass function
is the same as the assumption of Axsäter [18], where a retailer 
demand of size m follows the geometric distribution,  
 
. 
 
 
Initial Case 
 
We first consider a hypothetical region where there are only two wholesalers for a certain 
line of products, W1 and W2 and one supplier to replenish them.  
Without loss of generality, since the two wholesalers are assumed to be identical, one 
need only consider the problem of intra-shipment from the point of view of any wholesaler, 
W1 say.  
Therefore take W1 as fixed and consider the decision-making process at W1. Furthermore, 
take b1 = 2, h1=1, λ1 =1, p=0.8, p11=2.2, and Dmax =303.  
The unit time interval can be defined as one week, one day, or even half of either. There 
is exactly one product supplier, S11 for W1, and it has variable lead time with
. 
Finally, the current inventory level at W1 is
and the initial demand at W1 is
.  
Under assumption that another wholesaler has the adequate stocks the case is divided into 
four groups that differ in the intra-shipment price from W2 and expected lead time from S11. 
Group one has
and
, Group two has
and
, Group three 
has
and
, and Group four has
and
. For simplicity, we 
do not define the probability mass function of the supplier but directly give its expected lead 
time. Application of our decision rule for intra-shipment is shown in Table 1. All costs are for 
the wholesaler W1. Each line gives the results for each group. 
In Group three the decision rule is satisfied and the cost of W1 keeps decreasing with 
more intra-shipments while in Group four the decision rule is not satisfied.  
However, the cost of W1 in Group four is quite a bit lower than that of Group three. This 
is related to the problem of supplier selection the related discussion of which is given in 
Section 4.3.  
 
                                                        
3 Since a retailer demand
1
,m
if
follows the geometric distribution and
n
m
if ,
is obtained by m-fold convolution, 
n
m
if ,
deceases quickly and goes to zero when m become large. Given p=0.8 in the simulation, Dmax =30 is large 
enough.  
constant)
(
)
(



t
n
m
i
f
,

,3,2,1
)
1(
1
1
,



m
p
p
f
m
m
i
5
max
11 
L
0
)
0
(
1


6
)
0
(
1

d
5
2 
q
3
)
(
11 
L
E
9
2 
q
3
)
(
11 
L
E
7
2 
q
4
)
(
11 
L
E
7
2 
q
2
)
(
11 
L
E

Henry Lau 
52
Table 1. Results for the initial case. x represents the size of intra-shipment 
 
Total Cost of Wholesaler 1 
 
q2 
E(L11) 
x=0 
x=1 
x=2 
x=3 
x=4 
x=5 
x=6 
5 
3 
60.4 
57.2 
54 
50.8 
47.6 
44.4 
41.2 
9 
3 
60.4 
61.2 
62 
62.8 
63.6 
64.4 
65.2 
7 
4 
74.7 
71.5 
68.3 
65.1 
61.9 
58.7 
55.5 
7 
2 
47.9 
48.7 
49.5 
50.3 
51.1 
51.9 
52.7 
 
 
Figure 3. The total cost function with a variable, size of intra-shipment.  
Figure 3 clearly illustrates the tendency of total cost of W1 with increasing intra-
shipments for Group one and two. Zero in the x-axis means no intra-shipment between 
wholesalers; dots denote the total costs of W1 for Group one; Stars denote the total costs of W1 
for Group two. When the decision rule is satisfied (Group one), W1 saves its cost by intra-
shipment. However, when the decision is not satisfied (Group two) W1 has to increase its cost 
with trans-shipment from W2, and then W1 should order products from its supplier, rather than 
from another wholesaler. 
In Section 4.2 and 4.3 we consider a different variation of 4.1. In the present subsection 
we suppose that the stocks of the wholesaler which is asked for intra-shipment is enough to 
satisfy its counterpart. Section 4.2 considers the case that the trans-shipped wholesaler has 

A Cost Optimization Model for Intra-Shipment in a Supply Chain 
53
limited stocks. That is, we need to employ another decision rule to decide from which 
wholesaler to make intra-shipment under the assumption that there are more than two 
available wholesalers in the local area. 
 
 
More Wholesalers with Limited Stocks 
 
Here we consider that there are four wholesalers W1, W2, W3 and W4 and one supplier for 
them. We also investigate the second decision-rule process at W1. Take b1, h1, λ1, p, p11, Dmax,
and
are the same as those in section 4.1. The supplier, S11 for W1 has variable 
lead time with
and
. This case is divided into three groups according to 
the other three wholesalers: Group one has
and
, Group two has
and
, and Group three has
 and
. Clearly, we should make a trade-off 
between wholesalers‘ selling prices and their stocks. This can also be verified in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4. Trends of total costs of W1 with intra-shipment from W2, W3, and W4, denoted by crossing line, 
dot line and star line respectively.  
As shown in Figure 4, the first decision rule is satisfied for each group, i.e., W1 benefits 
from intra-shipment from W2, W3, or W4. Note that the dashed lines represent the total costs of 
W1 if it makes more intra-shipments from W3 and W4. Now we need to decide from which one 
to order intra-shipment so as to minimize the cost of W1. By the corollary, W4 is the best 
)
0
(
1
)
0
(
1
d
10
max
11 
L
3
)
(
11 
L
E
8
2 
q
6
2 

7
3 
q
5
3 

5.6
4 
q
3
4 


Henry Lau 
54
choice but taking its stocks into consideration we find that W1 does not benefit the most from 
W4 by intra-shipment. On the contrary, W2 has adequate stocks to satisfy the full demands at 
W1 but its selling price is relatively expensive. According to the second decision rule, 
is the minimal. Consequently, W1 should make intra-shipment from W3 and order all 
the available stocks at W3.  
 
 
Multi-Supplier and Multi-Wholesaler 
 
In this subsection we consider another variation of the previous cases. There are four 
wholesalers W1, W2, W3 and W4 in a local area and three suppliers to replenish them. For 
consistency, we still take W1 as the object of study.  
For fair comparison we use 
as the review period so we 
ignore their respective maximal lead times given in the tables below. All the other parameter 
values are the same as those in the previous subsection. 
In Table 2 the cost in each cell is calculated under the condition that the demands of W1 
are satisfied by a combination of the given supplier and wholesaler. For example, the value 
56.7 represents the total cost of W1 by making three orders from W2 and the rest from S13. 
 
Table 2. The total cost of W1 by making orders from certain suppliers and wholesalers 
 
Total Cost of Wholesaler 1  
 
  
Supplier 1 
p11=2.6 E(L11)=4 
Supplier 2 
p12=2.8 E(L12)=3 
Supplier 3 
p13=3.3 E(L13)=2 
Intra-
shipment 
Size 
W2 
q2=7 
W3 
q3=8 
W4 
q4=9 
W2 
q2=7 
W3 
q3=8 
W4 
q4=9 
W2 
q2=7 
W3 
q3=8 
W4 
q4=9 
0 
78.2 
78.2 
78.2 
65.7 
65.7 
65.7 
57.6 
57.6 
57.6 
1 
74.6 
75.6 
76.6 
63.9 
64.9 
65.9 
57.3 
58.3 
59.3 
2 
71.0 
73.0 
75.0 
62.1 
64.1 
66.1 
57.0 
59.0 
61.0 
3 
67.4 
70.4 
73.4 
60.3 
63.3 
66.3 
56.7 
59.7 
62.7 
4 
  
67.8 
71.8 
  
62.5 
66.5 
  
60.4 
64.4 
5 
  
65.2 
70.2 
  
61.7 
66.7 
  
61.1 
66.1 
6 
  
  
68.6 
  
  
66.9 
  
  
67.8 
 
)
5
(
113
C
5
}
,
,
{
max
13
max
12
max
11

L
L
L
max

A Cost Optimization Model for Intra-Shipment in a Supply Chain 
55
The blank cells indicate that the wholesaler cannot provide trans-shipments of more than 
its stocks. The global minimum in Table 2 (i.e., 56.7) indicates the optimal solution for W1 to 
make orders. In addition given S11 and S12, W1 will save the most with intra-shipment from W3 
and W2 respectively, as presented in Table 2. We also give Figure 5 to describe the contents in 
this Table. 
 
Table 3. The total cost of W1 by making orders from the combination of one supplier 
and one wholesaler 
 
Total Cost of Wholesaler 1 
 
  
Supplier 1 
p11=6.7 E(L11)=3  
Supplier 2 
p12=5.5 E(L12)=4 
Supplier 3 
p13=4.3 E(L13)=5 
Intra-
shipment 
Size 
W2 
q2=10 
W3 
q3=12 
W4 
q4=14 
W2 
q2=10 
W3 
q3=12 
W4 
q4=14 
W2 
q2=10 
W3 
q3=12 
W4 
q4=14 
0 
85.8 
85.8 
85.8 
80.6 
80.6 
80.6 
76.5 
76.5 
76.5 
1 
86.1 
88.1 
90.1 
81.1 
83.1 
85.6 
77.2 
79.2 
81.2 
2 
86.4 
90.4 
94.4 
81.6 
85.6 
89.6 
77.9 
81.9 
85.9 
3 
86.7 
92.7 
98.7 
82.1 
88.1 
94.1 
78.6 
84.6 
90.6 
4 
87.0 
95.0 
103.0 
82.6 
90.6 
98.6 
79.3 
87.3 
95.3 
5 
87.3 
97.3 
107.3 
83.1 
93.1 
103.1 
80.0 
90.0 
100.0 
6 
87.6 
99.6 
111.6 
83.6 
95.6 
107.6 
80.6 
92.7 
104.7 
 
From Figure 5, given supplier 1, C11 = C113(5) is the minimal; given supplier 2,  
C12 = C122(3) is the minimal; given supplier 2, C13 = C132(3) is the minimal. By the formula, 
we obtain  
 
. 
 
Consequently, under the condition above, W1 achieves the minimal cost by ordering from 
S13 and W2; and the size of intra-shipment is 3. 
In the case of multi-suppliers and multi-wholesalers any wholesaler, like W1, first of all, 
needs to determine which supplier to replenish from. That is, we estimate the total cost of W1 
by full replenishment from each supplier. Given the supplier, the wholesaler then determines 
whether it will make an intra-shipment and which wholesaler it will order from.  
Table 3 describes a special case in that the decision rule for intra-shipment is not satisfied 
and thus there is no intra-shipment for wholesaler 1. This is equivalent to selecting only the 
favorite supplier. Here we set b1 = 1,
and keep all the other 
parameter values unchanged. 
}
,
,
min{
1
i
iN
ij
i
i
C
C
C
C



)3
(
}
,
,
min{
132
13
13
12
11
1
C
C
C
C
C
C



6
}
,
,
{
max
13
max
12
max
11

L
L
L
max

Henry Lau 
56
 
Figure 5. Results for the case of multi-supplier and multi-wholesaler. x represents the size of the intra-
shipment. 
As presented in Table 3, W1 need to make all the replenishment from S13 in order to 
minimize its operation cost. Hence, our model also provides a decision rule for selection of 
suppliers to wholesalers without intra-shipment. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In this paper we describe the derivation of a decision rule that may be used for intra-
shipment decision-making in supply chains made up of suppliers, wholesalers and retailers, in 
any local region. The suggested decision rules will minimize the total expected future costs of 
the wholesaler when considering replenishment from one supplier and intra-shipment from 
one wholesaler. Some major advantages of this approach include the pragmatic inclusion of 
multiple suppliers for wholesalers as well as variable goods delivery lead times, both of 
which are important relaxations of the properties of previous models that neglect the central 
features of real operations in inventory systems. Another advantage of the present model is 
the straight-forwardness of its implementation which requires only direct calculations and a 
comparison of total costs. Numerical examples have also been included to illustrate the 
effectiveness of the technique. 
 
 
 

A Cost Optimization Model for Intra-Shipment in a Supply Chain 
57
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Thomas D., Griffin P., 1996. Coordinated supply chain management. European Journal 
of Operational Research, 94, 1–15. 
[2] 
Erenguc, S.S., Simpson, N., Vakharia, A.J., 1999. Integrated production/distribution 
planning in supply chains: An invited review. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 115 (2), 219–236. 
[3] 
Köchel, P., Kunze, S., Nieländer, U., 2003. Optimal control of a distributed service 
system with moving resources: Application to the fleet sizing and allocation problem, 
International Journal of Production Economics, 81-82, 443-459. 
[4] 
Weber, C.E., 2004. More on complementarily and substitutability in the transshipment 
problem, European Journal of Operational Research, 156 (1), 213-222.  
[5] 
Burton, J., Banerjee, A., 2005. Cost-parametric analysis of lateral transshipment 
policies in two-echelon supply chains, International Journal of Production Economics, 
93-94, 169-178. 
[6] 
Minner, S., Silver, E.A., 2005. Evaluation of two simple extreme transshipment 
strategies, International Journal of Production Economics, 93-94, 1-11.  
[7] 
Alfredsson, P., Verrijdt, J., 1999. Modeling emergency supply flexiblility in a two-
echelon inventory system. Management Science, 45, 1416-1431. 
[8] 
Guinet, A., 2001. Multi-site planning: A transshipment problem, International Journal 
of Production Economics, 74 (1-3), 21-32. 
[9] 
Rudi, N., Kapur, S., Pyke, D., 2001. A two-location in-ventory model with 
transshipment and local decision making. Management Science, 47, 1668-1680. 
[10] Dong, L., N. Rudi., 2004. Who benefits from transshipment? Exogenous vs. 
endogenous wholesale prices. Management Science, 50, 645-657. 
[11] Wong W., Cattrysse D., Van Oudheusden, D., 2005. Inventory pooling of repairable 
spare parts with non-zero lateral transshipment time and delayed lateral transshipments. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 165, 207-218. 
[12] Koster, R., Le-Duc, T., Roodbergen, K.J., 2007. Design and control of warehouse order 
picking: A literature review, European Journal of Operational Research, 182 (2), 481-
501. 
[13] Nagy, G., Salhi, S., 2007. Location-routing: Issues, models and methods, European 
Journal of Operational Research, 177 (2), 649-672. 
[14] Young, H.L., Jung, W.J., Young, S.J., 2007. An effective lateral transshipment policy to 
improve service level in the supply chain, International Journal of Production 
Economics, 106 (1), 115-126. 
[15] Axsäter, S., 1990. Modelling emergency lateral transshipments in inventory systems. 
Management Science, 36, 1329-1338. 
[16] Archibald, T.W., Sassen, A.A.E., Thomas, L.C., 1997. An optimal policy for a two-
depot inventory problem with stock transfer. Management Science, 43, 173-183. 
[17] Tagaras, G., Cohen, M., 1992. Pooling in two-location inventory systems with non-
negligible replenishment lead times. Management Science, 38, 1067-1083. 
 
 

Henry Lau 
58
[18] Axsäter, S., 2003. A new decision rule for lateral transshipments in inventory systems. 
Management Science, 49, 1168-1179. 
[19] Rosenshine M., Obee D., 1976. Analysis of a standing order inventory system with 
emergency orders, Operations Research, 24 (6), 1143-1155. 
 
 

In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
LOCATION STRATEGIES  
AND CONSIDERATIONS IN SUPPLY CHAIN  
AND OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT 
 
 
Terry Damron1,*, Amye Melton1 and Alan D. Smith2 
1Austin Peay State University, Clarksville, Tennessee, US 
2Robert Morris University, Moon, Pennsylvania, US 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Using a qualitative business case-study method, this chapter examines how two 
Pittsburgh-headquartered firms (i.e., a global manufacturing and a domestic service 
restaurant chain) used location strategies to take advantage of availability of skilled labor, 
transportation facilities, tax rates, regulatory environment, real estate tax, and other 
considerations to expand their operations. Supplier considerations and associated 
strategies also were essential to the firms‘ successful expansion plans.  
 
Keywords: case study, operations strategy, supply chain management, supplier collaboration, 
supplier integration, stakeholder theory 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Successful businesses constantly look to expand, strategically leveraging their location 
strategies through work with local, state, and national governments and supplier partners as 
they try to attract new businesses.  
Location strategies are extremely useful in the retention of current customers through 
good supplier collaboration and integration.  
 
                                                        
* Corresponding Author address: Department of Marketing, Austin Peay State University, Clarksville, TN 37044, 
Email: DamronT@apsu.edu. 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
60
Location Tools and Strategy 
 
Location decision-making helps provide the framework to allow markets to continually 
expand, underlying the successful acceleration of the global economy. Location has a 
significant impact on the overall risk and profit of the company. Depending on the product 
and type of production or service, transportation costs alone can total as much as 25% of the 
product‘s selling price (Basu and Nair 2012; Brito and Botter 2012; Bulcsu 2011; Carvalho 
Cruz-Machado and Tavares 2012). Up to one-fourth of a firm‘s total revenue may be needed 
just to cover freight expenses of raw materials coming in and finished products going out. 
Location may influence other costs such as taxes, wages, raw material costs, and rents. As all 
costs are being taken into account, location may adjust total operating expenses as much as 
50%. Companies make location decisions relatively infrequently, usually since demand has 
outgrown the current plant‘s capacity or because of changes in labor productivity, exchange 
rates, costs, or local attitudes. Additionally, companies may relocate their manufacturing or 
service facilities due to shifts in demographics and customer demands. Typical location 
options for any organization include expanding an existing facility instead of moving, 
maintaining current sites while adding another facility elsewhere, or closing the existing 
facility and moving to another location (Drezner 2009; Heizer and Render 2011). 
Decisions regarding location are fairly dependent on the type of business. When dealing 
with industrial location decisions, the strategy usually centers on minimizing costs, though 
innovation and creativity also may be critical. For retail and professional service 
organizations, the strategy focuses on maximizing revenue. Cost and speed of delivery are 
two significant driving forces essential to the warehouse location strategy. Overall, the 
objective of location strategy is to maximize the benefit of location to the firm (Kumar, 
Shankar and Yadav 2011; Mathirajan, Manoj and Ramachandran 2011; Paksoy and Cavlak 
2011). Since location is such a significant cost and revenue driver, it has the power to make or 
break a company‘s business strategy. Location decisions utilized in a low-cost strategy 
require particularly careful consideration. Once management makes a decision to commit to a 
specific location, many costs are set in place and difficult to reduce. If a new factory is 
located in a region with high energy costs, even good management and an efficient energy 
strategy may not help the company overcome the disadvantage. Management may have 
similar problems with its human resource strategy if labor in the selected location is 
expensive, ill-trained, or has a poor work ethic. As with most costs, location costs can be 
divided into two categories: tangible and intangible. Tangible costs are those that are readily 
identifiable and precisely measured (e.g., utilities, labor, material, taxes, depreciation, and 
other costs that accounting and management can base on defined activities). Costs such as 
transportation of raw materials, transportation of finished goods, and site construction are 
typically factored into the overall cost of a location. Intangible costs, which are less easily 
quantified, include quality of education, public transportation facilities, community attitudes 
toward the industry and the company, and quality and attitude of prospective employees.  
 
 
Purpose of Study 
 
In the past, vendor selection may have hinged on lowering operational costs; but in 
today‘s business climate, socially conscious consumers, the proliferation of the Internet, and 

Location Strategies and Considerations in Supply Chain … 
61
24/7 media coverage lead companies to choose vendors more carefully. Firms must look 
beyond costs and quality to consider possible environmental costs. To augment traditional 
low-price and high-quality products, companies must engage in social responsibility to 
improve their corporate image and responsiveness to the needs of stakeholders. For example, 
a firm must consider how its suppliers treat their workers.  
Essentially all companies, large (United States Steel) and small (Primanti Brothers 
Restaurant), face ever-increasing consumer demand to improve environmental stewardship 
and the quality of life for factory workers. Often, profit and legal forces promote offshoring 
firms‘ production facilities. Many of these facilities are located in countries where the 
workers, sometimes children, work long hours in substandard and unsafe factories, earning 
low wages. Although no federal laws require companies to maintain a transparent supply 
chain, some states have enacted legislation requiring a degree of transparency, enabling 
consumers to learn whether companies and their supply chain partners engage in illegal or 
unethical practices. For example, companies operating in California must adhere to the 
California Transparency in Supply Chains Act of 2010. This law requires companies 
conducting business in the state to disclose corporate policies and steps taken to eradicate 
slavery and human trafficking in their supply chains.  
To ensure the integrity of their supply chain partners and prevent consumer backlash, 
companies can proactively inspect factories during the vendor selection process. Such 
inspections require supply chain partners to meet specific standards such as those concerning 
employee age, wages, and health and safety.  
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
For many firms, locating near customers is of great importance, especially for service-
orientated firms. Service organizations, like drug stores, restaurants, post offices, or barbers, 
find that proximity to market is the main location factor. When transporting finished goods is 
expensive or difficult, manufacturing firms find it useful to be close to customers. Factors 
such as perishability, transportation costs, or bulk lead firms to locate near their raw materials 
and suppliers. Companies relying on inputs of heavy or bulky raw materials encounter 
expensive inbound transportation costs, making transportation costs a major factor. When 
producing goods for which there is a reduction in bulk during production, proximity to raw 
materials is important. Surprisingly, both manufacturing and service organizations prefer to 
locate near competitors. This concept, called clustering, occurs when a major resource is 
found in that region. Resources include natural resources, information resources, venture 
capital resources, and talent resources. Many of the factors influencing strategic location 
decisions also are considered in strategic vendor and supplier selection. 
Although industrial-sector location analysis may center primarily on cost minimization, 
the service sector focuses on revenue maximization. Manufacturing firms find costs tend to 
vary considerably among locations, while service firms find location often has more impact 
on revenue than cost. For service firms, the location focus frequently is dependent on 
determining the volume of business and revenue (Paksoy and Cavlak 2011; Pettersson and 
Segerstedt 2011; Pradhananga, Hanaoka and Sattayaprasert 2011; Von Haartman 2012). 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
62
Geographic information systems (GIS) help firms make successful, analytical location 
decisions. GIS are extremely useful in storing and displaying information which can be linked 
to location coordinates measured and updated in real time. For example, retailers, banks, food 
chains, gas stations, and print shop franchises all can use geographically coded files from the 
system to conduct demographic studies. Reviewing a combination of population, age, income, 
traffic flow, and density figures within a specific geographic area, a retailer can pinpoint the 
optimal location for a new store or restaurant. Within each area reviewed, GIS offer 
information related to factors that influence location decisions, including residential areas, 
retail shops, cultural and entertainment centers, crime incidence, and transportation options. 
Analytical tools (shipping models, transportation algorithms) can be important in 
deciding on a location. The purpose of the transportation model is to determine the best 
pattern of shipments from numerous points of supply or sources to numerous points of 
demand or destinations, thereby minimizing total production and transportation costs. 
Essentially every firm with a network of supply-and-demand points encounters such a 
decision (More and Babu 2012). Through use of a transportation model, a firm finds an initial 
realistic solution and then the model provides step-by-step improvements until an optimal 
solution is achieved. Other models are more robust and can include intangible factors in the 
location decision. A number of authors (Hamidi, Farahmand, Sajjadi and Nygard 2012; 
Kumar, et al. 2011; Mathirajan, et al. 2011) have suggested such modeling can lead to 
optimality in location selection. Selecting a location with the best qualitative conditions may 
prove more profitable than simply choosing the lowest cost location, an approach found in 
many transportation models. However, the researchers recognize a favorable location may not 
be a feasible location, as production capacity must be taken into consideration. In effect, firms 
must use quantitative and cost/benefit analytical techniques to eliminate locations where 
required resources simply are not available.  
Rajkumar (2013) sought to understand the major factors in industrial location selection 
for information technology organizations and the elements of industrial location factors for 
IT-based organizations. The study segmented location selection into 7 dimensions: 
manpower, technology, social, hedonistic, industrial site, economic factor, and governmental. 
Each of these factors was broken down into more precise elements for measurement. 
Structural equation modeling helped to develop coefficients of covariance among the 
dimensions, resulting in the identification of technological factors as most important in 
making location-selection decisions, followed by manpower and social constructs. 
Economical and industrial constructs were of medium importance to location selection, while 
governmental and hedonistic constructs had the least impact. While the study took place in 
India, the dimensions could easily be related to any geographic area, though social and 
governmental dimensions may have a larger coefficient in Asia than in African or European 
countries.  
Ho, Lee, and Ho (2008) performed an empirical study to determine a new method for 
developing a location strategy. Many types of analyses have been performed on methods of 
determining location, but few incorporate both a qualitative and quantitative research method. 
Using an analytic hierarchy process (AHP), the researchers hoped to allow management to 
determine criteria influencing location strategy and indicate the importance of each criterion. 
The case study considered a manufacturer of desktop and laptop computers that was 
anticipating more demand from the Chinese market.  

Location Strategies and Considerations in Supply Chain … 
63
The AHP phase of location selection considered many critical success factors needed to 
have a competitive advantage in the location and created a hierarchy of importance of each 
factor. An overall priority ranking was developed from these factors.  
The criteria selected were (from highest to lowest in the priority ranking): proximity to 
stakeholders, human resources, risks, flexibility of capacity, and quality of life. The firm 
identified several reasons for the selection of their criteria. Proximity to stakeholders consists 
of customers, since the modern supply chain is customer driven, and suppliers, since there is 
uncertainty in order cycle time and demand. The criterion of human resources is defined as 
labor availability and productivity. Risks identified were the future trend of land prices, 
transportation infrastructure, availability of utilities, and probability of the occurrence of a 
strike, theft, or natural disaster. Flexibility of capacity was considered important because the 
location needs to be able to satisfy both current and future production requirements. Quality 
of life was selected in order to attract skilled employees. 
When compared to a cost-based approach (i.e., total costs for each location are projected 
and the location with the lowest cost is selected), AHP results were very similar. However, 
the location associated with the lowest cost was not the same optimal location selected in the 
AHP-GP model. These results support the argument for a model including both qualitative 
and quantitative factors, as a purely cost-based approach may result in a lower-quality 
location with costs similar to those associated with a higher quality location. 
 
 
METHODS 
 
Qualitative Business Case Study  
 
The qualitative business case study is an approach to research that helps the exploration 
of a study of interest within its context using a variety of data sources. This ensures the issue 
is not explored through one lens, but rather a variety of many possible viewpoints to help to 
reveal and understand the concepts associated with the study.  
According to Baxter and Jack (2008), a common problem associated with case studies is 
the researchers‘ tendency to attempt to answer too broad questions or topics with too many 
objectives. To avoid this problem, Yin (2003) and Stake (1995) suggested placing boundaries 
on a case. This case is bound both by time and place and by definition and context; namely 
only one company, dealing with SCM integration/collaboration, and for the fiscal 2014 
period. 
 
 
Sample Selection 
 
Personal interviews of upper-to-middle management, along with comments from 
convenient samples of employees, were used to gather perceptions concerning the accuracy of 
the various firms‘ strategic management processes within a customer service focus. Most of 
the information contained in this case study was obtained from management and/or the firms‘ 
websites.  
 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
64
CASES 
 
CASE 1: United States Steel Corporation (USS) 
 
Company Overview 
United States Steel Corporation (USS), otherwise known as US Steel, is a major steel 
producing company based in Pittsburgh, PA. In operation since 1901, the company is one of 
the largest steel manufacturers in the world, with operations in the U.S., Canada, and Europe. 
The company was created when J.P. Morgan and Elbert Gary bought Carnegie‘s Steel 
Company, combining it with Federal Steel Company. In the company‘s golden era, it 
produced more than 65% of the steel used domestically. Many acquisitions and 
consolidations led to the considerable reduction of the company‘s market share. USS employs 
more than 40,000 employees globally, with annual revenues in excess of US$3.93 billion. 
The company has been labeled as a major source of pollution; achieving the dubious 
distinction of the eighth most polluting company in the U.S. 
As the domestic growth in production of steel began to slow, USS began to look for other 
options to expand their company. They became involved in the energy field, acquiring 
Marathon in 1982 and Texas Oil and Gas Corporation in 1986. This prompted the 1986 name 
change to USX Corporation. In 2001, the company restructured, with steel and steel-related 
businesses resuming operations under the United States Steel (USS) name and the energy 
business of USX becoming Marathon Oil Corporation. This corporate split allowed USS to 
focus primarily on steel, returning to a more global scale of production. 
At the time of the split, significant portions of the domestic steel industry were plagued 
with bankruptcy and other major economic problems. Some global companies sought 
bankruptcy protection, only to find they were unable to continue their operations. USS 
expanded and increased global production through acquisition of these companies, including 
VSZ (Slovakia), Sartid (Serbia), and Stelco, Inc. (Canada). The company also maintains 
facilities in Mexico and Brazil that help with warehousing and distribution, as well as a series 
of strategic joint ventures that were designed to enhance their SCM operations, integration, 
and collaboration efforts. 
 
Location Decisions 
A global producer of steel, USS committed significant planning resources in their 
location strategies. In order to get their products overseas, it was necessary for USS to invest 
in facilities and steel manufacturing plants at strategic global locations. As the industry began 
to decline domestically, management knew was necessary to look beyond the boundaries of 
previous operations. Unfortunately, many manufacturers met their demise due to an apparent 
reluctance to change and embrace globalization. USS was able to capitalize on other 
companies‘ shortcomings and planned accordingly for the future growth. The following 
discussion details some of the strategic location decisions USS makes in order to control the 
total costs of operations. 
As mentioned previously, shipping costs may be one of the main costs associated with a 
business. Given the nature of the products USS produces, timing and estimating shipping can 
be extremely costly and quite complicated. The firm has focused on the distribution end of 
operations, selecting locations on different continents to process and hold materials until they 

Location Strategies and Considerations in Supply Chain … 
65
are required for sale or distribution. USS currently operates warehouses and processing 
centers abroad, including those in Mexico, Canada, Brazil, and Europe (Slovak Republic). 
With locations in other parts of North America, as well as South America and Europe, steel 
products are made available at significantly reduced delivery times. Warehousing and storing 
products can create considerable cost; however, costs are saved elsewhere if suppliers are 
properly managed. If management can reasonably predict and plan out their shipping 
necessities because of reserves that exist in other continents, they can save a great deal in 
unexpected last minute shipping costs.  
Decisions concerning warehouse and processing facility locations are not the only 
location decisions that significantly impact USS logistical planning initiatives. Selecting 
where to produce steel in its various refined forms is an important decision. On a domestic 
side, the company has major corporate headquarters in a large number of regional facilities. 
For bulky items, transportation via water remains most economical, especially since the Ohio 
River system offers an efficient means for transportation by barge. The Ohio River Valley 
continues to serve as home to many facilities; however, other locations in the southern and 
western regions complement the overall production process. USS operates mines necessary to 
obtain the raw materials and fuel needed for the production of steel. Hence, management must 
ensure facilities are located in accordance with their respective resources and distribution 
channels. SCM involves the planning and management of activities required to convert raw 
materials into finished goods for end-product consumers. To mitigate the demand 
management risk, management needs to invest in sound communication infrastructure as a 
means of avoiding communication failures. Further, management should take steps to reduce 
risks associated with demand forecasting in order to adequately deal with volatile demand and 
decline problems (Diabat, Govindan and Panicker 2012). As described by Drezner (2009), 
uncertainty is a major risk when selecting a new location to build a facility. USS has 
attempted to choose stable locations that are unlikely feel the effects of major changes in a 
market. If demand in Europe or South America increases, then they have facilities in central 
locations among those continents in order to meet the need of consumers. With production 
facilities in Europe, management can adjust to demand volatility at a global scale faster than 
if they produced only domestically. With a central European location, USS can ship to any 
area of Europe, Africa, or Asia faster than a domestic facility. Because many U.S. locations 
are near major waterways, products are easily shipped into international waters if necessary. 
USS has made it clear that selecting and implementing a strong location strategy can help 
with not only saving costs, but propelling a company to ongoing success as an industry 
leader.  
 
 
CASE 2: Primanti Brothers Restaurant (PBR) 
 
Company Overview 
This study contrasts the location decisions of a large company with a much smaller 
enterprise, Primanti Brothers Restaurant (PBR), also located in Pittsburgh. Locally owned 
and operated since 1933, PBR is a sandwich shop best known for a signature sandwich 
featuring a generous serving of crunchy, tart coleslaw and crispy French Fries on top of soft 
Italian bread. Operations began when Joe Primanti opened a sandwich cart in Pittsburgh‘s 
Strip district and began selling to truck drivers nearly 24 hours a day. Eventually, Primanti 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
66
expanded to a small storefront on 18th Street, where his brothers and a nephew joined the 
business.  
In 1974, Primanti Brothers was sold to Jim Patrinos, who continued on with the tradition 
of serving quality food to busy local residents. A second location was opened in Oakland near 
the University of Pittsburgh, and was very successful with both students and professionals in 
the area. Eventually, PBR opened 17 locations in the greater Pittsburgh area, including 
locations at Heinz Field, PNC Park, and Consol Energy Center. Three out-of-state locations in 
Florida were established and all restaurant locations are strategically placed in convenient 
locations to better serve a growing customer base. 
 
Location Decisions 
Since the time of its inception, PBR has placed great focus and effort on location 
strategy. The company‘s original strategy of serving locals in busy areas has allowed the 
restaurant chain to gain popularity and grow. The firm has expanded well beyond Pittsburgh, 
strategically placing all restaurants in convenient and high traffic areas. PBR‘s very 
successful business model is based on convenience and premium food choices. 
When making location decisions, PBR lends considerable weight to the customer 
convenience factor. By placing their restaurants in busy areas, such as major league sports 
stadiums and arenas in downtown Pittsburgh, the company is able to serve large volumes of 
consumers on game days. PBR also has opened restaurants near major universities such as 
Robert Morris University and the University of Pittsburgh, as these are prime locations for 
attracting local college students‘ business. Additionally, PBR strategically places restaurants 
near major highways, providing added convenience for customers. PBR establishments 
positioned in close proximity to business clusters attract business professionals interested in 
evening hours and happy hour promotions. As costs associated with delivery of products can 
play a considerable role in strategic location decisions, PBR has positioned the majority of its 
restaurants within the greater metropolitan Pittsburgh area. Proximity to intermodal 
transportation platforms enables management to operate in a more efficient and cost sensitive 
manner, dramatically cutting the costs associated with distributing the products needed at the 
various restaurants. Such location strategies enhance greater collaboration and integration 
efforts to promote uniform high-quality standards through product offerings. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
Company Comparisons 
 
Both USS and PBR provide excellent examples of location strategies for manufacturing 
firms and service organizations, respectively, regardless of clientele size. Although the benefit 
of quality location strategies is significant, there are other, less tangible benefits associated 
with supplier relationship management and operational efficiencies. By selecting companies 
that are so different on the surface, the possibility is created to examine a substantial and 
material view of the practical applications of location strategy.  
These differences stem in part from the location decisions required during the companies‘ 
creation phases. Both USS and PBR were created in early 1900s Pittsburgh in the midst of the 

Location Strategies and Considerations in Supply Chain … 
67
steel industrial growth and manufacturing boom. USS had large-scale business intentions, 
originally intending to become a world leader in steel production. As a result, USS had to 
make location decisions common to manufacturing companies, working to keep costs low 
and, at the same time, move toward expansion. Although PBR came from more humble 
beginnings than USS, it had a similar intent to grow and differentiate via high-quality service 
and very reasonable prices. The original small local business required relatively low scale 
production and an extremely simple location strategy: sell where the most people are present. 
However, PBR slowly grew into a national restaurant chain and began making location 
decisions consistent with those of other service organizations, focusing on revenue. 
Regardless of original intensions, both organizations carefully considered location strategy as 
an important part of their long-term strategies of profitability and growth in their respective 
markets. 
 
 
Location Strategy Comparisons 
 
In terms of the specific aspects of their location strategies, USS and PBR have more 
similarities than differences. For both companies, locating near customers is the primary 
aspect of location strategy. A large company with global reach, USS been able to attain close 
proximity to customer through acquiring struggling steel companies around the world. These 
acquisitions allow USS to produce steel close to its international customers, to reduce costs, 
employ indigenous populations, and expedite the delivery process, thus adding further value 
for customers. The addition of warehousing facilities in Mexico and Brazil increased the 
company‘s global presence and opened access to local markets to take advantage of regional 
transportation systems. Although service and retail companies like PBR need to minimize the 
distance from clientele, they still must develop extensive supplier networks. 
Hastings (1999) investigated and documented a cautionary tale concerning global 
expansion without consideration of true strategic value. In the early 1990s, management at 
Lincoln Electric decided to expand globally. They expanded rapidly overseas, purchasing 
foreign firms and building plants at an incredible rate. Quick actions and poor analysis led to 
several damaging decisions. For example, management wrongly assumed the company‘s 
incentive pay system would work in any country and could be implemented quickly. The 
system was not widely accepted, especially where Lincoln purchased firms with similar 
traditions. Further, Lincoln incorrectly assumed targeting certain markets would require the 
purchase of an existing firm or opening of a new branch instead of exporting equipment 
domestically, spending large sums of money on acquisitions. These unnecessary acquisitions 
did not fit well with Lincoln‘s organizational culture, as management assumed the domestic 
management style would be effective in other countries. With no international experience and 
a shortage of quality managers to run global operations, Lincoln overestimated its ability to 
do business in a foreign country. The firm assumed operational efficiency alone would enable 
them to compete in the international markets. They believed that a low-cost, high-quality 
manufacturing operation would lead to international success. Management failed to place 
emphasis on market knowledge, distribution, and other important factors.  
Management eventually recognized operational efficiency alone could not create a 
sustainable competitive advantage. They recognized developing relationships in new markets 
and understanding the international business environment would help to build a quality 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
68
reputation. Although the domestic Lincoln work culture was a significant competitive 
advantage in the U.S., management eventually came to understand that culture could not be 
duplicated at every location. Changes were made to adapt to the local cultures. Most 
successful global companies realize that both company and international cultures are 
significant factors in any location decision. A recent trend entails insourcing from more local, 
not global, suppliers for food and related restaurant materials as a means of increasing quality 
and promoting a more socially conscious reputation (O'Flynn 2012). USS experiences similar 
pressures, which places further emphasis on establishing supplier collaboration and 
integration efforts.  
PBR has benefitted from locations in the vicinity of major sport complexes, near 
colleges, and close to busy highways like I376 and I79 in Pittsburgh. These strategic location 
decisions are geared not just for the current local population, but for future growth and flows 
of potential customers. Management at USS and PBR have made exceptional decisions in 
locating near customers, providing valuable customer convenience creating the opportunity to 
emerge as leaders in their respective markets.  
The key difference between the two companies is the motivation for selecting a specific 
location strategy. Shipping costs are significant motivators for USS, primarily because it is a 
manufacturing company. USS manages to reduce shipping costs in a few ways besides 
proximity to manufacturing facilities, suppliers, and transportation hubs. A common strategy 
for bulk and commodity manufacturers is to locate near waterways in order to reducing 
shipping costs, such as the Ohio River. By locating different stages in the steel production 
process along waterways, USS is able to inexpensively move the product in its various stages 
of production from one process to the next. PBR, however, is a service organization and, 
therefore, did not create a location strategy with the primary objective of cutting costs. The 
motivation for PBR‘s strategy was revenue based, and mainly focuses on locating near 
customers. 
 
 
Evaluation 
 
As seen in this evaluation of two different forms of business, location strategy is a vital 
component of business. For any type of business, location strategy can contribute to success 
or struggles. Whether in formation, functioning, or growing, companies must focus on 
location strategy if they want to achieve optimal success. Location strategy can impact a 
business in many ways, mainly in financial terms. If USS incorrectly chooses a location, the 
cost of shipping products can significantly impact finances. For PBR, location serves 
primarily to attract the customers they target and make it convenient for their consumers to 
access their facilities, as illustrated in Table 1.  
Selecting the location with the highest priority ranking based on the many intangible and 
tangible factors, as illustrated in Table 1, should allow a company the greatest probability for 
success in its new location. 
Regardless of business size, location decisions are of high concern to management and 
the company as a whole. Though USS is larger than PBR, location strategies impact the firms 
similarly. To minimize shipping and delivery costs, USS should examine locations in close 
proximity to raw materials and transportation.  
 

Location Strategies and Considerations in Supply Chain … 
69
Table 1. Brief location strategies advantages and disadvantages 
 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Effectively reduces costs, and can increase 
revenue. 
Planning costs and time in making 
decisions. 
Locate close to suppliers. 
Many factors to be considered, can impact 
the end decision. 
Ability to identify new markets for business.  
Too much focus on location strategy, 
company may overlook benefits through 
focus on other OM strategic decisions. 
Minimize shipping, receiving, and production 
costs. 
 
Enables business to reach optimal target market. 
 
Expand to places where demand is highest. 
 
 
The firm chooses locations close to waterways, enabling timely and cost-effective 
delivery, as well as easy access to international waters. PBR chooses locations convenient to 
loyal patrons and large numbers of prospective customers, including stadiums, college areas, 
and highways. As Gerdeman (2012) noted, geographic expansion often provides access to 
new markets with the potential of adding resources. Such moves should be viewed as 
strategic calculations to increase competitive advantage by complementing and creating new 
sources of value to its existing business. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
It is extremely difficult to predict demand and revenue. In effect, management must 
carefully consider the factors they think will lead to a location‘s success and select a location 
based on those factors. Management should consider factors that make them successful in 
their own country, or in other locations, and determine whether they will apply in the culture 
of the new location, as well. Ultimately, the value of location is primarily due to availability 
of resources and supporting industries through supplier collaboration and integration, 
management‘s commitment to capture and use knowledge gained from relocation, and the 
ability to strategically leverage this knowledge to differentiate the firm from its competitors. 
Models that are more integrative in scope and not driven only by low-costs factors may be 
more effective since they add qualitative factors that are intrinsically and extrinsically 
important to all the stakeholders involved in the location, including collaboration and 
integration of suppliers. The consideration of costs and available resources is important 
because if costs are too high or there are insufficient resources in a location, it will be 
impossible for the company to succeed.  
USS and PBR employ location strategies that benefit their business models in the most 
efficient and effective ways possible. They are able to reduce costs of production, shipping, 
and receiving products. The companies also benefit from locating in areas where they can 
easily reach customers. The companies‘ location strategies have allowed them to become 
leaders in their respective industries. USS is a worldwide producer of steel and is a well-
respected and trusted name in the steel industry, and PBR is a staple name in the Pittsburgh 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
70
and surrounding areas. Much of the success and future decisions of these companies will 
continue to center on location strategy and following operational model to reduce costs, 
maximize profitability, and promote intensive supplier collaboration and integration. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The authors extend their gratitude for the valuable contributions of reviewers. Peer 
reviewing and editing are commonly tedious and thankless tasks. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Basu, P., & Nair, S.K. (2012). Supply chain finance enabled early pay: Unlocking trapped 
value in B2B logistics. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 
12(3), 334-353. 
Baxter, P. & Jack, S. (2008). Qualitative case study methodology: Study design and 
implementation for novice researchers. The Qualitative Report, 13(4), 544-559. 
Brito, T.B., & Botter, R.C. (2012). Feasibility analysis of a global logistics hub in Panama. 
International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 12(3), 247-266. 
Bulcsu, S. (2011). The process of liberalising the rail freight transport markets in the EU: The 
case of Hungary. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 9(1). 89-
107. 
Carvalho, H., Cruz-Machado, V., & Tavares, J.G. (2012). A mapping framework for 
assessing supply chain resilience. International Journal of Logistics Systems and 
Management, 12(3), 354-373. 
Diabat, A., Govindan, K., & Panicker, V. V. (2012). Supply chain risk management and its 
mitigation in a food industry. International Journal of Production Research, 50(11), 
3039-3050.  
Drezner, T. (2009). Location of retail facilities under conditions of uncertainty. Annals of 
Operations Research, 167(1), 107-120.  
Gerdeman, D. (2012). Location, location, location: The strategy of place. Harvard Business 
School. [Online]. Retrieved February 7, 2015 from http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/6916.html. 
Hamidi, M., Farahmand, K., Sajjadi, S.R., & Nygard, K.E. (2012). A hybrid GRASP-tabu 
search metaheuristic for a four-layer location-routing problem. International Journal of 
Logistics Systems and Management, 12(3), 267-287. 
Hastings, D.F. (1999). Lincoln Electric's harsh lessons from international expansion. Harvard 
Business Review, 77(3), 168-178. 
Heizer, J., & Render, B. (2011). Location Strategies. Principles of Operations Management 
(11th Ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education, Inc. 
History of US Steel. (2012). US Steel Corporation. [Online]. Retrieved February 5, 2015 
from https://www.ussteel.com/uss/portal/home/aboutus/history. 
Ho, W., Ka Man Lee, C., & To Sum Ho, G. (2008). Optimization of the facility location-
allocation problem in a customer-driven supply chain. Operations Management 
Research, 1(1), 69-79. 

Location Strategies and Considerations in Supply Chain … 
71
Kumar, P., Shankar, R., & Yadav, S.S. (2011). Global supplier selection and order allocation 
using FQFD and MOLP. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 
9(1), 43-68. 
Mathirajan, M., Manoj, K., & Ramachandran, V. (2011). A design of distribution network 
and development of efficient distribution policy. International Journal of Logistics 
Systems and Supply Management, 9(1), 108-137. 
More, D., & Babu, A.S. (2012). Benchmarking supply chain flexibility using data 
envelopment analysis. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 
12(3), 288-317. 
O'Flynn, B. (2012). Six growing trends in corporate sustainability. Accountancy Ireland. 
44(3), 32. 
Our long, proud and colorful history. (2014). Primanti Brothers. [Online]. Retrieved February 
5, 2015 from http://www.primantibros.com/story/.  
Paksoy, T., & Cavlak, E.B. (2011). Development and optimisation of a new linear 
programming model for production/distribution network of an edible vegetable oils 
manufacturer. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 9(1), 1-21. 
Pettersson, A.I., & Segerstedt, A. (2011). Performance measurements in supply chains within 
Swedish industry. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 9(1), 69-
88. 
Pradhananga, R., Hanaoka, S., & Sattayaprasert, W. (2011). Optimisation model for 
hazardous material transport routing in Thailand. International Journal of Logistics 
Systems and Management, 9(1), 22-42. 
Rajkumar, P. (2013). A study of the factors influencing the location selection decisions of 
information technology firms. Asian Academy of Management Journal, 18(1), 35-44. 
Von Haartman, R. (2012). Beyond Fisher's product-supply chain matrix: Illustrating the 
actual impact of technological maturity on supply chain design. International Journal of 
Logistics Systems and Management, 12(3), 318-333. 
 


In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
BALANCED RESILIENCE:  
A PRACTICAL FRAMEWORK FOR MANAGING  
SUPPLY CHAIN PERFORMANCE 
 
 
Michael Reiss 
Stuttgart University, Germany 
Institute of Business Administration, 
Department of Organizational Design and Behavior 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Performance frameworks in general determine the key performance dimensions and 
the pivotal enablers (and disablers) of performance. The scope of performance 
frameworks for supply chain management has widened considerably since the early days 
of supply chain management. Some innovative new frameworks have been developed to 
replace others, like the lean, agile, or efficient consumer response frameworks. Some 
new, but less innovative frameworks such as leagile or lean-six sigma frameworks blend 
already existing frameworks. However, none of these frameworks meets all of the three 
basic requirements for a performance framework, i.e., ―feasibility,‖ ―orientation,‖ and 
―balance,‖ sufficiently. A better score is reached by the balanced resilience-framework 
which deploys the methodology of force field analysis. This framework is realistic owing 
to its focus on resilience, orienting since it specifies the core determinants, and balanced 
due to a combination of risk and opportunity management. The core parameters comprise 
the building-up of barriers to failure (risk management) and the dismantling of barriers to 
success (opportunity management). 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Performance management for designing and redesigning supply chains encompasses 1) 
performance dimensions (i.e., supply chain metrics of effectiveness and efficiency, key 
                                                        
 email: michael.reiss@bwi.uni-stuttgart.de. 

Michael Reiss 
74
performance 
indicators, 
perspectives) 
to 
accomplish 
performance 
measurement 
(Gunasekarana, Patel & McGaughey 2004) and 2) crucial determinants of performance 
(enablers and disablers). The two constituents serve as a framework for deploying patterns 
(e.g., supply chain governance, business relationship management, hub-spoke transport 
networks, continuous improvement, multi-echelon inventory optimization), tools (e.g., RFID, 
value stream mapping), skills (e.g., certified Six Sigma Black Belts) and processes (e.g., 
DMAIC: 
Define-Measure-Analyze-Improve-Control, 
delivery 
process, 
inventory 
management) for managing a supply chain (Frederico & Martins 2014). There are three 
clusters of performance dimensions: 1) market-focused indicators (e.g., cash flow, market 
share, profit) 2) resource-focused indicators (e.g., uptime, availability, learning) and 3) 
relationship-focused indicators (e.g., coordination costs, customer lifetime value, cohesion, 
retention, trust).  
Major challenges to performance management concern the performance metrics (e.g., 
measures of customer satisfaction, continuous improvement) as well as the interdependencies 
between (1) performance indicators (e.g., trade-offs), (2) indicators and determinants (e.g., the 
performance impact of standardization) and (3) between performance determinants (e.g., 
standardization and globalization, reactive and proactive intervention, centralization and 
decentralization of inventory systems). Some relationships are challenging because they are 
ambiguous and/or ambivalent: the interplay of short-term and long-term performance for 
instance implies an ambivalent status of short-term performance: on the one hand, it 
constitutes a facilitator of long-term performance (via subsidizing and financing). On the 
other hand it may turn out to be an inhibitor, especially if short-term success causes self-
complacency or short-term exploitation of resources. Likewise, the interdependency between 
effectiveness (quality, reliability, etc.) and efficiency (cost, time, etc.) is ambiguous: the 
controversy between the ―quality is free‖-hypothesis and the ―quick but dirty‖-dilemma (e.g., 
swift coordination processes resulting in poor compromises) perfectly illustrates this fuzzy 
relationship. Cost efficiency in turn is afflicted with the trade-off between production costs 
and coordination costs (e.g., as a result of negotiating processes or controlling behavioral 
risks).  
 
 
FRAMEWORK ARCHITECTURES 
 
Generic frameworks of performance management, often originally designed for corporate 
performance (e.g., organizational resilience, Sheffi 2005; Välikangas 2010), have been 
transferred to supply chains, strategic alliances and other governance systems. Yet, this 
transfer requires that consideration is given to the existing differences, e.g., with respect to 
different levels of coordination costs. 
Frameworks such as resilient, lean, agile, or sustainable supply chain management 
mandatorily incorporate several basic principles. Only occasionally they also encompass tools 
(e.g., scorecards for performance measurement, predictive maintenance, telematics, RFID, 
collaboration tools, knowledge sharing tools) or standard processes such as implementation, 
concurrent engineering, cloud computing, or make-or-buy-decision models. 
One category of frameworks is focused on a single critical success factor or a cluster of 
closely related success factors. This architecture is characteristic of the ―lean,‖ ―agile,‖ 

Balanced Resilience 
75
―market based view,‖ ―efficient consumer response‖ (Corsten & Kumar 2005), and ―Six 
sigma‖-models. Some focused frameworks are part of supply chain risk management (Sodhi, 
Son &Tang 2012; Wieland & Wallenburg 2012; Singh & Wahid 2014): this mainstream 
approach is mostly reflected in the resilient supply chain. Mixed frameworks constitute a 
second species of mainstream frameworks. The labels ―blended‖ or ―hybrid‖ frameworks are 
usually applied if they contain antithetic components, i.e., radically diverse determinants of 
supply chain performance. This holds for coopetition (mixing competition and cooperation) 
or mass customization (mixing mass production and customized production). ―Blending‖ is 
restricted to antithetic performance determinants, hence it does not include the prevalent 
mixing of similar constituents, e.g., SPC, quality circles, and quality awards in Total Quality 
Management-approaches. The basic logic of hybrids derives from the typical situation that 
two antithetic frameworks A and B, which represent second best solutions as a consequence 
of their weak points and drawbacks, are available. Instead of selecting one of these second 
best frameworks (A or B) or searching for a superior novel framework (C), the blending 
approach advocates a mix of the two second best solutions (A & B). Particularly from a 
heuristics point of view, it makes more sense to blend existing frameworks than to search for 
a new ―best way of supply chain management.‖  
Both costs and benefits of framework blending depend on the way the respective 
frameworks are coupled in order to create a high performing configuration. The manifold 
ways of coupling derive from a spectrum of archetypal patterns that determine the 
architecture of a blended framework. Figure 1 outlines six blending patterns that are 
embedded in the additive (complementary) and/ or alternative (crowding-out) paradigms of 
blended architectures (Reiss 2012). 
 
 
Figure 1. Patterns of framework blending. 
Within amalgam mixes and blended bundles blending is performed in a ―total‖ fashion 
yielding new genuinely hybrid frameworks that incorporate both genes of their parent 
frameworks: Whereas blending is mandatory in bundles, supplement configurations are based 
ADDITIVE  BLENDING
ALTERNATIVE BLENDING
BUNDLE
BLENDING
SECTORAL/   
SEQUENTIAL
BLENDING
SUBSIDIARY
BLENDING
MENU
BLENDING
AMALGAM
BLENDING
SUPPLEMENT
BLENDING
t

Michael Reiss 
76
on optional blending. In the case of sectoral and sequential coupling, supply managers pick 
different frameworks to apply them in distinct sectors or stages. By this strictly separated 
handling, tools can be contingently adjusted to different segments of the context (e.g., 
downstream or upstream, A- or C-customers). Subsidiary blending combines a default 
(standard) approach (e.g., insourcing) and a fallback approach (e.g., outsourcing as the 
exception). Blended menus offer at least two frameworks as alternative options for ad hoc-
choices: since frameworks are not pre-selected within a contingent supply management 
approach, the whole range of diverse options has to be provided.  
Blending patterns are quantitatively specified by fixing the proportions of blending: in 
sequential blending the duration of the episodes substantiates the blending. 50:50-proportions 
stand for balanced blending (e.g., within bundles), while an 80:20-ratio indicates the 
dominance of one category (e.g., within subsidiary blending). Postponement operations 
determine the fractions of ―push‖ and of ―pull‖ or of standardization (mass) and 
differentiation (Kim 2014). 
 
 
FOCUSED FRAMEWORKS 
 
Lean SCM: Lean management is focused on efficiency, foremost the elimination of 
waste, i.e., non-value added activities (such as inventories or lead time) detected by value 
stream analysis as well as of mistakes in general (―poka-yoke‖). Suppliers are closely 
integrated in product development (via simultaneous engineering) and order processing. 
Parallel to this, customers are integrated into product development (e.g., as pilot users), 
complaints systems, and pull-systems (Kanban). Furthermore, various forms of joint 
production, systems sourcing and Just-In-Time sourcing characterize the lean SCM-
framework. The team-based continuous improvement process (kaizen) serves mainly as a 
device for waste management (Mason-Jones, Naylor & Towill 2000). 
Agile SCM: Agility is focused on flexibility (Backhouse & Burns 1999; Rigby, Day, 
Forrester & Burnett 2000; Goldsby & Griffis 2006). It characterizes the ability to respond 
rapidly to changes in demand (volume, variety), enabled by production and logistics 
technologies such as Web-EDI, digitalization (e.g., simulation, additive manufacturing), the 
―Internet of things,‖ and telematics. Particularly with respect to project work along the supply 
chain, agility relies on incremental heuristics based on empowered ―entrepreneurial‖ 
teamwork. They provide imperfect second best solutions instead of a holistic optimization 
based on hard factors such as algorithms or standardized procedures. 
Six Sigma SCM: Its focus in on the effective supply chain (Drohomeretski, Gouvea da 
Costa, Pinheiro de Lima & da Rosa Garbuio 2014). On a high performance level, the 
approach pursues the radical improvement of process quality, not only product quality. This 
requires high quality standards implemented across the entire supply chain, including tier n-
suppliers.  
Resilient SCM: This framework is characterized by robustness and adaptive capacity 
towards threats and shocks (Pettit, Fiksel & Croxton 2010; Klibi, Martel & Guitouni 2010; 
Bhamraa, Daniab, & Burnarda 2011; Spieglera, Naima & Wikner 2012; World Economic 
Forum & Accenture 2013; Business Continuity Institute 2014). Resilience covers both 
traditional risks (e.g., bullwhip effect, propagation of quality defects) and current risks, such 

Balanced Resilience 
77
as lack of coordination along the supply chain, fraud, corruption, moral hazard, disruption, 
crises, embargos, strikes, disasters, and discontinuities in the wake of cyber-attacks, 
epidemics, and geopolitical turbulences. 
In addition, the relevant spectrum of focused frameworks contains generic frameworks 
with a range of application beyond the specific performance aspects of SCM. Several generic 
frameworks originate in risk management such as risk sharing, risk transfer or hedging which 
are also deployed in supply chain risk management. Further generic frameworks deal with the 
interplay of ―learning from success‖ and ―learning from failure‖ (Edmondson 2011).  
 
 
BLENDED FRAMEWORKS 
 
Leagile SCM: Leagility approaches blend efforts to improve efficiency (waste 
management) and effectiveness (agility). The standard coupling pattern (figure 1) is sectoral: 
the upstream section of the supply chain represents the realm of lean management, the 
downstream section is dominated by agile management (Van Hoek 2000; Goldsby & Griffis 
2006).  
Sustainable SCM: This mainstream framework implies multiple blending (Carter & 
Rogers 2008; Foerstl, Reuter, Hartmann & Blome 2010; Fearne, Garcia Martinez & Dent 
2012; Mari, Lee & Memon 2014; Pereseina, Jensen & Hertz 2014). First, the simultaneous 
attainment of environmental, social and economic goals which is addressed by holistic 
approaches like closed-loop supply chains (e.g., cradle-to-cradle), reverse logistics 
(Govindana, Soleimanib & Kannanc 2015), recycling, product recovery, refabrication, life 
cycle assessment (ISO 14040), social life cycle assessment (Fan, Wu, Chen & Apul 2015), 
product lifecycle management (Stark 2011), and total value of ownership-models. Secondly, 
sustainable SCM requires an optimal blend of short-term performance and long-term 
performance: while long-term performance is the characteristic goal, short-term performance 
serves as a precondition for reaching this goal. 
Lean Six Sigma SCM: This framework combines waste elimination projects and high-
performance quality programs (Jeyaraman & Teo 2010; Drohomeretski, Gouvea da Costa, 
Pinheiro de Lima & da Rosa Garbuio 2014). In analogy, Agile Six Sigma SCM blends agility 
and quality approaches. 
Antifragile SCM: An antifragile supply chain is both resilient and capable of exploiting 
shocks and threats as opportunities for performance improvement (Taleb 2012; Derbyshire & 
Wright 2014; Aven 2015). Some cognate approaches, e.g., the Beyond resilience-approach 
(Accenture 2013), adopt the basic idea of antifragility, i.e., the alignment of risk management 
and opportunity management. 
Ambidextrous SCM: Ambidexterity accomplishes both the exploitation of existing 
business, e.g., new generations of car models, and the exploration of new businesses, e.g., car 
sharing, no-emission vehicles or self-steering cars (Kristal, Huang & Roth 2010; Blome, 
Schoenherr & Kaesser 2013). Within a sectoral coupling pattern, venture units are in charge 
of explorative innovations whereas exploitative innovations are the job of the R&D 
departments of OEMs and suppliers. 
Coopetitive SCM: In addition to contract-based co-operation along the supply chain there 
are various species of organized competition, mainly used as strategies to identify the most 

Michael Reiss 
78
suitable supplier. Moreover, (serial) coopetition is also deployed in the shape of 
precompetitive co-operation and post-competitive co-operation (Gast, Filser, Gundolf & 
Kraus 2014; Wilhelm 2011; Ehrenmann & Reiss 2011; Walley 2007).  
Make & buy-strategies: Combinations of insourcing and outsourcing replace the 
customary make-or-buy-paradigm. The two options go along with different costs of 
coordination to reach a required level of supply security. They are the result of either additive 
patterns or subsidiary patterns of blending.  
Push-pull-systems: They couple downstream pull-control with upstream push-control 
(Simchi-Levi, Kaminsky & Simichi-Levi 2008). The core challenge for supply chain 
managers is determining the decoupling point where customer order-driven pull-forces and 
forecast-driven push-forces meet.  
Mass customization: This framework combines mass manufacturing of standard 
components with configuring these components for customized products (Piller &Tseng 
2009/2010; Barman & Canizares 2015; Reiss & Koser 2004). Traditional approaches rely on 
a segmentation of the supply chain into an upstream mass manufacturing segment and a 
downstream customizing segment (including self-customizing by end customers).  
Outpacing: This competitive strategy couples product-focused activities (e.g., new 
product development) and process-focused activities (e.g., robots, automation, digital factory, 
chaotic inventory systems, swap containers, RFID) in a serial fashion (Gilbert & Strebel 
1987). Figure 2 outlines the two modes of sequentially coupling product innovations and 
process innovations. 
 
 
Figure 2. Blended architecture of Outpacing. 
The relevant spectrum of blended frameworks also contains generic frameworks not 
specifically dedicated to supply management: the performance of portfolio management – 
such as technology portfolios, energy mixes, (human) resources portfolios, or business 
relationship portfolios – relies on the mixing of assets.  
BLENDING
FOCUSING
FOCUSING
BLENDING
PROCESS  INNOVATIONS
EFFECTIVENESS
OUTPACING
PRODUCT INNOVATIONS
EFFICIENCY

Balanced Resilience 
79
Blended mixes of significantly diverse assets – e.g., technologies with an expiring patent 
protection on the one hand and emergent technologies on the other - are capable of supporting 
both risk management (e.g., via cross-subsidizing) and opportunity management (via creating 
synergy). Moreover, the spectrum also encompasses blended frameworks which only cover a 
specific sector of SCM. For instance, the area of application of Scrumban, a blend of agile 
management and Kanban (Ladas 2008), is restricted to managing development projects within 
SCM. 
 
 
EVALUATION OF PERFORMANCE FRAMEWORKS: CRITERIA 
 
On a meta-level, any framework for performance management is expected to meet three 
generic criteria: feasibility, orientation, and balance. 
Feasibility: All building blocks of a performance-oriented approach to SCM should be 
realistic, all goals should be achievable in order to avoid mission impossible projects and 
activities. Several dilemmas (e.g., the innovator's dilemma), traps (e.g., the success trap, the 
failure trap, the ―success breeds failure trap‖), and paradoxes (e.g., the Icarus-paradox or 
Brooks‘s law: „Adding manpower to a late project makes it later―) have fostered an 
awareness for the systematic misjudgments of feasibility. A tentative assessment of feasibility 
is based on a performance scale with three critical levels of performance: existence denotes 
average and normal performance, which is assessed by help of statistics (median, modal 
value, etc.) and the benchmarking of supply chains. Excellence characterizes above average 
success determined by best practices or world class performance. Inversely, exit stands for 
extremely bad performance, manifested in customer loss, flops, market exit or long-lasting 
standstills in production and supply.  
Corresponding to the divergent aspiration levels of performance management, i.e., 
excellence and existence, there are two polar clusters of SCM frameworks:  
Excellence-focused approaches contain models of management excellence such as the 
model of the European Foundation for Quality Management (Kim, Kumar & Kumar 2010), 
high-performance systems-approaches, efficient consumer response, Zero defect, 100% 
service level, 100% uptime, perfect production, product development in half the time, ―total‖-
approaches, e.g., from Total Quality Management or Total Productive Maintenance, Best-of-
breed, Six Sigma, conflict transformation, and ambidexterity. As a rule, excellence-focused 
approaches overestimate the knowledge base of SCM (―Supply Chain Management Body of 
Knowledge‖) and underestimate the inherent complexity of supply processes. Moreover, 
excellence approaches normally operate on ―secrets‖ or ―panaceas,‖ i.e., guarantors of 
success which is not consistent with the insufficiencies of the available knowledge base that 
actually contains a plethora of highly conjectural elements. 
Resilience-focused approaches are – just like the viable systems-model - less ambitious, 
but more realistic than excellence-focused approaches. They pursue robustness of supply 
systems with respect to obstacles and risks. ―Resilience management‖ serves as the umbrella 
terms for these approaches, both on the inter-organizational and intra-organizational levels.  
Orientation: All approaches to supply management should provide goal-path-data which 
specify both performance dimensions (Bhagwat & Sharma 2007) and performance 
determinants. Some mainstream approaches offer plausible but rather vague, unspecific or 

Michael Reiss 
80
incomplete navigation data: they merely provide visions, guidelines, manifestos, doctrines, 
charters, outlines of appropriate mindsets as well as principles. However, these approaches do 
not contain specific roadmaps that would indicate milestones on the way to performance. On 
the other hand, the pragmatic toolbox-approaches do deliver operational inputs (e.g., service 
level agreements, supply chain towers, buffers, telematics, insurance, etc.), yet do not 
substantiate their performance impact. Orientation in SCM is ensured when all involved 
players are able to deal not only with abstract visions and principles, but also with concrete 
supply processes.  
Balance: Unlike biased performance approaches, a balanced approach encompasses all 
criteria of supply chain performance. For instance, balanced scorecards or 360 degree 
feedbacks intend to meet the expectations of all clusters of stakeholders in SCM. Balancing is 
required with respect to effectiveness (quality, security, environmental sustainability, etc.) 
and efficiency (costs, response time, speed, etc.). Last but not least balance means giving 
equal weight to risks and to opportunities of supply thereby dedicating equal attention to 
determinants of success and of failure in supply management. Risks and opportunities enter 
performance management models both as factors (e.g., unfavorable or favorable conditions) 
and as effects, for instance downside or upside effects and negative or positive deviations vis-
à-vis expectations. The underlying notion of opportunity (―chance‖) is not restricted to 
―business‖ opportunities. One determinant, for instance a conflict, may have multiple, even 
ambivalent impacts: predominantly negative impacts (risks, threats, etc.) characterize so 
called dysfunctional conflicts whereas functional conflicts have mainly positive impacts 
(opportunities such as improving motivation or enabling change). 
Trade-offs between the three meta-criteria represent a major challenge for performance 
frameworks and a hurdle to fulfill all three criteria simultaneously. Balance demands complex 
frameworks, whereas orientation and feasibility are rather attained by help of simple 
frameworks. As a consequence, focused frameworks in general outperform with respect to 
orientation and feasibility, whereas blended frameworks reach superior scores on the balance 
scale: due to the innate ―bias‖ of all focused frameworks their major disadvantage is ignoring 
or at least underestimating the relevance of certain dimensions and/ or determinants.  
Blending serves as a potent device for balance, an advantage captured in the ―best of both 
worlds-concept‖: blended frameworks basically inherit the strengths and weaknesses of their 
parent frameworks (figure 3). Their interplay may enable a synergistic accumulation of the 
strengths of both frameworks. At least, a mutual compensation of strengths and weaknesses 
can be reached. Unfortunately there is also a dark side of blending. Some mixes may turn out 
to be compromises that only provide some vague ―wishy-washy‖ orientation. Furthermore, 
conflicts between antithetic building blocks of frameworks may cause a state of confusion 
and disorientation. This holds especially for hybrid mixes: mixing antithetic elements like 
water and fire may generate ―steam‖ instead of ―firewater.‖ Stringent incompatibilities, like 
between ―slack as a precondition for flexibility‖ and ―slack as a species of waste,‖ end up in 
basal disorientation (chaos). Figure 3 shows the evaluation model for the hybrid combination 
of two antithetic frameworks, i.e., lean SCM and agile SCM. The evaluation is boiled down 
to just one characteristic strength and weakness of each framework.  
Figure 3 encompasses ―productive tensions‖ (above the diagonal) in a hybrid 
construction as well as ―unproductive frictions‖ (below the diagonal). To consolidate both 
effects they must be aggregated, taking into consideration weights and positive or negative 
signs. The results of the consolidated evaluation depend on the respective blending patterns 

Balanced Resilience 
81
and on proportions (figure 1). As a rule, additive patterns create more orientation problems 
(i.e., conflicts) than alternative blending patterns. 
 
 
Figure 3. Evaluation of a blended framework (leagile SCM). 
 
EVALUATION OF FOCUSED FRAMEWORKS 
 
Lean SCM: Continuous improvement delivers insufficient orientation data as long as the 
dimensions of improvement are not substantiated. As a consequence, possible trade-offs and 
incompatibilities between performance dimensions (e.g., employee and customer satisfaction) 
rest undiscovered and not handled. Hence, this approach is prone to unbalance. 
Agile SCM: Flexibility is a vague orientation as long as the context factors which require 
flexibility remain unspecified (Tang & Tomlin 2008). These factors encompass demand 
volatility, supply factors (e.g., new process technologies, renewable energies, raw materials) 
and/ or regulatory factors. Agility must not be exclusively focused on the volatility of demand 
(e.g., requirement churns) or on hypercompetition, but should also deal with changes in the 
supply markets (e.g., supply of rare earths) as well as in laws, regulations, technical standards, 
and IT-security. Moreover, the costs of agility - unlike its benefits - are not sufficiently taken 
into account, a fact that results in some lack of balance of this framework.  
Six Sigma SCM: First, covering the entire supply chain including tier n-suppliers with an 
extremely high level of aspiration seems unrealistic, especially against the background of the 
so called 1.5 sigma shift. In addition, the framework is unbalanced as a consequence of 
neglecting costs, primarily costs of coordination.  
Resilient SCM: This framework is realistic and not impaired by disorientation. However, 
due to the innate focus on mastering risks, the approach is unbalanced since improvements 
(opportunities) are not integrated into the framework.  
-
AGILE
SCM
LEAN
SCM
+
-
-
+
+
-
+
CHAOS
SYNERGY
STRENGTH
WASTE ELIMINATION
WEAKNESS
REACTIVE ADAPTATION
STRENGTH
FLEXIBILITY
WEAKNESS
INCREMENTALISM
EXCELLENCE
EXISTENCE
EXIT
CONFLICT
CONFLICT
COMPENSATION
COMPENSATION

Michael Reiss 
82
EVALUATION OF BLENDED FRAMEWORKS 
 
Leagile SCM: Basically, the blending attains some compensation between the respective 
strengths and weaknesses of the parent frameworks. Still, major weaknesses of the parent 
frameworks are not compensated: the controversial interpretations of redundancy as ―slack vs. 
waste‖ causes disorientation. Moreover, the demarcation of lean and agile sectors of the 
supply chain is vague or obsolete: even downstream processes have become objects of lean 
management. This holds not only for standardized service processes (e.g., McDonaldization, 
e-commerce) but also for the industrialization of the building sector via standardized products 
and processes.  
 
 
Figure 4. Unbalanced blending in sustainable SCM. 
Sustainable SCM: A sound solution for problems with trade-offs between environmental 
and economic goals, e.g., green local sourcing versus cost-effective global sourcing, is 
missing. Unless compromises are found, the framework seems merely visionary, i.e., 
feasibility is not safeguarded. Likewise, no solid balance between short-term and long-term 
performance goals has been established. Figure 4 highlights the bias of sustainable SCM 
towards long-term performance goals (e.g., strategic missions, future generations). This 
hyperopic approach seems unrealistic since long-term performance is dependent on short-
term performance as well as on operational activities. Whenever short-term performance 
(e.g., in the energy mix) is neglected, the migration from present to future solutions is at risk. 
Lean Six Sigma SCM: The questionable feasibility of the six sigma-framework is 
inherited and by no means compensated by the lean component.  
Antifragile SCM: The immanent ―resilience plus‖-approach establishes a balance which 
however does not cover the entire scope of relevant opportunities, such as learning from 
successful role models. The orientation provided is impaired by the fact that the specification 
of management parameters is extremely poor. 
high
low
high
low
LONG-TERM
PERFORMANCE GOALS
sustainability
visionary approach
hyperopia
market-exit risk
financing deficit
...
LONG-TERM
BIAS
BALANCED
ORIENTATION
LOW 
PERFORMANCE AMBITIONS
bifocal performance system
cross-subsidizing
balanced allocation of resources
migration plan 
...
exploitation
sprint mode
myopia
self-complacency
investment deficit
SHORT-TERM
PERFORMANCE  GOALS
SHORT-TERM
BIAS
...
stamina

Balanced Resilience 
83
Ambidextrous SCM: The orientation potential of this framework is diminished by the 
academic dispute between the ―complement school‖ and the ―conflict school‖ over the 
rationale of blending exploration and exploitation. In addition, the framework does not 
encompass the entire range of blending patterns, e.g., subsidiary blending that utilizes 
exploitation as a fallback in case exploration efforts fail. Consequently, the framework is not 
capable of offering information on the optimal allocation of R&D budgets. 
Coopetitive SCM: Coopetition is afflicted with incompatibility issues that cause 
disorientation: co-operation amongst competitors in the supply chain causes high coordination 
costs since it is not trust-based. (Organized) competition amongst partners may be detrimental 
to trust. The disorientation effect is less severe with patterns of alternative blending.  
Make & buy-strategies: The underlying blending allows balancing the coordination costs 
of different governance arrangements (e.g., contracts). Make: buy-proportions also reflect the 
respective attitudes to risk. For risk management purposes subsidiary blending serves as an 
attractive option.  
Push-pull systems: The optimal decoupling point represents an ambiguous orientation. 
First, this concept ignores the bi-functional involvement of customers into supply processes: 
customers are not only involved as principals, i.e., via order activities. Customers actually 
have a second voice as co-producers, produsers or prosumers, i.e., as providers of resources. 
Figure 5 outlines the relevant versions of a push-pull-blending based on different levels of 
integrating customer resources into supply processes.  
Secondly, the exclusive positioning of volatility in the downstream section of the supply 
chain neglects supply volatility in the wake of bottlenecks in the upstream section of the 
supply chain as well as changes in process technologies (e.g., Internet of things) and business 
models of suppliers (e.g., servitization, build-operate models). 
 
 
Figure 5. Resource-focused push-pull systems. 
Mass customization: Orientation problems relate to the choice of the optimal strategy of 
mass customizing, e.g., against the background of the segmentation-modularization interface: 
whereas segmentation is connected to one supply chain (postponement), modularization 
CUSTOMER FEEDBACK 
DEVELOPMENT
PRODUCTION 
DISTRIBUTION
CO-CREATION 
PROCUREMENT
ASSEMBLY
CO-PRODUCTION  
PRODUCT  FINALIZATION
SELF  CUSTOMIZING
CUSTOMER  SELF  SERVICE 
PUSH =
supplier resources
PULL =
customer resources

Michael Reiss 
84
affects several supply chains (carry-over parts). Even the prevalent segmentation mode offers 
merely poor orientation: the decoupling point is not only determined by postponement but 
also by different organizational solutions for the customizing activities, i.e., via vendor 
customizing, third party customizing, or self-customizing by end customers (Reiss & Koser 
2001).  
Outpacing: Basically, the framework enables a balance of effectiveness and efficiency. 
However, the lack of performance measures causes several deficits in orientation. As a 
consequence, the support for performance-based decisions for one of the two sequential 
blending patterns is rather poor.  
The evaluation of existing frameworks reveals that none of them meets all meta-criteria 
sufficiently. Especially, a balanced framework which couples risk and opportunity 
management is missing or only exists rudimentarily. Although the resilience framework is 
consistent with the challenging context of SCM, opportunity management represents the blind 
spot of this approach.  
 
 
THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE BALANCED  
RESILIENCE FRAMEWORK 
 
The balanced resilience framework (BR-framework) is capable of integrating opportunity 
management into the resilience approach. The labeling of this new framework is adopted 
from familiar nomenclature, e.g., the Supply Chain Balanced Scorecard. Lessons learned 
from other blended frameworks such as leagile or antifragile SCM are integrated. The core of 
the BR-performance framework is a model of four categories of performance determinants 
(Figure 6). 
The design of the framework follows the methodology of force field analysis which 
differentiates the direction and the strength of the respective performance determinants 
(Swanson & Creed 2014; Thomas 1985).  
As for direction, determinants facilitating success (performance enablers) as well as 
those inhibiting success (performance disablers) are incorporated. Both enablers and 
disablers of performance are differentiated into determinants with either a strong performance 
impact or a moderate impact. Enablers comprise traditional (critical) success factors that 
furnish excellence as well as barriers to failure that (merely) inhibit (more or less existential) 
threats, for instance a supply chain becoming the victim of a winner take all-situation. 
Correspondingly, disablers comprise failure factors (e.g., provoking forced market exit or 
flops) as well as barriers to success that inhibit excellent success (e.g., bureaucratic 
compliance systems).  
The assessment of strengths relies on the simple metrics underlying force field analysis 
that differentiates between ―weak = 1,‖ ―medium = 2,‖ and ―strong = 3.‖ Whenever the 
assessment of forces is supposed to capture the uncertainty of the knowledge base (Supply 
Chain Management Body of Knowledge), primarily one of two procedures can be deployed: 
The first option employs several, more or less optimistic scenarios for supply chain 
performance, i.e., a menu of alternative force fields. The second option utilizes probabilities. 
In probability approaches the strength of forces is assessed by ―impact x probability.‖ 
Probability metrics should not aspire numerical precision but rather align to the outlined 

Balanced Resilience 
85
metrics of impact measurement, for instance differentiating between „rarely (1),‖ 
―occasionally (2)― and ―frequently (3).‖ This realistic approach also characterizes some 
assessment tools in risk management, e.g., the failure mode and effect- analysis. The resulting 
range of expected strengths encompasses 1 2, 3, 4, 6 and 9. Unfortunately, the information 
content of these expected values is impaired by netting out effects: an expected value of ―3‖ 
either signals a likely, but weak performance determinant or a rare, but strong determinant. 
 
 
Figure 6. Architecture of the BR-framework. 
Prevalent frameworks concentrate on the factors with major impact, i.e., success and 
failure factors. As a rule, a listing of factors characterizes the essence of the framework. The 
range of prevailing success factors contains inter alia customer and supplier relationships, 
information and communication technology, and materials flow management (Ab Talib & 
Abdul Hamid 2014). The standard list of failure factors gathers disruption, disaster, cyber-
risks (World Economic Forum & Deloitte 2014), flops, excessive inventory, long cycle times, 
low uptime, excessive setup times, poor quality, incompatibility, external pressures and 
resource limits (Pettit, Croxton & Fiksel 2013).  
By contrast, the BR-framework concentrates on barriers. This focus serves as a safeguard 
of feasibility: given the limited validity of the supply chain management body of knowledge, 
categorizations as success or failure factors are rather conjectural and often not substantiated 
by sound information. On the one hand, the list of failure barriers contains generic barriers, 
such as fallbacks, BATNA, contingency plans, insurance, security management, escape 
options, decoupling, (unrelated) diversification, stamina and tolerance (e.g., in dealing with 
conflicts). On the other hand, there are supply-specific barriers, like postponement, dual 
sourcing, order splitting, slack resources in equipment and inventory (e.g., buffers, safety 
stocks), freezing of product requirements, and risk sharing (e.g., pain/gain share mechanisms 
between suppliers and OEMs).  
LEVEL  OF 
PERFORMANCE
FAILURE
FACTORS
SUCCESS
FACTORS
EXISTENCE
EXCELLENCE
EXIT
generate
success
opportunity
impact
zone
risk
impact
zone
PERFORMANCE
ENABLERS
PERFORMANCE
DISABLERS
inhibit
failure
FAILURE
BARRIERS
inhibit
success
SUCCESS
BARRIERS
provoke
failure
EXCELLENCE
EXCELLENCE
EXISTENCE

Michael Reiss 
86
The scope of barriers to success ranges from generic determinants like inertia, so called 
―anti-patterns‖ (e.g., group think, paralysis by analysis), contractual lock-ins, complacency to 
supply-specific determinants such as waste, lack of dedicated resources, competitive 
disadvantages, missing global standards, and costly (bureaucratic) infrastructures.  
The space between the upper limit of the existence-level and the excellence-level in 
figure 6 depicts the opportunity impact zone while the space between the lower limit and the 
exit level defines the risk impact zone of performance management. The overall interval 
between „best case― and „worst case― marks the uncertainty that performance-oriented supply 
chain managers have to cope with. 
The prevalent listing of performance determinants is not sufficient for successfully 
applying the BR-framework. Determinants have to be modeled as forces, i.e., both direction 
(enablers or disablers) and strength (barriers or factors) of their performance impact have to 
be fixed in order to safeguard orientation. A major challenge for modelling derives from the 
fact that many determinants are ambiguous (e.g., ―customer integration‖ standing for 
―customer requirements‖ or ―customer resources‖) and/ or ambivalent (e.g., conflicts having 
both enabling and disabling performance-effects). So, the collected determinants only serve 
as proxies, i.e., rather vague hints to forces. Quite frequently, the modelling as forces requires 
a decomposition of ambivalent determinants into enabling and disabling forces. One 
determinant represents several forces: supply chain governance (Richey Jr., Roath, Whipple 
& Fawcett 2010) for instance compromises a facilitating infrastructure (reduction of 
coordination costs) and an inhibiting infrastructure (bureaucracy, compliance). Likewise, 
learning processes may build-up a barrier to failure or dismantle a barrier to success. Existing 
business relationships diminish coordination costs on the one hand (dismantle success 
barriers) or represent lock-ins excluding promising alternative relationships (build-up success 
barriers).  
A precise (numerical) specification is especially mandatory in the case of quantitative 
determinants like ―stocks,‖ ―multiple‖ sources, or ―postponement.‖ Depending on the 
respective amounts or doses, the determinant in question will be alternatively allocated in the 
cluster of success barriers or failure barriers. 
Figure 7 visualizes an application of the BR-framework in the graphical representation of 
traditional force field analysis: relevant forces (performance determinants) are measured on a 
scale from 1 to 3 and visualized by the respective lengths of horizontal arrows. Barriers are 
characterized by strengths of 1 or 2, while success or failure factors have impacts of 3. The 
overall net-impact of enabling and disabling forces in the example is positive, i.e., a minor 
performance improvement can be obtained. For a further increase of performance, the 
strengthening of enablers and/ or the weakening of disablers serve as parameters of 
intervention. According to the BR-framework, barriers are promising candidates for 
intervention since the feasibility of intervention is higher than operating on factors. 
Sometimes, the costs of intervention decide whether the defensive strengthening of failure 
barriers (e.g., more buffers or risk sharing) or the offensive weakening of success barriers 
(e.g., investment in resources, closing gaps in standardization) are more appropriate. The 
activities of intervention change the rating of forces and consequently the overall net 
performance-impact. 
 

Balanced Resilience 
87
 
Figure 7. BR-framework in action. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The BR-framework for managing the performance of supply chains aligns two core areas 
of supply chain management: Risk management is accomplished by building-up failure 
barriers and opportunity management effected by dismantling success barriers. The BR-
framework is capable of assessing the performance impact of various mainstream 
developments in SCM, such as product lifecycle management, globalization, virtualization, 
regulation, 
modularization, 
servitization, 
supply 
chain 
mobility, 
smart 
products, 
projectification of businesses, sustainability, multi-sided markets, organized coopetition 
(auctions, tendering), digital convergence, long tail-business models (―selling less of more‖) 
and cloud computing. Moreover, it reflects the bifocal orientation of pivotal supply systems 
and industries, e.g., the automotive supply chain, the energy supply networks and IT-industry. 
The BR-framework handles determinants of performance as forces. Unlike prevalent 
approaches which predominantly rely on lists of determinants, the modeling of forces not 
only enables the concrete assessment with respect to direction, impact, and probability. In 
addition, transforming determinants into forces obliterates the ambiguity and the ambivalence 
inherent in existing frameworks, two deficits that are accountable for significant 
disorientation.  
The BR-framework meets the basic requirements of feasibility, orientation, and balance 
better than the other prevalent frameworks: feasibility due to the concentration on barriers, 
orientation owing to relying on forces and balance due to simultaneously integrating ―shields‖ 
(building-up failure barriers) as well as ―spears‖ (dismantling success barriers) into the 
management of supply chain performance.  
Nevertheless, major investment into the further development of the BR-framework is 
needed to compensate evident shortcomings and deficits. This concerns for instance the 
quality defects
limited resources
inertia
contractual lock-ins
supplier relationship management
on-demand manufacturing 
buffers
lack of standards
organized competition
risk sharing
PERFORMANCE
ENABLERS
PERFORMANCE
DISABLERS
3
2
1
3
2
1
+3
+2
+1
+3
+2
----
+11
Σ
+15
-15
1
-3
-2
-2
-1
-2
----
-10
Σ

Michael Reiss 
88
dynamics of framework performance: depending on the sustainability of forces, performance 
levels erode over time, a problem captured in the so called 1.5 sigma shift for instance. 
Moreover, intertemporal interdependencies between success and failure (e.g., success or 
failure creating success, Edmondson 2011; Gino & Pisano 2011) have to be incorporated into 
the framework. Dynamics is also an issue concerning the infrastructures of supply chains. 
Amongst the soft infrastructures the dynamics of trust is most challenging, since both positive 
spirals (self-enforcing tit-for-tat-based trust building) and negative spirals (fragility of trust) 
occur. Moreover, the management of the performance of a single supply chain has to be 
integrated into the coordinated management of clusters of several interconnected supply 
chains: the performance of carry-over parts- or platform-strategies requires a cross-supply 
chain assessment of performance that takes account of both specific opportunities (e.g., 
economies of scale) and risks (e.g., propagation of defective carry-over parts into multiple 
supply chains). 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Ab Talib, M.S. & Abdul Hamid, A.B. (2014). Application of Critical Success Factors in 
Supply Chain Management. International Journal of Supply Chain Management, 4(3), 
21-33. 
Accenture (2013). Beyond resilience. Turning Volatility and Uncertainty into Business 
Opportunity, Dublin, Ireland. 
Aven, T. (2015). The Concept of Antifragility and its Implications for the Practice of Risk 
Analysis. Risk Analysis, 35(3), 476-483. 
Backhouse, C.J. & Burns, N.D. (1999). Agile value chains for manufacturing. Implications 
for performance measures. International Journal of Agile Management Systems 1(2), 76-
82. 
Barman, S. & Canizares, A. E. (2015). A Survey of Mass Customization in Practice. 
International Journal of Supply Chain Management, 4(1), 65-72. 
Bendell, T. (2014). Building Anti-Fragile Organisations: Risk, Opportunity and Governance 
in a Turbulent World, Farnham, UK: Gower. 
Bhagwat, R. & Sharma, M. K. (2007). Performance measurement of supply chain 
management: A balanced scorecard approach. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 53 
(1), 43-62. 
Bhamraa, R., Daniab, S. & Burnarda, K. (2011). Resilience: the concept, a literature review 
and future directions. International Journal of Production Research, 49 (18), 5375-5393. 
Blome, C., Schoenherr, T. & Kaesser, M. (2013). Ambidextrous Governance in Supply 
Chains: The Impact on Innovation and Cost Performance. Journal of Supply Chain 
Management 49(4), 59-80. 
Business Continuity Institute (2014). Supply Chain Resilience 2014: An international survey 
to consider the origin, causes & consequences of supply chain disruption, Caversham, 
UK. 
Carter, C.R. & Rogers, D.S. (2008). A framework of sustainable supply chain management: 
moving toward new theory. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics 
Management, 38 (5), 360 – 387. 

Balanced Resilience 
89
Corsten, D. & Kumar, N. (2005). Do Suppliers Benefit from Collaborative Relationships with 
Large Retailers? An Empirical Investigation of Efficient Consumer Response Adoption. 
Journal of Marketing 69 (7), 80–94. 
Derbyshire, J. & Wright, G. (2014). Preparing for the future: Development of an ‗antifragile‘ 
methodology that complements scenario planning by omitting causation. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 82 215-225. 
Dong-Young, K., Kumar, V. & Kumar, U. (2010). Performance assessment framework for 
supply chain partnership. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 15 (3), 
187 – 195. 
Drohomeretski, E., Gouvea da Costa, S.E., Pinheiro de Lima, E. & da Rosa Garbuio, P. A. 
(2014). Lean, Six Sigma and Lean Six Sigma: an analysis based on operations strategy. 
International Journal of Production Research, 52 (3), 804-824. 
Edmondson, A. C. (2011). Strategies For Learning From Failure. Harvard Business Review, 
89 (4), 48-55. 
Ehrenmann, F. & Reiss, M. (2011). Co‐opetition as a facilitator of manufacturing 
competitiveness: opportunities and threats. ElMaraghy, H. A. (ed.): Enabling 
Manufacturing Competitiveness and Economic Sustainability: Proceedings of the 4th 
International Conference on Changeable, Agile, Reconfigurable and Virtual Production, 
403-408, Berlin, Germany: Springer. 
Fan, Y., Wu, R., Chen, J. & Apul, D. (2015). A Review of Social Life Cycle Assessment 
Methodologies. Muthu, S. S. (ed.). Social Life Cycle Assessment. An Insight, Berlin, 
Germany: Springer.  
Fearne, A., Garcia Martinez, M. & Dent, B. (2012). Dimensions of sustainable value chains: 
implications for value chain analysis. Supply Chain Management: An International 
Journal 17 (6), 575-581. 
Foerstl, K., Reuter, C., Hartmann, E. & Blome, C. (2010). Managing supplier sustainability 
risks in a dynamically changing environment—Sustainable supplier management in the 
chemical industry. Journal of Purchasing & Supply Management 16(2), 118–130. 
Frederico, G.F. & Martins, R.A. (2014). Performance Measurement Systems for Supply 
Chain Management: How to Manage Its Maturity. International Journal of Supply Chain 
Management, 3(2), 24-30. 
Gast, J., Filser, M., Gundolf, K. & Kraus, S. (2014). Coopetition research: towards a better 
understanding of past trends and future directions. International Journal of 
Entrepreneurship and Small Business 24 (4), 492-521. 
Gilbert, X. & Strebel, P. (1987). Strategies to outpace the competition. Journal of Business 
Strategy, 8 (1), 28 – 36. 
Gino, F. & Pisano, G.P. (2011). Why Leaders Don‘t Learn from Success. Harvard Business 
Review, 89 (4), 68-74. 
Goldsby, T. J. & Griffis, S. E. (2006). Modeling Lean, Agile, and Leagile Supply Chain 
Strategies. Journal of Business Logistics 27 (1), 57 – 80. 
Govindana, K., Soleimanib, H. & Kannanc, D. (2015). Reverse logistics and closed-loop 
supply chain: A comprehensive review to explore the future. European Journal of 
Operational Research 240 (3), 603–626.  
Gunasekarana, A., Patel, C. & McGaughey, R.E. (2004). A framework for supply chain 
performance measurement. International Journal of Production Economics, 87 (3), 333–
347. 

Michael Reiss 
90
Jayant, A. & Ghagra, H.S. (2013). Supply Chain Flexibility Configurations: Perspectives, 
Empirical Studies and Research Directions. International Journal of Supply Chain 
Management 2 (1), 21-29. 
Jeyaraman, K. & Teo, L.K. (2010). A conceptual framework for critical success factors of 
lean Six Sigma. International Journal of Lean Six Sigma 1(3), 191 – 215. 
Kim, S.-H. (2014). Postponement for Designing Mass-Customized Supply Chains: 
Categorization and Framework for Strategic Decision Making. International Journal of 
Supply Chain Management, 3(1), 1-11. 
Klibi, W., Martel, A. & Guitouni, A. (2010). The design of robust value-creating supply chain 
networks: A critical review. European Journal of Operational Research 203, 283–293. 
Kristal, M.M., Huang, X. & Roth, A.V. (2010). The effect of an ambidextrous supply chain 
strategy on combinative competitive capabilities and business performance. Journal of 
Operations Management 28 (5), 415–429. 
Ladas, C. (2008). Scrumban - Essays on Kanban Systems for Lean Software Development. 
Seattle, WA: Modus Cooperandi Press. 
Mari, S.I., Lee, Y.H. & Memon, M.S. (2014). Sustainable and Resilient Supply Chain 
Network Design under Disruption Risks. Sustainability, 6, 6666-6686. 
Mason-Jones, R., Naylor, B. & Towill, D. R. (2000). Lean, agile or leagile? Matching your 
supply chain to the marketplace. International Journal of Production Research, 38 (17), 
4061-4070. 
Pereseina, V., Jensen, L.-M. & Hertz, S. (2014). Challenges and Conflicts in Sustainable 
Supply Chain Management. Evidence from the heavy-vehicle industry. Supply Chain 
Forum: an International Journal 15 (1), 22-32. 
Pettit, T., Fiksel, J. & Croxton, K. (2010). Ensuring Supply Chain Resilience: Development 
of a Conceptual Framework. Journal of Business Logistics, 31 (1), 1-21. 
Pettit, T.J., Croxton, K.L. & Fiksel, J. (2013). Ensuring Supply Chain Resilience: 
Development and Implementation of an Assessment Tool. Journal of Business Logistics, 
34 (1), 46–76. 
Piller, F.T. & Tseng, M.M. (eds. 2009/2010). Handbook of Research in Mass Customization 
and Personalization (2 Volumes), Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Company. 
Reiss, M. & Koser, M. (2001). Third Party Customization. Blecker, T. & Gemünden, H. G. 
(eds.): Innovatives Produktions- und Technologiemanagement, 55-85. Berlin, Germany: 
Springer. 
Reiss, M. & Koser, M. (2004): From Mass Customization to Mass Personalization. A New 
Competitive Strategy in E-Business. Bensberg, F., vom Brocke, J. & Schultz, M.B. (eds.): 
Trendberichte zum Controlling, 285-310, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer. 
Reiss, M. (2012). Change Management, Norderstedt, Germany: BoD. 
Richey Jr., R. G., Roath, A. S., Whipple, J. M. & Fawcett, S.E. (2010). Exploring a 
governance theory of supply chain management: barriers and facilitators to integration. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 31(1), 237-256.  
Rigby, C., Day, M., Forrester, P. & Burnett, J. (2000). Agile supply: rethinking systems 
thinking, systems practice. International Journal of Agile Management Systems 2 (3) 
178-186. 
Sheffi, Y. (2005). The Resilient Enterprise: Overcoming Vulnerability for Competitive 
Advantage, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 

Balanced Resilience 
91
Simchi-Levi, D., Kaminsky, P., & Simichi-Levi, E. (2008). Designing and managing the 
supply chain: Concepts strategies and case studies, 3rd ed. Boston, Mass. et al.: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin. 
Singh, G. & Wahid, N. A. (2014). Supply Chain Risk Management: A Review. International 
Journal of Supply Chain Management, 3(3), 59-67. 
Sodhi, M.S., Son, B.-G. & Tang, C.S. (2012). Researchers‘ perspective on supply chain risk 
management. Production and operations management 21(1) 1 – 13. 
Spieglera, V.L.M, Naima, M.M. & Wikner, J. (2012). A control engineering approach to the 
assessment of supply chain resilience. International Journal of Production Research, 50 
(21), 6162–6187. 
Stark, J. (2011): Product Lifecycle Management, 2nd ed., London, UK: Springer. 
Swanson, D. J. & Creed, A.S. (2014). Sharpening the Focus of Force Field Analysis. Journal 
of Change Management 14(1) 28-47. 
Taleb, N.N. (2012). Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder. NewYork, NY: Random 
House. 
Tang, C. & Tomlin, B. (2008). The power of flexibility for mitigating supply chain risks. 
International Journal of Production Economics 116 (1), 12–27. 
Thomas, J. (1985). Force Field Analysis: A New Way to Evaluate Your Strategy. Long Range 
Planning 18(6), 54-59. 
Välikangas, L (2010). The Resilient Organization: How Adaptive Cultures Thrive Even When 
Strategy Fails, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Van Hoek, R.I. (2000). The thesis of leagility revisited. International Journal of Agile 
Management Systems 2 (3) 196 – 201. 
Walley, K. (2007). Coopetition. International Studies of Management and Organisation, 37 
(2), 11-31. 
Wieland, A. & Wallenburg, C.M. (2012). Dealing with supply chain risks: Linking risk 
management practices and strategies to performance. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 42 (10), 887 – 905. 
Wilhelm, M. M. (2011). Managing coopetition through horizontal supply chain relations: 
linking dyadic and network levels of analysis. Journal of Operations Management 29 (8), 
663–676. 
World Economic Forum & Accenture (2013). Building Resilience in Supply Chains. 
Cologny/Geneva, Switzerland. 
World Economic Forum & Deloitte (2014). Risk and Responsibility in a Hyperconnected 
World: Pathways to Global Cyber Resilience. Cologny/Geneva, Switzerland. 
 


In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6  
 
 
 
VIRTUAL OPTIMIZATION OF A WIRELESS, SOLAR 
PV/WIND HYBRID SYSTEM CONTROLLER  
FOR STREET-LIGHTING APPLICATIONS, BASED  
ON ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS 
 
 
S. E. Sadique* 
Weisberg Division of Engineering, Marshall University,  
Huntington, West Virginia, US 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
At present generation of electricity using renewable sources has significance 
priorities due to global warming, pollution etc. which focuses attention to invest in 
renewable energy. Under this circumstances, the idea of working on the implementation 
of renewable energy sources is becoming more appealing. In this study, HOMER 
software has been used to perform simulations of hybrid (solar PV/wind) systems for 
street-lighting applications. HOMER allows the designer to compare many different 
design options based on their technical and economic merits. Statistical analysis of the 
collected high resolution (10 minutes) data for CEI and monthly averaged Environment 
Canada data of TIA was also performed. In all, 32 different hybrid PV/wind system 
scenarios were simulated to estimate the cost and determine the feasibility of a system 
design using CEI and TIA datasets. Moreover, system sensitivity analyses were 
performed using sensitivity variables such as wind turbine hub height and annual capacity 
shortage. In summary, the 10-min solar/wind resolution data has an impact on the hybrid 
solar/wind system design. As a result, the following recommendations may be made: (i) 
It is necessary to compare the computer simulations to long-term performance 
measurements of an actual operating hybrid PV/wind system for street lighting to 
corroborate the simulation results. (ii) Since only two well-known micro-wind turbines 
were studied, it would be beneficial to study other emerging micro-wind turbine options 
with higher performance in the 1-4 m/s range and simulate their performance using 
                                                        
* Weisberg Division of Engineering, Marshall University, One John Marshall Drive, Huntington, WV 25755, 
Email: sadique@marshall.edu. 

S. E. Sadique 
94
HOMER software as well as physical testing. This is in order to determine if such 
technologies are able to provide distinct advantages over solar-only configurations. 
 
Keywords: HOMER, hybrid PV/wind system, street-lighting, statistical analysis, simulations 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Renewable energy has had a higher growth rate in the last few years compared with coal 
and lignite energy. In addition, wind-power and solar-power technologies have grown 
substantially among renewable energy options currently available [1]. It is presumed that 
solar and wind energy are sustainable, clean energy sources that can be focused to address 
problems with increasing energy demands and reduce environmental pollution worldwide [2]. 
The design of the Wind-Solar hybrid power system (WS-HPS) has been studied with four 
main aspects: (i) a hybrid control strategy for the wind-solar system with maximum power 
point trace, (ii) charging and discharging of the battery for increasing lifetime, (iii) light-
emitting diode (LED) dimming control for energy saving, and (iv) real-time monitoring to 
assess the performance and for maintenance. It is aimed to enable maximum power point 
tracking (MPPT) of the WP-HPS and efficient charge-discharge control of the battery and 
LED street lighting dimming is controlled. The energy efficiency enhanced by the WP-HPS 
design [3]. 
Electrical power needs are supplied by a large number of local power companies. Due to 
the isolation of many dwellings, agricultural sites, and industrial sites, there is considerable 
interest in novel forms of electricity production. Two such forms of production are solar 
photo-voltaic (PV) cells based on DC power-generating arrays and wind turbines based on 
propeller-driven DC power generators. Electrical power generation and special sources of 
electric power, like wind turbines, are frequently discussed in the public media. The 
additional factor of the general concern and interest for environmental issues is a further 
enticement to attract the student‘s interest in these ―green-technology‖ forms of electricity 
generation. 
Distributed electricity generation from Renewable Energy Sources (RES) such as solar 
and wind are increasingly seen as cost effective alternatives to centralized carbon-based 
generation. A disadvantage, common to wind and solar options, however, is their 
unpredictable nature and dependence on weather and climatic changes. The hybrid systems 
that combine solar and wind generating units with battery backup can attenuate their 
individual fluctuations and reduce energy storage requirements significantly. However, some 
problems stem from the increased complexity of the system in comparison with single energy 
systems. This complexity, brought about by the use of two different resources combined, 
makes an analysis of hybrid systems more difficult [4]. 
In order to efficiently and economically utilize the renewable energy resources, an 
optimum match design sizing method is necessary. Various optimization techniques such as 
the probabilistic approach, graphical construction method, iterative and artificial intelligence 
(AI) techniques have been recommended by researchers. 
A probabilistic approach based on the convolution technique presented to incorporate the 
fluctuating nature of the resources and the load, thus eliminating the need for time-series data, 
to assess the long-term performance of a hybrid solar-wind system for both stand-alone and 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
95
grid-connected applications [5]. On the other hand, a graphical construction technique for 
figuring the optimum combination of battery and PV array in a hybrid solar-wind system has 
been presented in the literature [6]. An iterative optimization technique has proposed 
following the loss of power supply probability (LPSP) model for a hybrid solar-wind system 
[7, 8]. The number selection of the PV module, wind turbine and battery ensures the load 
demand according to the power reliability requirement, and the system cost is minimized. 
Similarly, an iterative optimization method was presented to select the wind turbine size and 
PV module number needed to make the difference of generated and demanded power (DP) as 
close to zero as possible over a period of time [9].  
A hybrid PV/wind system using a simulation based optimization procedure conducted the 
optimization by OptQuest, which integrates various heuristic methods [10]. It is postulated 
that the response surface methodology (RSM) was used in size optimization of an 
autonomous PV/wind integrated hybrid energy system with battery storage [11]. RSM is a 
collection of statistical and mathematical methods which relies on optimization of response 
surface with design parameters. Later a methodology is developed to perform the optimal 
sizing of an autonomous hybrid PV/wind system according to the loss of power supply 
probability (LPSP) and the levelized cost of energy (LCE) concepts [12]. The methodology 
aims at finding the configuration, among a set of systems components, which meets the 
desired system reliability requirements, with the lowest value of levelized cost of energy. A 
methodology for optimal sizing of stand-alone is developed using PV/wind-generator systems 
[13]. The proposed methodology is based on the genetic algorithms (GA) and compared with 
linear programming. An optimal sizing model for a stand-alone hybrid solar-wind system was 
developed employing battery banks based on the loss of power supply probability (LPSP) and 
the annualized cost of system (ACS) concepts [4]. There was a demonstration on an 
evaluation of the combined solar and wind system for highway energy requirements such as 
lighting, SOS, billboard etc. [14]. A new model Savonius wind turbine was designed and its 
prototype was manufactured.  
Currently various software (models) have been developed for simulation Renewable 
Energy (RE) systems. Examples include HOMER, Hybrid2, INSEL, MATLAB, PROLOAD, 
RETScreen, RPM-Sim, SIMENERG, WDLTOOLS, WINSYS. 
In this study, the response surface, output performance measure, is the hybrid system 
cost, and the design parameters are the PV size, wind turbine rotor swept area and the battery 
capacity. HOMER (Hybrid Optimization Model for Electrical Renewables) software was 
used to perform simulation of a hybrid PV/wind system for street-lighting applications using 
performance characteristics of Global Power Design‘s (GPD) controller, selected solar and 
wind generators, as well as Centennial College‘s 5-year, high resolution 10 minutes solar and 
wind dataset. HOMER allows the designer to compare many different design options based 
on their technical and economic merits.  
Key Objectives of this project are: 
 
a) Determine the effect of solar/wind data resolution on the system design and its value 
for future end user and commercial point of power applications 
b) Determine which system would require the least energy storage and lowest projected 
system capital cost. 

S. E. Sadique 
96
c) Set expectations for a physical installation and testing of controller prototypes in a 
phase II ―proof of product‖ research project, to be completed under the FedDev 
Applied Research & Commercialization Initiative. 
 
 
2. EQUIPMENT AND METHODOLOGY 
 
The hybrid PV/Wind system for street lighting includes the following components 
(Figure 1): i) photovoltaic (PV) panels, ii) wind turbine, iii) batteries, iv) controller and v) 
street lamp (load). Power generated by the PV array during the day is stored in the battery 
bank through the energy controller, which controls the complete system. The wind generator 
starts generating power when wind reaches the cut-in speed and the output is stored also in 
the battery bank. The stored energy is drawn by the electrical load (street lamp) through the 
controller. The battery bank is designed to feed the loads up to a certain number of days with 
no sun or wind, depending upon the system requirement.  
 
 
Figure 1. Hybrid PV-Wind System Street Lighting Schematic Diagram. 
 
2.1. Location 
 
All scenarios have been simulated for Toronto, Ontario climate conditions using CEI and 
TIA dataset resources:  
 
 
Latitude = 4340 
 
Longitude = 7924 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
97
Toronto's continental climate is moderated by Lake Ontario; its climate is among the 
mildest in Canada east of the Rocky Mountains. It sits in a pocket of the humid continental 
climate (Köppen climate classification Dfa) climate zone found at the south-western end of 
Lake Ontario covering the southern part of the city - including downtown, where the annual 
average temperature exceeds 9°C (48°F). There is a high degree of variability from year to 
year and sometimes even over a period of days, particularly during the winter months [15]. 
 
 
2.2. Solar PV Panels 
 
Two types of solar PV modules selected by GPD have been used for this study: (1) 
Suntech 175 W STP175S-24/Ab-1 (Figure 2) and (2) Sanyo 215 W HIP-215NKHA6 (Figure 
3). Solar PV modules are installed fixed with no tracking; Oriented at Azimuth = 0 o, i.e., 
facing due south; Slope = 59 o, i.e., latitude +15 o for maximizing output in winter. 
 
i. Suntech 175 W STP175S-24/Ab-1 
Suntech PV module is mono-crystalline Si and it‘s efficiency = 13.67%; Temperature 
coefficient of power = -0.47% /oC; Nominal cell operating temperature = 45oC [16].  
Suntech PV module features are the following: 
 
 
High conversion efficiency based on leading innovative photovoltaic technologies 
 
High reliability with guaranteed +/-3% power output tolerance, ensuring return on 
investment 
 
Attractive appearance 
 
Withstands high wind-pressure and snow load, and extreme temperature variations 
 
Easy to install 
 
 
Figure 2. Suntech 175 W STP175S-24/Ab-1 solar PV module. 
Suntech 175 W STP175S-24/Ab-1 PV module characteristics of this module are 
presented in Table 1.  
 
 
 

S. E. Sadique 
98
Table 1. Suntech 175 W STP175S-24/Ab-1 PV Module Electrical Characteristics 
 
Characteristics 
STP175S-24/Ab-1 
Open-Circuit Voltage (Voc) 
44.2 V 
Optimum Operating Voltage (Vmp) 
35.2 V 
Short – Circuit Current (Isc) 
5.2 A 
Optimum Operating Current (Imp) 
4.95 A 
Maximum Power at STC (Pmax) 
175 Wp 
Operating Temperature 
-40oC to +85oC 
Maximum System Voltage 
600 V DC 
Maximum Series Fuse Rating 
15 AMPS 
Power Tolerance 
±3% 
 
ii. Sanyo 215 W HIP-215NKHA6 
SANYO‘S Technology: HIT solar cells are hybrids of mono crystalline silicon 
surrounded by ultra-thin amorphous silicon layers, and are available solely from SANYO 
[17]. 
Module Efficiency: 17.1% 
Cell Efficiency: 19.3% 
Power Output: 215 Watts 
 
 
Figure 3. Solar PV module Sanyo 215 W HIP-215NKHA6. 
SANYO silicon wafers located inside HIT solar panels are made in California and 
Oregon, USA (from October 2009), and the panels are assembled in an ISO 9001 (quality), 
14001 (environment), and 18001 (safety) certified factory. Unique eco-packing minimizes 
cardboard waste at the job site. The panels have a Limited 20-Year Power Output and 5-Year 
Product Workmanship Warranty. 
 
 
2.3. Wind Turbine  
 
Two types of wind turbines selected by GPD have been used for this study: (1) GUS-1B 
Vertical Wind Turbine [18] and (2) Air-X Horizontal Wind Turbine [19]. Figure 4 shows the 
GUS-1B Vertical Axis Wind Turbine. The GUS Vertical-Axis Wind Turbines (VAWT) 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
99
silently converts wind energy into electricity. It is of a vertical axis type, with double helix 
blade design.  
Figure 5 shows the AIR-X Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine. The AIR-X wind generator 
introduces the latest evolution in small wind turbines. AIR-X makes lower noise. Previous 
AIR wind turbines relied on their aero-elastic blade design for protection in high winds, 
causing loud flutter noise in winds above 35 mph (16 m/s). AIR-X‘s circuit monitors the wind 
speed and electronically slows the blades as it reaches its rated output, preventing it from 
going into flutter. This results in a quieter wind turbine. In high winds, the AIR-X wind 
turbine will continue to produce power at a reduced level until the wind decreases, at which 
point maximum output will resume.  
 
  
Figure 4. GUS-1B Vertical Axis Wind Turbine. 
 
Figure 5. AIR-X Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine. 

S. E. Sadique 
100
2.4. Battery 
 
Solar Batteries are specifically designed and used for renewable energy applications due 
to their higher freeze resistance, excellent high ‐ rate power discharge and their quick 
recharge rate, making them ideal for hybrid power generating applications. FullRiver DC 105 
AH, 12 V, AGM Lead Acid batteries have been used for this study (Figure 6).  
 
 
Figure 6. FullRiver DC 105 AH, 12 V, AGM Lead Acid battery. 
FullRiver DC 105 AH battery specifications are the following: 
 
 
Nominal Voltage: 12 V 
 
Rated Capacity (20 hour rate): 105 AH 
 
The FullRiver DC 105 AH battery characteristics are presented in Table 2 [20]. 
 
 
2.5. Charge Controller 
 
Charge Controllers maximize the amount of power sent to the batteries to ensure minimal 
power loss. The charge controller periodically stops charging, reads the battery voltage, 
compares it to the voltage setting and if the battery is charged, it completely shuts off all 
current going to the battery. This function is performed within a few milliseconds. Only when 
the battery has dropped below its voltage set point generators will startup and resume 
charging. GPD‘s charge controller characteristics are the following [21]: 
 
 
Pure Solar Scenario: 
 
Controller has two isolated inputs 
 
Both inputs operate at the solar panels‘ Mpp unless charger goes into finish rate 
charge or float 
 
Controller will not operate until panel Voc voltage is over 10 Vdc 
 
Controller will shut down if panel voltage is above 30 Vdc 
 
The solar panels are fully isolated from the battery at all times. Ie battery voltage 
is not equal to panel voltage 
 
Controller maximum output to the battery from each source is set at 10 Adc. Ie 
max. total controller current is 10 + 10 = 20 Adc 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
101
 
During bulk charge the controller will attempt to put out maximum current up to 
a set gassing point voltage (2.37 Vpc at 25°C, for a 24 Vnom the gassing point is 
28.44 Vdc at 25°C). This profile assumes 100% of discharge energy has been 
applied to battery. An additional 10% required for full charge. 
 
Table 2. FullRiver DC 105 AH battery characteristics 
 
Capacity 77oF (25oC) 
20 Hour Rate (5.3 A to 10.5 V) 
105 AH 
10 Hour Rate (9.5 A to 10.5 V) 
95 AH 
5 Hour Rate (17.2 A to 10.2 V) 
86 AH 
Internal Resistance 
Full charged Battery 77oF (25oC) 
4.0 mOhm 
Capacity Affected by Temperature (20 Hour 
Rate) 
104oF (40oC) 
102% 
77oF (25oC) 
100% 
32oF (0oC) 
85% 
5oF (-15oC) 
65% 
Self-Discharge 77oF (25oC) 
Capacity after 3 month storage 
91% 
Capacity after 6 month storage 
82% 
Capacity after 12 month storage 
64% 
Max. Discharge Current 77oF (25oC) 
1000 A (5 
Terminal 
Standard 
M8 
Charging (Constant 
Voltage) 
Cycle 
Initial Charging Current ≤ 0.2 x C20 
14.5V - 14.7 V/77oF (25oC) 
Float 
13.6 V - 13.8 V/77oF (25oC) 
 
 
Pure Wind Scenario: 
 
Controller has two isolated inputs 
 
Both inputs operate at the wind turbines‘ Mpp unless charger goes into finish 
rate charge or float. This is defined as the maximum loading on the turbine until 
the voltage falls 
 
Controller will not operate until wind turbine Voc voltage is over 10 Vdc 
 
Controller will begin braking if turbine voltage is above 28 Vdc or if the turbine 
has reached wind speed above maximum power output or if less charge current 
is required 
 
The turbines are fully isolated from the battery at all times. Ie battery voltage is 
not equal to wind turbine voltage 
 
Controller maximum output to the battery from each source is set at 10 Adc. Ie 
max. total controller current is 10 + 10 = 20 Adc 
 
During bulk charge the controller will attempt to put out maximum current up to 
a set gassing point voltage (2.37 Vpc at 25°C, for a 24Vnom the gassing point is 
28.44 Vdc at 25°C 
 
Controller Losses Modeling: 
 
400 mW continuous 
 
Input to battery conversion losses 
 
Solar 
o 
Switching and Conduction Losses 
o 
1.5 W no load to 2.5 W full load + 3% 

S. E. Sadique 
102
 
Wind 
o 
Rectification / bridge losses 
o 
0.8V x I charge current (P = I x E)  
o 
Switching and conduction (same as solar) 
 
Light Timer is activated by the solar panel that acts as a photo sensor to turn ON the LED 
light at dusk and OFF at dawn and with custom programming, the light can be turned off for a 
few hours every night to conserve battery power. This fully adjustable lighting control 
ensures that the LED light is on only during the required hours. The summary of the hybrid 
PV/ wind system‘s components used in this study is shown in Table 3. 
 
Table 3. Hybrid PV/ Wind System Components 
 
No. 
COMPONENT 
CAPACITY 
COST 
DETAILS 
1 
1.1 Solar PV module 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 Solar PV module 
175 Wp 
 
 
 
 
 
215 Wp 
$3  
per Watt 
SunTech mono-crystalline Si,  
Efficiency = 13.67% 
Temperature coeff. of power = -
0.47% / oC 
Nominal cell operating temperature 
= 45oC 
Sanyo mono-crystalline Si,  
Module Efficiency: 17.1% 
Cell Efficiency: 19.3% 
2 
2.1 Wind Turbine  
 
 
2.2 Wind Turbine  
70 Watts 
at 10 m/s 
 
146 Watts 
at 10 m/s 
$1,200  
per unit 
 
$1,000  
per unit 
GUS-1B by Greenpower Utility 
Systems 
 
 
AIR-X by Southwest Windpower 
3 
Battery 
105 Ah, 12V 
$250 
per unit 
FullRiver 
4 
Streetlight 
4.1 LED 
4.2 LED 
35 W 
57 W 
ON all night 
$600 
King Luminaire 
5 
5.1 Pol 
5.2 Ar 
5.3 Battery compartment 
5.4 Transport & hole 
5.5 Installation, 4h at $75 
 
$1,500 
$500 
$1,000 
$500 
$300 
Efston Science 
 
 
3. CLIMATE DATA AND LOAD 
 
Two sets of environmental recourses data have been used to simulate the Hybrid 
PV/Wind system‘s scenarios: i) Centennial College‘s solar/wind 5-year data set, with high 
10-minute resolution and ii) Toronto Int‘l Airport‘s (TIA) monthly average data.  
 
 
 
 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
103
3.1. Centennial Energy Institute (CEI) Data 
 
The Environmental Data Collection tower/equipment used at Centennial College‘s 
meteorological station is the 30-meter (100') NRG NOW System-Symphonie. The 
components included in the package are listed in Table 4. 
 
Table 4. Components of NRG NOW System-Symphonie 
 
Qty 
Part and Description 
1 
30 Meter (100 feet) NRG TallTower™, 114 mm (4.5 inches) diameter with galvanized steel 
baseplate, guy wires, screw-in anchors, and all necessary hardware for quick installation 
1 
Symphonie NRG Logger 
2 
16 MB Non-volatile MMC FLASH Memory Cards 
1 
Steel Shelter Box enclosure with mounting hardware for the 
Symphonie NRG Logger 
2 
NRG #40 Maximum Anemometers with protective terminal boots 
1 
NRG #200P Wind Direction Vane with protective terminal boot 
1 
NRG 110S Temperature Sensor with Radiation Shield 
3 
Sensor Side Mount Booms with clamps for 30 m and 20 m level sensors 
1 
Li-Cor LI-200SA Pyranometer – General-purpose solar radiation sensor for gathering direct and 
reflected solar radiation data. 
1 
Pyranometer Boom with Clamps – Mounting hardware for the Li-Cor LI-200SA pyranometer.  
1 
Symphonie SCM Card for Li-Cor LI-200SA Pyranometer – Signal conditioning module (SCM) for 
interfacing pyranometer with the Symphonie NRG Logger. 
1 
NRG BP20 Barometric Pressure Sensor – Micro-machined absolute pressure sensor providing 
high-level voltage output signal proportional to absolute pressure. 
2 
#2C Shielded Sensor Cables for 30 m and 20 m level anemometers 
1 
#3C Shielded Sensor Cable for 30 m level wind direction vane 
1 
Grounding Kit with lightning spike, ground rod, and 31 m solid copper grounding wire 
1 
Symphonie Data Retriever Software 
 
i. Solar Insolation Data 
The baseline data is a one-year time series representing the average global solar radiation 
on the horizontal surface, expressed in kWh/m2, for each time step of the year. HOMER 
displays the monthly average radiation and clearness index of the baseline data in the solar 
resource table and graph. There are two ways to create baseline data: HOMER is used to 
synthesize hourly data from monthly averages, or time series radiation data are imported from 
a file. To synthesize data, the user must enter twelve average monthly values of either solar 
radiation or clearness index. As the user enters values in the table, HOMER builds a set of 
8,760 solar radiation values, or one for each hour of the year. HOMER creates the synthesized 
values using the Graham algorithm, which results in a data sequence that has realistic day-to-
day and hour-to-hour variability and autocorrelation. The dataset can be a prepared text file 
containing the solar radiation data in each time step for a complete year. Alternatively it may 
be imported data with any time step down to one minute. HOMER detects the time step when 
the user imports the data file. For example, if the data file contains 8760 lines, HOMER will 
assume that it contains hourly data. If the data file contains 52,560 lines, HOMER will 
assume that it contains 10-minute data [22, 23]. 

S. E. Sadique 
104
The text file that contains the Centennial College‘s 10-minute solar radiation data has 
been prepared and used for simulation in this study. Also, solar radiation monthly averages 
were determined for each year and four years respectively (Table 5) using CEI resource data. 
 
Table 5. Global Horizontal Solar Radiation Monthly Averages (kWh/m2/day) 
 
Month 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
Average CEI 
Jan 
1.25 
1.26 
1.23 
1.56 
1.33 
Feb 
2.26 
2.29 
2.08 
2.48 
2.28 
Mar 
3.78 
2.95 
3.51 
3.61 
3.46 
Apr 
4.77 
3.24 
5.04 
4.46 
4.38 
May 
5.50 
5.78 
5.19 
5.72 
5.55 
Jun 
5.75 
6.37 
5.11 
5.21 
5.61 
Jul 
5.60 
5.43 
5.53 
4.76 
5.33 
Aug 
5.16 
4.99 
5.16 
4.70 
5.00 
Sep 
2.87 
4.35 
3.74 
4.16 
3.78 
Oct 
2.24 
2.03 
2.53 
1.98 
2.20 
Nov 
1.19 
1.42 
1.50 
1.63 
1.44 
Dec 
1.04 
0.85 
1.01 
1.08 
1.00 
Average 
3.45 
3.41 
3.47 
3.45 
3.45 
 
Figure 7 shows the global horizontal solar radiation monthly averages (kWh/m2/day) 
variation for four years: 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009. As can be seen (Figure 7), although the 
solar radiation monthly averages data vary from year to year, the annual averages data are 
almost the same for four years. 
 
 
Figure 7. Global Horizontal Solar Radiation Monthly Averages (kWh/m2/day) Variation. 
ii. Wind Speed Data 
The text file that contains the Centennial College‘s 10-minute wind speed data has been 
prepared and used for simulation in this study. Also, wind speed monthly averages were 
determined for each year and four years respectively (Table 6) using CEI resource data.  
Figure 8 shows the wind speed monthly averages (m/s) variation for four years: 2006, 
2007, 2008 and 2009. 
 
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Egl (kWh/m2/day)
2006
2007
2008
2009

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
105
Table 6. Wind Speed Monthly Averages (m/s) 
 
Month 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
Average CEI at 20 m  
Jan 
4.34 
4.34 
4.94 
4.30 
4.48 
Feb 
4.91 
5.75 
4.47 
4.41 
4.88 
Mar 
4.44 
5.00 
4.32 
3.92 
4.42 
Apr 
4.28 
4.78 
3.91 
4.87 
4.46 
May 
3.62 
3.10 
4.17 
4.13 
3.75 
Jun 
3.81 
3.65 
3.60 
3.11 
3.55 
Jul 
3.62 
3.23 
3.37 
3.30 
3.38 
Aug 
3.53 
3.76 
3.13 
3.41 
3.46 
Sep 
3.69 
3.23 
2.85 
3.23 
3.25 
Oct 
4.28 
3.63 
3.68 
3.61 
3.80 
Nov 
3.30 
4.11 
3.59 
3.16 
3.54 
Dec 
4.98 
4.40 
5.12 
4.57 
4.77 
Average 
4.07 
4.08 
3.93 
3.83 
3.98 
 
 
Figure 8. Air Temperature Monthly Averages (oC) Variation. 
 
iii. Toronto Int’l Airport (TIA) Data(NASA) 
Environment Canada‘s weather service – the Meteorological Service of Canada (MSC) 
has been collecting environmental data and translating these into practical weather prediction 
tools and services since 1871 [15]. The MSC maintains weather collecting stations throughout 
Canada‘s territories, one of which is located at Pearson International Airport located in the 
western environs of the GTA. In the case of long-term weather data for solar insolation, wind 
data air temperature, etc. the MSC has published monthly averages. These averages, however, 
are based on data collected over the period from 1971 to 2000. This is about to be updated in 
2011. 
 
 
-10.00
-5.00
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Temperature (oC)
2006
2007
2008
2009

S. E. Sadique 
106
iv. Calculation of the 1971 to 2000 Climate Normals for Canada  
―Climate averages,‖ ―climate means‖ or ―climate normals‖ are all interchangeable terms. 
They refer to arithmetic calculations based on observed climate values for a given location 
over a specified time period.  
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) recommends that countries prepare 
climate normals for the official 30-year normals periods ending in 1930, 1960 and 1990, for 
which the WMO World Climate Normals are published. In addition, WMO recommends the 
updating of climate normals at the end of every decade as provided here for 1971 to 2000 
[24].  
 
 
3.2. Calculation Method 
 
There are many ways to calculate ―climate normals‖; the most useful ones adhere to 
accepted standards. The WMO considers thirty years long enough to eliminate year-to-year 
variations. Thus the WMO climatological standard period for normals calculations are 
computed over a 30 year period of consecutive records, starting January 1st and ending 
December 31st. In addition, the WMO established that normals should be arithmetic means 
calculated for each month of the year from daily data with a limited number of allowable 
missing values. For normals values representing averages, such as temperature, a month was 
not used if more than 3 consecutive days or more than a total of 5 days were missing. This 
rule is referred to as the ―3 and 5 rule‖ established as a guideline for completeness by the 
WMO. Furthermore, its corresponding year-month mean should not be computed and should 
be considered missing. For normals values representing totals, such as precipitation, degree-
days, or days with, an individual month was required to be 100% complete in order for it to 
be included in the normals calculation [24].  
First, the average or total, as appropriate for the element, for all individual months was 
calculated for all locations. Normals values were then calculated as the mean for each month 
from all the individual months in the period that sufficiently fulfilled the requirement for 
completeness for 1971 to 2000. With the exception of the annual standard deviation (see 
calculations below), the annual normal value was calculated as the mean or total of monthly 
normals values only for stations where means or totals for every month of the year were 
available [24].  
 
i. Solar Insolation Data 
Solar radiation is the measurement of radiant energy from the sun, on a horizontal 
surface. There are several standardized components of independent measurements. Each 
component is assigned a different identifying number referred to as Radiation Fields (RF). 
The standard metric unit of radiation measurement is the Mega Joule per square meter 
(MJ/m2) [24].  
Components measured and used by MSC:  
 
RF1: Global Solar Radiation: the total incoming direct and diffuse short-wave solar 
radiation received from the whole dome of the sky on a horizontal surface.  

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
107
RF2: Sky Radiation (Diffuse): the portion of the total incoming short-wave solar 
radiation received on a horizontal surface that is shielded from the direct rays of the sun by 
means of a shade ring.  
RF3: Reflected Solar Radiation: the portion of the total incoming short-wave radiation 
that has been reflected from the Earth‘s surface and diffused by the atmospheric layer 
between the ground and the point of observation onto a horizontal surface.  
RF4: Net Radiation: the resultant of downward and upward total (solar, terrestrial 
surface, and atmospheric) radiation received on a horizontal surface (RF1 + RF2 + RF3).  
The TIA‘s global horizontal solar radiation monthly averages data are presented in Table 
7 using RETScreen resource data [25, 26]. 
 
Table 7. Global Horizontal Solar Radiation (kWh/m2/day), Wind Speed (m/s) and Air 
Temperature (oC) Monthly Averages Data 
 
Month 
Global Solar Radiation, Egl 
Wind Speed (m/s) 
Air Temperature (oC) 
Jan 
1.68 
5 
-5.1 
Feb 
2.28 
4.7 
-4.3 
Mar 
3.6 
4.8 
0.0 
Apr 
4.9 
4.7 
6.8 
May 
5.36 
4.1 
13.3 
Jun 
5.82 
3.7 
18.7 
Jul 
6.18 
3.6 
21.6 
Aug 
5.28 
3.4 
20.5 
Sep 
3.9 
3.6 
16.2 
Oct 
2.5 
3.9 
9.5 
Nov 
1.28 
4.5 
3.8 
Dec 
1.18 
4.7 
-1.8 
Average 
3.67 
4.2 
8.3 
 
Wind directions measured by U2A‘s are recorded to the nearest ten degrees, while those 
from the 45B are provided to 8 points of the compass. All wind directions are defined as the 
direction from which the wind blows with respect to true or geographic north. For example, 
an easterly wind is blowing from the east, not toward the east. A wind direction observation 
represents the average direction over the two minutes period ending at the time of 
observation. The most frequent wind direction is based on the number of occurrences of each 
of the 36 possible directions for each month. A monthly average is calculated for each 
direction for all months having sufficient record (90% complete for hourly elements). The 
direction with the highest average count is assigned as the most frequent wind direction for 
the month. The most frequent wind direction for the year is simply deduced as the direction 
with the highest average occurrence count for all months.  
Wind speed and direction are greatly affected by proximity to the ground and by the 
presences of obstacles such as hills, buildings and trees. It tends to increase in speed and veer 
with height above ground. For meteorological purposes, the standard exposure of anemometer 
cups is at a height of 10 metres above the ground surface. 
The TIA‘s wind speed monthly averages data are presented in Table 8 using RETScreen 
resource data [25, 26].  
 

S. E. Sadique 
108
Table 8. Global Horizontal Solar Radiation Monthly Averages (kWh/m2/day) 
 
Month 
Average CEI 
TIA (NASA) 
Jan 
1.33 
1.68 
Feb 
2.28 
2.28 
Mar 
3.46 
3.60 
Apr 
4.38 
4.90 
May 
5.55 
5.36 
Jun 
5.61 
5.82 
Jul 
5.33 
6.18 
Aug 
5.00 
5.28 
Sep 
3.78 
3.90 
Oct 
2.20 
2.50 
Nov 
1.44 
1.28 
Dec 
1.00 
1.18 
Average 
3.45 
3.66 
 
ii. Air Temperature Data 
Temperature measurements are made from self-registering maximum and minimum 
thermometers set in a louvered, wooden shelter. The shelter is mounted on a stand so that the 
thermometers are approximately 1.5 m above ground, which is usually a level, grassy surface. 
At most climatological stations, maximum temperature is the highest temperature recorded in 
a 24-hour period ending in the morning of the next day. The minimum values are for a period 
of the same length, beginning in the evening of the previous day. Mean temperature is the 
average of the two. At most principal stations, the climatological day begins at 0600 UTC 
(Universal Time Coordinate) and ends at the onset of 0600 UTC on the following day. These 
times are equivalent or close to midnight local standard time for most of Canada [24]. The 
TIA‘s air temperature monthly averages data are presented in Table 8 using RETScreen 
resource data [25, 26].  
 
iii. The Difference between CEI’s and TIA’s Environmental Data 
Current estimates of environmental data showed (revealed) that climate data from various 
sources vary sometimes widely. Effects of micro-climates are not well known. Reliable data 
sources are often interpolated over large distances, or supplemented by satellite-derived data 
which still suffer from serious shortcomings. More work is needed to increase the reliability 
and spatial coverage of solar radiation estimates [27]. 
 
iv. Solar Insolation Data 
The CEI‘s and TIA‘s global horizontal solar radiation monthly averages data are 
presented in Table 8. 
Figure 8 shows the comparison between CEI‘s and TIA‘s global horizontal solar 
radiation monthly averages (kWh/m2/day) variation. 
 
 
 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
109
 
Figure 9. Global Horizontal Solar Radiation Monthly Averages (kWh/m2/day) Variation. 
v. Wind Speed Data 
The CEI‘s and TIA‘s wind speed monthly averages data are presented in Table 9. 
 
Table 9. Wind Speed Monthly Averages (m/s) 
 
Month 
Average CEI at 20 m 
TIA (NASA) at 10 m 
Jan 
4.48 
5.0 
Feb 
4.88 
4.7 
Mar 
4.42 
4.8 
Apr 
4.46 
4.7 
May 
3.75 
4.1 
Jun 
3.55 
3.7 
Jul 
3.38 
3.6 
Aug 
3.46 
3.4 
Sep 
3.25 
3.6 
Oct 
3.80 
3.9 
Nov 
3.54 
4.5 
Dec 
4.77 
4.7 
Average 
3.98 
4.2 
 
 
Figure 10. Wind Speed Monthly Averages (m/s) Variation. 
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Egl (kWh/m2/day)
Average CEI
TIA (NASA)
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Wind Speed (m/s)
Average CEI at 20 m
TIA (NASA) at 10 m

S. E. Sadique 
110
Figure 10 shows the comparison between CEI‘s and TIA‘s wind speed monthly averages 
(m/s) variation. 
 
vi. Wind Speed Distribution - Histograms 
The Weibull k value is a parameter that reflects the breadth of a distribution of wind 
speeds. HOMER fits a Weibull distribution to the wind speed data, and the k value refers to 
the shape of that distribution. It was observed a correlation between the Weibull k value and 
the average wind speed, with higher annual average wind speeds tending to correspond to 
lower Weibull k values [22]. Figure 11 shows the Weibull wind speed histograms for CEI‘s 
and TIA‘s wind speed monthly averages (m/s) data.  
 
 
Figure 11. The Weibull Wind Speed Distribution Histograms. 
Table 10. Air Temperature Monthly Averages (oC) 
 
Month 
Average CEI 
TIA (NASA) 
Jan 
-0.57 
-5.1 
Feb 
-2.14 
-4.3 
Mar 
3.03 
0.0 
Apr 
10.53 
6.8 
May 
16.30 
13.3 
Jun 
22.24 
18.7 
Jul 
24.36 
21.6 
Aug 
24.07 
20.5 
Sep 
19.86 
16.2 
Oct 
13.08 
9.5 
Nov 
7.31 
3.8 
Dec 
1.35 
-1.8 
Average 
11.62 
8.3 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
111
The CEI data is over 5 years, from 2005-2009 only, whereas the TIA data is averaged 
over 30 years, from 1971 to 2000. 
The analysis of wind speed distribution histograms (Figure 11) shows that within a range 
of 2.0 to 5.0 m/s the wind speed frequency has the maximum values and varies from 200 to 
450. 
Figure 12 shows the comparison between CEI‘s and TIA‘s air temperature monthly 
averages (oC) variation. 
 
vii. Air Temperature Data 
The CEI‘s and TIA‘s air temperature monthly averages data are presented in Table 10. 
As can be seen from Figures 9, 10 and 12 the climate data from CEI and TIA sources 
vary from month to month since the CEI‘s data are monthly average for four years while 
TIA‘s data are average for a 30 years period. 
 
 
Figure 12. Air Temperature Monthly Averages (oC) Variation. 
 
4. LOAD 
 
Two types of LED lights of 57 W and 35 W each are used.  
The street lights are switched on when the intensity of solar radiation is zero in the 
evening and they are switched off at first light when the intensity of solar radiation is greater 
than zero. Time Series Data (10 minutes averages) has been used.  
In one Scenario the load profile incorporates dimming of the street lights from midnight 
00:00 - 04:00 AM when the wattage of light is reduced to 67%. The 57W light is dimmed to 
39W (Figure 13). 
A more realistic, complex load profile will consider Dusk to Dawn operation of the street 
lights and take into account variation in daylight hours. This will be based on the actual times 
of Sunrise and Sunset, and can be inputted as an Hourly Time Series Load Profile. 
A High Efficiency LED Light Fixture is claimed to throw the same amount of light on the 
street as sodium vapor lights at 1/10th the power consumption with only a slight lumen 
depreciation after 70,000 hours.  
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Wind Speed (m/s)
Average CEI at 20 m
TIA (NASA) at 10 m

S. E. Sadique 
112
The Simple and Complex Load Profile that has been used are shown in the Figures 13, 14 
and 15.  
 
 
Load Profiles 
 
i. 57 Watts 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 13. 57 W Load (without dimming) Profile: (a) Daily and (b) Seasonal. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 14. 57 W Load (with dimming) Profile: (a) Daily and (b) Seasonal. 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
113
ii. 35 Watts 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 15. 35 W Load (without dimming) Profile: (a) Daily and (b) Seasonal. 
 
5. HYBRID PV/WIND SYSTEM FOR STREET LIGHTING  
SIMULATION SCENARIOS 
 
5.1. For All Scenarios 
 
The climate data used for the different Scenarios remain the same. This includes 
temperature, solar and wind resource data. Moreover, all Scenarios use one of the two basic 
Load Profiles.  
Assumptions: 
 
 
Location - GTA, Toronto  
 
Project Lifetime - 20 years 
 
System fixed O&M cost - Zero $ 
 
System voltage - 24 V 
 
Battery - 105 AH, 12 V, AGM Lead Acid batteries 
 
Data on DC 105-12 provided by FullRiver 
 
Effect of temperature on capacity and lifetime not considered by HOMER 
 
Solar PV panel - Fixed with no tracking,  
 
Oriented at south (Azimuth = 0o), Slope = 59o 
 
Wind Turbine - GUS1B and AIR-X 
 
The all system Scenarios that were run using HOMER are presented in Table 11.  
 
 
 

S. E. Sadique 
114
Table 11. System Simulation Scenarios 
 
Environmental Data 
Hybrid 
Wind only 
Solar only 
(Suntech) 
GUS 1B 
Air-X 
Suntech 
Sanyo 
Suntech 
35W 
57W 
35W with 
Temp. Effect 
Dimming 57W 
35W 
57W 
35W 
35W 
35W 
 
 
CEI 
Scenario: 3 (6.4) 
Scenario: 1 (6.1) 
 
Scenario: 3.1 
(6.8) 
Scenario: 10 (6.3)
 
Scenario: 4 (6.5) 
Scenario: 2 (6.2) 
Scenario: 31 
(6.11) 
Scenario: 7 (6.6) 
Scenario: 8 (6.7) 
 
 
TIA 
Scenario: 5 (6.9) 
 
 
 
Scenario: 6 
(6.10) 
 
Scenario: 32 
(6.12) 
 
 
 
 
 
5.2. Scenario No.1 - CEI Data, Gus1B, 175W Suntech, Fullriver 105Ah, 57 W 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Surface plot results of Scenarios. 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
115
The summary of scenarios is presented in Table 12. 
 
Table 12. Summary of Scenarios 
 
Scenario 
No: 
Variables 
Components 
Cost 
Remarks 
1.1 
Capacity Shortage: 0% 
Height : 7.62 m 
PV Panels: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 4 
 NPC $10,298.00 
Levelized $3.458/kWh 
 
1.2 
Capacity Shortage: 1.4% 
Height : 7.62 m 
PV Panels: 4 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $9,063.00 
Levelized $3.086/kWh 
Actual: 1.4% 
1.3 
Capacity Shortage: 2.5% 
Height : 7.62 m 
PV Panels: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $8,577.00 
Levelized $2.952/kWh 
Actual: 2.5% 
1.4 
Capacity Shortage: 4% 
Height : 7.62 m 
PV Panels: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $8,577.00 
Levelized $2.952/kWh 
No change 
from 2.5% 
1.5 
Capacity Shortage: 5% 
Height : 7.62 m 
PV Panels: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $8,577.00 
Levelized $2.952/kWh 
No change 
from 2.5% 
1.6 
Capacity Shortage: 4.7% 
Height : 10 m 
PV Panels: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $8,092.00 
Levelized $2.850/kWh 
Actual: 4.7% 
1.7 
Capacity Shortage: 2% 
Height : 12 m 
PV Panels: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $8,577.00 
Levelized $2.936/kWh 
Actual: 2% 
1.8 
Capacity Shortage: 4% 
Height : 15 m 
PV Panels: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $8,092.00 
Levelized $2.820/kWh 
Actual 3.7% 
 
 
Discussion: 
Scenarios were run with a sensitivity analysis on wind turbine hub height vs capacity 
shortage, with storage capacity and solar inputs as variables. The system uses the Suntech 
175W solar module. The results are shown in Table 12. For the wind turbine hub height 7.62 
m and 0% capacity shortage the optimal system is consisted of 3 PV Panels, one Wind 
Turbine and 4 Batteries. From the surface plot (Figure 16) it can be seen that hub height 
changes have no noticeable impact on system configuration. As the system capacity shortage 
increases the number of PV panels and number of batteries is decreased or remains the same 
due to the price difference of components. For higher hub heights the capacity shortage is 
lowered due to greater wind power output. 
 
 
5.3. Scenario No.2 - CEI Data, Gus1B, 215W Sanyo, Fullriver 105Ah, 57W 
 
The summary of scenarios is presented in Table 13. 
 

S. E. Sadique 
116
 
 
 
Figure 17. Surface plot results of Scenarios. 
Table 13. Summary of Scenarios 
 
Scenario 
No: 
Variables 
Components 
Cost 
Remarks 
2.0 
Capacity Shortage: 0% 
Height : 7.62 m 
PV Panels: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 4 
NPC $10,631.00 
Levelized $3.568/kWh 
 
2.1 
Capacity Shortage: 3.8% 
Height : 7.62 m 
PV Panels: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $8,314.00 
Levelized $2.899/kWh 
 
2.2 
Capacity Shortage: 3.3% 
Height : 10 m 
PV Panels: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $8,314.00 
Levelized $2.885/kWh 
 
2.3 
Capacity Shortage: 2.6% 
Height : 15 m 
PV Panels: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
NPC $8,314.00 
Levelized $2.864/kWh 
 
 
Discussion: 
Scenarios were run with a sensitivity analysis on wind turbine hub height vs capacity 
shortage, with storage capacity and solar inputs as variables. The system uses the Sanyo 
215W solar module. The results are shown in Table 13. For hub height 7.62 m and 0% 
capacity shortage the optimal system is comprised 3 PV Panels, one Wind Turbine and 4 
Batteries. From the surface plot (Figure 17) it can be seen that hub height changes have 
noticeable impact on system configuration. As the system goes for higher capacity shortage 
the number of PV panels and batteries are reduced. For higher hub height the capacity 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
117
shortage is lowered due to greater wind power. For 0% capacity shortage the NPC is the 
highest and for other values of capacity shortage the NPC remains same. 
 
 
5.4. Scenario No. 3.1 - CEI Data, Temperature Effect, Gus1B, 175W Suntech, 
Fullriver 105Ah, 35W 
 
The effect of temperature is taken into consideration. Ampere-Hour rating (accumulated 
charge) of battery is affected by the ambient temperature. A typical relation between ambient 
temperature and Ah capacity is shown below (Figure 18): 
 
 
Figure 18. Effect of temperature on Ampere-Hour rating of battery. 
The rate capacity data taken from this graph for the average temperature of GTA area is 
shown below: 
 
January 
% @-4.5 Degree  
71% 
February 
% @ -3.5 Degrees  
73% 
November 
% @ 4.0 Degrees  
82% 
December 
% @ -1.5 Degrees  
77% 
 
Considering the temperature effect, scenario 3.1 was simulated for the cold months of 
January, February, November and December 2009. The unmet load and battery state of 
charge is plotted as follows: 
 
 
5.5. Battery State of Charge and Unmet Load Summary 
 
i. CEI Data: 2 X 175 Suntech PV Panel, 1 GUS 1B, 2 X FullRiver DC‐105 Ah Battery 
NO temperature effect Power Capacity Shortage is 0%. 
 
 

S. E. Sadique 
118
Considering Temperature effect the capacity shortage in power is as follows: 
 
November 2009 
December 2009 
26-Nov  250 min 
27-Nov  160 min 
 
15-Dec  250 min 
16-Dec  450 min 
27-Dec  220 min 
28-Dec  200 min 
Total:  410 min 
Total:  1120 min 
 
Net Total for 2009: 1530 min or 25.5 Hour 
Annual Shortage in power: 0.60% 
 
ii. CEI Data: CEI Data for 2009, System: 1 175W Suntech, 1 AIR-X, 2 Fullriver 
105Ah, 35W  
 
October 2009 
November 2009 
December 2009 
1540 min – 25.7 hour 
3360 min – 56 hour 
3930 min – 65.5 hour 
 
Net Total for 2009: 8830 min or 147.2 Hour 
Annual Shortage in power: 3.3% 
 
 
6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
The monthly average electric power output for the system capacity shortage 0% and 5%, 
35W load and different wind turbine‘s hub heights is presented in Table 14.  
 
Table 14. Monthly Average Electric Productions (kW) 
 
Month 
7.62 m 
10 m 
12 m 
15 m 
 
0% 
5% 
0% 
5% 
0% 
5% 
0% 
5% 
Jan 
0.044 
0.024 
0.045 
0.025 
0.046 
0.026 
0.047 
0.027 
Feb 
0.060 
0.032 
0.061 
0.034 
0.062 
0.035 
0.064 
0.036 
Mar 
0.065 
0.034 
0.066 
0.035 
0.067 
0.036 
0.068 
0.037 
Apr 
0.062 
0.034 
0.063 
0.035 
0.065 
0.037 
0.067 
0.038 
May 
0.064 
0.034 
0.065 
0.035 
0.066 
0.036 
0.067 
0.037 
June 
0.052 
0.027 
0.052 
0.027 
0.053 
0.028 
0.053 
0.028 
July 
0.049 
0.026 
0.049 
0.026 
0.050 
0.026 
0.050 
0.027 
Aug 
0.053 
0.028 
0.054 
0.028 
0.054 
0.029 
0.055 
0.029 
Sept 
0.059 
0.031 
0.059 
0.031 
0.060 
0.032 
0.060 
0.032 
Oct 
0.037 
0.020 
0.038 
0.021 
0.039 
0.022 
0.040 
0.023 
Nov 
0.039 
0.021 
0.040 
0.021 
0.040 
0.021 
0.040 
0.022 
Dec 
0.033 
0.019 
0.034 
0.021 
0.035 
0.022 
0.037 
0.024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 PV 
 
 
1 PV 
 
 
 
 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
119
6.1. Load: 35W 
 
Monthly average electric productions (kW) from the hybrid PV/Wind system is shown in 
Figure 19.  
As can be seen from Figure 14 at all hub heights more power is generated in case of 5% 
capacity shortage since the number of PV panels is higher. 
The monthly average electric power output for the system capacity shortage 0% and 5%, 
57 W load and different wind turbine‘s hub heights is presented in Table 15.  
 
 
Figure 19. Monthly Average Electric Productions (kW). 
Table 15. Monthly Average Electric Productions (kW) 
 
Month 
7.62 m 
10 m 
12 m 
15 m 
 
0% 
5% 
0% 
5% 
0% 
5% 
0% 
5% 
Jan 
0.065 
0.065 
0.066 
0.045 
0.066 
0.046 
0.068 
0.047 
Feb 
0.088 
0.088 
0.089 
0.061 
0.090 
0.062 
0.092 
0.064 
Mar 
0.095 
0.095 
0.096 
0.066 
0.097 
0.067 
0.098 
0.068 
Apr 
0.090 
0.090 
0.092 
0.063 
0.093 
0.065 
0.095 
0.067 
May 
0.094 
0.094 
0.095 
0.065 
0.096 
0.066 
0.097 
0.067 
June 
0.077 
0.077 
0.077 
0.052 
0.078 
0.053 
0.078 
0.053 
July 
0.072 
0.072 
0.072 
0.049 
0.073 
0.050 
0.073 
0.050 
Aug 
0.079 
0.079 
0.079 
0.054 
0.080 
0.054 
0.080 
0.055 
Sept 
0.087 
0.087 
0.088 
0.059 
0.088 
0.060 
0.089 
0.060 
Oct 
0.054 
0.054 
0.055 
0.038 
0.056 
0.039 
0.057 
0.040 
Nov 
0.058 
0.058 
0.058 
0.040 
0.058 
0.040 
0.059 
0.040 
Dec 
0.046 
0.046 
0.048 
0.034 
0.049 
0.035 
0.051 
0.037 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 PV 
 
2 PV 
 
 
 
 

S. E. Sadique 
120
Monthly average electric productions (kW) from the hybrid PV/Wind system is shown in 
Figure 20.  
 
 
Figure 20. Monthly Average Electric Productions (kW). 
 
6.2. Power Output of Wind Turbine 
 
Wind Turbine: GUS 1B 
Wind Speed Data: CEI 10 min, 20 m  
Load: 35 W 
The wind turbine‘s monthly average electric production for the system capacity shortage 
0% and 5%, 35 W load and different wind turbine‘s hub heights is presented in Table 16. 
 
 
Figure 21. Wind Turbine‘s Monthly Average Power Output (kW). 
Monthly average power output (kW) from wind turbine is shown in Figure 21.  
As can be seen from Figure 17 the wind turbine‘s power output varies from month to 
month, and it is higher in winter-spring period. The maximum values of wind turbine‘s 
electric production are for the months - December, January, February and April. 
0.000
0.020
0.040
0.060
0.080
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
Power output, kW
Monthly Average Electric Production by the wind turbine (kW )
7.62 m 0%
7.62 m 5%
10 m 0%
10 m 5%
12 m 0%
12 m 5%
15 m 0%
15 m 5%

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
121
Table 16. Monthly Average Electric Productions  
by the wind turbine (kW) 
 
Month 
7.62 m 
10 m 
12 m 
15 m 
 
0% 
5% 
0% 
5% 
0% 
5% 
0% 
5% 
Jan 
0.004 
0.004 
0.004 
0.004 
0.005 
0.005 
0.006 
0.006 
Feb 
0.005 
0.005 
0.006 
0.006 
0.007 
0.007 
0.008 
0.008 
Mar 
0.004 
0.004 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.007 
0.007 
Apr 
0.006 
0.006 
0.007 
0.007 
0.008 
0.008 
0.010 
0.010 
May 
0.004 
0.004 
0.005 
0.005 
0.006 
0.006 
0.007 
0.007 
June 
0.002 
0.002 
0.002 
0.002 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
July 
0.002 
0.002 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.004 
0.004 
Aug 
0.002 
0.002 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.004 
0.004 
Sept 
0.002 
0.002 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.004 
0.004 
Oct 
0.003 
0.003 
0.004 
0.004 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
0.005 
Nov 
0.002 
0.002 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
0.003 
Dec 
0.006 
0.006 
0.007 
0.007 
0.009 
0.009 
0.010 
0.010 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 17. Wind Turbine‘s Annual Average Power Output (%): (a) Load 35W and (b) Load 57W. 
The Wind turbine‘s annual average power output (%) for 35 W and 57 W loads is shown 
in Figure 17.  
The Figure 17(a) shows that the contribution of wind power is 7% at 7.62 m hub height 
and 11% at 15 m hub height in case of 0% maximum annual capacity shortage. On the other 
hand, the contribution of wind power is 13% at 7.62 m hub height and 20% at 15 m hub 
height for 5% capacity shortage [Figure 17(a)].  
The Figure 17(b) shows that the contribution of wind power is 5% at 7.62 m hub height 
and 8% at 15 m hub height in case of 0% maximum annual capacity shortage. On the other 
hand, the contribution of wind power is 5% at 7.62 m hub height and 11% at 15 m hub height 
for 5% capacity shortage [Figure 17(b)].  
The monthly average electric power output for the system capacity shortage 0% and 5%, 
35W load and different wind turbine‘s hub heights is presented in Figure 18.  
7
8
9
11
13
15
17
20
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
20
Power output, %
Wind Turbine Hub Height, m
Annual Average Electric Production, % : 
Wind 
Load: 35 W
0%  capacity shortage
5% capacity shortage

S. E. Sadique 
122
 
(a) 
 
 
 (b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d) 
 
Figure 18. Monthly Average Electric Productions (kW) at hub height: (a) 7.62 m; (b) 10 m; (c) 12 m; 
(d) 15 m. 
0.000
0.020
0.040
0.060
0.080
0.100
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr May June July
Aug Sept Oct
Nov Dec
Power output, kW
Monthly Average Electric Production (kW): PV and Wind 
Load: 35 W
7.62 m 0% PV
7.62 m 0% Wind
7.62 m 5% PV
7.62 m 5% Wind
0.000
0.020
0.040
0.060
0.080
0.100
0.120
Jan
Feb Mar Apr May June July
Aug Sept Oct
Nov Dec
Power output, kW
Monthly Average Electric Production (kW): PV and Wind  
Load: 35 W
10 m 0% PV
10 m 0% Wind
10 m 5% PV
10 m 5% Wind

 
Table 17. Summary of simulated results 
 
Environmental 
Data 
Hybrid 
Wind only 
Solar only (Suntech) 
GUS 1B 
Air-X 
Suntech 
Sanyo 
Suntech 
35W 
57W 
35W with 
Temperature 
Effect 
Dimming 57W 
35W 
57W 
35W 
35W 
35W 
CEI 
Scenario: 3 (6.4) 
PV Panel: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $8,092 
 
PV Panel: 1 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 3.7% 
NPC: $7,606 
Scenario: 1 
(6.1) 
PV Panel: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 4 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: 
$10,298 
 
PV Panel: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 2. 
5% 
NPC: $8,577 
Scenario: 
3.1 (6.8) 
PV Panel: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 
0.6% 
NPC: 
$8,092 
 
Scenario: 10 
(6.3) 
PV Panel: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 4 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $10,298 
 
 
PV Panel: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh:1.6% 
NPC: $8,577 
Scenario: 4 
(6.5) 
PV Panel: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $8,910 
 
PV Panel: 1 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 2% 
NPC: $8,016 
Scenario: 2 
(6.2) 
PV Panel: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 4 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $10,631 
 
PV Panel: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh:3.8% 
NPC: $8,314 
Scenario: 31 (6.11) 
PV Panel: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $8,577 
 
 
PV Panel: 1 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 3.3% 
NPC: $7,606 
Scenario: 7 
(6.6) 
Height: 7.62m 
Wind Tur: 10 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $16,121 
 
Height: 15m 
Wind Tur: 5 
Battery: 6 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $14,563 
Scenario: 8 (6.7) 
PV Panel: 4 
Wind Tur: 0 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $8,063 
 
 
PV Panel: 2 
Wind Tur: 0 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 1.1% 
NPC: $7,092 
TIA 
Scenario: 5 (6.9) 
PV Panel: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 4 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $9,813 
 
PV Panel: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 0.5% 
NPC: $8,092 
 
 
 
Scenario: 6 
(6.10) 
PV Panel: 1 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 4 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $9,737 
 
PV Panel: 2 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 0.1% 
NPC: $8,910 
 
Scenario: 32 (6.12) 
PV Panel: 3 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 0% 
NPC: $8,577 
 
PV Panel: 1 
Wind Tur: 1 
Battery: 2 
Cap Sh: 1% 
NPC: $7,606 
 
 
Note: 1. Scenarios in the table 17 are for 7.62 m hub height. The scenario No.7 (―wind only‖) was run for 7.62 m and 15 m hub height. 2. Scenarios with other 
hub height are also available in the scenario table. 
 

S. E. Sadique 
124
The Figure 18 shows that not only for 0% capacity shortage but also for 5% capacity 
shortage at all hub heights most of the power (approximately 90%) is generated by PV panels. 
The summary of results of simulated scenarios is presented in Table 17. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The analysis of the simulated scenarios results leads to the following conclusions: 
 
 
In summary, the 10-min solar/wind resolution data has an impact on the hybrid 
solar/wind system design. The CEI data was real time data which was incorporated in 
HOMER for simulation whereas the TIA data was monthly average data for over a 
30 year period which was converted into high resolution data by HOMER using pre-
determined models. Comparing the high and low resolution datasets, the low 
resolution dataset gave slightly more pessimistic energy production results, leading 
to slightly more robust system configurations. The variation of results for these two 
sources of data in all scenarios was in a range of 0.1% to 5%. The use of a lower 
resolution dataset, therefore, provides a small safety margin for the system designer, 
while the use of a higher resolution dataset provides more insights into where and 
how system capacity shortages arise and might be mitigated. 
 
The differences are not impressive (dramatic), however, leading to the conclusion 
that when relevant high resolution meteorological data are not available, publically 
available monthly averaged (monthly resolution) environmental data (Environment 
Canada, NASA, etc.) can be used effectively in a tested analysis software like 
HOMER. 
 
Hybrid systems with Sanyo PV panels had higher battery state of charge compared to 
systems with Suntech PV panels. The annual averaged battery state of charge for the 
system with Sanyo PV panels was 90% and for the one with Suntech PV panels was 
88% though Sanyo generated 518 kWh and Suntech generated 420 kWh of electrical 
energy. For having zero hours of unmet load Sanyo PV module is better to be used 
than Suntech PV panel; however, the price of the Sanyo PV panel is 50% higher than 
that of the Suntech PV panel. 
 
The analysis of the individual contributions towards annual energy output of solar 
and wind components of the systems for hybrid-powered street lights of 7.62 m 
height, situated in the Greater Toronto Area, revealed that the GUS 1B Vertical Axis 
Wind Turbine contributes only 7% for the least energy storage system using Suntech 
PV panels and 6% for the least energy storage system using Sanyo PV panels.  
 
The hybrid system (2 PV, 1 Wind Turbine, 2 Batteries) with AIR-X wind turbine was 
having 8 hours more unmet load than the system with GUS-1B though AIR-X wind 
turbine has a higher rated capacity of 0.4 kW. The cut-in speed was 4 m/s for AIR-X 
turbine and 3 m/s for GUS-1B wind turbine. Although AIR-X was generating 6 kWh 
more electric energy than GUS-1B for the whole year, it was not generating any 
power when wind speed was lower than 4 m/s. Therefore, AIR-X wind turbine is not 
feasible for the hybrid solar/wind applications in GTA‘s real climate conditions. 

Virtual Optimization of a Wireless, Solar PV/Wind Hybrid System Controller … 
125
 
The simulation results show that hybrid (PV/wind) systems have half the system cost 
(NPC of $8,092) compared to the systems using wind-generators exclusively (NPC 
of $16,121). Hybrid (PV/wind) systems, however, have approximately the same cost 
(NPC of $8,092) compared to systems using only PV sources (NPC of $8,063). 
Therefore, it can be concluded that solar PV only and solar/wind hybrid systems, 
using the technologies specified, offer nearly identical energy performance and NPC 
results. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Remus T., Marco L., Pedro R.; Grid Converters for Photovoltaic and Wind Power 
Systems, Wiley, 2011. 
[2] 
Engin M., Colak M.; Analyzing solar-wind hybrid power generating system. 
Pamukkale University Faculty of Engineering, Journal of Engineering Sciences, Vol. 
11, No. 2, pp. 225-230, 2005. 
[3] 
Lee Y-S, Gim J-H; Development of LED Street Lighting Controller for Wind-Solar 
Hybrid Power System. J. Electr. Eng. Technol. Vol. 9, No. 5: 1643-1653, 2014. 
[4] 
Hongxing Y., Wei Z., Lin L., Zhaohong F.; Optimal sizing method for stand-alone 
hybrid solar-wind system with LPSP technology by using genetic algorithm. Solar 
Energy 82, pp. 354-367, 2008. 
[5] 
Tina, G., Gagliano, S., Raiti, S.; Hybrid solar/wind power system probabilistic 
modeling for long-term performance assessment. Solar Energy 80, 578-588, 2006. 
[6] 
Borowy B. S., Salameh Z. M.; Methodology for optimally sizing the combination of a 
battery bank and PV array in a wind/PV hybrid system. IEEE Transactions on Energy 
Conversion 11 (2), 367-373, 1996. 
[7] 
Yang H. X., Burnett L., Lu L.; Weather data and probability analysis of hybrid 
photovoltaic–wind power generation systems in Hong Kong. Renewable Energy 28, 
1813-1824, 2003. 
[8] 
Yang H. X., Lu L., Zhou W.; A novel optimization sizing model for hybrid solar–wind 
power generation system. Solar Energy 81, 1, 76-84, 2007. 
[9] 
Kellogg W. D., Nehrir M. H., Venkataramanan G., Gerez V.; Generation unit sizing 
and cost analysis for stand-alone wind, photovoltaic and hybrid wind/PV systems. IEEE 
Transactions on Energy Conversion 13 (1), 70-75, 1998. 
[10] Banu E. Y., Orhan E.; Simulation based size optimization of a PV/wind hybrid energy 
conversion system with battery storage under various load and auxiliary energy 
conditions. Applied Energy, Vol. 86, Issue 9, pp. 1387-1394, 2009. 
[11] Orhan E., Banu E. Y.; Size optimization of a PV/wind hybrid energy conversion system 
with battery storage using response surface methodology. Applied Energy, Vol. 85, 
Issue 11, pp. 1086-1101, 2008.  
[12] Diaf S., Diaf D., Belhamel M., Haddadi M. and Louche A.; A methodology for optimal 
sizing of autonomous hybrid PV/wind system. Energy Policy, Vol.35, Issue 11, pp. 
5708-5718, 2007. 

S. E. Sadique 
126
[13] Koutroulis E., Kolokotsa D., Potirakis A., Kalaitzakis K.; Methodology for Optimal 
Sizing of Stand-Alone Photovoltaic/Wind-Generator Systems Using Genetic 
Algorithms, Solar Energy, Vol. 80, 9, pp. 1072-1088, 2006. 
[14] Taskin S., Dursun B., Alboyaci B.; Performance assessment of a combined solar and 
wind system. The Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering, Vol. 34, Number 1B, 
pp. 217- 227, 2009. 
[15] http://www.ec.gc.ca/meteo-weather/default.asp?lang=En&n=FDF98F96-1 - Environne- 
ment Canada, 1871. 
[16] http://suntech-power.com/en/technology.html. 
[17] http://www.sanyo.com/solar.  
[18] http://www.escience.ca/hybrid - EfstonScience. 
[19] http://www.windenergy.com/index_wind.htm - Air-X. 
[20] http://www.fullriver.com/products/admin/upfile/DC105-12.pdf.  
[21] http://globalpowerdesign.com/.  
[22] National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL); HOMER Getting Started Guide, 
Version 2.0. Golden, Colorado, May 2003. Available at http://www.nrel.gov/homer, 
accessed October 26, 2005.  
[23] Lambert, T., Gilman, P., Lilienthal, P.; Micropower system modeling with HOMER. In 
Integration of alternative sources of energy, Farret, F.A. and Simões, M.G., John Wiley 
& Sons, pp. 379-418, 2006.  
[24] http://climate.weatheroffice.gc.ca/prods_servs/normals_documentation_e.html#wmo. 
[25] RETScreen International Renewable Energy Decision Support Centre: Chapter 2: Wind 
Energy Project Analysis. Minister of Natural Resources Canada, 2001-2002. Available 
at http://www.retscreen.net, accessed October 26, 2005.  
[26] http://www.retscreen.net/.  
[27] Thevenard D., Driesse A., Pelland S., Turcotte D., Poissant Y.; Uncertainty in long-
term photovoltaic yield predictions, report # 2010-122 (RP-TEC), CanmetENERGY, 
Varennes Research Center, Natural Resources Canada, March 31 2010, 52 pp. 
 

In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
 
 
 
EXPLORING TRADITIONAL AND STRUCTURAL 
APPROACHES TO OUTSOURCING FUNCTIONS 
 
 
Alan D. Smith* and Steven R. Clinton 
Robert Morris University, Moon, Pennsylvania, US 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Outsourcing activities have been growing exponentially, as manufacturer and 
suppliers are strategically incorporating their mutually beneficial relationships with better 
lines of communication, warranty obligations, and information sharing. Supplier 
collaboration and integrations are reinforced when the outsourcing benefits greatly 
mitigate the inherent risks associated with fostering such relationships. A major problem 
that many manufacturers face is finding the best suppliers for the material they need. 
Many global suppliers can produce and create great products, but can sometimes be 
unreliable, especially in term of service serve that have cultural and political 
ramifications. At times, suppliers who are very reliable can sometimes create bad 
products and materials. Service providers and manufacturers are generally looking to 
improve upon the benefits that outsourcing can provide, especially in structured or more 
traditional competitive environments. 
 
Keywords: business strategy, supplier collaboration, supplier integration, quality risk 
management, service quality, virtual assistants 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Outsourcing As an Operational Alternative 
 
A very straightforward definition of outsourcing is the act of ―obtaining work previously 
done by employees inside the companies from sources outside the company‖ (Pearce and 
                                                        
* Corresponding Author address: Email: smitha@rmu.edu. 

Alan D. Smith and Steven R. Clinton 
128
Robinson 2009, p. 312). Companies leverage outsourcing to their advantage in order to 
become more productive and profitable. ―Outsourcing allows a shop to take on more work 
than its equipment, manpower and capacity would normally allow it to handle‖ (Steele 2007, 
p. 16). This strategy creates opportunities for companies to focus on those tasks more 
important than others, and gain production through work done by supply chain partners or 
manufacturers/service providers outside the company. Undoubtedly, there are many benefits 
to outsourcing and what this strategy can do for a company for the long-term future. ‗―We 
continue to see an increase of outsourcing revenues,‖ stated analyst Alex Sumarta‘ (Steele, p. 
16). Directly due to the ability for a company to concentrate on the more profitable tasks of 
the company, outsourcing has become so compelling to use as a strategy based on the low-
cost cost perspective (More and Babu 2012; Paksoy and Cavlak 2011; Pettersson and 
Segerstedt 2011). Conversely, with the involvement of an outside firm assisting the company, 
this develops a disadvantage to involving a company in this strategy if culture and mutual 
trust issues are not properly managed and mitigated early in the partnership. There are very 
legitimate concerns about loss of autonomy, focus of control, quality, speed, and corporate 
reputation that are at stake on sides of the outsourcing equation (Smith 2010; Smith and 
Minutolo 2014).  
Companies may tend to have a difficult time leaving the responsibilities of completing 
tasks and production in the hands of an outside firm, especially if they are well insulated 
against the effects of failure to complete the required tasks in a timely and quality matter. 
This is understandable for a company not to invest in an outside firm, in part due to an initial 
financial investment or a perceived lack of reliability with a firm that is not historically linked 
to the company. The initial fear factors of important and sensitive knowledge transfer and 
uncertainties surrounding unrealized financial gains and expectations are among the well-
documented risks of outsourcing, which will be explored later in this chapter. While cost 
savings is a major factor that is frequently cited as a major reason in determining to choose 
outsourcing, companies may ultimately select not to due to the feelings that the outside firm 
does not hold the same company values as the hiring company. Ultimately, there are many 
advantages and disadvantages that must be considered before a firm commits its time and 
scare resources outsourcing.  
Regardless if a company chooses the outsourcing strategy, there will definitely be a 
decision on how to delegate the productivity. With this decision, a company will allow itself 
to become profitable and productive, but how it accomplishes these feats will be determined 
by the firm they choose to assist them and how they properly manage the supplier integration 
and collaborative partnerships. 
 
 
Strategies of Outsourcing 
 
The strategy of outsourcing has evolved over time, and companies have developed trends 
with which allow themselves to compete and be successful within their marketplaces. 
Traditionally, ―Outsourcing is a phenomenal way to support your company and not have the 
tremendous liability and overhead as you would if you took into your core business‖ 
(DeFelice 2007, p. 14). Many outsiders do not feel it is a resource, but it is genuinely 
benefiting those companies who use it become more productive, and build connections.  

Exploring Traditional and Structural Approaches to Outsourcing Functions 
129
In this age of knowledge-based innovation, many trends have been identified to allow for 
companies to use strategically leverage outsourcing. The theory of creating a more 
personalized interaction between businesses, whether it is by customer-service calls or using 
virtual assistants, with technology is typical in these times (Tiffany 2007). Many companies 
have developed different trends due to the involvement of technology in this era, whether it is 
via Internet or whatnot. Due, in part, to the increasing involvement of many nations in 
assisting companies with outsourcing, there has been the philosophy of ―outsourcing the 
outsourcing‖ (Tiffany 2007, p. 1). This involves companies having issues finding countries 
with manpower to help them outsource the work, because there is a high demand of certain 
countries to assist in this strategy. Both of these trends involve the use of technology, and the 
use of technology itself is a trend being used because it is creating easier access from one firm 
to another and more efficiency and effectiveness in completing tasks.  
Involving multiple firms in the completion of tasks has developed several different types 
of trends for outsourcing and the productivity by companies. ―Utility services and modular, or 
‗component,‘ offerings are trends that are emerging as the outsourcing industry reaches a new 
level of maturity‖ (Ferranti 2005, p. 1). The use of offshoring, where companies relocate 
certain business processes to another has been implemented in many of the top multinational 
companies (Ferranti 2005). Global outsourcing has become commonplace in today‘s market, 
and has allowed for the most productive companies to become even more successful by 
completing the most crucial tasks to becoming profitable. Therefore, ―cross-company 
outsourcing, companies coming together for scale, is a model that is increasingly being 
adopted‖ (Ferranti 2005, p. 2). The strategy of cross-company outsourcing increases the 
profitability of the company, because this is the strategy where costs drop dramatically. Many 
people adopt outsourcing as a strategy due to the ability to drop costs and increase 
productivity, thus becoming more profitable, therefore finding a partner company who can 
assist in doing this allows for great relationships to be made from one firm to another.  
An innovative strategy that has been created in this area is a combination or hybrid, 
called ―best-shoring,‖ where companies look outside traditional outsourcing firms into other 
countries or even regional areas to find those who can produce within the in-house workforce 
(Ali and Alolayyan 2013; Bhamu, Khandelwal and Sangwan 2013; Fumi, Scarabotti, and 
Schiraldi 2013). With this strategy, companies can use their resources and values to identify 
those firms, nationally or internationally, who will allow the company to find a benefit in 
choosing the firm to help with its production. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
Outsourcing Benefits 
 
There is no question that many firms have chosen outsourcing as part of their routine 
operations or strategy. A major thrust for this widespread adoption is the array of benefits that 
can be achieved through outsourcing. One of the main benefits of outsourcing is that it can be 
used to solve a number of problems, depending on need. The reasons firms chose to outsource 
business functions differ, but the basis of these decisions are to make each firm more agile 
and best use the resources available. Some of the specific benefits of outsourcing are 

Alan D. Smith and Steven R. Clinton 
130
discussed below (Smith 2011; Summers and Scherpereel 2008). Many firms, despite the 
identified problems, hope to gain the benefit of lower cost when outsourcing one or more 
functions. The idea is that specialized companies which focus on the outsourced business 
function can complete the necessary tasks in a more efficient and less expensive manor than 
the company choosing to outsource. This is often realized due to economies of scale, learning 
curves, and the ability to use resources more efficiently (Busbin, Johnson, and DeConinck 
2008). For example, a small firm may not have enough internal need to justify having a 
lawyer on staff. Outsourcing legal duties to a law firm can enable the company to have the 
legal support required at a lower cost. Obviously, initial costs can be lowered by outsourcing 
functions to global areas where the labor costs associated are less expensive than the home 
country. 
While saving money is a strong benefit, critics may argue that quality and service levels 
will fall. Most companies realize that this is not acceptable. Specialized firms will offer 
outsourcing opportunities to both decrease expenses and maintain or improve service. The 
outsourcing companies are not only able to complete the tasks more efficiently, but better 
than the hiring firm. This is due to the fact that many outsourcing companies specialize in the 
business function they provide (Hesketh 2008). For a manufacturing company the 
administrative accounting functions may be done by a small number of employees. This is 
clearly not the core competency of the manufacturing firm. An accounting firm will be more 
knowledgeable of the process and will be able to provide more experience and improved 
services than the small internal group of people who currently only work for the 
manufacturing firm. For the same reasons, outsourcing can provide increased flexibility and 
quality. 
Outsourcing can enable a firm to have access to the best talent and latest technology for a 
specific business function. Specialized firms are able attract and retain market specialists in 
their areas better than those companies with only a small department assigned to such 
functions (Kremic, Tukel and Rom 2006). If being the specialized firm‘s main focus it is 
likely that this firm has invested in both human and technological resources that are out of 
reach for other companies. 
Outsourcing non-core functions allows the firm to focus on core competencies or mission 
critical activities by eliminating distractions in non-core departments (Pearce and Robinson 
2009; Smith and Offodile 2007). Essentially all businesses know that resources are scarce, 
particularly human and financial resources, and they must properly account, allocate, and 
manage those scare resources. By outsourcing selected back-office functions, management 
can focus their efforts on core competencies instead of administrative functions that the 
company does not specialize in. This is even truer statement if significant savings are realized 
through outsourcing efforts than normally expected if such activities stayed within the 
internal control of the original hosting firm. 
Going along with these low-cost and being more horizontally focused benefits, firms can 
strategically leverage outsourcing to get mediate certain ―pain points‖ or trouble areas. This 
should be used for non-core competencies, but can be a great benefit (Kremic et al. 2006). If a 
particular non-core function is causing problems for a firm attempting to correct problems 
internally, such a practice may not be the best use of resources or in the best interests of the 
firm. As previously discussed, outsourcing can provide better services at lower costs; hence, 
enabling management to eliminate these problems and realize additional benefits. 

Exploring Traditional and Structural Approaches to Outsourcing Functions 
131
Outsourcing business functions can provide a firm with better management and 
accountability for the outsourced areas. Due to the contractual relationship organizations can 
actually retain overall control of outsourced functions (Hesketh 2008). The day-to-day 
responsibility and implementation is placed with the third party. The hiring firm can specify 
its needs and requirements and not worry about daily management tasks. Being contractually 
tied to providing the required services the outsourcing agent is held accountable, sometimes 
more so than internal employees. 
―Careful selection of outsourcing partners allows the firm to potentially learn and develop 
its abilities through ideas and capabilities that emerge from the growing expertise‖ of 
outsource partner firm (Pearce and Robinson 2009, p. 359). By working with an outsourced 
firm the hiring company can learn how to perform the outsourced functions better based on 
the industry knowledge and process the outsourcing partner has already developed. Even 
further, if the outsourcing firm adds to its knowledge from another client the hiring firm will 
benefit from the increase in knowledge as it is serviced by the same firm. 
Possibly one of the biggest benefits of outsourcing is when a company can use it to 
develop sustainable competitive advantages. This can be realized by maximizing the 
flexibility benefits of outsourcing through a network of partners. Hence, it is important for a 
firm to have the ability to create and manage an effective network of outsource partners as 
part of its overall sustainable competitive advantage strategy (Kremic et al. 2006). While 
some critics may argue that this can be copied and is therefore not strategic, the management 
of many value chains is not a simple task that can be copied. Further, managing these 
relationships can provide a level of flexibility in the company which results in a competitive 
advantage. Companies should review the outsourced partnerships and work with the third 
parties to manage these relationships in order to maximize benefits to the firm. All of these 
benefits and more can be realized through the proper use of an outsourcing plan, although 
companies must realize that not every benefit will be realized with every plan. 
 
 
Outsourcing Risks 
 
Outsourcing can seem like a very viable solution to a company on the surface, yet pose 
significant hurdles when management tries to implement such a strategy. Superficially, it can 
reduce costs and workloads and help a company pay more attention to their crucial operating 
areas. A company has to be careful; however, to make sure they are aware of all the major 
risks that are involved in the entire outsourcing process in developing their contingency plans. 
It can be too easy for a company to decide what they can have someone else do, and then not 
follow up on the progress of such a decision. Many times companies are too consumed in 
deciding what to outsource and what vendor to choose, that they forget about risks that are 
involved in the managing of the outsourcing. They can ultimately lead to the failure of not 
only the operations that were contracted out, but the entire company as well. An overlooked 
risk can hurt both a company‘s finances and reputation to the point of no recovery. It is 
important for managers and CEOs to be aware of the most common types of risk that can 
happen throughout the outsourcing process.  
One of the most common risks that companies is the financial risks involved. The 
companies want to know how much the outsourcing process will cost them and if it is even 
worth it the consideration. What companies may not realize is that the true risk lies in not 

Alan D. Smith and Steven R. Clinton 
132
accounting for unexpected costs. Many times companies receive estimated prices from a 
vendor that would fit their budget. It is not until much deeper in the negotiation process that 
they realize that a vendor charges fees for every exception that is made. Perhaps, one of the 
best ways to prepare for this risk is to closely monitor the entire contract writing process. It is 
not likely that a company will find a vendor that can do everything they want for one basic 
price. Every vendor will have some type of additional charges to customize what the parent 
company needs. All of these charges should be clearly established in the contract and both the 
managers and CEOs should know what they are getting themselves into. This may seem like 
an obvious statement, but many times companies get burned by extra fees. This is because 
they did not realize how many times they would require work that would cost extra. All too 
often managers take a rough estimate at how many times they may request a special report, 
for example, but in reality that report may be needed a lot more often than originally planned. 
This can make the contract writing very strenuous and confusing. A complex contract 
increases the ―opportunity for misunderstandings between the parties which could result in 
(costly) renegotiations and thus non-anticipated cost burdens‖ (Gewald and Gellrich 2007, p. 
280). This can be a costly error and if they are not prepared, the entire outsourcing process 
can end up costing more than if the company performed the operations themselves. 
Another risk that can be encountered is performance risk (Bhamu, et al. 2013; Brown 
1990). It is important to find a third-party vendor that is willing to live up to the performance 
standards that the parent company demonstrates. A vendor can agree to perform numerous 
functions, but the level of service they provide must be discussed before an agreement is 
signed. For example, a company that one of the authors was previously employed outsourced 
many of administrative human resources functions. Management spent roughly two years in 
contract negotiations when they choose the most appropriate vendor before they allowed fully 
functional operations to be implemented. The operation functions did very well in terms of 
cost reduction; however, the help desk is receiving a lot of negative feedback. Many 
employees felt that the vendor‘s service center was not offering the support they needed and 
became extremely frustrated. It was the responsibility of the parent company to work with the 
vendor to make sure they are living up to the same customer service standards that they would 
have used. This can be an overlooked risk because there are many functions, like customer 
service, that are taken for granted. In the vendor‘s eyes, the way they are handling situations 
may be considered good customer service to them, but it is the parent company that has to 
follow up to ensure they and their customers agree with the vendor‘s definition of quality 
services. A vendor is probably not going to criticize a parent company that they do not 
operate and provide good customer service. It is imperative for the parent company to 
consistently monitor the vendors‘ actions both in the final product and all other areas leading 
up to it. 
An important type of outsourcing risk is security (Cheelu, Babu and Venkatakrishna 
2014; Rathnayake, Jing and Wijeratne 2014; Smith 2009). This risk includes confidentiality 
of private information i.e., both of the company‘s and their clients), poor hiring practices by 
the vendor, and malicious intent by the vendor, to mention a few. As previously mentioned, 
often operations that are outsourced are back-office administrative duties that require 
processing information and are not considered a core function of the company. The 
information that the vendor is processing can contain sensitive or confidential client 
information. If this should be mishandled in any way by the vendor, it can reflect poorly on 
the parent company. When the issue of security is brought up in outsourcing negotiations, 

Exploring Traditional and Structural Approaches to Outsourcing Functions 
133
managers may begin to focus on the security of the technology they are using (i.e., protection 
from hackers or viruses). The other areas of security can be overlooked and this is a risk that 
the company cannot afford to make.  
One such area of security is the hiring practices of the vendor. Desouza (2008) gave the 
example of firm that outsourced their security guards to a third-party vendor. This firm did 
not verify that the vendor background checks on their employees and some of the security 
guards were found stealing supplies from the company. It is often taken for granted that a 
vendor would act ethically when handling the parent company‘s resources, but this is not 
always the case. A company needs to be proactive with questions about how the vendor 
operates. If there is something they do not like about the vendor‘s own security system, then 
they need to look for someone who they feel more secure in working with. There is the threat 
of a vendor acting maliciously and leaking valuable information about the company. Many 
vendors are specialists in a particular operating/administrative area. They normally offer their 
services to many different companies in similar industries. There can be the case where a 
vendor shares confidential information of one client to another one of their clients to gain 
some advantage for themselves. A company needs to be aware of all the other clients a 
vendor has and talk with them to see if they had any negative experiences with the vendor. 
The company must discuss their privacy regulations with the vendor and stress the 
cancellation of the contract if those issues are violated. 
An important and equally important outsourcing risk is on that is based in psychosocial 
dimensions. This is when a vendor does not perform in the best interest of the parent 
company and, thus, causes a negative public image on the parent company. It can be a 
common misconception for many companies that once they outsource a function, they are no 
longer responsible for it in terms of production and quality. Although to a sense it is true, they 
must still monitor the production to make sure the vendor is living up to its end of the deal 
and regardless of outcomes, the parent company‘s reputation is dependent on vendors 
performing their duties well. Many consumers do not know when a company is using a 
vendor or not, so if they have a bad experience, they will blame the parent company. 
Ultimately, the parent company‘s reputation is ―the reputation at stake,‖ not the third-party 
vendor in management‘s quest to become more lean through outsourcing (Griffin 2008; 
Scherrer-Rathje, Boyle and Deflorin 2009; Shah, Chandrasekaran and Linderman 2008). It is 
extremely important for companies to make sure the vendor is not doing anything that will 
hurt their name. Even if a company makes it known that the error/issue was not done by them, 
consumers will still hold that parent company responsible.  
It is too easy for a company to outsource and think they can transfer complete 
responsibility of the operations in a handoff to the vendor, but this can lead to ultimate failure 
if a company does not take the proper precautions to prevent choosing the wrong vendor. 
For example, the Federal Deposit and Insurance Incorporation (FDIC) has taken an 
interest into what companies outsource. In the case of banks, they have issued a guidance to 
help a company through the process of outsourcing. It provides a ―roadmap‖ to the company 
to understand the necessary steps and risks involved when choosing a vendor (Griffin 2008). 
These steps are similar to those a company uses in house to make sure they are successful, the 
only difference is that this guidance reminds companies to apply these same rules to vendors 
as well.  
The FDIC let companies know that with outsourcing, not only will consumers still hold 
the parent company responsible for issue, but they will as well. Regulations that are required 

Alan D. Smith and Steven R. Clinton 
134
by the FDIC are expected to be upheld by the new vendor, and the parent company will be 
held accountable if they are not in compliance.  
Although the functions of the company can be outsourced, risk factors cannot, and 
companies are still held liable for the actions a third party vendor takes in its name. This is 
why it is important for companies to look for these common risk factors when deciding to 
outsource a part of their operations. All too often, companies get burned in one of these areas, 
and that is when they learn from their mistake and become more proactive the second time 
around. This can be a dangerous tactic because any one of the risks mentioned above could be 
detrimental to a business and could cause the ultimate failure of the entire company. A 
company must be proactive when deciding to outsource. They must weigh the benefits and 
the risks that can occur to make sure the investment is worthwhile. They must spend an equal 
amount of time on choosing and monitoring a third party vendor. In the end, if a company is 
aware of the risks and takes the time to establish the possible consequences with the vendor 
then they will be more likely to succeed in their outsourcing efforts. 
 
 
A MORE STRUCTURED APPROACH TO OUTSOURCING 
 
Traditional Approaches to Outsourcing 
 
Throughout the years, outsourcing has become a popular but controversial concept within 
the business world. Outsourcing is simply obtaining work previously done by employees 
inside the companies from sources outside the company. This simple definition has led to 
many companies outsourcing just about any business activity, from information technology to 
human resources, without much regard for strategic analysis. Outsourcing can be further 
defined in terms of traditional versus strategic. Outsourcing is considered traditional if a 
process not considered ―critical‖ for the organization is outsourced (Franceschini, Galetto, 
Pignatelli and Varetto 2003; Scherrer-Rathje et al. 2009; Shah et al. 2008). 
Traditional outsourcing decision-making is often characterized by cost analysis (Morton 
and Hu 2008; Parthasarathy and Ramachandran 2008; Power, 2009). Strategic outsourcing is 
term that may define the conditions when companies outsource everything except those 
special activities in which they could achieve a unique competitive edge (i.e., core 
competences). Strategic outsourcing decision-making is associated with understanding the 
risks and advantages of outsourcing functions. Over the last decade, outsourcing decision-
making has moved from a traditional approach to a more strategic approach. However, many 
management scholars claim the move to a more strategic outsourcing process has lacked a 
structured model to follow. It‘s the traditional decision making approach and the lack of more 
strategic, structured approach that has led to poor outsourcing decisions. 
 
 
Strategic Approaches to Outsourcing 
 
A strategic approach to outsourcing includes emphasizing the risks and advantages that 
can arise from outsourcing and the importance of contract management with the outsourcer. 
Strategic outsourcing models can be used in many application fields such as information 

Exploring Traditional and Structural Approaches to Outsourcing Functions 
135
technology, supply chain, facilities management, and human resources. One suggested model 
of is based on a four step strategic decision-making model. The main steps of this model 
include internal benchmarking analysis, external benchmarking analysis, contract negotiation, 
and outsourcing management ((Franceschini et al. 2003).  
The first step of this strategic model, and may be the most important, is internal 
benchmarking analysis. This involves a company monitoring their processes, analyzing their 
efficiencies and evaluating what to outsource while considering their core competencies. 
Within this step, top management should consider and compare the efficiency of different 
company activities through highlighting possible unnecessary internal costs and lack of 
employee skills. This step involves identifying and considering a variety of costs including 
production costs and transactional costs (e.g., bargaining costs, monitoring costs, market 
costs, contractual costs). Outsourcing relationships is another key element to the internal 
benchmarking analysis step (Ali and Alolayyan 2013: Brown 1990).  
There are at least four basic outsourced-outsourcer relationships that can be entered 
(Franceschini, et al. 2003). These relationships to consider include the traditional vendor 
relationship, temporary relationship, strategic union, and network organization. The third 
element of this step is activities stratification. This process involves the ordering of activities 
to be outsourced. This ordering of activities is considered critical to the outsourcing process. 
Once a company has strategically identified the processes subject to outsourcing through 
evaluating costs and skills, determining an appropriate outsourcing relationship and activities 
stratification, the company should begin the external benchmarking analysis step. 
The external benchmarking analysis step involves evaluating the outsourcer (Beldona and 
Tsatsoulis 2010; Bhamu et al. 2013); hence, the basic goal of this step is successful supplier 
selection. Companies may choose between several supplier selection strategies within step. 
Three relevant strategies include single vendor, multiple vendors, and integrated suppliers. 
The single vendor strategy allows the organizations to work together through the vendor 
understanding the clients‘ needs and offers better services. A multiple vendor strategy 
involves a significant effort in monitoring and coordinating with more vendors. However, this 
strategy does offer better services and lower costs. An integrated supplier strategy involves 
less coordination problems on the outsourced company. The outsourcing company only deals 
with the main outsourcer. There are several selection criteria that are a part of the supplier 
selection process (e.g., market positioning, technical quality, price, ability to manage 
outsourcing relationships and previous contracts). After evaluating key selection criteria and 
choosing the appropriate outsourcing supplier relationship strategy, companies should begin 
the contract negotiation step of this strategic model. 
Contract negotiation is another important within this overview of a strategic model to 
outsourcing decision-making (Franceschini et al. 2003). This step involves the formalization 
of the relationship between a company and its outsourcing provider. Within this step, 
companies should seek to formalize a contract that identifies time development, general terms 
and conditions of the relationship, expected performance targets, evaluation criteria, and the 
process for handling future relationship controversies. Once the outsourced and outsourcer 
have reached a favorable agreement to both parties, a company can begin the outsourcing 
management step of the strategic outsourcing model. 
The successful outsourcing management consists of the realization and monitoring of the 
planned outsourcing process. To assist companies in this step, a test-bench approach can be 
used. This step-by-step method is used to evaluate the different strategies in managing 

Alan D. Smith and Steven R. Clinton 
136
outsourcing processes. This tool involves five steps that include the definition of the phase of 
the outsourcing process to be implemented, evaluation of all possible information about the 
outsourcing process, application of proposed method and study of alternatives, analysis of 
results, and the next phase (Franceschini et al. 2003). The failure to properly manage the 
outsourcing process will eventually lead to a loss of any advantages that were to be gained 
through outsourcing the given process. 
Outsourcing often can be advantageous for companies but sometimes it results in lost 
critical skills and knowledge when improper outsourcing decisions are made (Smith and 
Offodile 2007; Steele 2007; Summers and Scherpereel 2008). Going from the more 
traditional cost initiated outsourcing approach to a more strategic approach emphasizing risks 
and advantages of outsourcing decision-making, companies most likely will make more 
appropriate outsourcing decisions. By applying a more strategic approach to outsourcing 
decision-making, such as the suggested model described above, companies can reduce their 
risk of losing key skills and knowledge that are critical to a company‘s competitive edge and 
success.  
 
 
POTENTIAL PROSPECTS OF OUTSOURCING 
 
Exploring Business Prespectives 
 
From a business perspective, outsourcing has gained popularity over the last 17 years. 
Lau and Hurley (1997) traced the beginnings of outsourcing to 1991, when the advent of 
global competition after the 1991 recession required many domestic companies to look for 
cost savings by keeping their core activities and outsourcing other functions to external 
suppliers. The popularity of outsourcing has accelerated as companies saw outsourcing as a 
quick fix for poor company financials, and the rush was on. However the picture of 
outsourcing has not been entirely rosy. Consider the following examples provided by 
EBStrategy.com (―Offshore outsourcing failure case studies,‖ 2015). Due to a great surge of 
complains, Dell stopped using a technical support center in India to handle calls from its 
corporate customers. A number of customers complained the Indian technical-support 
representatives were difficult to communicate with because of accents and scripted responses. 
In another example, Shop Direct, which employs 1,200 people in the U.K., opened a call 
center in Bangalore and transferred 250 jobs from U.K. Unfortunately, the service from the 
new location has been considered called poor and the call center was closed.  
These examples suggested that the outsourcing decision is much more than a simple 
consideration of cost. The decision must be focused on improving competitive advantage, 
service quality, and include other strategically important aspects of the firm‘s business. 
Additional questions about process control, skill requirements, outsourcing time lines, and 
legal and sociopolitical considerations must be answered by the outsourcing firm.  
Although outsourcing may have a number of negative connotations in some service 
sections of the U.S., it should remain as a mainstay in the global economy. Pearce and 
Robinson (2009) noted that many outsourcing IT services (e.g., call center services, routine 
computer programming services, managing IT systems) have become major industries in their 
own right. ―Business process outsourcing is the most rapidly growing segment of the 

Exploring Traditional and Structural Approaches to Outsourcing Functions 
137
outsourcing services worldwide, and it is expected to reach more than 200 billion in revenues 
in 2008‖ (p. 357). Virtually any department within an organization can potentially be 
outsourced. Areas within organizations thought to be immune from outsourcing have now 
been added to the mix. The fact that organizations are moving beyond outsourcing IT, help 
desk, and/or customer service functions to other business functions underscores the fact that 
outsourcing is here to stay, and the importance of grounding the outsourcing decision around 
key principles aside from cost. 
So what changes can businesses expect in the near future in terms of outsourcing? One 
possibility is that firms will approach outsourcing with a ―crawl, walk, run‖ approach. In a 
2008 interview, Uttiya Dasgupta described this approach (Raisinghani 2008). Dasgupta 
suggested that the firm must build its internal capabilities to support outsourcing in two areas, 
those being preparations and governance. In his view, the ―crawl‖ phase tests the proof of 
concept and involves piloting outsource of non-critical functions, building the preparation and 
governance structure. The ―walk‖ phase is implemented by beginning to add more critical 
work and or additional outsource providers. It is during this stage that more detailed control 
metrics are established and a true team working across organizations emerges. The final stage 
in the approach is the ―run‖ phase in which true strategic partnerships are formed, additional 
activities are outsourced, and preparations and governance become seamless and outsourcing 
becomes an integral part of the business.  
Undoubtedly, current economic conditions in the global economy have added pressures 
on firms to look for opportunities to improve supply chain management and other processes, 
and to reduce inventories and manage their costs. Naturally, management will continue to 
look for areas where outsourcing may provide an advantage. One industry currently receiving 
great attention in the media is the U.S. auto industry for its supplier integration and 
collaboration efforts. As the auto industry works to restructure and retool with the possible 
help of the federal government, the major domestic auto makers will certainly look to 
continue the process of outsourcing that has been underway for some time. Primarily the auto 
industry outsources through the development of strategic supplier alliances. Japanese auto 
manufacturers have long taken advantage of strategic alliances in order to produce quality 
products at a low cost and high quality. India and other emerging countries have patterned 
these approaches to their industries (Khanna, Vrat, Shankar and Sayay 2002a, 2000b; Sahay, 
Cavale, Rajani and Mohan 2003).  
While domestic manufacturing firms exerted control over the supply of component parts 
in an effort to reap the benefits of economies of scale, Japanese firms were building working 
relationships with suppliers. This provided Japanese auto makers with competitive 
advantages. Slowly but surely, the U.S. auto industry has recognized the need for these 
partnerships. There are an estimated 15,000 parts in a typical automobile, which makes the 
automobile industry ripe with outsourcing opportunities. Lau and Hurley (1997) emphasized 
the importance of strategic supplier outsourcing when they provide that Chrysler‘s profit 
margin is four times as high as GM‘s due to effective outsourcing, and Chrysler plans to 
reduce the number of its primary suppliers from 750 to 250. The major domestic auto makers 
have to play catch up to equal Toyota‘s reduced base of 168 suppliers.  
There are many inherent problems if a firm uses only one supplier, especially if that 
vendor cannot supply all the materials needed to create a good, then manufacturers are then 
faced to look elsewhere for the materials. A partial solution may be to dual-sourcing, in which 
the manufacturer will take the bulk of the standing orders from the first supplier, but 

Alan D. Smith and Steven R. Clinton 
138
otherwise if they need more material in which they cannot get from the first, they will look 
elsewhere for another supplier. This is important and can ultimately help the manufacture. In 
this case, as with outsourcing in general, moving around suppliers and vendors may leads to 
possibly damage relationships. As with all supplier and vendor relationships, collaboration 
and integration are based on forming good relationships based on trust and fully functional 
communication links. Other issues were discussed that included that primary manufacturer 
risks the quality of the materials by adding more suppliers to the equation. There will always 
be the issue of control and reputation in terms of product and service quality. More vendors, 
suppliers, and outsourcers will certainly make communication can be much more difficult. 
Ultimately, the quality of the good can decline if the materials are different and not a 
consistent high quality.  
Although manufacturers need to improve and will likely include additional outsourcing in 
their equation, they must stave off pressure from both government and unions alike as 
difficult decisions and possible job shifts lie ahead. Whatever the industry, businesses will 
continue to look to gain strategic competitive advantage with the help of a number of tools 
including outsourcing.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The authors wish to thank the reviewers most heartedly for the valuable contributions for 
their input into the final paper. Peer reviewing and editing are commonly tedious and 
thankless tasks. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Ali, K. A. M., & Alolayyan, M. N. (2013). The impact of total quality management (TQM) 
on the hospital's performance: An empirical research. International Journal of Services 
and Operations Management, 15(4), 482-506.  
Beldona, S., & Tsatsoulis, C. (2010). Identifying buyers with similar seller rating models and 
using their opinions to choose sellers in electronic markets. International Journal of 
Information and Decision Sciences, 2(1), 1-16. 
Bhamu, J., Khandelwal, A., & Sangwan, K.S. (2013). Lean manufacturing implementation in 
an automated production line: A case study. International Journal of Services and 
Operations Management, 15(4), 411-429. 
Brown, S. (1990). Marketers must take the lead in defining service quality. Marketing News, 
24(22), 11-12. 
Busbin, J. W., Johnson, J. T., & DeConinck, J. (2008). The evolution of sustainable 
competitive advantage: From value chain to modular outsource networking. Competition 
Forum, 6(1), 103-108.  
Cheelu, D., Babu, M.R., & Venkatakrishna, P. (2014). A fuzzy-based intelligent vertical 
handoff decision strategy with maximised user satisfaction for next generation 
communication networks. International Journal of Process Management and 
Benchmarking, 3(4), 420-440. 

Exploring Traditional and Structural Approaches to Outsourcing Functions 
139
DeFelice, A. (2007). Secrets of outsourcing. Accounting Technology , 23(8), 14. 
Desouza, K. (2008). The neglected dimension in strategic sourcing: Security. Strategic 
Outsourcing: An International Journal, 1(3), 288-292. 
Ferranti, M. (2005). As outsourcing matures, new trends emerge. [Online]. Retrieved 
February 12, 2015 from http://www.inforworld.com/archives/emailPrint.jsp?R=print 
This&A=/article/05/10/19. 
Franceschini, F., Galetto, M., Pignatelli, A., & Varetto, M. (2003). Outsourcing: Guidelines 
for a structured approach. Benchmarking: An Internal Journal, 10(3), 246-260. 
Fumi, A., Scarabotti, L., & Schiraldi, M.M. (2013). The effect of slot-code optimisation on 
travel times in common unit-load warehouses. International Journal of Services and 
Operations Management, 15(4), 507-527. 
Gewald, H., & Gellrich, T. (2007). The impact of perceived risk on the capital market‘s 
reaction to outsourcing announcements. Information Technology and Management, 8(4), 
279 – 297. 
Griffin, L. (2008). When you face risk from actions others take in your name. American 
Bankers Association. ABA Banking Journal, 100(9), 54-57. 
Hesketh, A. (2008). Should It Stay or Should It Go? Examining the Shared Services or 
Outsourcing Decision. Strategic Outsourcing: An International Journal, 1(2), 154-172. 
Khanna, V. K., Vrat, P., Shankar, R., & Sayay, B.S. (2002a). Developing causal relationships 
for a TQM index for the Indian automobile sector. Work Study, 51(7), 364-373. 
Khanna, V.K., Vrat, P., Shankar, R., and Sayay, B.S. (2002b). Transition Phase in Indian auto 
sector: A system dynamics approach. International Journal of System Dynamics and 
Policy Planning, 14(1/2), 23-38. 
Kremic, T., Tukel, O. I., & Rom, W. O. (2006). Outsourcing decision support: A survey of 
benefits, risks, and decision factors. Supply Chain Management, 11(6), 467-482. 
Lau, R. S. M., & Hurley, C.N. (1997). Outsourcing through strategic alliances. Production 
and Inventory Management Journal, 38(2), 6-10. 
More, D., & Babu, A.S. (2012). Benchmarking supply chain flexibility using data 
envelopment analysis. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 
12(3), 288-317. 
Morton, N. A., & Hu, Q. (2008). Implications of the fit between organizational structure and 
ERP: A structural contingency theory perspective. International Journal of Information 
Management, 28(5), 391-404.  
Offshore outsourcing failure case studies (2015). EBStrategy.com. [Online]. Retrieved 
February 12, 2015 from http://www.ebstrategy.com/Outsourcing/cases/failures.htm. 
Paksoy, T., & Cavlak, E.B. (2011). Development and optimisation of a new linear 
programming model for production/distribution network of an edible vegetable oils 
manufacturer. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 9(1), 1-21. 
Parthasarathy, S., & Ramachandran, M. (2008). Requirements engineering method and 
maturity model for ERP projects. International Journal of Enterprise Information 
Systems, 4(4), 1-13.  
Rathnayake, J., Jing, L., & Wijeratne, A.W. (2014). Dry ports: A lacuna in Sri Lanka. 
International Journal of Process Management and Benchmarking, 3(4), 441-466. 
Pearce, J. A., & Robinson Jr., R.B. (2009). Strategic Management: Formulation, 
Implementation, and Control. (11th Ed.). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill Irwin. 

Alan D. Smith and Steven R. Clinton 
140
Pettersson, A. I., & Segerstedt, A. (2011). Performance measurements in supply chains within 
Swedish industry. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, 9(1), 69-
88. 
Power, D. (2009). Business process management and MDM: BPM is the foundation of a 
successful strategy for integrating an MDM hub in the enterprise. Information 
Management, 19(1), 47-59.  
Raisinghani, M. S. (2008). The expert opinion: An interview with Uttiya Dasgupta. Journal 
of Global Information Technology Management, 11(1), 69-72. 
Sahay, B S., Cavale, V., Rajani, R., & Mohan, R. (2003). The Indian supply chain 
architecture. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 8(2), 93-106. 
Scherrer-Rathje, M., Boyle, T. A., & Deflorin, P. (2009). Lean, take two! Reflections from 
the second attempt at lean implementation. Business Horizons, 52(1), 79-85. 
Shah, R., Chandrasekaran, A., & Linderman, K. (2008). In pursuit of implementation 
patterns: The context of Lean and Six Sigma. International Journal of Production 
Research, 46(23), 6679-6698.  
Smith, A.D. (2009). The impact of e-procurement systems on customer relationship 
management: A multiple case study. International Journal of Procurement Management, 
2(3), 314-338. 
Smith, A.D. (2010). Balancing internal supply chain logistics: A comparative analysis of 
manufacturing and service firm operations. International Journal of Logistics Systems 
and Supply Management, 3(2), 145-166. 
Smith, A.D. (2011). Component part quality assurance concerns and standards: Comparison 
of world-class manufacturers. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 18(1), 128-148.  
Smith, A.D., & Minutolo, M.C. (2014). Green supply chain acceptability and internal 
stakeholder concerns. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management, Vol. 
19, No. 4, pp. 464-490. 
Smith, A.D. and Offodile, O.F. (2007). Exploring forecasting and project management 
characteristics of supply chain management. International Journal of Logistics and 
Supply Management, 3(2), 174-214. 
Steele, J. (2007). The outlook on outsourcing. Wide Format Imaging, 15(11), 16. 
Summers, G. J., & Scherpereel, C. M. (2008). Decision making in product development: Are 
you outside-in or inside-out? Management Decision, 46(9), 1299-1314. 
Tiffany, L. (2007). 5 out-of-the-ordinary outsourcing trends. [Online]. Retrieved February 12, 
2015 from Entrepreneur.com: http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/printthis/187064.html. 
 
 
 

In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
ROLE OF GREEN SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 
IN CEMENT MANUFACTURING PROCESS: 
AN OVERVIEW ON INDIAN INDUSTRIES 
 
 
P. Muralidhar and V. Srihari1 
NICMAR, NAC Campus, Kothaguda Post, Hyderabad, India 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The pollutants from the cement industry are the potential sources of environmental 
pollution. The Green Supply Chain Management (GSCM) strategies are to be immensely 
implemented from raw material stage to finished product of a manufacturing process that 
helps to reduce the pollutants into the environment. 
Green supply chain strategies are also considered in procurement, customer service, 
etc. apart from manufacturing stage. The present chapter discusses the role of green 
supply chain management in cement manufacturing process. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Cement industry is the second largest emission pollutants in the manufacturing sector of 
India. The carbon emissions produced are very high from the procurement stage to final 
transportation stage in the cement industry. Hence, cement sector has decided to reduce the 
carbon emission rate to a considerable level to enhance the sustainability. The Green Supply 
Chain Management (GSCM) is the process of integrating environmental concepts like eco-
friendly product design, material sourcing, and selection, manufacturing processes, delivery 
of the final product to the consumers and end-of-life management of the product after its 
                                                        
 Dr. P. Muralidhar: Associate professor, National Institute of Construction Management and Research (NICMAR), 
NAC Campus, Kothaguda post, Hyderabad, PIN: 500084, India. E-mail: pmuralidhar17@gmail.com, ph: +91 
9441952479. 
1 Dr. V. Srihari: Professor, NICMAR, NAC Campus, Hyderabad, PIN 50084, India. E-mail: vsrihari2005@gmail. 
com. 

P. Muralidhar and V. Srihari 
142
useful life. The GSCM is extensively focusing on sustainable management, hence forth it is 
also considered as sustainable supply chain management (SSCM). The GSCM principles are 
dire essential to cement manufacturing process so that the fly ash (waste from the thermal 
power plants) is used in cement manufacturing instead of lime stone reserves. 
Therefore, the energy and emissions associated with the limestone procurement and 
processing are saved in the in-bound supply chain process (Muralidhar et al., 2012). 
Similarly, the fly ash disposal is effectively mitigated and minimises carbon family emissions 
will strike the balance between the environment and ecology. 
The awareness about green supply chain management made some of the manufacturing 
industries to use renewable energy in their operations. During the manufacturing of the 
product, their waste is minimized to zero level and helped them to produce sustainable 
products. The present study is aimed to propose sustainable strategies for a cement 
manufacturing plant. The cement plants are well-known for pollution aspects. This study 
describes sustainable strategies for enforcing the balance between effective manufacturing 
practices, to reduce pollution and also to save the environment (Muralidhar et al., 2012). 
Hence, the whole strategy is designed based on available sub-criteria and best strategies of the 
process. This will be evaluated and proposed by using a case study. 
The basic raw material, limestone, is obtained from mines through blasting. According to 
GSCM the green procurement leads to reduce pollution in mining through effective 
supervision on blasting methodologies, air pollution control by dust collectors, adopting 
strategic safety measures and also converting fly ash as basic raw material for the production 
of fly-ash bricks which leads to green procurement. 
During the production of green manufacturing process, the reduction of emissions into 
the atmosphere to permissible limits is achieved by adopting additional pollution control or 
by Process automation. In the customer service point of view extending the good technical 
support, maintaining the quality of the product, reducing the complaints and reducing the 
frequency of shortages are copiously concentrated while supplying (Muralidhar et al., 2012). 
 
 
CEMENT MANUFACTURING PROCESS - CASE STUDY 
 
Cement is an essential material for any construction work. Cement is mainly used in 
preparation of concrete and mortar works and it has myriad modern uses in building, 
transport, water pipe lines and cement works. 
Cement is mainly classified into natural cement and artificial cement. The artificial 
cement is the Portland cement made up of mixing lime stone with gypsum. Cement is the 
most active component in concrete. During the manufacturing of cement from limestone, 
while converting CaO into CaCO3, lot of carbon emissions/foot prints are released into 
atmosphere, they are mainly classified as Scope-I emissions. The calcinations stage of cement 
manufacturing is mainly contributing to (up to 50%) Scope-I emissions. 
This causes damage to the environment by releasing green house gasses. Cement industry 
is the second largest producer of Green House Gases (GHG) into the atmosphere. Therefore, 
cement industry is copiously contributing towards production of carbon foot prints (CII-GBC, 
2010). 
 

Role of Green Supply Chain Management in Cement Manufacturing Process 
143
The cement manufacturing process is as follows: 
 
Stage-I (Figure 2.1) 
 
1. Blasting: The raw materials used to manufacture cement (mainly lime stone and clay) 
are blasted from the quarry. 
2. Transport: The raw materials are collected from the quarry and loaded into a dumper. 
3. Crushing and Transportation: The raw materials, after crushing, are transported to the 
plant by a conveyor. The plant stores the material before they are homogenized 
(Figure 2.1). 
 
Stage-II (Figure 2.2) 
 
4. Raw grinding: The materials are very finely grinded in order to produce raw mix. 
5. Burning: The raw mix is pre-heated before it goes into kiln, which is heated by a 
flame to the tune of 2000°C. The raw mix burns at 1500°C producing clinker which 
when it leaves the kiln. So, the raw mix is burnt to produce clinker. 
 
Stage-III (Figure 2.3) 
 
6. Grinding: The clinker and gypsum are very finely grinded giving a‘ pure cement,‘ 
other secondary additives and cementitious materials can be added to make blended 
cement. 
7. Storage, Packing and Dispatch: The cement is stored in silos before being dispatched 
either in bulk or in bags to its final destination. 
 
 
Figure 2.1. Cement manufacturing stage from crushing to transportation. 
 
Figure 2.2. Grinding of raw material and burning. 
 

P. Muralidhar and V. Srihari 
144
 
Figure 2.3. Clinkering stage to final transportation to customers. 
Cement industry is one of the major industries releasing appreciable quantity of green 
house gases with one of the major sources being the process emissions itself. The present 
contribution of GHG emissions from the industry is approximately 8 per cent of the total 
national emissions. As per CII‘s (Confederation of Indian Industry) estimate of average 
GHG‘s emissions based on the public available data and in depth studies of emissions of 
Indian cement industry presents, an average emissions of 697 kg CO2/ton of cement. Indian 
cement industry intends to achieve a target of 20 per cent reduction in its GHG emissions 
intensively, from the present average of levels of 697 kg CO2/ton of cement to 560 kg  
CO2/ ton of cement. This calls for about 137 kg CO2/ton reduction/ton of cement across the 
sector. 
The Indian cement industry is the second largest in the world. It is regarded as one of the 
best in the world in terms of technology, quality, efficiency and productivity measures. The 
total installed capacity was about 260 Million MT as on March 2010. The industry added over 
40 Million MT to its installed capacity in just one year during April 2009 to march 2010. The 
capacity of utilization of cement industry is close to 100 per cent. 
India has more than 52 companies involved in cement manufacturing business. The 
cement industry comprises of 148 large cement plants and more than 365 mini cement plants. 
The large plants account for more than 96 per cent of total production. 
The cement industry in India produces cement varieties such as Ordinary Portland 
Cement (OPC), Portland Pozzolana Cement (PPC) and Portland slag based Cement (PSC). 
India presently stands fourth largest emitter of green house gasses, ranking next to China, 
United States of America and Russia. However, per capita emissions of India are far below 
world‘s average levels. Moreover, India in recent years has managed an 8 per cent growth 
rate only and 3.7 per cent increase in energy consumption. Over the last few years, the 
construction industry activities have gone up to the peak level, therefore the production and 
consumption of cement has become higher than ever before. So, there is a requirement of 
strategies for supporting/enhancing the environmental activities for reduction of carbon foot 
prints. Hence, an experiment has been made by proposing the measurement indicators under 
green procurement, green manufacturing, customer service and environmental management 
as (level-II) indicators under GSCM strategies (level-I) for developing competitive strategies 
for green supply chain management for cement manufacturing process, the following criteria 
are proposed in the present case study. The first strategy chosen is Green procurement, the 
procurement and transportation of raw material used for manufacturing the cement has to 
follow environmental compliances. The raw material procurement is done by surface mining, 

Role of Green Supply Chain Management in Cement Manufacturing Process 
145
rock breaking and blasting methods. As part of green procurement, environment friendly 
practices are highly encouraged to reduce the dust, smoke and carbon foot prints. 
During the production planning of Green manufacturing process, the reduction of 
limestone material leads to low carbon emissions within permissible limits into the 
atmosphere is achieved by manufacturing low grade cement, i.e., 33 grade cement instead of 
43 and 53 grade cements. In the calcinations stage, alternative fuels from hazardous waste 
materials like municipal solid waste are used rather than burning coal by adopting additional 
pollution control equipment like making complete automation process. 
In the Customer service (as per B-3 Indicator) point of view, it is always essential to 
extend the good technical support to maintain appropriate grade cement of high quality of the 
end product and to reduce the complaints of frequent shortages. According to the indicator B-
4 in Figure 2.4 Environment management, the raw material is fed into pre-heater, the pre-
heating helps to save the energy, resource recovery before the calcinations stage. Cement is 
packed into bags by electronic packing method rather than manual packing to reduce dust into 
the environment. 
In the present chapter aimed at the following aspects: 
 
 Measurement indicators level-I, level-II, level-III (from C1 to C16) are developed 
 Methodologies adopted in SCM solutions/problems 
 
 
Green Procurement (GP) 
 
To develop the sustainable supply chain strategies for any business the first important 
criterion will be making the procurement process greener. For this purpose, under the Green 
procurement four sub criteria are selected as per the company‘s needs and demands. The sub 
criteria are presented in the Figure 2.4. 
 
 
Figure 2.4. Measurement indicators for green supply chain management. 

P. Muralidhar and V. Srihari 
146
Green Manufacture (GM) 
 
Under this green manufacturing process, the company should be an ISO: 14001 certified 
and they are not permitted to go out of green manufacturing tolerance limits. Under the 
emergency requirements, the process must be within the limits of green manufacturing. Under 
this criterion, four important parameters are chosen as shown in the Figure 2.4. 
 
 
Customer Service (CS) 
 
In the customer service process, the parameters are chosen and pair-wise comparisons are 
made to serve best to the customers with less time and simultaneously to maintain effective 
market share for the product and to respond quickly to market demand at any given point of 
time within sustainable supply chain parameters as shown in Figure 2.4. 
 
 
Environmental Management (EM) 
 
As it is very clear that the company has to obey the environment laws and regulations, so 
as per that the basic raw material should be obtained through green channel, recovery of 
resources is very much essential to save energy in manufacturing process, the waste obtained 
should be able to recycle and also the emissions obtained through this should be within 
specified limits. The parameters selected are listed in the Figure 2.4. 
 
 
APPROACHES IN SSCM/GSCM 
 
The various approaches used in SSCM/GSCM are: 
 
 Reactive approach 
 Proactive approach 
 Value seeking approach 
 
The reactive approach always suggests to use minimum amount of virginal input 
resources during production to commit environmental-friendly initiatives and ‗end of life‘ 
practices to lower the impact on production (Srivastava, 2005). The proactive approach pre-
empts new environmental laws by initiating all green principles like recycling, 
remanufacturing, reuse, etc. This helps in producing better competitive products and 
attempting green design activities (Srivastava, 2006). 
The value seeking approach adds the value to the product by inducing environmental 
principles in the product life cycle like green procurement, green manufacturing, etc. These 
strategic initiatives help in contributing to product and environment as part of business 
strategy. These new GSCM initiatives by Beamon (1999) are helpful in optimizing the 
performance of the supply chain process by gaining the competitive advantage over the 
similar products (Beamon, 1999). 

Role of Green Supply Chain Management in Cement Manufacturing Process 
147
Few models are developed by researchers in this area and they are found to be effective 
in real life situations. Game theory, dynamic programming and simulation techniques are 
extensively used by researchers to propose mapping the GSCM strategies. Green design has 
seen very little application in terms of mathematical tools, techniques and methodologies. 
Joseph Sarkis (Sarkik, J., 1998, Srivastava, 2005 and Sudheer Gupta, 2011), focused on 
reverse logistics models on network design problems and borrow heavily from traditional 
location and layout models. 
The present research study focuses on life cycle of the cement manufacturing process, 
aimed to propose the strategies for following green supply chain practices in the cement 
manufacturing, thus reducing the carbon foot prints into atmosphere and contribution towards 
green house gasses (Van der Laan et al., 1996 and Van der Laan et al., 1999). 
 
 
SSCM CONSIDERATIONS IN INDIA 
 
India‘s aggregate GHGs have increased from 1.2 billion tons of CO2 in 1994 to 1.7 
billion tons of CO2 in 2007. A compound annual growth rate of 2.9 per cent, earned India 5th 
spot in aggregate GHG emissions in the world. 
However, the per capita GHG emissions remain low at around 1.7 tons/person in 2007 
compared to global average of about 4.3 tons/person and India‘s per capita GHG emissions 
are expected to remain between 2.77 and 5.0 tons/person in 2031, though aggregate emissions 
are expected to increase between 4.0 and 7.3 billion tons. 
However Indian policy makers have been looking at various avenues to curb emissions 
through schemes such as renewable energy certificates (REC) and perform –achieve- trade 
(PAT). Based on these schemes Indian experts believe that there is ample scope for creating a 
new domestic market for emissions mitigation in next few years. 
The emerging consensus of policies and incentive mechanisms for promoting market 
based approaches are particularly desirable to mobilize Indian business to solve 
environmental problems in positive way (Van der Laan et al., 1996 and Ertugtul, I., 2008). 
The per capita income is envisioned to triple over next two decades and proportionally, 
the Indian consumer market may expect to grow up to 32 per cent. This enhancement 
dramatically changes the retail sector. It demands immediate and drastic changes in policies, 
addressing production and marketing concerns, product life cycle, end of life cycle, end of 
life disposal, and distribution channels adopted by firms. 
In this regard, the absence of sustainable supply chains and insufficient government 
incentives have been identified as some of the most important issues that the industry is 
facing today. With the growing global competition and enhancing emphasis primarily on 
environmental concerns, firms are increasing required not only to offer high quality and 
innovative products with competitive prices, but also to develop supply chains that are 
sustainable in the long run. Emission and waste reduction, climate change mitigation and 
energy conservation sectors in India are likely to see significant growth in the future. 
 
 
 
 

P. Muralidhar and V. Srihari 
148
REFERENCES 
 
Beamon, B. M. (1999), Designing the green supply chain, Logistics Information 
Management, 12, pp. 332-342. 
CII-Sohrabji (2010) Green business centre, May 2010, Low carbon road map for Indian 
Cement Industry. 
Ertugtul, I. and Karakasoglu, N. (2008), Comparison of fuzzy AHP and fuzzy TOPSIS 
methods for facility location selection, International Journal Adv. Manufacturing 
Technology. 
Muralidhar, P., K. Ravidranath and V. Srihari (Nov. 2012), Prioritizing Green Supply Chain 
Management Using GRA and TOPSIS – A Case Study, International Conference at 
Siksha „O‟ Anusandhan University, Bhubaneswar, India. 
Muralidhar, P., Ravindranath, K. and Srihari, V. (2012), ―Application of Fuzzy AHP for 
Evaluation of Green supply Chain Management Strategies‖ 2(3), IOSR Journal of 
Engineering, pp. 61-467 (ISSN 2250-3021). 
Muralidhar, P., Ravindranath, K. and Srihari, V. (2012), ―Green Supply Chain Management 
Strategies using AHP and TOPSIS,‖ IOSR Journal of engineering, 2(4), IOSR Journal of 
Engineering, pp. 824-830 (ISSN 2250-3021). 
Muralidhar, P., Ravindranath, K. and Srihari, V. (2012), ―Green Supply Chain Management 
Strategies Using AHP and GRA,‖ Industrial Engineering Journal (2012). 
Sarkis, J., (1995), Supply chain management and environmentally conscious design and 
Manufacturing, International Journal of Environmentally Conscious Design and 
Manufacturing, 4, pp. 43-52. 
Sarkis, J. (1998), Evaluating environmentally conscious business practices, European Journal 
of Operational Research, 107, pp. 159-174. 
Sarkis, J. (1999), A methodological framework for evaluating environmentally conscious 
manufacturing programs, Computers and Industrial Engineering, 36, pp. 793-810. 
Srivastava, S. K. and Srivastava, R. K. (2005), Profit driven reverse logistics, International 
Journal of Business Research, Vol. 4, pp. 53-61. 
Srivastava, S. K. and Srivastava, R. K., (2006), Managing product returns for reverse 
logistics. International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management 
(Special Issue on 3PL, 4PL and Reverse Logistics), 36, pp. 524-546. 
Sudheer Gupta, Omkar, D. and Palsule Desai, (2011), ―Sustainable supply chain 
management: Review and Research Opportunities,‖ Journal of IIMB review 23, pp. 234-
245e Science direct. 
Van der Laan, E. A. and Salomon, M., (1997), Production planning and inventory control 
with remanufacturing and disposal, European Journal of Operational Research, 102, pp. 
264-278. 
Van der Laan, E. A., Salomon, M., Dekker, R. and Ridder, A., (1996b), An(s, Q) inventory 
model with remanufacturing and disposal. International Journal of Production 
Economics, pp. 339-350. 
Van der Laan, E. A., Salomon, M., Dekker, R. and van Wassenhove, L. N. (1999a), Inventory 
control in hybrid systems with remanufacturing, Management Science, 45, pp. 733-743. 
 
 

In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9  
 
 
 
MULTI-CONFLICT MANAGEMENT  
IN SUPPLY NETWORKS 
 
 
Michael Reiss 
Institute of Business Administration, 
Department of Organizational Design and Behavior 
Stuttgart University, Germany 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In theory and practice, conflict management in supply systems is focused on 
managing separate conflicts in terms of handling a pool of coexisting conflicts with the 
same party or with different customers, competitors, suppliers or authorities. By contrast, 
little attention is given to the management of a ―nexus‖ of interconnected conflicts. 
Multi-conflict management copes with interconnected multi-party and/or multi-issue and/ 
or multi-strategy constellations which are typical of the conflict landscape in supply 
systems. These constellations require more than just prioritizing conflict engagements 
against the background of limited resources for conflict management. Both intelligence 
and intervention activities concentrate on the three drivers of multi-conflict 
constellations: embeddedness of actors in supply-related business relationships, 
interdependencies between different conflict issues, and spillovers between strategies of 
conflict management. Nexus-based strategies of intervention aim at reconfiguring the 
supply system as well as modifying the business relationships to enhance the overall 
value of the proprietary nexus of conflicts for each individual party.  
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
State-of-the-art approaches to managing conflict focus on the reactive and proactive 
management of separate conflicts in supply systems (Lumineau, Eckerd and Handley 2015; 
Deutsch 2014). The respective models cover the intraconflict arena with a standard 
configuration ―two conflicting parties supported by third-parties in charge of mediation, 
                                                        
 email: michael.reiss@bwi.uni-stuttgart.de. 

Michael Reiss 
150
arbitration, and/ or litigation.‖ In contrast, real-world conflict-loaded supply processes take 
place in a complex environment of networked business relationships between diverse actors. 
This complex context requires management models which also cover the interconflict arena 
(multi-conflict management) as well as the extraconflict arena (managing the conflict-
cooperation interface). 
Multi-conflict constellations are not just a compilation of several coexisting separate 
conflicts. In fact they also take account of the interconnectedness (Ritter 2000) of conflicts, 
i.e., the connections between conflicts. Consequently, there are major differences between 
standard conflict management approaches and multi-conflict management approaches, both 
with respect to the problems addressed and the practices applied: 
Vertical propagation along the supply chain: The propagation of defects downstream the 
supply chain (as well as along the intracorporate value chains of the companies involved) is 
normally accompanied by a propagation of conflicts, e.g., an inversely directed chain of 
regress claims. They occur both between adjacent tiers (short distance-conflicts), e.g., 
supplier-supplier, supplier-OEM, OEM-distributors, distributors-customers (e.g., in the case 
of product recalls) and amongst distant tiers, i.e., long distance- conflicts (e.g., OEM and 
component or raw materials suppliers over non-compliance to fair trade-standards).  
Vertical propagation along the chain of control: In addition, quality, compliance and 
coordination initiatives create a chain of control in supply systems to assure the ―control of 
controllers‖ or the ―supervision of supervisors‖ (e.g., the supervision of credit rating 
agencies). So, third parties (e.g., certification agencies, mediators, public supervisory 
authorities, clearing houses, label providers) are in turn evaluated by ―fourth‖ parties to 
safeguard their expertise or impartiality. Similarly, in 4PL-systems a 4th party is in charge of 
coordinating the contract suppliers. In the case of misleading evaluations or services, a chain 
of conflicts (e.g., regress claims) is triggered.  
Complementor directed horizontal dissemination: Conflicts due to the non-fulfillment of 
contracts along the supply chain may trigger conflicts with complementors, i.e., providers of 
accessories (e.g., hardware peripherals, software) and services (e.g., logistics, recycling, 
knowledge-intensive business services). So, manufacturers of accessories may try to get some 
kind of compensation from the manufacturer of appliances for the reduction of their revenues 
caused by the delayed availability of the primary product for the customers. Unlike the 
predominantly unidirectional propagation of conflicts along the supply chain (based upon 
input-output relations), complementor relationships are bidirectional: they may also imply a 
conflict triggered by delayed market launches of complementary products such as games for 
video game consoles as primary platform products. 
Competitor directed horizontal dissemination: Channel conflicts, e.g., between brick 
channel and click channel, may trigger conflicts between the respective channel managers and 
corporate management dealing with unfairness issues, e.g., in the wake of showrooming. In 
addition to emergent competition various forms of organized competition such as tendering, 
auctions, elections, or tournaments (e.g., quality awards; Connelly, Tihanyi, Crook and 
Gangloff 2014) are embedded in supply systems. These species of controlled conflict often 
trigger uncontrolled conflicts if bidders violate regulations, e.g., by practicing pseudo 
competition. Moreover, unfair practices such as violations of non-discrimination rules will 
most likely cause conflicts. For instance, last call/ last offer-options are rifely considered as 
inconsistent with the rules of fair competition. 

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
151
Conflicts triggering productive conflicts: Owing to its risk management focus, standard 
conflict management neglects the positive effects of conflicts. Whenever a reference conflict 
induces so called functional or productive conflicts, the resolution of the reference conflict, 
i.e., the optimal strategy of managing separate conflicts in the intraconflict arena, proves to be 
a suboptimal strategy. Take for example intense duopolistic competition (e.g., in the aircraft 
industry) which may lead both competitors to switch to strategies of organized competitive 
sourcing such as tendering which stimulates a productive competition between suppliers.  
Conflicts as tools to control other conflicts: In standard conflict management-approaches 
conflicts have no (positive) instrumental value. Actually, conflicts represent useful tools to 
control collateral conflicts: Strike-induced conflicts with customers (from customer 
complaints to impending customer loss) for example are frequently used as a lever to exert 
pressure in the primary labor relations conflict. 
Connections between intra- and inter-supply chain conflicts: In addition to conflicts 
within a supply chain (e.g., rail logistics) the entire chain is competing with other chains (e.g., 
truck logistics). ―External‖ and ―internal‖ conflicts are interconnected: Internal conflicts may 
de-escalate inter-chain competition (e.g., because of supplier membership in several rivaling 
supply chains). External conflicts often mitigate intra-chain conflicts (via enhancing 
solidarity).  
Connections between intra- and inter-network conflicts: Not all participants in a supply 
chain are members of the same industry association, cluster, standards consortium, market, or 
other networks. Every network has its proprietary infrastructure, e.g., governance systems like 
laws against dumping or abuse of market power, regulations, charters, and codes of conduct. 
The diversity of network affiliations beyond the membership in a referent supply chain is 
accompanied by the risk of inter-network conflicts, e.g., between two competing standards 
consortia (―standards wars‖) that cause or aggravate intra-supply chain conflicts between 
supply chain actors. 
 
 
THE CONFLICT-SUPPLY INTERFACE 
 
Conflict management constitutes a standard building block of supply chain management. 
As a rule, conflict management is located in supply chain risk management. Concise 
characterizations of the two management domains are useful for assessing and understanding 
their communalities and intersections.  
 
 
Conflict Management 
 
Social conflicts are specified by two building blocks: the configuration in terms of the 
scope of involved parties and the association, capturing interactions such as escalation, 
negotiating, communicating, withdrawal, or threatening. As for involved actors or 
―stakeholders‖ (in terms of ―any group or individual who is affected by or can affect the 
achievement of objectives‖), multi-conflict management is based on an extended scope of 
relevant roles beyond the two- or three-party standard configurations of the intraconflict 
arena: The primary parties are the conflicting parties of a reference conflict (e.g., OEM and 

Michael Reiss 
152
supplier). Secondary parties encompass actors positively affected by the reference conflict 
(―freeriders‖ or ―beneficiaries,‖ e.g., competitors) or negatively affected by the reference 
conflict (―victims,‖ e.g., customers) who do not actively intervene. Some secondary parties 
are involved as ―hostages‖ of primary parties: this holds for suppliers or complementors such 
as certification agencies, reviewers or label companies because their reputation will be 
impaired, e.g., if the respective primary party is defeated in a quality related dispute. Tertiary 
parties provide a diverse scope of services for conflict management, ranging from lawyers, 
insurance companies, intelligence services (e.g., early warning systems) and communication 
services to traditional (neutral) third party services of mediation, arbitration, litigation, and 
consulting. In addition there are providers of the infrastructure for conflict resolutions, e.g., 
trainers, legislators, and jurisdiction. Some tertiary parties professionally instigate conflicts, 
e.g., by arranging organized competition (auctions, tendering, competitive awards, beauty 
contests and the like). 
Actors not only differ with regard to their roles but also to their extent, a fact which 
creates a multilevel configuration. Individual suppliers or customers represent the micro-
actors whereas hubs, joint ventures, or consortia stand for collective actors (macro-entities). 
Conflicts between micro-entities often trigger inter-level conflicts between organizational 
micro-units and macro-units, e.g., system suppliers and component suppliers over insufficient 
performance or violations of rules. Collective actors in turn often have a multilevel 
architecture, e.g., national, regional (e.g., European) and global industry associations, which 
implies the risk of more inter-level conflicts. 
―Non-parties‖ represent actors that are aware of a conflict but (proactively or reactively) 
develop strategies to deliberately keep out of the conflict, i.e., to make sure they are not 
passively impacted nor that they actively interfere. This holds for public occupational bodies 
that preserve their impartiality in strikes which affect not only one primary industry (e.g., 
pharmaceutical) but also supply industries (e.g., logistics, chemical) against the background 
of so called ―cold lock outs‖ in related industries. ―Non-players‖ are not aware of the 
reference conflict and consequently do not develop any conflict management strategies, i.e., 
they do not have the status of actors. This marginal position may be the result of insufficient 
intelligence, possibly due to camouflage or nondisclosure activities of the other actors 
involved in the conflict.  
The interactions or associations between actors are based on factual interdependencies, 
informal agreements or formal contracts. Usually, the level of association is measured on 
one-dimensional scales, e.g., in terms of weak or strong ties, market or hierarchy 
arrangements or loose versus tight coupling. For the specification of a conflict as a specific 
variety of association either the (a) level of dis-integration (i.e., mistrust, disharmony, lack of 
shared values and propinquity), (b) the level of interdependence (i.e., exchange, pooling of 
tangible assets, Thompson 2003) or (c) an integration-interdependence ratio is employed 
(Rahim 2007). The distribution of power between the involved actors, i.e., a symmetrical or 
an asymmetrical distribution, represents a complementary third dimension of association.  
 
 
Supply Management  
 
Modelling supply systems is also accomplished by configuration and association models. 
Supply systems are defined by the core association between the involved actors: supply and 

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
153
value creation (e.g., of a specific car, an ERP-software, a pill, or a web-service). More and 
more frequently, associations are handled as business relationships, for instance via customer 
relationship management or supplier relationship management. Associations are based upon 
input-output relations and materials flows. As a rule, they are controlled by contracts and 
business process management, e.g., order fulfilment processes. Additional relationships deal 
with the required infrastructure, both for production (e.g., technical standards, resources) and 
for the coordination of involved actors, e.g., push-pull-systems, committees, SCM-software, 
codes of conduct, and performance measures.  
As for configuration, traditional supply chain or value chain models are inadequate since 
they do not cover the entire range of involved stakeholders. More appropriate are supply 
network models such as business eco-systems or value nets (Nalebuff and Brandenburger 
1996). The vertical dimension of the supply network is covered by SCM. Horizontal business 
relationships refer to competitors (e.g., concerning the development of standards) and 
complementors (Reiss 2011; Noonan and Wallace 2004). The relevance of complementors 
derives from the fact that ―supply‖ does - more and more often - not relate to single products 
but to bundles, hardware-software systems, solutions, product service systems, full service 
business models, and aftermarket services. On the supply side this trend is intensified by 
technological convergence, e.g., digital convergence. Unlike upstream suppliers that get a 
fixed remuneration for their inputs, complementors often act as co-entrepreneurs. 
Complementors are members of the supply network, however, as a rule, they are not part of 
the OEM‘s supply chain. 
Altogether, the scope of actors contributing to supply processes (figure 1) contains 
customers (as co-producers, produsers, prosumers and co-creators), suppliers, competitors (as 
benchmarks, good competitors, strategic allies), complementors (e.g., providers of 
accessories, especially in the case of platform products addressing multisided markets). 
Compared to (―strong‖) contractual relationships along the supply chain, complementor 
relationships are in fact ―weak‖: frequently, they do not rely on formal contracting nor do 
they necessarily imply transactions. The value net-architecture is also capable of capturing 
―diagonal‖ disseminations of conflicts in supply systems, e.g., third party damage liability: if 
a complementing certification agency certifies faulty products, consumer protection agencies 
will probably not only sue the manufacturer but also the certification agency.  
In addition to the individual companies that operate as suppliers, supply networks also 
encompass actors who manage the network as a whole or at least the activities of several 
companies. Their role is determined by supply chain governance models that establish a 
multilevel configuration of macro-actors and individual actors, primarily via determining the 
role of an organizational entity in charge of coordinating the supply network (Bitran, 
Gurumurthi and Sam 2007). In addition to brokers, 4PL-logistics providers, system suppliers, 
hubs or focal companies (e.g., OEMs) temporary units such as committees, round tables, 
project teams, or task forces are established for this job, underpinned by complementary tools 
of network infrastructure, e.g., supply chain control towers, web 2.0-tools or codes of 
conduct. Supply chains operate on fragmented infrastructures since they cross various 
frontiers, not only between companies, but also between industries, strategic groups, and 
nations. Consequently, coordination infrastructures, i.e., technical standards, codes, rules, and 
norms (homologation), are mostly rather patchworks out of several fragments than unified 
and harmonized global standards (such as ISO standards) or agencies for international instead 

Michael Reiss 
154
of merely national arbitration. This diversity provokes the risk of conflicts between the 
multiple protagonists of the respective local infrastructures, e.g., in product piracy disputes.  
Vertical and horizontal extrapolations of the value net generate a multi-tier architecture 
(e.g., wholesale retail, tier 1 2, 3, n-suppliers). Interpolation takes account of the multitude of 
diverse intermediaries ranging from retailers, value added resellers, system integrators, and 
cybermediaries to providers of production infrastructure and coordination infrastructure such 
as billing or logistics services. Intrapolation specifies the micro-structure of the different 
categories of involved actors, i.e., of suppliers, customers, competitors, and complementors: 
as a rule, not an entire company (e.g., an automotive OEM), but some business unit (e.g., 
product division such as the power train division), plant, subsidiary, or captive supplier 
operate as nodes in the supply network. 
 
 
Figure 1. Value net based syndrome of supply network conflicts. 
Figure 1 visualizes the conflict-supply interface by outlining a conflict-focused 
representation of a supply network containing a (1) value net configuration and an (2) 
overlaying conflict network. The figure comprises the five clusters of actors involved in the 
interorganizational supply management: The OEM plays the role of a referential 
organizational unit. Together with suppliers and customers the OEM is part of the (vertical) 
supply chain. Complementors furnish complementary services and products to the customers. 
Competitors evidently represent conflicting parties with respect to market shares and scarce 
resources. In addition to the interorganizational value network figure 1 also contains a 
―conflict map‖ in the shape of an overlaying interconflict network with conflicts as nodes and 
connections between the conflicts as edges. The outlined nexus of conflicts represents a 
typical conflict syndrome covering four conflicts (interconflict arena) and four (positive or 
negative) conflict externalities on cooperative relationships (extraconflict arena). The strength 
of connections is visualized by the respective widths of the arrows. The ―root‖ conflict 
COMPETITORS
COMPLEMENTORS
CUSTOMERS
SUPPLIERS
CONTRACT  BASED 
PROPAGATION
BREACH OF
CONTRACT
MORE  INTENSE
COMPETITION
DOWNGRADED
COOPERATION
OEM
UPGRADED
COOPERATION
UPGRADED
COOPERATION
DOWNGRADED
COOPERATION
conflict
CONTRACT  BASED 
PROPAGATION
cooperation

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
155
derives from an upstream OEM-supplier dispute over quality (non-conformity) or service 
level. This conflict is propagated downstream into an OEM-customer conflict as well as 
horizontally into an OEM-complementor conflict. Moreover, the intensity of competition is 
raised since the OEM must develop competitive strategies to make up for a relatively weaker 
position on procurement and sales markets.  
Figure 1 also takes into account that secondary parties, e.g., victims or beneficiaries of 
primary conflicts, are possibly capable of influencing the intensity of the primary conflict. 
Along these lines, actors in downgraded cooperations will attempt to mitigate the root conflict 
whereas parties profiting from upgraded cooperations will invest in fueling it. Moreover, 
figure 1 signals that any actor within the supply system can play any role in conflict 
management: a tier 1-supplier for instance may act as a primary party, benefiary (of inter 
supply chain conflicts between OEMs), victim (of strikes) or third party in the case of tier 2- 
disputes. Tertiary parties in conflict management act as intermediaries in supply management. 
This signals that conflict management activities such as negotiating and communicating 
generate value and enrich the supply process. 
 
 
COMPLEXITY OF MULTI-CONFLICT CONSTELLATIONS 
 
Complexity constitutes the apparent challenge of the outlined multi-conflict 
constellations. Numerosity, i.e., the ―multi‖-feature, stands for multi-party and/ or multi-issue 
and/ or multi-strategy. Yet, numerosity represents only the ostensible facet of complexity. It 
triggers three additional facets of a holistic approach to conflict management in supply 
networks:  
Diversity primarily captures the links between the opposite worlds of cooperation and of 
conflict (e.g., competition). This extraconflict arena stretches beyond the domain of conflict 
management, making clear that the conflict-conflict connections in the interconflict arena do 
not exhaust the entire scope of business relationships that are relevant for a holistic approach 
to conflict management: The built-in flexibility of configurations in supply networks, 
accomplished for instance by so called second or dual sourcing arrangements, often implies a 
―conflict provokes cooperation‖-logic: Whenever the business relationship between one OEM 
and one supplier is impaired by conflicts (e.g., over prices, service levels, allegations of 
corruption), the cooperation with a third party that replaces the original source will be 
intensified. Owing to this flexibility the relevance of the primary conflict is less significant 
than assumed. Similarly collusion, i.e., a species of cooperation in terms of a reduction of the 
intensity of conflict between competitors, provokes various conflicts, i.e., with anti-trust 
authorities, with competitors that are not members of the cartel, and with (negatively) affected 
customers. Existing alliances represent another source of collateral conflicts: allies of 
conflicting parties will have to engage in conflict strategies with an external aggressor due to 
explicit alliance case-clauses or to informal notions of balanced relations in triads according 
to a principle of transitivity, such as ―The enemies of my allies are my enemies‖ (Phillips, 
Liu, and Costello 1998).  
Ambiguity constitutes the third dimension of complexity innate in multi-conflict 
constellations. From a supply management perspective ambiguity is concerned with 
oymorons like ―good competitors‖ or with hybrid concepts like ―coopetition‖ (Gast, Filser, 

Michael Reiss 
156
Gundolf, and Kraus 2014; Wilhelm 2011; Walley 2007): Some interactions in supply systems 
are hybrid in terms of both cooperative and competitive (instead of either cooperative or 
competitive). They cannot be unambiguously assigned to either the intraconflict or the 
extraconflict arena: a planned transition characterizes the hybrid models of pre-competitive 
cooperation where cooperation (in the development cycle) is followed by competition (in the 
market cycle) as well as post-competitive cooperation (e.g., cooperation between the ―best‖ 
and the ―second-best‖ supplier after competitive bidding). 
Instability of configurations and associations of supply networks, the fourth dimension of 
complexity, measures their rate of change on the time line. This volatility is reflected in the 
emergent dynamics of roles and relationships: the involvement of neutral third parties (e.g., 
mediators, arbiters, courts, ombudsman services, escrows) by the conflicting parties may 
trigger conflicts between the respective principals and the mediators, especially if agreements 
suggested by the mediating agencies are not accepted or impartiality is called into question. 
Likewise, the contract-based involvement of assisting third parties, for example agents, 
lawyers, law firms, legal insurance, directors-and-officers-insurance, errors and omissions 
insurance) by a conflicting party into a conflict provokes the risk of conflicts between the 
principal and the agent in question, e.g., concerning remuneration of agent‘s services or 
divergent preferences with respect to the (de-)escalation in conflict handling. In these 
instances, a cooperative interaction mutates into a conflicting interaction. The involvement of 
complementors such as certification agencies, reviewers, trustees, and notaries basically 
provides complementary services and infrastructures for preventing or resolving conflicts 
between producers and customers. However, if their service is considered deficient (e.g., 
misleading certificates, faulty advice) by either of the two primary parties, the complementor 
turns into a conflicting party in a conflict handling process between one of the primary 
conflicting parties and the contract complementor. The relationships to infomediaries, i.e., 
intermediary information brokers, the media, and communication services (e.g., web 
services), is also instable. On the one hand they cooperatively provide communication 
services (e.g., litigation public relations for lawsuits). On the other hand, their access to data 
about ongoing conflicts (i.e., strategies, outcomes) may be tempting to make a business out of 
these data by selling them to competitors of the primary parties. This violation of non-
disclosure agreements, codes of professional discretion or insider information-laws may 
cause a collateral conflict with the principal.  
 
 
EMERGENCE OF MULTI-CONFLICT CONSTELLATIONS 
 
A complex multi-conflict landscape is caused by three drivers (figure 2):  
Embeddedness of involved actors in relationship networks: The interconnected business 
relationships in a supply network (figure 1) do not cover the totality of relevant relationships. 
Network embeddedness encompasses affiliations to several networks: suppliers for instance 
are also members of standards consortia, industry associations, knowledge communities, 
clusters, and strategic groups (Easley and Kleinberg 2010).  
Interdependencies between conflict issues: The input-output-interdependencies between 
the nodes of a supply network (e.g., downstream propagation of defects) together with the 
pooling of tangible and intangible resources, arranged in contractual governance models like 

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
157
quasi-firms, vendor managed inventory, joint ventures, tier 0.5 suppliers (in the automotive 
supply chain) establish a high level of interdependency between conflict issues. The long list 
of binary interdependencies contains prices and risk handling, prices and contract duration, 
prices and co-ownership of patents as well as prices and distribution of brand value.  
 
 
Figure 2. Mind map of multi-conflict emergence. 
Spillovers between conflict handling strategies: As a rule, the inadequate handling of a 
reference conflict instigates follow-up conflicts. For instance, the incompetent handling of a 
complaint of one customer may trigger an escalation by the same customer (e.g., in the wake 
of making the problem public via social media or going to court) or identical complaints from 
other customers. Discriminatory treatment in terms of handling two more or less identical 
conflicts (e.g., complaints) differently will most likely instigate follow-up conflicts focused 
on discrimination issues, significantly pushing the overall costs of the pool of interconnected 
conflicts. Likewise, aggressive competitive strategies induce retaliation from competitors, 
either in the same business or in other businesses: the factual severity of the primary conflict 
turns out to be higher than assumed if and when the evaluation is based on the entire nexus of 
prompted conflicts. According to this tit-for-tat-logic, compromising in one conflict will 
inversely decrease the likelihood of aggressive strategies applied by the same opposite party 
in another conflict. Moreover, the specific strategies deployed in and the results of the 
management of one conflict (e.g., patent dispute) may prevent similar conflicts: they possibly 
deter other actors (competitors, etc.) from starting a dispute of their own because of high 
expected management costs or pessimistic prospects of success. At the least, aggressive 
strategies may absorb major resources of the opponent thus impairing his capacities to engage 
Interdependencies
between conflict issues
COLLATERAL
CONFLICTS
Spillovers between
strategies
Embeddedness in 
relationship networks
price reduction

Michael Reiss 
158
in other conflicts. The thereby avoided costs represent a benefit in terms of an interconflict 
“peace dividend” of the primary conflict. Finally, some strategic concepts, such as 
agreements or court decisions, serve as test cases, best practices, benchmarks, and standards 
for the handling of other conflicts. 
 
 
MULTI-CONFLICT MANAGEMENT:  
PARADIGMS, PATTERNS AND PARAMETERS 
 
The building blocks of multi-conflict management originate from different management 
levels. A three level approach (with a paradigm, a pattern, and a parameter level) - in analogy 
to the strategic, tactical, and operational levels of planning systems - seems to be useful. 
Multilevel approaches balance extent (reach) and specification on each level: paradigms (e.g., 
the resilient supply chain) have an ample extent combined with a poor specification whereas 
parameters (e.g., processes, tools) have a narrow extension coupled with high specification. In 
between, patterns (e.g., principles) have a medium range of application as well as a mean 
precision. Paradigms and patterns serve as frameworks for the application of parameters. As 
for numerosity, a multilevel management-architecture contains only few principles 
(sometimes stated in a manifesto, a charter or a doctrine), but a plethora of tools. The balance 
within a multi-level architecture model is warranted by a two-way integration of the 
respective levels: a top-down design supports orientation (embeddedness in frameworks), 
while a bottom-up design fosters feasibility. By a two-way down-up procedure both 
orientation and feasibility are obtained.  
Paradigms: They originate from two utterly different frameworks for management in 
general: one being the rationalistic world of plans, rules, and procedures that design conflict 
handling the way it ought to be in order to reach performance goals and meet requirements. 
The other being a comprehension of the emergent structures that actually underlie conflict 
processes in reality such as the evolutionary escalation of a conflict, conflict externalities, or 
processes of the viral dissemination of conflicts via rumours, leaks, imitation or contagion 
(Gelfand, Shteynberg, Lee, Lun, Lyons, Bell, Chiao, Bruss, Al Dabbagh, Aycan, Abdel-Latif, 
Daghe, Khashan, and Soomro 2012; Jehn, Rispens, Jonsen, and Greer 2013). Since neither of 
the two visions has proved superior, mixed visions that combine rationalistic construction and 
realistic reconstruction such as guided emergence, guided evolution, guided self-organization, 
organized anarchy, or logical incrementalism seem more appropriate (Reiss 2012; Lovas and 
Goshal 2000). They blend emergent lifecycles of a conflict on the one hand with the 
performance-oriented optimization of a conflict on the other hand. According to these mixed 
paradigms multi-conflict management is not primarily about finding optimal solutions but 
rather about heuristics and mechanisms of facilitation or inhibition.  
Patterns: Embedded in blended paradigms like guided emergence, this level operates on 
behavioral patterns that outline a combined ―emergence and design‖ of collateral conflicts. 
Such a pattern is captured in the AIDA-formula (Attention-Interest-Desire-Action), a 
modified version of the original formula for buying behavior. Attention is established by the 
perception of a conflict issue as opposed to non-perception due to denial or distraction. 
Interest in a conflict is the result of scrutinizing the factual impact of a primary conflict. 
Hence, ―interest‖ has a different meaning for a conflicting party, a victim, a beneficiary or a 

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
159
provider of conflict management services. Attention and interest are determined by conflict 
attitudes, e.g., conflict tolerance. Desire denotes aspirations to obtain a better position in the 
conflict network, e.g., to switch the state of a passive victim into an active plaintiff in the 
collateral conflict. Action means the way an actor reacts to the primary conflict in the arena of 
a collateral conflict, e.g., by employing strategies of joint problem solving, escalation, formal 
litigation, or withdrawal based on the competencies of the actor in conflict management. 
AIDA relies on a funnel model: only a fraction of perceived conflict signals (attention) leads 
to factual action. 
Parameters: This management level contains the processes and the toolbox for dealing 
with multi-conflict constellations. A tool-supported management improves cost efficiency 
since conflicts are handled by means of routines and standardized tools. The degree of 
standardization varies however: among the tools to visualize the interconnectedness of 
conflicts for instance, maps (e.g., mind-maps, roadmaps, heatmaps) are less standardized than 
charts (e.g., matrices, arborescent structures). Moreover, standardized tools enable an 
intersubjective handling which is mandatory whenever several actors in the supply network 
have to find consensual ways of dealing with interconnected conflicts. 
 
 
PERFORMANCE OF MULTI-CONFLICT MANAGEMENT 
 
The scope of standard performance indicators encompasses the effectiveness and the 
efficiency of the handling of multi-conflict constellations (Hamann, Schiemann, Bellora, and 
Guenther 2013; Kim, Kumar and Kumar 2010): whereas effectiveness specifies the overall 
benefits (payoffs, utility) of a balanced handling of functional conflicts and dysfunctional 
conflicts, efficiency captures the costs of and time required for multi-conflict management 
activities. The overall costs comprise the emergent follow-up costs and the costs of 
intervention.  
Performance management treats conflicts as a specific category of intangible assets 
normally called relational assets or social capital (Dyer and Singh 1998; Robison and Ritchie 
2010). ―Good‖ conflicts – partly synonymous with ―functional‖ conflicts – have a positive 
asset value since they represent a source of income, a tool for change management, and a 
lever for stimulating productivity and creativity. ―Bad‖ conflicts have a negative value, owing 
to the lack of instrumentality combined with dysfunctional consequences such as risks. Good 
conflicts are taken care of by opportunity management. Bad conflicts are dealt with by risk 
management activities attempting to minimize the negative impact of a conflict. Without 
doubt, many a conflict has a negative value since it represents a damage or threat (Everett and 
Borgatti 2014). Conflicts share this feature with other assets such as contaminated physical 
resources. On the other hand, some conflicts serve as facilitators of change or sources of 
innovation. Moreover, for providers of conflict management services, the value of a conflict 
stands for the cash flow of a business opportunity. Likewise for factually affected secondary 
parties, a positive value captures the fact that they are ―windfall-profiting‖ from the conflict 
in question. 
Particularly since multi-conflict constellations not only cover manifest but also 
anticipated or latent conflicts, costs and benefits signify expected data. The conflict value is 
consequently calculated as ―extent of impact (benefits/ emergent costs)‖ times ―probability of 

Michael Reiss 
160
impact.‖ Yet, the information content of the expected value-concept is impaired by netting 
out effects: First, high benefits may be veiled in case of high costs. Second, low costs indicate 
either minor damage or unlikely damage (or both). Since netting out-operations have a 
levelling effect, very many conflicts will get a similar value although they differ significantly 
with respect to their benefits and costs or their damage and its likelihood – differences that 
would trigger extremely diverse ways of appropriately handling these conflicts. Hence, for 
many purposes it is more appropriate to rely on primary performance criteria than to 
aggregate them. 
With respect to a single conflict the benefits subtracted by the costs assess its net value in 
terms of its negative or positive contribution to the overall added value of the respective 
supply system. Contrary to this, the multi-conflict management approach relies on the 
aggregated value of a nexus of primary, follow-up or corollary conflicts, capturing something 
equivalent to the ―total value of ownership of a conflict.‖ The examples outlined in the 
introductory section signal that the segregate value and the integrated value may differ 
considerably. Moreover, both the composition and the value of the respective nexus differ 
significantly for primary, secondary, and tertiary parties.  
The benefits and costs obtained by managing conflicts in supply networks are normally 
measured at two organizational levels: at the micro-organizational level as benefits for an 
individual party in the supply network (e.g., a product division) and at the macro-
organizational level as benefits for the overall configuration of all involved parties, e.g., an 
entire supply chain. Sometimes it makes sense to interpolate a meso-organizational level of 
tier 1-suppliers, joint ventures, or quasi firms (spanning two tiers), which corresponds to an 
additional interpolated level in the performance measurement system. The benefit of an 
individual actor in a typical supply network-conflict is measured by the share of the pooled 
resources, market or value added he obtains. This is normally referred to as the pieces-level. 
There are as many ―pieces‖ as there are parties involved – not just the pieces for the two 
primary conflicting parties. Hence, in addition to the primary conflicting parties also 
secondary parties (positively or negatively affected) and contract third parties calculate 
conflict values. As for the proportions of pieces amongst the various participants in a supply 
network, many different (e.g., triadic) constellations of win-win-lose or lose-win-lose or win-
win-win may occurr. They reflect the perceptions (expectations), the power and the conflict 
competencies of the involved actors.  
The total benefit for all involved parties is usually referred to as the pie-level in terms of 
the aggregated value added of the supply network. This value is increased by productive 
conflicts that ―make the pie bigger‖ thereby enabling win-win-win situations. These value 
adding-effects of functional conflicts comprise productivity gains (e.g., from organized 
competition), an improved knowledge base (owing to dialectic approaches and learning from 
contradictions) as well as facilitating change (via destabilizing, ―rocking the boat,‖ or 
unfreezing; Schaller-Demers 2008). In the interconflict arena, the escalation of one conflict 
may be deployed to de-escalate another conflict. 
The level of performance (as opposed to the organizational level) in multi-conflict 
management ranges from excellent success (e.g., conflict transformation, Kriesberg 2011) to 
severe failure (e.g., in the shape of downward spirals or vicious circles). Whereas the risk of 
an escalation ending up in some intractability is quite common in single conflict-management 
(Vallacher, Coleman, Nowak, Bui-Wrzosinska, Liebovitch, Kugler, and Bartoli 2013), even 
despite of the intervention of mediators or the deployment of other conflict resolution 

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
161
strategies, the multi-conflict paradigm operates on antagonistic forces of ―escalation versus 
de-escalation‖ as well as ―dissemination versus containment‖ in a nexus of conflicts. The 
impact of these polar forces can inhibit extreme failure: conflict externalities that trigger the 
intervention of secondary parties (victims) who are negatively affected by primary (high 
intensity) conflicts, may prevent a negative spiral, the same way deterance effects or Chinese 
walls serve as ―conflict-disabling‖ forces in a multi-conflict context. Force field analysis 
serves as a suitable tool for modeling the interaction of these antagonistic forces of 
aggravation and mitigation. 
 
 
FUNCTIONS OF MULTI-CONFLICT MANAGEMENT 
 
Multi-conflict management follows the generic management cycle. The core activities are 
intelligence (an umbrella term for the assessment, screening, diagnosis, detection, and 
monitoring of conflicts) and intervention (e.g., strategies of coupling or decoupling conflicts). 
Intelligence activities are supported by tools such as complaint systems, simulation, failure 
mode and effect-analysis (FMEA), force field analysis, Pareto analysis, ABC analysis, cross-
impact analysis as well as business intelligence tools, e.g., pattern recognition (via data and 
text mining or cluster analysis). Intervention in multi-conflict constellations aims at 
optimizing the value of a pool of interconnected conflicts for any of the primary, secondary or 
tertiary parties involved. Some tool support comes from multi-project management (e.g., 
prioritizing conflicts according to their expected values) and portfolio management (e.g., 
cross-subsidizing between different investments in conflict handling).  
 
 
INTELLIGENCE 
 
According to the generic paradigm of proactive management, intelligence operations are 
supposed to serve as early recognition systems by identifying weak signals of latent conflicts, 
which is especially useful for conflict prevention since undiscovered conflicts have an innate 
tendency to escalate. The basic relevance of intelligence activities derives from the fact that 
only perceived conflicts can be dealt with by strategies. From tools like FMEA we know that 
the performance of intelligence systems can be operationalized by probabilities of detection 
(corresponding to the attention-step in the AIDA-model). With respect to conflicts this may 
turn out to be a challenging job against the background of countervailing activities that 
intensify the information asymmetry amongst the involved actors by means of distraction, 
camouflage, subterfuges, and misleading signaling.  
Intelligence must cover the four functions outlined in figure 3. The system is based on a 
funnel model: all signals of conflicts with negligible impact or probability are eliminated, the 
remaining signals are structured to make sure that only relevant conflicts are dealt with by 
activities of intervention. Finding and filtering serve as a conflict radar dealing with separate 
signals (e.g., a complaint, a controversial issue), more or less like the steps of attention and 
interest in the AIDA-model. Formatting and focusing operations deal with multi-conflict 
constellations, both clusters (e.g., a certain category of complaints) and complexes of 
anticipated conflicts (e.g., conflict propagation and other conflict syndromes, figure 1).  

Michael Reiss 
162
 
Figure 3. Functions of conflict intelligence. 
Finding activities screen parties and their associations. The radar is capable of 
discovering manifest conflicts (e.g., by means of surveys and questionnaires) as well as 
anticipated conflicts (via what-if-reasoning or simulation models). Filtering aims at 
eliminating irrelevant signals of conflict. Adopting the rationale of risk management, i.e., 
assessing risks via combinations (expected values) of impact and probability, it operates on 
two filters: one filter accomplishes the elimination of ―peanut‖ conflicts (e.g., complaints of 
C-customers). Another filter eliminates signals with a very low probability of generating a 
conflict.  
The processes of formatting structure the pool of remaining conflicts. This is 
accomplished by clustering similar conflicts or forming complexes (i.e., syndromes and 
patterns). Additionally, some global signals (e.g., an unsatisfactory service level) have to be 
decomposed because each of them stands for several conflict issues. In the case of a one-way 
dissemination of conflicts, focusing operations make sure that strategies of multi-conflict 
management do not concentrate on the symptoms but on the roots (causes) of a complex of 
conflicts. Both formatting and focusing require an analysis of interconnectedness, i.e., 
interconflict connections. In general, tools for assessing the connections between conflicts are 
expected to deliver information on three features of cross impacts: extent (―strength‖), 
probability (―validity,‖ e.g., coefficient of determination), and direction (in terms of 
increasing or decreasing parameters of the target conflict, e.g., escalation or de-escalation). 
Cross-impacting constellations require this information for both ways of influence. 
 
 
INTERVENTION 
 
The particular challenges for intervention derive from the complexity of 
interconnectedness. Frequently, interdependencies between conflicts do not follow a 
DIAGNOSEFUNKTION
ERLÄUTERUNG
FINDEN
Entdecken von Gestaltungsbedarfen
FILTERN
Eliminieren von unwahrscheinlichen und
unwesentlichen Gestaltungsbedarfen
FORMATIEREN
Zerlegen bzw. Zusammenfassen von
Gestaltungsbedarfen
FOKUSSIEREN
Ermitteln der ursächlichen bzw.
typischen Gestaltungsbedarfe
DIAGNOSEFUNKTION
ERLÄUTERUNG
FINDEN
Entdecken von Gestaltungsbedarfen
FILTERN
Eliminieren von unwahrscheinlichen und
unwesentlichen Gestaltungsbedarfen
FORMATIEREN
Zerlegen bzw. Zusammenfassen von
Gestaltungsbedarfen
FOKUSSIEREN
Ermitteln der ursächlichen bzw.
typischen Gestaltungsbedarfe
DIAGNOSEFUNKTION
ERLÄUTERUNG
FILTERN
Eliminieren von unwahrscheinlichen und
unwesentlichen Gestaltungsbedarfen
FORMATIEREN
Zerlegen bzw. Zusammenfassen von
Gestaltungsbedarfen
FOKUSSIEREN
Ermitteln der ursächlichen bzw.
typischen Gestaltungsbedarfe
DIAGNOSEFUNKTION
ERLÄUTERUNG
FILTERN
Eliminieren von unwahrscheinlichen und
unwesentlichen Gestaltungsbedarfen
FORMATIER
EN
Zerlegen bzw. 
Zusammenfassen von
Gestaltungsbedarfen
FOKUSSIEREN
Ermitteln der ursächlichen bzw.
typischen Gestaltungsbedarfe
ERLÄUTERUNG
FILTER
N
Eliminieren von 
unwahrscheinlichen und
unwesentlichen 
Gestaltungsbedarfen
FORMATIEREN
Zerlegen bzw. Zusammenfassen von
Gestaltungsbedarfen
FOKUSSIEREN
Ermitteln der ursächlichen bzw.
typischen Gestaltungsbedarfe
FUNCTIONALITY
PROCESSES AND TOOLS
FILTERING
FORMATTING
FOCUSING
Identifying eteological and typical conflicts
cross-impact analysis, cause-effect diagrams, influence diagrams, pareto analysis, …
Composing or decomposing conflicts
configuration analysis, cluster analysis, data mining, …
Elimating unlikely and irrelevant conflicts
ABC-analysis, probability assessment,  FMEA, impact evaluations, risk assessment, …
FINDING
Discovering signals of conflicts
customer feedbacks, complaint systems, simulation, role playing, what if-reasoning, …  

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
163
unidirectional tree-structure. In fact, several feedback mechanisms provoke bi- or 
multidirectional interdependencies (mutual cross impacts) that require network models. 
Consequently, the underlying interactions between the multiple actors go far beyond familiar 
escalation mechanisms such as tit-for-tat-patterns between strategies deployed (e.g., 
retaliation).  
The intensity of intervention into multi-conflict constellations follows rather diverse 
frameworks or paradigms: they range from incremental intervention to radical intervention. 
Incremental intervention is restricted to rearranging conflicts without changing their features 
nor their connections. This is accomplished by the ranking framework and the portfolio 
framework which directly operate on intelligence data. Contrary to this, radical intervention 
relies on reshaping the nexus of interconnected conflicts via changing the configurations and 
associations in the underlying supply network. Optimizing configuration and association 
constitute the core activities in the nexus framework.  
 
 
THE RANKING FRAMEWORK 
 
In order to obtain the optimal performance of handling multi-conflict-constellations, 
managers should focus on the conflicts that are most relevant for performance. Consequently, 
intervention in the interconflict-arena is centered on prioritizing. Rankings are capable of 
directing multi-conflict-management by prioritizing the handling of conflicts. This approach 
is familiar from multi-project management. The required information for prioritizing conflicts 
is delivered by finding and filtering data (figure 3). All indicators of significance rely on the 
segregate evaluation of the respective conflicts.  
However, owing to the generic complexity of performance measurement, there is no ―one 
best‖ indicator nor one superior ranking scale that would deliver unambiguous, non-
controversial priorities for intervention. Especially, effectiveness orientation and efficiency 
orientation end up in different rankings. Against this background, the performance of 
intervention may be obtained by rankings according to a wide scope of ―second best‖ 
indicators:  
Incidence of a conflict: The most frequently occurring conflicts, e.g., complaints or 
contract breaches, are considered the most relevant conflicts. However, the underlying 
counting operations ignore the value of the conflicts, hence ―peanuts‖ may become top 
priorities. 
Intensity of a conflict: The most exacerbated (―warlike‖) and intractable conflicts 
(Vallacher , Coleman, Nowak, and Bui-Wrzosinska 2010) will rank highest and will be 
tackled first. Unfortunately intensities are ambiguous indicators since they may go along with 
either functional or dysfunctional consequences. 
Benefits of a conflict: Conflicts with the highest positive performance impact are focused. 
This opportunity-based ranking ignores the costs of handling the respective conflicts.  
Emergent costs of a conflict: Conflicts with the highest negative performance impact are 
considered top priority. Yet, this risk-focused ranking ignores the benefits of the conflicts in 
question.  
Efficiency: With respect to an efficient allocation of scarce resources and time, priority 
rules provide guidelines for a schedule according to which a pool of conflicts (―jobs‖) should 

Michael Reiss 
164
be processed. A ranking based on the shortest processing time of an intervention (SPT-rule) 
addresses routine conflicts first, whereas protracted conflicts are dealt with last. Inversely, the 
longest processing time-rule (LPT) prioritizes the challenging conflicts with respect to 
processing time and resource consumption.  
To cover the various facets of performance simultaneously, multidimensional scoring 
models such as value benefit analysis are an option, provided there is consensus about the 
weighting of the respective performance indicators.  
Prioritizing, at first glance a most convincing and unsophisticated way of handling 
multiple conflicts, is compatible with the salient paradigm of managing conflicts separately. 
However, it provides misleading evaluations since the interconflict-connections are ignored 
by managers who rely on segregate values: as a consequence they will possibly confuse ―big 
nuts‖ and ―peanuts.‖  
 
 
THE PORTFOLIO FRAMEWORK 
 
Portfolio management in general aims at obtaining the optimal value of a pool of assets 
by mixing these assets. Unlike the assets in investment portfolios, product portfolios or 
alliance portfolios, many constituents of a conflict portfolio are normally neither deliberately 
created nor selected: they rather stand for ―windfall‖ involvements. Every conflict portfolio 
contains the entire scope of different conflict involvements of the respective actor in the 
supply network. Just the proportions of involvements as primary, as secondary or as tertiary 
parties normally vary from party to party: for contract third parties (e.g., lawyers, insurance 
companies, arbiters, organizers of tournaments) most assets stand for businesses in a business 
portfolio. For primary and secondary parties, conflict portfolios primarily represent specific 
relationship portfolios (Hoffmann 2007; Wassmer 2010). 
The common denominator of all portfolio approaches is their two-dimensional 
architecture. Figure 4 visualizes the transfer of this archetypical architecture to conflict 
management with relevance and competence serving as the external and the internal critical 
success factor respectively. 
Portfolio mixing relies on an as-well-as-approach, hence strategies of eliminating assets 
or handling them in a serial ranking-based mode are prohibited. Conflicts are positioned with 
their segregate values, mostly as ―bubbles‖ in portfolio diagrams. Some of the values are 
negative, just like negative cash flows of poor dogs in familiar business portfolios. Mixing is 
often accomplished on a macro-level in terms of mixing clusters of assets. Clustering relies 
on formatting-data (figure 3). Mixing aims at a twofold balance of the four clusters of 
conflicts in figure 4: vertically a balance of highly attractive and less attractive conflicts is 
intended, horizontally a balance of the competently mastered conflicts and the challenging 
conflicts. This parallel balancing enables a diagonal balance of challenges (―question marks,‖ 
in the case of providers of mediation services for instance ―new businesses‖ such as deal 
mediation or online-mediation) and chores (routine conflicts). The logic of mixing allows 
high intensity conflicts as long as their negative performance impacts, primarily their high 
costs, are compensated by low intensity conflicts or functional conflicts. Typical examples of 
such a ―good conflicts/bad conflicts‖-balance in a supply network are more intensive conflicts 
with competitors compensated by less intensive conflicts upstream the supply chain or 

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
165
intensified conflicts with competitors being compensated by more cooperation in industrial 
relations.  
 
 
Figure 4. Architecture of a conflict portfolio. 
Although the pervasiveness of portfolio management as a standard management tool 
facilitates its implementation in multi-conflict management, the implicit reliance on segregate 
values of conflicts considerably impairs the usefulness of this framework: investing resources 
into the resolution of challenging conflicts may (paradoxically) diminish the overall value of 
the portfolio value whenever these conflicts turn out to be ―good‖ conflicts, either because 
they trigger functional conflicts or because unresolved conflicts serve as a lever for managing 
collateral conflicts. However, this interconnectedness of portfolio constitutents remains 
undiscovered when standard portfolio tools are deployed. 
 
 
THE NEXUS FRAMEWORK 
 
This framework is not focused on simply rearranging or balancing several conflicts. 
Instead, the network of conflicts - with conflicts as nodes and connections as edges - is the 
subject of major modifications. Against the backround of an ambivalent mix of ―good‖ and 
―bad‖ conflicts, these modifications require a subtle selective strategy relying on a blend of 
risk management and opportunity management activities: connections triggering bad conflicts 
should be blocked whereas connections to good conflicts should be smoothed. The optimal 
nexus is eventually obtained by a radical intervention into the underlying supply network, i.e., 
the networks of relationships and issues. For intervention purposes, the three drivers of multi-
conflict constellations (embeddedness in relationship networks, interdependencies of conflict 
high
low
high
low
COMPETENCE
RELEVANCE
CHALLENGES
major impacts/
major intervention costs
BAD RISKS
minor benefits/
major intervention costs
ATTRACTIONS
major impacts/
minor intervention costs
CHORES
minor impacts/
minor intervention costs

Michael Reiss 
166
issues, spillovers between strategies, figure 2) serve as parameters for managing the 
relationship nexus, the issue nexus, and the strategy nexus. 
Multi-conflict managers must keep in mind that the nexus of conflicts is not restricted to 
unidirectional chain- or tree-shaped connections (dissemination, propagation, dependencies), 
but also contains two-way connections (interdependencies): in the case of a simultaneous 
handling of primary and anticipated derivative conflicts, primary conflicts will be intensified 
if aggressive strategies of conflict management are employed in collateral conflicts. Impacts 
on the strategies employed in primary conflicts also occur, whenever the configuration of 
parties in the collateral conflict changes, e.g., in the wake of the involvement of allies that 
strengthen the position of one conflicting party or by additional providers of expertise and 
other conflict management services. 
Managing the relationship nexus: Modifications of business relationships between the 
involved actors are accomplished by changing the configuration of and/ or the associations in 
the supply network. 
Configuration management offers one potent option of decreasing the risk of conflict: the 
reduction of the number of parties involved in the supply processes. This intervention reduces 
a specific category of negative network externalities (diseconomies of network) related to the 
number of involved parties: The larger the configuration, the higher the risk of conflict. One 
way of eliminating actors is disintermediation. Contracting with intermediaries such as 
wholesale, retail, or brokers increases the risk of conflicts over nonfulfillment. The bypassing 
of intermediaries is accomplished by insourcing these activities which is facilitated by e-
business infrastructures. Integration efforts also diminish the number of immediately involved 
actors: activities like establishing one international standard consortium instead of several 
national or regional standards consortia, the tiering of the upstream supply chain, coalition 
building, mergers and equity joint ventures create collective actors who replace the numerous 
individual actors. Inversely, integration efforts are also supposed to prevent a fragmentation 
of the supply network, e.g., into different standards consortia (e.g., rivaling operating systems 
for mobile phones).  
However, not all elimination strategies do automatically decimate the number of conflict 
arenas. Instead they merely result in a translocation of conflict arenas. This holds for tiering, 
4PL-systems or insourcing: these interventions primarily replace inter-corporate by intra-
corporate conflicts, e.g., between the product divisions and captive suppliers. However, since 
intra-corporate units are more integrated, these models factually reduce the intensity of the 
conflicts and thereby the costs of intervention. 
In contrast, from an opportunity management point of view, an increase of the number of 
involved actors is advocated. As for intermediaries, this holds for insurance companies or 
neutral third parties. Likewise, a shift from single sourcing to dual or multiple sourcing 
mitigates the risk of lock-ins by offering a fallback option. Moreover, competitive dual 
sourcing stimulates productivity and creativity of suppliers.  
In addition to the mere number of involved actors, reconfiguration also implies a 
modification of the roles that actors play in the multi-conflict context since role switching 
may help increase the overall benefits or reduce costs. Typical examples of planned role 
dynamics are encouraging secondary parties to turn into primary parties (e.g., victims allying 
with one of the conflicting parties) or latent non-actors to turn into active stakeholders. 
Inversely, overall performance can be increased by downgrading the involvement of some 

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
167
actors, e.g., by the withdrawal from a supply network to avoid excessive costs of membership 
(e.g., costs of certification and coordination).  
Besides reconfiguration, association management constitutes the second focus of 
intervention. The levels of integration, interdependency, and symmetry between two or more 
than two actors in the supply network serve as the base for managing the connections between 
conflicts.  
The derogation of dysfunctional connections constitutes the essence of the risk 
management-approach. This strategy is usually termed containment or percolation, a 
decoupling strategy that treats conflicts the same way as viruses (Newman 2013). 
Containment is primarily accomplished by preventing the dissemination of a conflict from a 
source conflict to target conflicts. They serve as the two toeholds for intervention: 
Quarantine-strategies cover all activities that inhibit dysfunctional connections by isolating 
the source conflict. Chambre séparée- or Chinese wall-strategies represent a prevalent 
example for such barriers preventing outgoing impulses. They aim at protecting (two or more) 
dyadic cooperations against the risk of turning into conflicts (Brandes, Brege, Brehmer, and 
Lilliecreutz 2007): Whenever a supplier (of components or services) is cooperating with two 
(or more) OEMs that are competitors to each other the risk of leaks is battled by activities of 
demarcating the two accounts in the organization of the supplier, e.g., by separating 
responsibilities or by non-disclosure regulations. 
Buffers in the flow of materials help decouple actors and thus at least help decelerate the 
propagation of conflicts. Likewise, the control of information flows (e.g., word-of-mouth-
dissemination) by help of complaint systems or non-disclosure agreements inhibits the 
uncontrolled dissemination of the primary conflict. Firewalls prevent the access of 
unauthorized actors to conflict-related data.  
The immunization-strategy protects (potential) target conflicts from being infected by 
incoming stimuli. This is mainly accomplished by fostering a sufficient high level of conflict 
tolerance (e.g., of victims). If preventive immunisation should fail, compensatory measures 
for the negatively impaired secondary parties (e.g., complementors) are useful to cover the 
collateral damage. 
Yet, multi-conflict managers should be aware of the lessons learned from so called small 
world-models in social network analysis (Easley and Kleinberg 2010): They signal that it is 
not feasible to radically disconnect actors. So, containment will not eliminate connections but 
just make the paths longer and thereby more costly. In case preventive quarantine strategies 
do not work, some palliative measures (e.g., insurance) can be deployed.  
The opportunity management approach in the nexus framework focuses on ―good‖ 
conflicts. The corresponding strategy of solidification of functional connections is 
accomplished by leaning the supply processes (i.e., by eliminating slack) and by creating 
transparency via implementing gateways. The information asymmetry with regard to 
secondary parties can be reduced via dismantling barriers (―walls,‖ ―shields‖) in the flow of 
information, via investing in conflict communication or deliberately inserting ―leaks‖ into the 
information system.  
Managing the issue nexus: In addition to managing relationships, interventions in the 
nexus framework also deal with the interconnected conflict issues in a supply network. This 
list of typical supply-related issues contains prices, quality, conformity, target dates, 
interoperability, compliance, corruption, hidden information, and hidden agendas. 
Effectiveness of conflict management can be reached by merging two different issues 

Michael Reiss 
168
concerning the same conflicting parties in order to find one solution for two conflicts 
simultaneously. This bundling is applied to interdependent issues, preferably issues with a 
high elasticity of substitution (e.g., price and quality, service level and 24/7 availability). 
Although paradoxical at first glance the one step-procedure enlarges the scope of 
compromises obtained via collaborative problem solving. 
Managing the strategy nexus: As outlined above, the interconflict strategy-nexus is 
primarily characterized by tit-for-tat mechanisms. Moreover, primary and tertiary parties 
develop a specific reputation or profile through abiding by the same conflict management 
style in different conflicts. Last but not least, a strategy nexus is the result of adopting 
strategies of benchmarks. The adoption process either follows a learning approach (e.g., good 
practices, imitating role models) or a complying approach when strategies adopt prior 
decisions of courts or agreements of arbiters in similar cases.  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Neglecting the interconflict-arena (because of focusing on the intraconflict-arena) impairs 
the practical relevance of strategies for conflict management as well as the rigor of academic 
models. The results of a multi-conflict management-approach may significantly differ from 
the conclusions drawn by managing conflicts separately, quite often they are even 
contradictory: whereas segregate conflict management may advocate a resolution of a conflict 
(i.e., the reduction of the intensity of a conflict), a holistic approach may obtain a better 
performance by escalating the respectice conflict (e.g., between several supply networks) in 
order to de-escalate a collateral conflict (within the respective supply network). 
Multi-conflict management affords a reframing of mindsets together with a new 
architecture of management models. The scenarios for the future development of conflict 
management imply either a moderate or a radical change. In analogy to the scenarios of 
obtaining progress in budgeting, the moderate reorientation can be characterized as ―better 
conflict management‖ whereas a radical change ends up in a ―beyond conflict management‖ 
paradigm. 
Better conflict management considers conflict management as a specific domain of 
management comparable to domains like international management or change management. 
A progress in this domain is achieved by integrating new strategies into the scope of 
strategies for the intraconflict arena (e.g., methods of alternative dispute resolution, early 
recognition systems, differentiated models of conflict behavior of individual versus collective 
actors, integrating the risk and the opportunity management approach) as well as for the 
interconflict arena (e.g., conflict portfolios, multistage interdependencies between conflicts). 
Moreover, the interconnectedness of different species should be investigated more 
thoroughly, for instance social conflicts causing intrapersonal conflicts (of interest) or the 
interface between knowledge conflicts (e.g., controversies about the overall costs of 
outsourcing or the risks of cloud computing) and economic conflicts (e.g., about transfer 
pricing of outsourced services). 
Beyond conflict management constitutes a lesson learned from the interconnectedness of 
conflict and non-conflict interactions, e.g., from the blurring boundaries between cooperation 
and competition against the background of coopetition. When the conflict arenas and the 

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
169
extraconflict arena are merged (Malhotra and Lumineau 2011), conflict management loses its 
character as a separate management function and competence. Instead, relevant management 
activities deal with generic processes, skills, and tools such as communicating, negotiating, 
coordinating, empathy, tolerance, participation, round tables, and stakeholder conferences. 
Whereas the better conflict management-approach interprets communication as a device for 
conflict management (e.g., trust building), the beyond conflict management–approach rather 
uses conflict management as a device for communication (e.g., via compromising on 
communication infrastructure, channels, media, and language). Eventually, conflict 
management is completely incorporated into relationship management. This embeddedness 
takes account of the fact that every social interaction (―association,‖ ―transaction,‖ ―relation‖ 
or ―relationship‖) implies a certain level of intensity of conflict. In neoinstitutional economics 
for instance potential conflict between contracting parties roots in opportunistic behavior, 
cheating, shirking, hidden characteristics, hidden action, and hidden intention (Williamson 
1979; Miller 2008). The performance of relationship management is viewed as coordination 
performance (e.g., synergetic linking). In other words ―conflict‖ and ―non-conflict‖ are two 
domains of coordination that can only be differentiated by an artificial dichotomization of an 
intensity of conflict-scale separating low from high intensities of conflict (Jehn 1995).  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bitran, G., Gurumurthi, S. & Sam, S. L. (2007). The need for third-party coordination in 
supply chain governance. MIT Sloan Management Review, 48(3), 30-37. 
Brandes, O., Brege, S., Brehmer, P.-O. & Lilliecreutz , J. (2007): Chambre Separée in product 
development: vertically mediated coopetition in the automotive supply chain. 
International Journal of Automotive Technology and Management, 7(2/3), 168–183. 
Connelly, B.L., Tihanyi, L., Crook, T.R. & Gangloff, K.A. (2014). Tournament Theory: 
Thirty Years of Contests. Journal of Management, 40 (1), 16-47. 
Deutsch, M. (2014). Cooperation, competition, and conflict. In: Coleman, P.T., Deutsch, M. 
& Marcus, E.C. (eds.), The Handbook of Conflict Resolution: Theory and practice, 3rd 
ed., pp. 23-42. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Dyer, J.H. & Singh, H. (1998). The Relational View: Cooperative Strategy and Sources of 
Interorganizational Competitive Advantage. Academy of Management Review 23 (4), 
660-679. 
Easley, D. & Kleinberg, J. (2010). Networks, Crowds, and Markets: Reasoning about a 
Highly Connected World, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Everett, M.G. & Borgatti, S.P. (2014). Networks containing negative ties. Social Networks, 
38,111-120. 
Gast, J., Filser, M., Gundolf, K. & Kraus, S. (2014). Coopetition research: towards a better 
understanding of past trends and future directions. International Journal of 
Entrepreneurship and Small Business 24 (4), 492-521. 
Gelfand, M., Shteynberg, G., Lee, T., Lun, J., Lyons, S., Bell, C., Chiao, J.Y., Bruss, C.B., Al 
Dabbagh, M., Aycan, Z., Abdel-Latif, A.H., Dagher, M., Khashan, H. & Soomro, N. 
(2012). The cultural contagion of conflict. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society 367, 692-703. 

Michael Reiss 
170
Hamann, P.M., Schiemann, F., Bellora, L., & Guenther, T.W. (2013). Exploring the 
Dimensions of Organizational Performance: A Construct Validity Study. Organizational 
Research Methods 16 (1), 67-87. 
Hoffmann, W.H. (2007). Strategies for managing a portfolio of alliances. Strategic 
Management Journal 28 (8), 827–856. 
Jehn, K.A. (1995). A Multimethod Examination of the Benefits and Detriments of Intragroup 
Conflict. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40 (2), 256-282. 
Jehn, K., Rispens, S., Jonsen, K. & Greer, L. (2013). Conflict contagion: a temporal 
perspective on the development of conflict within teams, in: International Journal of 
Conflict Management 24 (4), 352-373. 
Kim, D.-Y., Kumar, V. & Kumar, U. (2010). Performance assessment framework for supply 
chain partnership. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal 15 (3), 187- 195. 
Kriesberg, L. (2011): The State of the Art in Conflict Transformation, http://image.berghof-
foundation.org/fileadmin/redaktion/Publications/Handbook/Articles/kriesberg_handbook.
pdf. 
Lovas, B. & Ghoshal, S. (2000). Strategy as guided evolution. Strategic Management Journal 
21 (9), 875-896. 
Lumineau, F., Eckerd, S. & Handley, S. (2015). Inter-organizational conflicts: Research 
overview, challenges, and opportunities. Journal of Strategic Contracting and 
Negotiation 2015 1(1), 42–64. 
Malhotra, D. & Lumineau, F. (2011). Trust and collaboration in the aftermath of conflict: The 
effects of contract structure. Academy of Management Journal, 54 (5), 981–998. 
Miller, G.J. (2008): Solutions to Principal-Agent Problems in Firms. In: Menard, C. & 
Shirley, M. M. (eds.): Handbook of New Institutional Economics, pp. 349-370. Berlin, 
Germany: Springer. 
Nalebuff, B. & Brandenburger, A. M. (1996). Co-opetition: a revolution mindset that 
combines competition and cooperation, New York: Doubleday. 
Newman, M.E.J. (2013). Networks: An Introduction, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Noonan, J. F. & Wallace, M. J. (2003). Complementors: fellow travellers in contract 
manufacture. Supply Chain Management, 8(1), 26-31.  
Phillips, J., Liu, B. S. & Costello, T. C. (1998). A balance theory of perspective of triadic 
supply chain relationships. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 6 (4), 78-91. 
Rahim, M. A. (2002). Toward a Theory of Managing Organizational Conflict. International 
Journal of Conflict Management 13(3), 206-235.  
Reiss, M. (2011). Complementor Relationship Management. Missing Link in Supply Chain 
Management, In: Samson, R. (ed.) Supply-Chain Management: Theories, Activities and 
Problems, pp. 139-156, New York: Nova Science Publishers. 
Reiss, M. (2012). Change Management, Norderstedt, Germany: BoD. 
Ritter, T. (2000). A Framework for Analyzing Interconnectedness of Relationships. Industrial 
Marketing Management 29(4), 317-326. 
Robison, L.J. & Ritchie, B.K. (2010). Relationship Economics: The Social Capital Paradigm 
and its Application to Business, Politics and Other Transactions, Farnham, UK: Gower.  
Schaller-Demers, D. (2008). Conflict: A Catalyst for Institutional Change. Journal Of 
Research Administration, 39 (2), 81-90. 
Thompson, J. D. (2003): Organizations in action: social science bases of administrative 
theory, Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers.  

Multi-Conflict Management in Supply Networks 
171
Vallacher, R.R., Coleman, P.T., Nowak, A., Bui-Wrzosinska, L., Liebovitch, L., Kugler, K. & 
Bartoli, A. (2013). Attracted to Conflict: Dynamic Foundations of Destructive Social 
Relations, Berlin, Germany 2013: Springer.  
Vallacher R.R., Coleman, P.T., Nowak, A. & Bui-Wrzosinska, L. (2010). Rethinking 
Intractable Conflict: The Perspective of Dynamical Systems. American Psychologist, 65 
(4), 262–278. 
Walley, K. (2007). Coopetition. International Studies of Management and Organisation, 37, 
11-31. 
Wassmer, U. (2010). Alliance Portfolios: A Review and Research Agenda. Journal of 
Management, 36 (1), 141-171. 
Wilhelm, M. M. (2011). Managing coopetition through horizontal supply chain relations: 
linking dyadic and network levels of analysis. Journal of Operations Management 29 (8), 
663–676. 
Williamson, O. (1979). Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual 
Relations. Journal of Law and Economics 22 (2), 233-261. 
 
 


In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
 
 
 
SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT USED IN INDUSTRIAL 
SALES AND BEST BUSINESS PRACTICES 
 
 
Terry Damron1,*, Amye Melton1 and Alan D. Smith2 
1Austin Peay State University, Clarksville, Tennessee, US 
2Robert Morris University, Moon, Pennsylvania, US 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Using The Fastenal Company has achieved through revolutionizing the way they sell 
to their customers, providing supply chain measures not available from the competition. 
Embracing global measures, GSCM, purchasing management for the company and 
customers, and the use of IT within stores and distribution centers, Fastenal has grown at 
an unprecedented rate for the last 40 years, becoming one of the largest industrial supply 
companies in North America and a global competitor.  
 
Keywords: distribution centers, IT, global measures, GSCM, purchasing management, 
supplier collaboration, supplier integration, supply chain 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Supply chain management is a comprehensive and ever-changing side to any business, 
making it important for companies to use up-to-date techniques and principles in order to stay 
competitive.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
* Corresponding Author address: Department of Marketing, Austin Peay State University, Clarksville, TN 37044, 
Email: DamronT@apsu.edu. 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
174
Supply Chain Collaboration and Integration 
 
Mentzer, Stank, Esper, (2008) suggested that supply chain management (SCM) includes 
concepts typically related to marketing, logistics, production, and operations management. 
Therefore, SCM can be referenced for decisions in essentially all operations management 
decisions, with an emphasis on quality management, process and capacity design, location, 
inventory, material requirements planning, JIT, and scheduling (Wolfgang and Koch 2010; 
Zhang, Joglekar and Verma 2012). Collaboration and SCM are synonymous in many ways as 
both include communication and teamwork to reach an end goal. A firm‘s external and 
internal collaborations often improve quality and business practices, fueling growth (Jing and 
Felix 2011; More and Babu 2012). Information sharing is a critical part of SCM-related 
activities for organizations prioritizing accuracy in order size, specifications of design, and 
even production aspects among employees (Maxwell 2008; Melnyk, Lummus, Vokurka, 
Burns and Sandor 2008; Meyr 2004). Such sharing and data/information capturing plays a 
critical role in collaboration, as the transfer of information from one party to another allows 
partners to correctly make decisions and fulfill requests from one another. 
There are at least three aspects of information sharing, including operations, marketing, 
and information systems (Carvalho, Cruz-Machado and Tavares 2012; Kohli and Jensen 
2010). The operations aspect allows for the buying department to collaborate with a supplier 
based on their priority systems and required metrics in order to maintain efficient, timely 
production. Marketing collaboration involves new product development and promotional 
planning, as well as consumer pattern recognition and marketing research activities. With 
increasing levels of technology, progressive development of supplier collaboration allows for 
almost instantaneous sharing of information for proper strategic planning. Information-
intensive systems (e.g., expert, ERP, MRP) allow for a significant degree of automation and 
promote communication and collaboration with suppliers. Information systems bring a 
number of benefits to SCM, including purchase order creation, low quantity alerts, and 
determination of demand forecasts for reduced inventories. 
Joint planning is another important aspect of SCM, as it aids in the direct conversation 
between buyer and supplier about future actions and forecasts. Commonly practiced types of 
collaboration activities include operational and sales/business planning, which often coincide 
with one another (Kayas, McLean, Hines and Wright 2008; Kim, Youn and Roh 2011; 
Koplin, Seuring and Mesterharm 2006; Kumar, Shankar and Yadav 2011). Once the sales 
department has sold a number of units, the production department must fulfill the order in an 
efficient and timely manner. This information is then shared with the various suppliers and 
planned out over the course of the lead time. Such sharing typically allows for goal 
congruence among all involved and allows for a firm to execute a strategic plan. Kohli and 
Jensen (2010) empirically studied the effectiveness of collaborative efforts within a supply 
chain as compared to companies‘ demographics, current collaborations, and independent 
variables related to operational techniques. As Kohli and Jensen suggested, goal congruence 
allows organizations to form specific joint performance measures, IT standardization, 
defining roles and responsibilities of each partner, formalizing information shared, alignment 
of schedules, and development and implementation plans among the various collaborative 
partners. Hence, once supply partners are communicating in a very standardized way, 
understanding specific needs and goal expectations, it is reasonable to expect a smooth 
transition into completing tasks and obtaining objectives. 

Supply Chain Management Used in Industrial Sales and Best Business Practices 
175
The shared understanding of goals and expectations would most likely not occur without 
personal interaction and relationship building (Dasci and Laporte 2005; Ghemawat 2001; 
Greenhut, Greenhut and Li 1980; Hameed and Amjah 2009; Kohli and Jensen 2010). 
Personal interaction is the social quality individuals and groups use to communicate face-to-
face. This direct communication, greatly enhanced by technology, helps create a personal 
nature to business. Because they are comfortable with one another, parties often can solve 
problems more quickly. Through such personal communication, long-term relationships built 
on mutual trust and commitment to achieving joint goals can be built. Supplier collaboration 
and integration are built on trust in properly managing supply chains. It is important all 
partners establish a history of fulfilling their contractual obligations and information sharing. 
Undoubtedly, if strong trust is built, manufacturers and retail buyers are far less likely to 
change suppliers, even if competitive bids are lower. Through planning, goal congruence, and 
interaction, partners can build a trustworthy relationship that positively influences the inner 
workings of the supply chain (Pettersson and Segerstedt 2011; Rodriguez and Ghosh 1999; 
Smith and Offodile 2007; 2008a; 2008b).  
 
 
Collaborative Forecasting and Complexity 
 
A number of researchers (Mathirajan, Manoj and Ramachandran 2011; Pradhananga 
Hanaoka and Sattayaprasert 2011; Parthasarathy and Ramachandran 2008; Pettersson and 
Segerstedt 2011) are convinced that, along with sharing resources and collaborative process 
operation, collaborative process improvement plays a crucial role in gaining sustainable 
competitive advantage in logistics and production. This is especially true for successful 
internal collaborative forecasting and planning activities (Smith and Offodile 2007). 
Management needs to pay increased attention to collaborative process improvement in their 
strategic planning activities. 
Nakano (2009) presented empirical evidence of a strong, positive correlation between 
internal and external collaborative forecasting and planning. Nakano examined collaborative 
forecasting and planning in both internal and external supply chain on performance. 
Collaborative forecasting and planning with main suppliers and collaborative forecasting and 
planning with the main customer are strongly and positively correlated, as well. The author 
found a statistically significant causal relationship between internal collaborative forecasting 
and planning and logistics and productions performance. Only internal collaborative 
forecasting and planning had a significant effect on logistics and production performance. 
The correlation between internal collaborative forecasting and planning with main suppliers 
was greater than one between internal collaborative forecasting and planning and 
collaborative forecasting and planning with main customers. The correlation with upstream 
firms was stronger than with downstream firms, but this could be dependent on the 
manufacturer‘s position in an external relationship.  
There are many important issues in supply chain forecasting (Kroes and Ghosh 2010; 
Smith and Offodile 2007), but few are as critical as complexity in the supply chain; de Leeuw 
and van Goor (2013) addressed the problem of increasing complexity issues within the 
modern supply chain from a modeling approach. First, the authors defined the drivers of 
supply chain complexity and then proposed a method by which to measure that complexity. 
They decided upon eight drivers of supply chain complexity: uncertainty (i.e., related to 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
176
supply and demand unknowns), diversity (i.e., related to the number of suppliers/customers 
and the number of products and services), size (i.e., volume of the firm‘s operations), 
variability (i.e., changes in requirements over time), structure (i.e., the various systems and 
processes throughout the organization); speed (i.e., how quickly the firm is required to 
respond to changes), lack of information synchronization (i.e., the degree to which 
information is coordinated throughout the organization), and the lack of cooperation (i.e., ―the 
degree of closeness in relations between partners in the supply chain‖ (p. 967).  
de Leeuw and van Goor (2013) believed firms can better position themselves to cope 
with the complexity in their supply chains through implementation of certain measures; 
however, business managers must be aware of the tradeoffs between implementing a coping 
mechanism and its costs. For example, keeping inventory may decrease uncertainty 
concerning supplies, but doing so typically impacts cost. Thus, operations managers must 
weigh the benefits of reduced uncertainty and added inventory costs. The authors concluded 
firms may cope with areas of high complexity within their supply chains through maintenance 
of suitable levels of inventory (i.e., in order to cope with uncertainty of supplies), flexibility 
of resources (e.g., flexible work schedules for employees that better matches peak activity 
times), increasing the exchange and communication of information (i.e., to aid the 
identification and the fixing of problems across the various units), rationalization, outsourcing 
(i.e., to reduce problems encountered and associated costs), and isolation (i.e., creating a 
separate unit to solely solve complexity issues). Management‘s identification and 
measurement of drivers of supply chain complexity allows firms to identify major areas of 
their supply chain and determine the complexity of those drivers. In doing so, firms can see 
what they are doing well and improve upon the areas in which they struggle. Undoubtedly, 
supply chain complexity heavily influences supply chain forecasting. Management‘s ability to 
increase awareness concerning the impact of supply chain complexity on a firm‘s operations 
may prove the most critical link to improving responses and probabilities of success. 
 
 
Purpose of Present Study 
 
The purpose of this research is to explore the importance of SCM and collaborative 
processes within Fastenal Company, a global leader in the distribution of fastenings, fixings, 
and associated products. The study showcases operations management concepts, particularly 
the managerial effect of operational and social capital on the buyer-supplier relationship. 
Decisions regarding the supply chain can influence operations managers‘ other decisions. As 
firms attempt to compete via cost or customization, quality, cost reductions, and a product‘s 
speed to market, more emphasis is placed on the supply chain. Effective SCM typically 
centers on the formation of partnerships with suppliers, pursuing the firm‘s strategy to satisfy 
the end customer.  
The available literature on SCM is quite extensive, especially with respect to the value-
added of collaborative buyer–supplier relationships. The vast majority of these studies 
support the importance of establishing trusting collaborative supplier relationships. In many 
cases, shared vision and trust enables management to reduce the likelihood of conflicts and 
promote cooperative behavior. To this point, many SCM-related studies and literature have 
focused on the positive side of social capital (Hall 2010; Hameed and Amjah 2009; Jing and 
Felix 2011; Kohli and Jensen 2010). 

Supply Chain Management Used in Industrial Sales and Best Business Practices 
177
These results contribute to the argument that a model integrated with both qualitative and 
quantitative factors may be needed because using the cost-based approach results only may 
result in a lower-quality location with similar costs associated with higher quality location 
determined by a more integrated model. 
 
 
METHODS 
 
Qualitative Business Case Study  
 
The qualitative case study approach to research uses a variety of data sources to explore a 
topic of interest within its context. This ensures the issue is not explored through one lens, but 
rather through a variety of many possible viewpoints to help to reveal and understand the 
concepts associated with the study. According to Baxter and Jack (2008), one of the common 
problems associated with a case study is the tendency for researchers to attempt to answer 
questions that are too broad or approach topics with too many objectives.  
To avoid this problem, Yin (2003) and Stake (1995) suggested placing boundaries on a 
case. This case is bound by time, place, definition, and context; namely, it focuses on SCM 
integration/collaboration for one company during the 2014 fiscal period. 
 
 
Sample Selection 
 
Personal interviews of upper-to-middle management along with comments from 
convenient samples of employees were used to gather perceptions concerning the accuracy of 
the firm‘s strategic management processes within a customer service focus. Most of the 
information contained in this case study was obtained from management and/or the firm‘s 
website. 
 
 
CASE: FASTENAL COMPANY 
 
Corporate Overview 
 
Founded in 1967 in Winona, Minnesota with an initial investment of US$30,000, the 
Fastenal Company currently grosses more than US$3 billion per year.  
The company‘s success stems from exceeding customers‘ expectations concerning 
delivery lead times, product knowledge, and variety of fasteners and industrial products not 
available via typical retailers. An outside sales company, Fastenal goes directly to the 
manufacturer, service provider, or end-user in order to drive sales in a regionally specific 
marketplace. What began with a single 1,000 sq. ft. store has grown to a corporation of more 
than 2,600 stores and 15,000-plus employees.  
The firm achieved this growth because they activity invested in customers service and 
were involved in continuously improvement of multidimensional service network that 
includes a full-service manufacturing center, a strict quality management system, regional 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
178
distribution centers, and locations in South America, Europe, and Asia. During this study, a 
number of employees mentioned seeing first-hand the benefits and capabilities of the firm‘s 
complex and efficient supply chain system.  
Fastenal must not only obtain the product and provide a fair price, but also must ensure 
fasteners and industry-specific supplies meet stringent standards required for performance in 
critical applications.  
These standards demand that any supplier use strict ISO 9000 qualifications and even 
upwards of AS 9100 certification for the aerospace industry. Fastenal has either met or can 
use a direct supplier that allows for any of these certifications to be met in order to be RoHS 
compliant.  
Basically, the driving force behind RoHS directives is restricting certain dangerous 
substances commonly found in electronic-related equipment. Being greener in its approaches 
allows for more socially- and environmentally-conscious strategic planning initiatives (Park 
and Min 2013; Rajapakshe, Dawande and Sriskandarajah 2013).  
Such initiatives enhance corporate reputation and enable the company to either have, 
make, or outsource any industrial product a particular customer needs almost anywhere in the 
world, regardless of environmentally sensitive legislation and/or restrictions. Such robust 
certifications may differentiate the firm from its competition, as many in the industry do not 
supply a primary sourcing option.  
A full-service industrial supplier, Fastenal uses its supply chain network to its utmost 
potential in order to meet the company goal of excellence through customer service. 
 
 
Global Impact 
 
Because the fastener industry is relatively large and global in nature, it is important for 
suppliers to use their supply chains to serve customers in a collaborative and integrative 
fashion.  
Recognizing intensive supplier partnering as a growing trend, Fastenal responded with 
the creation of FASTCO, an overseas subsidiary in Asia.  
The firm sells products to Asian companies and distributes their own products in mass 
quantities. They ship products to their regional distribution centers in the U.S., States, 
Canada, and a number of other countries.  
This creates better margin on imported products and allows the firm to make custom 
manufactured parts overseas. Supplier integration is driven by a need for firms that are trying 
to make their intra-firm business processes and inter-firm supply chains more efficient and/or 
more responsive by ―outsourcing and offshoring many manufacturing and RandD activities, 
sourcing in low-cost countries, reducing inventories, or collaborating more intensively with 
other supply chain actors‖ (Wagner 2008, p. 307). Such activities allow Fastenal to partner 
with their various stakeholders in the manufacturing arena, offering options for customers 
who prefer domestic production and price-conscious customers who wish to outsource to 
overseas companies.  
Because of these supply chain options, Fastenal is extremely competitive in the global 
industrial market and could expand their stores, distribution centers, and manufacturing 
outlets into other countries. 
 

Supply Chain Management Used in Industrial Sales and Best Business Practices 
179
Green Supply Chain Management (GSCM) 
 
With an eye toward environmental issues and efficiency, Fastenal has embraced many 
green initiatives. Such green operational practices are generally aimed at reducing waste, 
pollution, and the consumption of energy and material resources (Kim, et al. 2011; Kinnear, 
Taylor and Ahmed 1974; Koplin, et al. 2006; Laroche, Bergeron and Barbaro-Forleo 2001; 
Mainieri and Barnett 1997). As Toke (2012) noted, such activities are ―obviously good for the 
environment, and are the best for the supply chain because they cut operational cost‖ (p. 373). 
Fastenal‘s initiatives include green electronic processes, retrofit lighting projects, and 
recycling programs for specific reusable goods from the stores or customers. 
Green-based electronic communication processes impact carbon footprints, costs, and 
speed. Large data warehouses and data analytics create significant competitive advantages. 
Fastenal embraces the use of electronic fax, e-mail, and mobile communications-based orders. 
For example, many of the vendors within Fastenal‘s buyers guide are equipped to receive 
orders only through EDI. This feature provides assurance of order receipt and tracking via a 
distribution center or UPS. 
Fastenal drives sales and assists companies in their green efforts via retrofitting lighting 
projects, which entails replacing T12 lights for the now-standard and more efficient T8 bulbs 
and ballasts. A federal tax credit was recently created for any consumer in a business setting 
that would undergo this change. Although it has a relatively high initial start-up cost, doing a 
retro-fit within an entire business is a significant short-term investment, but has equally 
significant long-term benefits in decreasing total energy usage. Fastenal‘s management 
estimated the average time for the payback period is approximately two years. 
Another major green initiative for Fastenal is recycling and/or trade up programs for used 
or damaged goods. Management created and promotes these programs as part of its green 
supply chain management (GSCM) initiatives. Typically, GSCM includes reverse logistics 
systems (i.e., recovering system of used materials and products) and recovery networks (i.e., 
which creates a market of used products for eventual resell by properly repairing or 
remanufacturing such items), based on the demand for these products in the reuse market. 
Fastenal established many of their recycling programs with large suppliers, including 
Milwaukee and DeWalt, in order to provide a gateway for new business and, through 
recycling, minimize environmental impact. For example, Fastenal lowers costs when various 
outlets reuse the corrugated boxes in which goods are received for store projects or the 
packaging of customer orders.  
 
 
Purchasing Management 
 
A key feature of Fastenal‘s current supply chain model is the proper use of purchasing 
management to ensure margin and adequate supply. Purchasing is an important component of 
any supply chain system, as it dictates the amount of material that can either be sold or 
manufactured for a company. Internal and marketplace success result from Fastenal‘s three 
forms of purchasing: corporate level, store level via distribution centers, and store level via 
special stock. 
At the corporate level, an organization needs a sustainable approach to SCM. This may 
be achieved through contingency planning activities and supplier integration initiatives 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
180
throughout the entire supply chain. Ultimately, management of the value chain leverages each 
partner‘s purchasing power and their influence to promote positive changes that lead to 
enhanced customer value. Sound SCM should lead to social and environmental performances 
of the supply chain, promoting a win-win situation for all stakeholders (Mateen and More 
2013; Park and Min 2013; Smith and Offodile 2007). To help assure these goals within their 
various regional distribution centers, Fastenal employs purchasing agents and uses automated 
systems to ensure orders that are beginning to get low by setting a min/max on every item. 
This approach allows for great distributor-supplier relationships since it creates continuous 
orders for distribution and contact between Fastenal and its many suppliers. 
At the store level, the use of purchasing and sourcing can make or break the profitability 
of a branch. Operational margin and sales figures are two of the most carefully scrutinized 
aspects within Fastenal. Since purchasing has the most profound effect on these figures, 
Fastenal places an emphasis on exploring all options and resources in order maximize profits. 
Branch managers use a supplier book of business which includes a large detailed list of 
suppliers, what they supply, and their contact information. This information helps ensure the 
salesforce has the ability to make contact with brand representatives, source-out products, 
develop quotes for customers, and then purchase. The firm typically uses a purchase order 
system that allows for tracking and accountability for the suppliers and the branch, and 
enables the accounting department to quickly pay invoices. 
One of the most interesting and important components of the Fastenal purchasing system, 
is the store managers‘ ability to purchase special stock items. In essence, this means each 
store can purchase items directly from any supplier and create an individual part number for 
each item. This option allows the salesforce to outsource any product, price it, and create a 
part number for referencing. This supply chain process creates a competitive advantage for 
Fastenal, as the salesforce – not restricted to the firm‘s catalogue – has access to a diverse 
supply base that enables them to meet or exceed the expectations of their customers. 
 
 
IT Practices 
 
The use of IT practices within Fastenal, as within any customer-service based company, 
is vital because of its customer-valued implications with efficiency, lead time, and inventory 
availability. A primary goal of any successful supply chain software is integration throughout 
all sections of a company‘s business. These systems are used to integrate the various product 
stages with their modules through the supply chain. In general, SCM systems and their 
analytics are critical for effective production planning, problem solving, and strategic 
planning activities (Elysee 2015; Latha and Suganthi 2015). Undoubtedly, the complexity of 
global supply chains will only increase and empowered customers will continue to demand 
more sophisticated productions and services, reduced response times, higher inherent value, 
and reduced transactional costs. To meet the need for enhanced supply chain capabilities, IT 
services and architecture must become equally sophisticated. Fastenal attempts to tie all of 
these different modules together in their POS system, through which distribution centers and 
stores are completely connected and can share information instantly via e-mail or mobile 
notifications. For example, if a delivery truck is running late, an e-mail is sent to the stores on 
the truck‘s route. If an inventory clain or return needs to take place for an overstocked part, a 
notification is sent through the POS system from corporate headquarters to the affected store. 

Supply Chain Management Used in Industrial Sales and Best Business Practices 
181
The POS system, which supports both the distribution centers and its branches, is a 
simplified form of Oracle. Relatively user friendly, the platform does not typically require 
additional training, thereby reducing time distractions from production. Training for this 
system is completed primarily online via interactive e-learning lessons. Such instructional 
technology allows users to experience POS software, practicing the submission of purchase 
orders. Internally dubbed the ―Fastenal School of Business,‖ this training is a staple for the 
firm. For many employees, the experience serves not only as training to use the company‘s 
technology, but also an opportunity to learn new business practices. This use of IT allows for 
a hands off approach to production activities for Fastenal to train their employees, while 
maintaining their productivity throughout the day.  
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
Progressive companies like Fastenal try to employ a continuous improvement business 
model in order to more quickly adapt to their rapidly growing business. Although annual sales 
have surpassed US$3 billion dollars, the firm is still fairly small compared to competitors 
such as Grainger, MSC, and McMaster Carr. In order to eventually close the gap, 
management understands they need to focus on the areas of logistics, expansion, and reducing 
or changing their supply base in order to become a more profitable organization. 
Improvements in these areas should allow Fastenal to become more efficient, innovative, and 
appealing to potential and current clientele. 
In terms of logistics, Fastenal is becoming more innovative in some areas, but lacks in 
others. For example, competitors MSC and Grainger can deliver product to a business 
location within a few hours of order placement; Fastenal offers no such option. The addition 
of same day shipping through a localized distribution center would improve competitive 
position. Fastenal‘s distribution centers are regionally based and staggered throughout 
domestic and global locations. Each facility services hundreds of stores. The closest 
distribution center for an Akron, Ohio store is located nearly an hour away. Same day pick-up 
is possible, but the loss of time can lower the overall profitability of an item. Perhaps the key 
to improving customer satisfaction rests in the development of a decentralizing strategy 
whereby smaller distribution centers would serve each state, cutting lead times from one or 
two days to same day. This change would allow Fastenal to compete more aggressively in the 
marketplace while inviting new business and eventually growing in sales. 
Domestic sales growth is obviously very important for any business, but global expansion 
allows for a larger supplier and customer base that can more rapidly increase sales and 
strengthen the overall supply chain. Although Fastenal has invested in some international 
expansion, the firm is a relatively unknown brand. With proper infrastructure and supply 
chain networks, the company could enter markets and gain business on every continent. 
Perhaps the firm could build and maintain stores and distribution centers near very large 
industrial cities such as Rio, London, and Dubai. Before acting on such global expansion 
plans, Fastenal would require proper needs and feasibility studies. Further, the success of such 
ventures would depend upon the firm‘s ability to compete in local international markets, a 
goal attained via the development of a supply base to include suppliers in that particular part 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
182
of the world. Perhaps a global mindset will enable Fastenal to compete with (and eventually 
outgrow) competitors focused solely on domestic growth. 
As Fastenal and its competitors continue to grow and develop their niches, they are 
becoming more and more ―big book‖ distributors that literally carry any and every product 
that you can think of. Whether they actually sell those products or not, it is important for 
distributors to give customers the option of purchasing a particular product at any time. This 
option creates a very large supply base and does not always lead to the best pricing. By 
focusing on key aspects of their business that have high inventory turnover ratios and with 
high profit margins, Fastenal could extensively lower their supply base and focus their efforts 
in a few arenas in order to find their niche markets which obviously include fasteners. This 
switch could seriously raise profits and allow for Fastenal to target markets and gain business 
instead of chasing any and every industrial account and smaller and more local ―mom-and-
pop‖ repair shops. Promoting and retaining customers are based on superior product lines and 
customer support. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The use of collaboration and integration activities in SCM are some of the most important 
aspects to operational success since it directly correlates to all aspects of any firm‘s supply 
chain. Without collaborations, companies would have to internally invest in significant 
financial resources to plan, design for manufacture, specify, and manufacture every aspect of 
their own products. Such internal activities would create a large increase in the cost of goods 
sold and puts all of the responsibility of the manufacturing on the parent company, instead of 
disbursing some of the responsibilities to a supplier, and place the firm in an uncompetitive 
position in the marketplace. With good communication and collaboration among buyers and 
suppliers, firms can build lasting relationships and provide the utmost amount of service to 
their customers, which in turn can create sustainable growth. 
Training within an organization is a critical part to the success of the employees and the 
company as a whole. Fastenal endorses an online, hands-off approach for the basis of their 
initial training. A number of the employees have suggested they would like to experience 
more hands-on training and allow the general managers to physically train new employees on 
the ideologies and supply chain methods Fastenal uses on a routine basis. Hands-on 
experience has a number of proven training advantages and it should be a good investment for 
the company, especially with the increasing complexities of supplier collaboration and 
integration activities the firm currently promotes.  
Management at Fastenal, especially in terms of supply chain, has traditionally leveraged 
the use of technology. Mobile and more innovative communication technologies that enhance 
supplier collaboration and integration, especially in terms of industrial sales, can significantly 
differentiate suppliers and allow for the measureable gains in customer satisfaction (Dharni 
2014; Gupta and Naqvi 2014; Alderete and Gutiérrez 2014). Better integration of mobile 
technologies, such as iPads or other tablet forms, is essential for the salesforce in order to 
enhance the ordering process on sites with Wi-Fi capabilities. Such technological 
improvements should lower the lag time between visiting a customer and physically placing 
the order, which in turn makes the overall supply chain more efficient as a whole. Adding 

Supply Chain Management Used in Industrial Sales and Best Business Practices 
183
such options would be a great selling feature for customers that would like to see orders get 
placed correctly and it would allow for POs to be confirmed instantly and direct customer 
interactions about orders. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The authors wish to thank most heartedly for the valuable contributions by the reviewers 
for their input into the final paper. Peer reviewing and editing are commonly tedious and 
thankless tasks. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Alderete, M. V., & Gutiérrez, L. H. (2014). Drivers of information and communication 
technologies adoption in Colombian services firms. International Journal of Business 
Information Systems, 17(4), 373-397. 
Baxter, P., Jack, S., 2008. Qualitative case study methodology: Study design and 
implementation for novice researchers. The Qualitative Report. 13(4), 544-59. 
Carvalho, H., Cruz-Machado, V., Tavares, J.G, 2012. A mapping framework for assessing 
supply chain resilience. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management. 
12(3), 354-373. 
Dasci, A., Laporte, G., 2005. A continuous model for multistore competitive location. 
Operations Research. 53(2), 263-280.  
de Leeuw, S., Grotenhuis, R., & van Goor, A.R., 2013. Assessing complexity of supply 
chains: Evidence from wholesalers. International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management. 33(8), 960-980.  
Dharni, K., 2014. Exploring information system evaluation in Indian manufacturing sector. 
International Journal of Business Information Systems. 17(4), 453-468. 
Elysee, G., 2015. An empirical examination of a mediated model of strategic information 
systems planning success. International Journal of Business Information Systems. 18(1), 
44-66. 
Ghemawat, P., 2001. Distance still matters: The hard reality of global expansion. Harvard 
Business Review. 9(8), 137-147. 
Greenhut, J., Greenhut, M., Li. S. (1980). Spatial pricing patters in the United States. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 94(1), 328-350. 
Gupta, R., Naqvi, S.K., 2014. A framework for applying critical success factors to ERP 
implementation projects. International Journal of Business Information Systems. 17(4), 
469-490. 
Hall, P. V., 2010. Shifting proximities: The maritime ports sector in an era of global supply 
chains. Regional Studies. 44(9), 1103-1115.  
Hameed, A., Amjah, S., 2009. Impact of office design on employees' productivity: A case 
study of banking organizations of Abbottabad, Pakistan. Journal of Public Affairs, 
Administration and Management. 3(1), 1-13. 

Terry Damron, Amye Melton and Alan D. Smith 
184
Jing, L., Felix, C., 2011. The impact of collaborative transportation management on demand 
disruption of manufacturing supply chains International Journal of Production Research. 
50(19), 5635-5650. 
Kayas, O. G., McLean, R., Hines, T., Wright, G.H., 2008. The panoptic gaze: Analysing the 
interaction between enterprise resource planning technology and organisational culture. 
International Journal of Information Management. 28(6), 446-553.  
Kim, J. H., Youn, S., Roh, J. J., 2011. Green Supply Chain Management orientation and firm 
performance: evidence from South Korea. International Journal of Services and 
Operations Management. 8(3), 283-304. 
Kinnear, T., Taylor, J., Ahmed, S., 1974. Ecologically concerned consumers: Who are they? 
Journal of Marketing. 38(2), 20-24. 
Kohli, A.S., Jensen, B.J., 2010. Assessing effectiveness of supply chain collaboration: an 
empirical study, Supply Chain Forum. 11(2), 1-16. 
Koplin, J., Seuring, S., Mesterharm, M., 2006. Incorporating sustainability into supply 
management in the automotive industry - the case of the Volkswagen AG. Journal of 
Cleaner Production. 15(11-12), 1053-1062. 
Kroes, J.R., Ghosh, S., 2010. Outsourcing congruence with competitive priorities: Impact on 
supply chain and firm performance. Journal of Operations Management. 28(1), 124-143. 
Kumar, P., Shankar, R., Yadav, S. S., 2011. Global supplier selection and order allocation 
using FQFD and MOLP. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management. 
9(1), 43-68. 
Laroche, M., Bergeron, J., Barbaro-Forleo, G., 2001. Targeting consumers who are willing to 
pay more for environmentally friendly products. Journal of Consumer Marketing. 18(6), 
503-520. 
Latha, T.J., Suganthi, L., 2015. An empirical study on creating software product value in 
India - an analytic hierarchy process approach. International Journal of Business 
Information Systems. 18(1), 26-43. 
Mainieri, T., Barnett, E., 1997. Green buying: The influence of environmental concern on 
consumer behaviour. Journal of Social Psychology. 137(6), 189-204. 
Mathirajan, M., Manoj, K., Ramachandran, V., 2011. A design of distribution network and 
development of efficient distribution policy. International Journal of Logistics Systems 
and Management. 9(1), 108-137. 
Mateen, A., More, D., 2013. Applying TOC thinking process tools in managing challenges of 
supply chain finance: A case study. International Journal of Services and Operations 
Management. 15(4), 389-410.  
Maxwell, J.R., 2008. Work system design to improve the economic performance of the firm. 
Business Process Management Journal. 14(3), 432-446. 
Melnyk, S. A., Lummus, R. R., Vokurka, R. J., Burns, L. J., Sandor, J., 2008. Mapping the 
future of supply chain management: A Delphi study. IEEE Transactions on Engineering 
Management. 55(2), 304-315. 
Mentzer, J. T., Stank, T. P., Esper, T. L., 2008. Supply chain management and its relationship 
to logistics, marketing, production and operations management. Journal of Business 
Logistics. 29(1), 31-46. 
Meyr, H., 2004. Supply chain planning in the German automotive industry. OR Spectrum. 
26(4), 447-470. 

Supply Chain Management Used in Industrial Sales and Best Business Practices 
185
More, D., Babu, A. S., 2012. Benchmarking supply chain flexibility using data envelopment 
analysis. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management. 12(3), 288-317. 
Nakano, M., 2009. Collaborative forecasting and planning in supply chains. International 
Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management. 39(2), 84-105.  
Smith, A.D., & Offodile, O.F., 2007. Exploring forecasting and project management 
characteristics of supply chain management. International Journal of Logistics and 
Supply Management. 3(2), 174-214. 
Smith, A.D., & Offodile, O.F., 2008a. Data collection automation and total quality 
management: case studies of healthcare providers. Health Services Quarterly. 25(3), 217-
240.  
Smith, A.D., Offodile, O.F., 2008b. Strategic importance of team integration issues in product 
development processes to improve manufacturability. Team Performance Management: 
An International Journal. 14(5/6), 269-292.  
Park, B-N., Min, H., 2013. Global supply chain barriers of foreign subsidiaries: The case of 
Korean expatriate manufacturers in China. International Journal of Services and 
Operations Management. 15(1), 67-78.  
Parthasarathy, S., Ramachandran, M., 2008. Requirements engineering method and maturity 
model for ERP projects. International Journal of Enterprise Information Systems. 4(4), 1-
13.  
Pettersson, A.I., Segerstedt, A., 2011. Performance measurements in supply chains within 
Swedish industry. International Journal of Logistics Systems and Management. 9(1), 69-
88. 
Pradhananga, R., Hanaoka, S., & Sattayaprasert, W., 2011. Optimisation model for hazardous 
material transport routing in Thailand. International Journal of Logistics Systems and 
Management. 9(1), 22-42. 
Rajapakshe, T., Dawande, M., Sriskandarajah, C., 2013. On the trade-off between 
remanufacturing and recycling. International Journal of Services and Operations 
Management. 15(1), 1-53. 
Rodriguez, M., Ghosh, C., 1999. Devising a corporate facility location strategy to maximize 
shareholder wealth. The Journal of Real Estate Research. 17(3), 321-340. 
Smith, A. D., Offodile, O. F., 2007. Exploring forecasting and project management 
characteristics of supply chain management. International Journal of Logistics and 
Supply Management. 3(2), 174-214. 
Stake, R. E. (1995). The Art of Case Study Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.  
Toke, L. K. (2012). An empirical study of green supply chain management in Indian 
perspective. International Journal of Applied Sciences and Engineering Research. 1(2), 
372-83.  
Wagner, S. M. (2008). An empirical examination of supply chain performance along several 
dimensions of risk. Journal of Business Logistics. 29(1), 307-325.  
Wolfgang, K., Koch, J. (2010). The effect of quality management on the service quality and 
business success of logistics service providers. International Journal of Quality and 
Reliability Management. 27(2), 185-200. 
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case Study Research: Design and Methods (3rd Ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage Publishing. 
Zhang, J. J., Joglekar, N., Verma, R., 2012. Pushing the frontier of sustainable service 
operations management. Journal of Service Management. 23(3), 377-399.  


In: Supply Chain Management 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-096-5 
Editor: Md. Mamun Habib 
 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 11 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF SPREADSHEET-BASED 
SIMULATION PACKAGE FOR SUPPLY CHAIN 
INVENTORY POLICY ANALYSIS  
 
 
Joby George* and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
National Institute of Technology Calicut, Kerala, India 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
The selection of right inventory policy in supply chain stages is often quoted as an 
effective means to achieve better supply chain coordination and to alleviate overall 
supply chain cost. Plenty of mathematical models are being developed to solve inventory 
problems, which are harder to understand, and the complexity is often high, as the 
number of parameters affecting the problem increases. In the busy working environment, 
the managers may not have ample time to study these models and implement it to get the 
solution. Spreadsheet-based simulation models are a remedy for this problem as these 
models are easier and simpler to use. In this chapter, we are discussing the development 
of a spreadsheet-based simulation package to analyze the impact of various periodic 
review inventory policies on the performance of a serial supply chain having four stages 
such as retailer, wholesaler, distributor and factory. The simulation package is developed 
using Microsoft Excel with Visual Basic for Application for scripting. The inventory 
policies considered are order-up-to level policy; modified order-up-to level policy; (r, S) 
policy where, r is reorder point and S is maximum inventory level; demand flow strategy; 
and average demand strategy. The performance measures considered are supply chain fill 
rate, supply chain backorder rate, supply chain risk of shortage, bullwhip effect and total 
cost of supply chain. Using the proposed spreadsheet simulation package, we have 
designed eight experimental scenarios and the best performing inventory control policy 
for each scenario is found using Grey relational analysis. The analysis shows that the best 
performing inventory policy depends on the supply chain scenario, and the proposed 
package is a suitable tool for simulating inventory distribution problem in a four-stage 
serial supply chain.  
 
                                                        
* Corresponding author: Email: jobycg2005@gmail.com. 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
188
Keywords: supply chain, inventory policy, spreadsheet simulation, performance measures, 
grey relational analysis 
 
 
NOTATIONS 
 
t 
 
time period index  
i 
stage indices, (i = 1(retailer), i = 2 (wholesaler),  
i = 3 (distributor) and i = 4 (factory)) 
S 
 
maximum inventory level  
r 
 
reorder point 
c 
 
can-order level 
Q  
fixed order size  
  
   
order placed by stage i at time period t  
   
   
inventory position of stage i at time period t 
    
  
expected demand during review period of stage i at time period t 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The supply chain, in which a company operates, is responsible for the success or failure 
of a company and hence, now-a-days, the competition is among supply chains rather than the 
members of a chain (Chwif et al., 2002). The success of members of a supply chain and better 
performance of the entire supply chain can be ensured by the high degree of coordination 
among supply chain members. Lack of coordination among members may lead to the poor 
performance of the entire supply chain. Coordination is achieved by sharing information 
about customer demand, lead time, inventory levels, inventory policies, inventory shortage 
management techniques, and cost structure. One of the challenging roles of a company 
manager is to keep inventory cost as low as possible by choosing an appropriate inventory 
policy in consideration with inventory policies chosen by other members of the same supply 
chain (De Sensi et al., 2008). Inventory policy refers to the rule used by a supply chain 
member to make decisions on when and how much to order (Chopra et al., 2006). The 
selection of right inventory policies is often quoted as an effective means to achieve better 
supply chain coordination and alleviate overall supply chain cost. In the literature, there are 
several models and methods available to solve supply chain inventory problems. In common, 
these methods can be divided into two categories: analytical approach and simulation 
approach. The analytical approach involves mathematical optimization techniques that give 
an exact solution to the inventory management problem. The shortcomings associated with 
the analytical approach are applicability for small size problem, cumbersome modelling 
process, difficulty in understanding, and very high complexity (Hung et al., 2006). The 
advantages of simulation approach with the analytical approaches are performance evaluation 
prior to implementation, powerful what-if analyzes and comparison of various inventory 
policy settings with complex supply chain structures (Chang & Makatsoris, 2001; Lau et al., 
2004). Supply chain simulators can be categorised as (i) programming language-based (ii) 
simulation software package-based and (iii) spreadsheet-based (Othman et al., 2012). The 

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
189
discouraging factors related to the first two categories are a high cost to purchase the 
software, lack of user friendliness, highly perplexing output, lengthy learning time and 
difficulty in understanding the logic of programming languages. These discouraging factors 
forces the managers to think about a 'quick' and 'easy' spreadsheet-based simulation 
methodology for solving inventory control problems (Sezen & Kitapci, 2007). 
The objective of this chapter is to discuss the development of a spreadsheet-based 
simulation package to analyze the impact of various periodic review inventory policies such 
as (i) order-up-to level (OUL), (ii) modified order-up-to level (MOUL), (iii) (r, S) (iv) 
demand flow strategy (DFS) and (v) average demand strategy (ADS) on the performance of a 
serial supply chain. Figure 1 depicts the structure, order flow and shipment flow of supply 
chain. The supply chain has four stages: retailer, wholesaler, distributor and factory. 
Performance measures considered are supply chain fill rate (SCFR), supply chain backorder 
rate (SCBR), supply chain risk of shortage (SCRS), bullwhip effect (BWE) and total cost of 
supply chain (TCSC). A spreadsheet-based simulation package is developed using which 
eight experimental scenarios are designed. The best-performing inventory control policy for 
each scenario is found through Grey relational analysis (GRA) by considering the inventory 
policies as alternatives and the performance measures as attributes. This chapter answers the 
following questions: 
 
(1) How to develop a spreadsheet-based simulation methodology for inventory policy 
analysis in a serial supply chain? 
(2) How to perform an experimental study by using the developed software package? 
(3) How to select the best performing inventory policy using Grey relational analysis? 
 
The outline of this chapter is as follows: Section 2 reviews the relevant literature and 
Section 3 explains the features of the proposed spreadsheet-based simulation package. Section 
4 describes different experimental scenarios and also the Grey relational analysis of 
simulation results. Finally, Section 5 gives the concluding remarks. 
 
 
2. LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
The amplification of order variance as moving from lower to the upper stage in a supply 
chain is known as bullwhip effect (Lee et al., 1997). For a serial two-stage supply chain, 
under periodic review OUL policy, Chen et al. (2000) developed an analytical model for 
quantifying the bullwhip effect. The researchers identified the reasons for bullwhip effect as 
the following: demand forecasting, supply shortages, lead times, batch ordering and price 
variations. For a divergent supply chain, the increase in order variability under (r, S) ordering 
policy was analyzed by Kelle & Milne (1999). The policy would increase order variance and 
frequent small orders can reduce this increase. Hassanzadeh et al. (2013) analyzed the causes 
of bullwhip effect in a serial supply chain under (r, S) ordering policy. In a decentralised (no 
sharing of information) supply chain, the lead time, and in a centralised supply chain, the 
order batching, could reduce the bullwhip effect. 
 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
190
 
Figure 1. Order and shipment flows in a supply chain. 
The nature of customer demand and configuration of the supply chain can influence the 
performance of a supply chain. Monthatipkul & Yenradee (2008) proposed a mixed integer 
linear programming model of periodic review policy for a divergent two-stage supply chain. 
This supply chain faces stationary and non-stationary uncertain demand and the objective is 
to minimize the total expected cost. The simulation approach of De Sensi et al. (2008) 
compared the performance of a real divergent supply chain with other two supply chain 
configurations having pessimistic and optimistic scenarios. The factors considered in the 
scenarios are customers demand intensity, customers demand variability and lead times, and 
these factors are taken up under different inventory policies. Dominguez et al. (2014) 
compared the bullwhip effects of four-stage serial and divergent supply chains under 
stationary and non-stationary customer demand situation in terms of order rate variance ratio 
and bullwhip slope. The results showed that, for non-stationary customer demand, the 
difference in bullwhip effects of both supply chain structures are significant. 
The replenishment parameters such as lead time, review period, information sharing, 
forecasting and safety factor can affect the performance of a supply chain (Kelepouris et al., 
2008). Shorter lead time and information sharing help for the efficient operation of the entire 
supply chain. Heydari et al. (2009) analyzed the impact of lead time variability in the order 
variance through a simulation approach for a serial four-stage supply chain with simple 
ordering strategies. Samvedi & Jain (2011) developed a simulation model to study the impact 
of periodic review replenishment policy parameters in a four-stage supply chain under 
disruptions in the manufacturing stage. The results show that the cost of players in the chain 
increases with increase in maximum inventory level and decreases with increase in the review 
period. Information sharing mitigates bullwhip effect and helps to improve supply chain 
performance. Cachon & Fisher (2000) studied the impact of information sharing in a supply 
chain where the members follow (r, Q) policy, and the results show that the full information 
sharing reduce the total cost. Reddy & Rajendran (2005) proposed a mathematical model to 
determine dynamic OUL for the members in a serial five-stage supply chain as a function of 
forecasted demand, forecasted replenishment lead time and safety factor. 
Lee & Wu (2006) compared the performance of a serial supply chain under two 
traditional policies with statistical process control based inventory policy. The result shows 
the dominating nature of statistical process control based policy over the traditional policies. 
Liang & Huang (2006) considered a serial four-stage supply chain where retailer uses (c, S), 
distributor uses OUL, manufacturer uses (r, Q) and supplier uses OUL. Lau et al. (2008) 
studied the impact of four policies: (i) economic order quantity, (ii) periodic order quantity, 
(iii) Silver-Meal approach and (iv) part period balancing method. These policies are tested 
under information sharing and early order commitment. Economic order quantity policy 
provided the lowest cost for the entire supply chain. Also, it is found that information sharing 

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
191
and early order commitment would help to reduce cost and improve service level. Wadhwa et 
al. (2009) investigated the impact of number of simultaneous demand impulses on the 
performance of each member as well as in the entire chain of a serial four-stage supply chain 
under periodic review inventory policies such as fixed order quantity, OUL, (r, Q), (r, S), 
DFS and ADS. A policy that is most efficient for one particular member necessarily not 
efficient for the entire chain and fixed order quantity policy is found to be outperforming 
compared to other policies under impulse demand. Setamanit (2010) developed an ARENA 
based simulation model to study the effect of periodic review (r, S) policy in the performance 
of a two-stage serial supply chain. The researcher examined the impact of uncertainties in 
demand, lead time and review period in terms of average total cost per period and fill rate. 
Pillai et al. (2013) analyzed the performance of a four-stage serial supply chain under various 
periodic system-based replenishment policies such as DFS, fixed order quantity, OUL, (r, Q), 
(r, S) and ADS in terms of bullwhip effect, supply chain fill rate and total cost of supply 
chain. Fixed order quantity policy is found to be the best in most of the experimental 
scenarios. 
There are many contributions regarding the use of spreadsheet-based simulation 
methodology for inventory problem analysis. Through an inventory model, Seila (2004) put 
forward the steps of a spreadsheet simulation setup which contains the modules: (i) inputs to 
the model, (ii) intermediate computations and (iii) outputs from the model. Sezen & Kitapci 
(2007) developed a simple spreadsheet simulation model for illustrating the procedure for 
generating a simulation tool for a divergent three-stage supply chain inventory allocation 
problem with economic order quantity policy in all stages. Mahamani et al. (2008) developed 
a spreadsheet-based simulation model for performance evaluation of a single-stage supply 
chain of a manufacturing company that compares reorder point policy with the existing 
ordering policy. Boute & Lambrecht (2009) quantified bullwhip effect under demand 
forecasting when OUL policy is used in a serial two-stage supply chain, and spreadsheet-
based method is used for this purpose. 
From the literature review, we found that, for inventory management problem and 
inventory policy analysis in various structures of supply chain, simulation approaches play an 
important role. Most of the existing spreadsheet-based models can incorporate dynamic 
behaviour of one or two parameters and in general, the simulation background is supported by 
Excel functions only. The contribution of this chapter is to develop a supply chain inventory 
policy simulator, which helps to predict the dynamic behaviour of a serial supply chain under 
various settings of different input factors (inventory policy, lead time, information sharing, 
and customer demand nature). We have adopted a structured approach to the development of 
spreadsheet-based package and it consists of an input, intermediate and output modules. User-
friendly spreadsheet interface is incorporated in the package for inputting policy parameters 
and simulations parameters. The output of the simulation is displayed in spreadsheet and 
graph forms. The period of simulation and replications are suitably incorporated in the 
package. The back end of the package is supported by visual basic for application (VBA) 
program that automates the simulation process. The package can replicate the simulation 
based on simulation parameters, and it can display the average performance over replications.  
 
 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
192
3. FEATURES OF PROPOSED SPREADSHEET-BASED  
SIMULATION PACKAGE 
 
The simulation package is developed in the Microsoft Excel platform and for scripting 
VBA is used. Several macros are developed in VBA and are used along with macros and 
functions available in Excel. A macro is a sequence of instructions used to automate a 
repeatedly performing task. The proposed spreadsheet simulation package has three modules: 
an input module, an intermediate module, and an output module. Figure 2 shows the overall 
framework of the package. The input module has a single spreadsheet for selection of 
inventory policy and its parameters for each stage of the supply chain and inputting 
simulation parameters. In the intermediate module, there is a spreadsheet for every stage in 
the supply chain. Output module has a single spreadsheet that shows performance measures 
of the supply chain and these modules are integrated into an Excel workbook. 
 
 
Figure 2. Overall framework of the spreadsheet-based simulation package. 
 
 
 

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
193
3.1. Input Module 
 
The user can set the specifications of various details required for the simulation through 
the input module ('Input' sheet). There are nine details, which include customer demand 
distribution, inventory policy details, lead time, review period, initial inventory, forecast 
parameters, cost structure, simulation parameters and evaluation period. Drop down menu is 
available for selection of customer demand, inventory policy, and forecast related features & 
parameters. For all other input details, only the keyboard entry option is available. Depending 
on the supply chain inventory distribution problem for analysis, the user selects/enters the 
necessary details and press the 'Submit' button. The simulation starts with submission. A 
'Clear contents' button is provided in the input sheet for clearing the contents in each sheet of 
the intermediate module. Pressing this button before the next analysis is recommended. The 
description of each input details is as follows: 
 
 (1) Customer demand distribution 
 
Normal (parameters: mean and standard deviation) 
 
Uniform (parameters: lower limit and upper limit) 
(2) Inventory policy 
 
Type: Five periodic review policies (Three inventory position-based and two 
non-inventory position-based policies are available in the package.) 
 
Periodic nature: Week (user can assume any duration for a period) 
 
Environment: Lostsales or Backorder 
(3) Lead time 
 
Order lead time: Time was taken to reach an order from a lower stage to the next 
upper stage. This integer value can range from 1 to (simulation length minus 1). 
 
Delivery lead time: Time was taken to reach the replenishment quantity from an 
upper stage to the next lower stage. This integer value can range from 1 to 
(simulation length minus 1). 
(4) Review period: Any integer value from 1 to (simulation length minus 1). 
(5) Initial inventory: Initial inventory at each stage is set so that it satisfies the demand 
expected till it receives the first replenishment order from its next upper stage 
(6) Forecast 
 
Known: In this case, mean customer demand information is shared among stages 
(no need of forecast). When this option is selected, no need of entering forecast 
related parameters. The package assumes appropriate mean demand based on the 
customer demand distribution parameters. 
 
Unknown: In this case, mean customer demand is not shared among stages 
(moving average forecast method be used) 
 
Period of moving average: Enter the period of moving average 
 
First period demand forecast: Enter an estimate of the demand of the first 
period 
 
 
 
 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
194
(7) Cost 
 
Order cost (per order): Cost incurred for placing an order  
 
Transportation cost (per shipment): Cost incurred for transporting goods from 
upper stage to lower stage (from the production area to the factory, it is assumed 
as zero) 
 
Holding cost (per unit per period): Cost incurred for holding goods at the end of 
the period. 
 
Shortage cost (per unit per period): Cost arises while shortage occurs (either 
lostsales cost or backorder cost) 
(8) Simulation parameters 
 
Simulation length: Number of periods considered for simulation  
 
Replication: Number of times simulation is carried out for the simulation length 
(maximum number of replications possible is 499) 
(9) Evaluation period: Specifies the beginning period and end period for performance 
evaluation. The average performance measures of all the replications are calculated 
between the beginning and ending periods. The end period value must be lower than 
or equal to the simulation length. 
 
Figure 3 shows the screen shot of spreadsheet simulation 'Input' module when OUL 
policy is used for analysis. In 'Policy details' cell, the user can choose the desired inventory 
policy from the drop-down menu of each supply chain stage. All the inventory policies are 
periodically monitored, and the orders are placed once in each period. Each inventory policy 
places new orders in a review period if some conditions are satisfied. The ordering decision 
for some of the inventory policies is based on the inventory position. Inventory position is the 
net inventory at a period. That is, inventory position = (on-hand inventory) + (on-order 
inventory) – backorders. The policies OUL, MOUL and (r, S) are inventory position-based 
policies. DFS and ADS are non-inventory position-based policies. The review is performed 
for all policies at the beginning of a period. The conditions for ordering decision and order 
quantity determination for policies incorporated in the package are given below: 
  
 
Figure 3. Screenshot of spreadsheet simulation 'Input' module when  OUL policy is used. 

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
195
 
Order-up-to level (OUL): A maximum inventory level (S) is determined first. At the 
review point, if the inventory position falls below this maximum inventory level (or 
order-up-to level), an order is placed so that the available inventory and ordered 
quantity together become equal to OUL. The order quantity is determined as follows: 
 
 







)
(
if
),
(
)
(
if
,0
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
S
IP
IP
S
S
IP
O
 
(1)  
 
 
Modified order-up-to level (MOUL): This policy is a variant of OUL policy. In this 
policy, an order is placed at review period t, if the inventory position is less than the 
maximum inventory level (S). If the difference between S and inventory position is 
greater than the expected demand during the review period then the order size is 
equal to the difference of OUL and inventory position, otherwise the order size is 
equal to the expected demand during the review period. In this policy, the order size 
is decided based on the condition given below: 
 
 














t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
EDR
IP
S
S
IP
EDR
EDR
IP
S
S
IP
IP
S
S
IP
O
)
(
&
)
(
if
,
)
(
&
)
(
if
),
(
)
(
if
,0
 
(2) 
 
 
(r, S): The first parameter ‗r‘ is called reorder point. When the inventory position 
falls below the reorder point at a review point, an order is placed so that the sum of 
on-hand inventory and the ordered quantity become equal to the maximum inventory 
level (S). 
 
 







)
(
if
),
(
)
(
if
,0
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
t
i
r
IP
IP
S
r
IP
O
 
(3) 
 
 
Demand flow strategy (DFS): Transfer the actual customer demand from one stage to 
another without transforming it. The demand only gets delayed by the time equal to 
the order lead time. 
 
Average demand strategy (ADS): The order quantity is equal to the average demand 
of previous ‗n‘ periods. 
 
 
3.2. Intermediate Module 
 
Figure 4 depicts the inventory distribution activities associated with each stage of the 
supply chain in the intermediate module. The simulation methodology is developed based on 
the following assumptions: (i) Each stage receives replenishment quantity at the beginning of 
a period, if there is a replenishment, (ii) Purchase order is placed at the beginning of a period, 
(iii) Initial inventory at the start of simulation at each stage will be fixed, (iv) Inventory 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
196
holding cost are incurred at the end of the period, (v) Customer order arises at retailer only, 
(vi) There are no capacity constraints and storage space constraints at each stage, and (vii) 
The factory has infinite production capacity and enough raw materials for production. 
The intermediate module comprises of four sheets, which are named as ‗Retailer,‘ 
‗Wholesaler,‘ ‗Distributor‘ and ‗Factory.‘ Figure 5 shows a typical screen shot of inventory 
updation related operations in the retailer sheet when OUL policy is used under no sharing of 
information scenario and for the input details given in Figure 3. The generated demand 
appears on the ‗Retailer sheet‘ as customer order (CO, column ‗E‘). The column namely 
‗WEEK‘ shows the periods of the simulation and it goes up to the length of simulation period 
(WEEK, column ‗A‘) specified. Retailer receives replenishment quantity (RQ, column ‗B‘) 
from the Wholesaler at the start of a period and beginning inventory (BI, ‗C‘ column) is 
calculated, which is the sum of previous period ending inventory (EI, column ‗G‘) and RQ in 
the current period. Then, the inventory position (IP, column ‗D‘) is calculated which is equal 
to (on-hand + on-order) for lostsales environment and is equal to (on-hand + on-order – 
backorder) for backorder environment. Based on the inventory policy (here OUL) chosen, 
Retailer places order to the Wholesaler (OPW, column ‗J‘). As mean customer demand is 
unknown to the retailer, the order-up-to level (OUL, column ‗I‘) is calculated by multiplying 
moving average forecast (FORECAST, column ‗H‘) with the sum of length of review period 
and total lead time of a stage. AQ (column ‗F‘) is the allocated quantity to the customer from 
the on-hand inventory of the retailer and then, end period inventory is calculated. If sufficient 
inventory is not available to meet the customer demand, the unmet quantity is reflected as 
lostsales or backorder (LOSTSALES, column ‗K‘), based on the business environment. In 
each replication, the output of inventory distribution activities of previous replication will be 
replaced by the current replication output. Each replication output information is used to 
calculate the performance measures shown in the output module. This process will continue 
for a total number of replications, and final output of inventory distribution activities 
corresponding to the last replication will be displayed on the sheet. So the data shown in 
Figure 5 corresponds to the output of the inventory distribution activities of last replication. 
Similar worksheets are prepared for the Wholesaler, Distributor, and Factory.  
 
 
3.3. Output Module 
 
In each replication, the output of the inventory distribution activities of each stage will 
load onto the corresponding sheets and the performance measures are calculated for the 
evaluation period. At the end of experimentation, for each stage, the average of each 
performance measure, for the entire replications is calculated and displayed on the 
'Performance' sheet of the output module. Figure 6 shows the screen shot of 'Performance' 
sheet when OUL policy is used under no sharing of information scenario. The performance 
measures comprise of fill rate (in lostsales environment), backorder rate (in backorder 
environment), risk of shortage, bullwhip effect and total cost of supply chain. Each of the 
performance measures is defined as follows: 
 
 
 
 

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
197
 
Figure 4. Inventory distribution logic at each stage of the supply chain in the intermediate module of the 
proposed package. 
 
Figure 5. Screenshot of  'Retailer' sheet when OUL policy is used in lostsales environment. 
 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
198
 
Supply chain fill rate (SCFR): The fill rate is defined as the fraction of demand met 
from the shelf in a timely manner. The fill rate of the retailer is considered as supply 
chain fill rate. 
 
Supply chain backorder rate (SCBR): The backorder rate is calculated as the ratio of 
unmet demand to the demand arose. The backorder rate of the retailer is considered 
as supply chain backorder rate. 
 
Supply chain risk of shortage (SCRS): It can be found by counting the number of 
shortage periods and dividing it by the total number of periods for which demand 
arose. The risk of shortage of retailer is considered as supply chain risk of shortage. 
 
Bullwhip effect (BWE): In this study, it is measured as the ratio of the variance of 
orders placed by the factory to the variance of customer orders. 
 
Total cost of supply chain (TCSC): Total cost of a stage is the sum of all costs 
incurred in the cost computation periods. Various costs considered are ordering cost, 
transportation cost, holding cost and shortage cost. The total cost of supply chain is 
the sum of the costs of all stages. 
 
 
4. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY 
 
We have designed eight experimental scenarios using the spreadsheet-based simulation 
package. The experimental scenario classifications are based on different levels of three input 
factors that are business environment (two levels: lostsales and backorder), customer demand 
distribution (two levels: normal and uniform) and status of mean customer demand 
information sharing (two levels: known and unknown). First four scenarios are in lostsales 
environment, and next four scenarios are in backorder environment. 
 
 
Figure 6. Screenshot of  'Performance' sheet when OUL policy is used in lostsales environment. 
 
 

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
199
Table 1. Different experimental scenarios in lostsales  
and backorder environments 
 
Environment 
Scenario 
Customer demand 
distribution 
Demand 
information 
Lostsales 
1 
Normal 
Unknown 
2 
Uniform 
Unknown 
3 
Normal 
Known 
4 
Uniform 
Known 
Backorder 
5 
Normal 
Unknown 
6 
Uniform 
Unknown 
7 
Normal 
Known 
8 
Uniform 
Known 
  
The experimental scenarios are given in Table 1. The input details for each scenario and 
costs are given in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Simulations are performed for the 
experimental scenarios and the best-performing inventory control policy in each scenario is 
found through Grey relational analysis by considering the inventory policies as alternatives 
and the performance measures as attributes. For a particular scenario, all the members of the 
supply chain use the same inventory policy (i.e., if the retailer uses OUL policy then all other 
stages use OUL policy). Length of simulation is taken as 2 years, that is, 104 periods (weeks), 
in which first 52 periods are considered as the warm-up period. The performance measures of 
the supply chain are calculated under each inventory policy considering the data for periods 
from 53 to 104. For each scenario, simulation is performed under five inventory policies for 
simulation length, and the average of each performance is measured. The required number of 
replication is calculated by the method suggested by Banks et al. (2005), which involves the 
calculation of the number of replication based on the initial number of replications, specified 
level of error and significance level. For this experimental study, value for these parameters 
are as follows: initial number of replications = 10, the level of significance = 0.05, specified 
error = 5% of the mean value of the performance measure. A pilot study is conducted for all 
experimental situations. Based on the pilot study and calculations, the maximum number of 
replication is obtained for the MOUL with uniform distribution and unknown case (no 
sharing of mean customer demand information), which is equal to 382 and is set at 420. The 
average value of each performance measure for 420 replications of each scenario is recorded 
and is used for establishing the inferences of the study. 
 
 
4.1. Results and Discussion 
 
The performance of the supply chain against each alternative (inventory policy) in terms 
of various performance measures (attributes) under lostsales environment and backorder 
environment are given in Figures 7 and 8 respectively.  
 
 
 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
200
Supply chain fill rate under each inventory policy for the scenarios 1 to 4 is shown in 
Figure 7 (a). It is seen that the policies ADS and DFS performed well in all scenarios 
compared to other policies. The least fill rate is observed for (r, S) policy. The performance 
measure, supply chain risk of shortage is given in Figure 7 (b). It is the least for ADS policy 
and the highest for (r, S) policy. It is also observed that under information sharing the supply 
chain risk of shortage is improved for inventory position-based policies. The BWE for each 
supply chain scenario under each inventory policy is given in Figure 7 (c). It is observed that 
the highest bullwhip is generated for (r, S) policy and is the least for ADS policy. The 
performance of inventory position-based policies is improved very well in scenarios 3 and 4 
(both information sharing) compared to non-inventory position-based policies. The TCSC 
performance is shown in Figure 7 (d), and it is found that TCSC is best under DFS policy for 
both scenarios 1 and 2. For scenarios 3 and 4 the TCSC is least under MOUL policy. The 
performance of inventory position-based policies is improved under the information sharing 
scenarios 3 and 4. 
 
Table 2. Various input details required for each of the experimental scenarios 
 
Environment 
Scenario 
Details 
Customer demand 
Lead time in week for all stages) 
Review period in week (for all stages) 
Initial inventory in units (for all stages) 
Period of Moving average in week 
First period value for forecast 
Simulation length in weeks 
Number of replications 
Evaluation period 
Lostsales 
1 
Normal 
(20,5) 
Order to reach 
upper stage - 1, 
Delivery to reach 
lower stage - 1 
 
1 
 
40 
4 
20 units 
104 
420 
Beginning period– 53, Ending period- 104 
2 
Uniform 
(11,29) 
4 
20 units 
3 
Normal 
(20,5) 
- 
- 
4 
Uniform 
(11,29) 
- 
- 
Backorder 
5 
Normal 
(20,5) 
4 
20 units 
6 
Uniform 
(11,29) 
4 
20 units 
7 
Normal 
(20,5) 
- 
- 
8 
Uniform 
(11,29) 
- 
- 

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
201
Table 3. Inventory related cost for all experimental scenarios 
 
Member 
Order cost 
(per order) 
Transportation cost 
(per shipment) 
Holding cost (per 
unit per period) 
Shortage cost (per 
unit per period) 
Retailer 
200 
50 
20 
60 
Wholesaler 
150 
40 
18 
50 
Distributor 
100 
30 
16 
45 
Factory 
50 
0* 
12 
40 
*Assumes sufficient raw material inventory at production floor. So transportation cost is assumed as 
zero. 
 
 
Figure 7. Performance measures for various scenarios in lostsales environment. 
Supply chain backorder rate under each inventory policy for the scenarios 5 to 8 are 
shown in Figure 8 (a). It is observed that MOUL has the least backorder rate, and ADS has 
the highest backorder rate in all scenarios. The performance measure, supply chain risk of 
shortage under backorder environment is shown in Figure 8 (b). It is observed that MOUL 
shows the least risk of shortage and DFS shows the highest shortage for all scenarios. Figure 
8 (c) shows the BWE generated by the policies under various scenarios. BWE is the least 
under ADS policy and the highest when (r, S) is used. Under information sharing (scenarios 7 
and 8), the BWE generated by inventory position-based policies got reduced. The TCSC 
performance under backorder environment is shown in Figure 8 (d) and is found that TCSC is 
the best for all scenarios under DFS and is worst under (r, S). The performance of inventory 
position-based policies is improved in information sharing scenarios 7 and 8. 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
202
 
Figure 8. Performance measures for various scenarios in backorder environment. 
From Figures 7 and 8, it is found that no policy is performing better with respect to all 
performance measures considered. Hence, Grey relational analysis is used to determine the 
best inventory policy.  
 
 
4.2. Grey Relational Analysis 
 
Grey relational analysis (GRA) is used to solve multi-attribute decision-making problems 
(Fung, 2003; Kuo et al., 2008; Nagpal et al., 2012; Talari, 2014). The procedure of GRA is as 
follows: Initially, the performance of each alternative is translated into a comparability 
sequence in GRA. According to the comparability sequences, a reference sequence called an 
ideal target sequence is defined. In the next step, a grey relational coefficient between the 
reference sequence and the comparability sequence of every alternative is calculated. Finally, 
a grey relational grade, between the reference sequence and every comparability sequence is 
calculated based on the grey relational coefficients. The comparability sequence that has the 
highest grey relational grade between the reference sequence and itself is the best choice, and 
the alternative of that comparability sequence is the best alternative. GRA can be used to 
identify the best performing inventory policy in each experimental scenario. In this 
experimental study, for each scenario, GRA is conducted by considering the inventory 
policies as alternatives and the performance measures as attributes. So in each scenario we 
have five alternatives and four attributes. Out of all performance measures, supply chain fill 

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
203
rate belongs to the category of the-larger-the-better and all the remaining performance 
measures belong to a the-smaller-the-better category. 
 
Table 4. Grey relational coefficients, grey relational grade and  
rank in lostsales environment 
 
Scenario 
Policy 
Grey relational coefficient 
Grey 
relational 
grade 
Rank 
SCFR 
SCRS 
BWE 
TCSC 
1 
OUL 
0.3840 
0.4569 
0.4003 
0.5023 
0.4359 
4 
MOUL 
0.4566 
0.6873 
0.6322 
0.7285 
0.6261 
3 
(r, S) 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3333 
5 
ADS 
0.7506 
1.0000 
0.9586 
0.9447 
0.9135 
2 
DFS 
1.0000 
0.9612 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.9903 
1 
2 
OUL 
0.3496 
0.4324 
0.3864 
0.4849 
0.4133 
4 
MOUL 
0.3817 
0.5572 
0.5666 
0.6705 
0.5440 
3 
(r, S) 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3333 
5 
ADS 
0.5378 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.8845 
2 
DFS 
1.0000 
0.9413 
0.9189 
0.9841 
0.9611 
1 
3 
OUL 
0.8384 
0.5452 
0.4351 
0.7023 
0.6303 
4 
MOUL 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.8122 
1.0000 
0.9530 
1 
(r, S) 
0.5488 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3872 
5 
ADS 
0.3333 
0.9848 
1.0000 
0.9682 
0.8216 
2 
DFS 
0.4937 
0.4071 
0.7929 
0.9699 
0.6659 
3 
4 
OUL 
0.9239 
0.5060 
0.3903 
0.6610 
0.6203 
4 
MOUL 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.8176 
0.9616 
0.9448 
1 
(r, S) 
0.5918 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3980 
5 
ADS 
0.3333 
0.9706 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.8260 
2 
DFS 
0.5241 
0.3720 
0.8060 
0.9378 
0.6600 
3 
 
Table 5. Grey relational coefficients, grey relational grade and  
rank in backorder environment 
 
Scenario 
Policy 
Grey relational coefficient 
Grey 
relational 
grade 
Rank 
SCBR 
SCRS 
BWE 
TCSC 
5 
OUL 
0.4168 
0.4184 
0.5931 
0.7928 
0.5553 
4 
MOUL 
0.4824 
0.6065 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.7722 
1 
(r, S) 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.4873 
0.6477 
0.4504 
5 
ADS 
0.8190 
1.0000 
0.5811 
0.3333 
0.6834 
3 
DFS 
1.0000 
0.9995 
0.3333 
0.6790 
0.7530 
2 
6 
OUL 
0.3439 
0.3611 
0.6120 
0.8259 
0.5357 
4 
MOUL 
0.5423 
0.6921 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.8086 
1 
(r, S) 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.4621 
0.6897 
0.4546 
5 
ADS 
0.8393 
1.0000 
0.3862 
0.3333 
0.6397 
3 
DFS 
1.0000 
0.9995 
0.3333 
0.7289 
0.7654 
2 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
204
Table 5. (Continued) 
 
Scenario 
Policy 
Grey relational coefficient 
Grey 
relational 
grade 
Rank 
SCBR 
SCRS 
BWE 
TCSC 
7 
OUL 
0.3997 
0.3868 
0.4877 
0.6515 
0.4814 
4 
MOUL 
0.6504 
0.6301 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.8201 
1 
(r, S) 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.3923 
0.4330 
0.3730 
5 
ADS 
0.7095 
1.0000 
0.5686 
0.3333 
0.6529 
3 
DFS 
1.0000 
0.9828 
0.3333 
0.4406 
0.6892 
2 
8 
OUL 
0.4662 
0.5246 
0.5110 
0.8998 
0.6004 
3 
MOUL 
0.5162 
0.5342 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.7626 
1 
(r, S) 
0.3333 
0.3333 
0.4170 
0.6927 
0.4441 
5 
ADS 
0.5112 
1.0000 
0.4007 
0.3333 
0.5613 
4 
DFS 
1.0000 
0.9881 
0.3333 
0.6732 
0.7487 
2 
 
The grey relational coefficients, grey relational grade and assigned rank for various 
experimental scenarios are given in Tables 4 and 5. In lostsales environment, a non-inventory 
position based policy (i.e., DFS) is ranked first under no sharing of information and an 
inventory position based policy (i.e., MOUL) is ranked first under sharing of information 
irrespective of the demand distribution. The rank of a policy in scenarios 1 and 2 is the same 
and similar is the case in scenarios 3 and 4. In backorder environment, for all scenarios, 
MOUL is ranked first irrespective of the information sharing and nature of demand 
distribution. Also, GRA based comparison indicates that MOUL is the best for scenarios 3 to 
8 compared to other policies. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In a busy working environment, the operational managers are looking for a ‗handy‘ tool 
to manage inventory. Compared to other simulation software packages, spread spreadsheet-
based simulation package is superior in terms of the cost of the program, installation 
procedure, learning time and suitability for a particular need. This chapter discussed the 
development of a spreadsheet-based simulation package that supports the analysis of various 
periodic review policies in a serial supply chain. The simulation package is developed in the 
Excel platform using VBA. It consists of three modules such as input module, intermediate 
module and an output module. An experimental study is conducted under various supply 
chain scenarios to describe how to use the simulation package for inventory policy analysis. 
The performance measures are tabulated for lostsales and backorder environments. The 
analysis has shown that the proposed package is a suitable tool for simulating inventory 
distribution problem in a four-stage serial supply chain. As a part of the analysis, the selection 
of a right inventory policy for supply chain management considering several performance 
measures is also discussed. Grey relational analysis is the tool used for this purpose. MOUL 
is identified as the best inventory policy for most of the supply chain scenarios.  

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
205
This package can be used only for the analysis of a four-stage serial supply chain. It can 
be further developed to analyze supply chain inventory policies under different supply chain 
structures. 
 
  
REFERENCES 
 
Banks, J., Carson, J. S., Nelson, B. L., Nicol, D. M. & Shahabudeen, P. (2005). Discrete-
event system simulation (Fourth edi.). Pearson Education, New Delhi. 
Boute, R. N. & Lambrecht, M. R. (2009). Exploring the bullwhip effect by means of 
spreadsheet simulation. INFORMS Transactions on Education, 10(1), 1–9. 
Cachon, G. P. & Fisher, M. (2000). Supply chain inventory management and the value of 
shared information. Management Science, 46(8), 1032–1048.  
Chang, Y. & Makatsoris, H. (2001). Supply chain modeling using simulation. International 
Journal of Simulation, 2(1), 24–30. 
Chen, F., Drezner, Z., Ryan, J. K. & Simchi-Levi, D. (2000). Quantifying the Bullwhip Effect 
in a Simple Supply Chain: The Impact of Forecasting, Lead Times, and Information. 
Management Science, 46(3), 436–443.  
Chopra, S., Meindl, P. & Kalra, D. V. (2006). Supply chain management: Strategy, planning, 
and operation (Third edit.). Pearson Education, New Delhi. 
Chwif, L., Paulo, S., Ribeiro, M., Barretto, P., Barretto, M. R. P. & Saliby, E. (2002). Supply 
Chain Analysis: Spreadsheet or Simulation? In Proceedings of the 34th conference on 
Winter simulation (pp. 59–66). 
De Sensi, G., Longo, F. & Mirabelli, G. (2008). Inventory policies analysis under demand 
patterns and lead times constraints in a real supply chain. International Journal of 
Production Research, 46(24), 6997–7016.  
Dominguez, R., Framinan, J. M. & Cannella, S. (2014). Serial vs. divergent supply chain 
networks: a comparative analysis of the bullwhip effect. International Journal of 
Production Research, 52(7), 2194–2210.  
Fung, C. P. (2003). Manufacturing process optimization for wear property of fiber-reinforced 
polybutylene terephthalate composites with grey relational analysis. Wear, 254(3), 298–
306.  
Hassanzadeh, A., Jafarian, A. & Amiri, M. (2013). Modeling and analysis of the causes of 
bullwhip effect in centralized and decentralized supply chain using response surface 
method. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 38(9-10), 2353–2365.  
Heydari, J., Kazemzadeh, R. B., Chaharsooghi, S. K., Baradaran Kazemzadeh, R. & 
Chaharsooghi, S. K. (2009). A study of lead time variation impact on supply chain 
performance. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 40(11-
12), 1206–1215. 
Hung, W. Y., Samsatli, N. J. & Shah, N. (2006). Object-oriented dynamic supply-chain 
modelling incorporated with production scheduling. European Journal of Operational 
Research, 169(3), 1064–1076. 
Kelepouris, T., Miliotis, P. & Pramatari, K. (2008). The impact of replenishment parameters 
and information sharing on the bullwhip effect: a computational study. Computers & 
Operations Research, 35(11), 3657–3670. 

Joby George and V. Madhusudanan Pillai 
206
Kelle, P. & Milne, A. (1999). The effect of ordering policy on the supply chain. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 59(1-3), 113–122.  
Kuo, Y., Yang, T. & Huang, G. W. (2008). The use of grey relational analysis in solving 
multiple attribute decision-making problems. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 
55(1), 80–93. 
Lau, J. S. K., Huang, G. Q. & Mak, K. L. (2004). Impact of information sharing on inventory 
replenishment in divergent supply chains. International Journal of Production Research, 
42(5), 919 – 941.  
Lau, R., Xie, J. & Zhao, X. (2008). Effects of inventory policy on supply chain performance : 
A simulation study of critical decision parameters. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 
55(3), 620–633.  
Lee, H. L., Padmanabhan, V. & Whang, S. (1997). Information Distortion in a Supply Chain: 
The Bullwhip Effect. Management Science, 43(4), 546–558.  
Lee, H. & Wu, J. (2006). A study on inventory replenishment policies in a two-echelon 
supply chain system. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 51(2), 257–263.  
Liang, W. Y. & Huang, C. C. (2006). Agent-based demand forecast in multi-echelon supply 
chain. Decision Support Systems, 42(1), 390–407.  
Mahamani, A., Rao, K. P., Prahlada Rao, K. & Pandurangadu, V. (2008). The development of 
a simulation-based approach to optimise the inventory policy in a single-echelon supply 
chain: a case study. International Journal of Data Analysis Techniques and Strategies, 
1(2), 173 – 192. 
Monthatipkul, C. & Yenradee, P. (2008). Inventory/distribution control system in a one-
warehouse/multi-retailer supply chain. International Journal of Production Economics, 
114(1), 119 – 133.  
Nagpal, G., Uddin, M. & Kaur, A. (2012). A Hybrid Technique using Grey Relational 
Analysis and Regression for Software Effort Estimation using Feature Selection. 
International Journal of Soft Computing and Engineering (IJSCE), 1(6), 20–27. 
Othman, S. N., Mustaffa, N. H. & Sallehuddin, R. (2012). Supply Chain Spreadsheet 
Simulation Optimization. In 2012 Fourth International Conference on Computational 
Intelligence, Modelling and Simulation, (pp. 188 – 193). IEEE. 
Pillai, M., Talari, P. C. & Elluri, P. V. (2013). Performance analysis of some supply chain 
replenishment strategies. International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 
17(5), 357 – 376.  
Reddy, M. M. & Rajendran, C. (2005). A simulation study of dynamic order-up-to policies in 
a supply chain with non-stationary customer demand and information sharing. The 
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 25(9-10), 1029–1045.  
Samvedi, A. & Jain, V. (2011). Studying the impact of various inventory policies on a supply 
chain with intermittent supply disruptions. In Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation 
Conference, (pp. 1641 – 1649). 
Seila, A. F. (2004). Spreadsheet Simulation. In Proceedings of the 2004 Winter Simulation 
Conference, 2004. (pp. 41–48). IEEE. 
Setamanit, S. (2010). Using simulation to explore the impact of inventory policies on supply 
chain performance. Technology Management for Global Economic Growth (PICMET), 
2010 Proceedings of PICMET‟10, 1–6. 
Sezen, B. & Kitapci, H. (2007). Spreadsheet simulation for the supply chain inventory 
problem. Production Planning and Control, 18(1), 9–15.  

Development of Spreadsheet-Based Simulation Package for Supply Chain … 
207
Talari, P. C. (2014). Analysis of information sharing and inventory policies on supply chain 
performance. Ph.D. Thesis. National Institute of Technology Calicut, India. 
Wadhwa, S., Bibhushan. & Chan, F. T. S. S. (2009). Inventory performance of some supply 
chain inventory policies under impulse demands. International Journal of Production 
Research, 47(12), 3307 – 3332. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
A 
ABA, 139 
abuse, 151 
access, 1, 5, 15, 23, 33, 67, 68, 69, 129, 130, 156, 
167, 180 
accountability, 24, 131, 180 
accounting, 4, 13, 17, 60, 130, 132, 180 
acquisitions, 64, 67 
adaptability, 33 
aerospace, 178 
Africa, 65 
age, 4, 39, 61, 62, 129 
agencies, 150, 152, 153, 156 
agility, 18, 76, 77, 81 
agriculture, 6 
air temperature, 105, 108, 111 
algorithm, 17, 103, 125 
amalgam, 75 
ambidexterity, 77, 79 
ambivalence, 87 
antifragility, 77 
arbitration, 150, 152, 154 
arithmetic, 106 
artificial intelligence, 94 
Asia, 25, 62, 65, 178 
aspiration, 79, 81 
assessment, 77, 79, 84, 87, 88, 89, 91, 125, 126, 161, 
170 
assessment tools, 85 
assets, 33, 78, 79, 152, 159, 164 
asymmetry, 161, 167 
AT&T, 36 
attitudes, 60, 83, 159 
authorities, 149, 150, 155 
automate, 192 
automation, 37, 78, 174, 185 
autonomy, 128 
awareness, 79, 176 
B 
backlash, 61 
bacteria, 11 
banking, 183 
bankruptcy, 64 
banks, 62, 95, 133 
bargaining costs, 135 
barriers, 33, 38, 73, 84, 85, 86, 87, 90, 167, 185 
base, 28, 36, 38, 60, 66, 79, 84, 137, 160, 167, 180, 
181, 182 
batteries, 96, 100, 113, 115, 117 
behaviors, 14 
benchmarking, 38, 79, 135 
benchmarks, 153, 158, 168 
beneficiaries, 152, 155 
benefits, 1, 8, 9, 12, 15, 21, 23, 27, 31, 37, 38, 53, 
57, 69, 75, 81, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 134, 137, 
139, 159, 160, 163, 166, 174, 176, 178, 179 
bias, 80, 82 
blame, 133 
blends, 77 
blind spot, 84 
boat, 160 
bottom-up, 158 
Brazil, 64, 65, 67 
brothers, 66 
building blocks, 79, 80, 151, 158 
bureaucracy, 86 
business cycle, 14 
business environment, 41, 67, 196, 198 
business function, 129, 130, 131, 137 
business model, 5, 10, 12, 66, 69, 83, 87, 153, 181 
business processes, 29, 33, 129, 178 
business strategy, x, 5, 60, 127 
businesses, 3, 9, 10, 12, 59, 64, 77, 87, 129, 130, 
137, 138, 157, 164 
buyer(s), 5, 37, 138, 174, 175, 176, 179, 182 

Index 
210
C 
call centers, 21, 22, 23, 36 
candidates, 86 
carbon, 94, 179 
cartel, 155 
case study(s), 1, 8, 11, 18, 59, 62, 63, 70, 90, 136, 
138, 139, 140, 177, 183, 184, 185, 206 
cash flow, 74, 159, 164 
causal relationship, 139, 175 
causation, 89 
CEI Data, 114, 115, 117, 118 
cell phones, 36 
cement manufacturing, x, 141, 142, 143, 144, 147 
Centennial Energy Institute (CEI), 93, 96, 103, 104, 
105, 108, 109, 110, 111, 114, 115, 117, 118, 120, 
123, 124 
certification, 34, 150, 152, 153, 156, 167, 178 
chain mobility, 87 
challenges, ix, 17, 23, 38, 74, 162, 164, 170, 184 
changing environment, 89 
chaos, 80 
cheese, 11 
chemical, 28, 89, 152 
chemical industry, 89 
children, 61 
China, 23, 28, 29, 38, 185 
cities, 181 
clarity, ix 
classification, 97 
clean energy, 94 
clients, 132, 133, 135 
climate(s), 60, 96, 97, 106, 108, 111, 113, 124, 126 
cluster analysis, 161 
clustering, 61, 162 
clusters, 66, 74, 79, 80, 88, 154, 156, 161, 164 
coal, 94 
codes of conduct, 151, 153 
cognitive system, 16 
collaboration, 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 15, 16, 29, 33, 59, 63, 64, 
66, 68, 69, 70, 74, 127, 137, 138, 170, 173, 174, 
175, 177, 182, 184 
collateral, 151, 155, 156, 158, 165, 166, 167, 168 
collateral damage, 167 
college students, 66 
colleges, 68 
collusion, 155 
commercial, 95 
commodity, 8, 25, 68 
commodity markets, 25 
communication, 6, 23, 30, 36, 65, 85, 138, 152, 156, 
167, 169, 174, 176, 179, 182, 183 
communication technologies, 182, 183 
community(s), 10, 60, 156 
comparative analysis, 140, 205 
compensation, 80, 82, 150 
competition, 25, 30, 31, 33, 75, 77, 83, 89, 136, 147, 
150, 151, 152, 155, 156, 160, 168, 169, 170, 173, 
178, 188 
competitive advantage, x, 2, 30, 63, 67, 69, 131, 136, 
137, 138, 175, 179, 180 
competitiveness, 28, 37, 89 
competitors, 61, 69, 83, 149, 151, 152, 153, 154, 
155, 156, 157, 164, 167, 181, 182 
compilation, 150 
complement, 65, 83 
complementarity, 42 
complementary products, 150 
complexity, 39, 79, 94, 155, 156, 162, 163, 175, 176, 
180, 183, 187, 188 
compliance, 42, 84, 86, 134, 150, 167 
complications, 10 
composites, 205 
composition, 160 
comprehension, 158 
computation, 41, 42, 198 
computer, 93, 136 
computer simulations, 93 
computing, 74, 87, 168 
concise, 151 
concurrent engineering, 74 
conditioning, 103 
conduction, 102 
conference, 205 
confidentiality, 132 
configuration, 26, 37, 75, 95, 115, 116, 149, 151, 
152, 153, 154, 160, 163, 166, 190 
conflict, x, 79, 80, 83, 149, 150, 151, 152, 154, 155, 
156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 
166, 167, 168, 169, 170 
Conflict Management, 149, 151, 158, 159, 161, 170 
conflict prevention, 161 
conflict resolution, 152, 160 
conformity, 155, 167 
congruence, 5, 11, 174, 175, 184 
consensus, 13, 164 
constituents, 74, 75, 164 
construction, 34, 60, 80, 94, 95, 158 
consulting, 152 
consumer protection, 153 
consumers, 6, 8, 11, 13, 60, 61, 65, 66, 68, 133, 184 
consumption, 13, 14, 111, 164, 179 
containers, 78 
contingency, 85, 131, 139, 179 
controversial, 82, 134, 161, 163 
controversies, 135, 168 

Index 
211
convergence, 87, 153 
cooling, 11 
cooperation, x, 33, 75, 150, 155, 156, 165, 168, 170, 
176 
coordination, 30, 74, 77, 78, 81, 83, 86, 135, 150, 
153, 154, 167, 169, 187, 188 
copper, 103 
co-producers, 83, 153 
correlation, 110, 175 
corruption, 77, 155, 167 
cost benefit analysis, 25 
cost benefits, 23 
cost effectiveness, 4 
cost minimization, 61 
cost saving, 4, 24, 26, 128, 136 
costs of production, 69 
covering, 81, 97, 154 
creativity, 60, 159, 166 
credit rating, 150 
crises, 77 
crystalline, 97, 98, 102 
cultural differences, 23, 29 
culture, 28, 29, 68, 69, 128, 184 
customer loyalty, 13 
customer relations, 140, 153 
customer service, 12, 23, 38, 63, 132, 137, 177, 178 
customers, x, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 21, 22, 26, 28, 32, 33, 36, 
41, 42, 59, 61, 63, 66, 67, 68, 69, 76, 78, 83, 84, 
132, 136, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 
157, 162, 173, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 182, 
183, 190 
cyber-attack, 77 
D 
dairy industry, 2, 6, 11 
data set, 102 
decentralization, 74 
decision-making process, 51 
decomposition, 86 
decoupling, 78, 83, 84, 85, 161, 167 
defects, 22, 26, 76, 150, 156 
denial, 158 
depreciation, 60, 111 
depth, 37 
detection, 161 
determinants of performance, 74, 87 
developing countries, 25 
directives, 178 
directors, 4, 156 
disaster, 85 
disclosure, 156, 167 
discrimination, 150, 157 
distribution, x, 6, 11, 18, 34, 43, 46, 51, 57, 64, 65, 
67, 71, 110, 111, 139, 152, 157, 173, 176, 178, 
179, 180, 181, 184, 187, 193, 195, 196, 197, 198, 
199, 204, 206 
diversification, 85 
diversity, 151, 154, 176 
dominance, 76 
double helix, 99 
dumping, 151 
E 
early warning, 152 
Eastern Europe, 23 
e-commerce, 82 
economic performance, 184 
economic problem, 64 
economics, 24, 169 
economies of scale, 88, 130, 137 
education, 60 
effectiveness, 3, 4, 22, 56, 73, 74, 77, 80, 84, 129, 
159, 163, 174, 184 
efficiency, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 26, 35, 44, 67, 73, 74, 76, 77, 
80, 84, 94, 97, 129, 135, 144, 159, 163, 179, 180 
e-learning, 181 
election, 62 
electricity, 93, 94, 99 
e-mail, 179, 180 
emergency, 57, 58 
emission, 77 
empathy, 28, 169 
employees, 7, 22, 60, 63, 64, 127, 130, 131, 132, 
133, 134, 174, 176, 177, 178, 181, 182, 183 
employment, 23 
enemies, 155 
energy, ix, 60, 64, 78, 82, 87, 93, 94, 95, 96, 99, 101, 
106, 124, 125, 126, 179 
energy efficiency, 94 
energy sources, ix, 93, 94 
energy supply, 87 
enforcement, 34 
engineering, 24, 76, 91, 139, 185 
England, 38 
entrepreneurs, 153 
environment(s), 1, 10, 33, 59, 98, 127, 150, 179, 187, 
196, 197, 198, 199, 201, 202, 203, 204 
environmental impact, 179 
environmental issues, 94, 179 
environmental sustainability, 80 
equilibrium, 25 
equipment, 6, 11, 24, 26, 28, 34, 67, 85, 103, 128, 
178 
equity, 166 

Index 
212
Europe, 64, 65, 178 
evidence, 16, 17, 175, 184 
evolution, 29, 99, 138, 158, 170 
exchange rate, 60 
execution, 30, 37 
expertise, 37, 41, 131, 150, 166 
exploitation, 74, 77, 83 
exposure, 107 
external relations, 175 
externalities, 154, 158, 161, 166 
extraconflict arena, 150, 154, 155, 156, 169 
F 
facilitators, 90, 159 
factories, 61 
family members, x, xi 
farmers, 6, 7, 10, 11 
farms, 6, 8, 10, 13, 16, 18 
FDIC, 133 
fear, 128 
federal government, 137 
federal law, 61 
fiber, 205 
filters, 162 
financial, ix, 3, 4, 5, 9, 15, 18, 31, 32, 68, 128, 130, 
131, 182 
financial performance, 4, 5, 18 
financial resources, 130, 182 
firm size, 5 
flexibility, 5, 18, 37, 63, 71, 76, 80, 81, 91, 130, 131, 
139, 155, 176, 185 
fluctuations, 13, 94 
food, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 17, 28, 62, 66, 68, 70 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 7, 10, 11 
food chain, 62 
food industry, 10, 70 
food products, 7 
force, 73, 84, 86, 161, 178 
force field analysis, 73, 84, 86, 161 
forecasting, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 65, 140, 175, 
176, 185, 189, 190, 191 
forecasting model, 12 
foreign firms, 67 
formation, ix, 68, 176 
formula, 55, 158 
fragility, 88 
fragments, 153 
fraud, 77 
freezing, 85 
friction, 24 
G 
genes, 75 
geography, 16 
Germany, 89, 90, 170, 171 
GIS, 62 
global competition, 136 
global economy, 60, 136, 137 
global scale, 64, 65 
global warming, ix, 93 
globalization, 39, 64, 74, 87 
goods and services, 2 
governance, 74, 83, 86, 90, 137, 151, 153, 156, 169 
governments, 59 
graph, 103, 117, 191 
grounding, 103, 137 
growth, 5, 36, 64, 67, 68, 94, 174, 177, 181 
growth rate, 94 
GSCM applications, x 
guidance, xi, 9, 133 
guidelines, 12, 80, 163 
H 
handoff, 133, 138 
hazards, 22, 28 
health, 28, 32, 61 
hedging, 77 
height, 2, 93, 107, 115, 116, 121, 122, 123, 124 
high winds, 99 
highways, 66, 68, 69 
hiring, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133 
histogram, 110, 111 
history, 70, 71, 175 
HOMER, ix, 93, 94, 95, 103, 110, 113, 124, 126 
homes, 23 
Hong Kong, 125 
host, 45 
hub, 16, 70, 74, 93, 115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 121, 
122, 123, 124, 140 
human, 33, 39, 60, 61, 63, 78, 130, 132, 134, 135 
human capital, 39 
human resources, 63, 132, 134, 135 
Hungary, 16, 70 
hybrid, ix, 17, 70, 75, 80, 93, 94, 95, 96, 100, 102, 
119, 120, 124, 125, 126, 129, 155 
hypothesis, 74 
I 
ideal, 15, 100, 202 
identification, 62, 176 

Index 
213
IMA, 16 
image(s), 13, 39, 61, 133, 170 
imitation, 158 
immunization, 167 
imported products, 178 
imports, 103 
improvements, 62, 81, 182 
impulses, 167, 191 
incidence, 62 
income, x, 62, 159 
incompatibility, 83, 85 
independent variable, 174 
India, x, 23, 29, 36, 38, 62, 136, 137, 184, 187, 207 
individuals, 175 
industrial location, 60, 62 
industrial processing, 13 
industrial relations, 165 
industrialization, 82 
industry(s), 5, 9, 11, 12, 18, 24, 28, 37, 60, 64, 65, 
69, 71, 87, 90, 129, 131, 133, 136, 137, 138, 140, 
151, 152, 153, 156, 178, 184, 185 
inertia, 86 
inferences, 199 
information sharing, 5, 34, 127, 174, 175, 190, 191, 
198, 200, 201, 204, 205, 206, 207 
information technology, x, 62, 71, 134, 135 
infrastructure, 65, 86, 151, 152, 153, 154, 169, 181 
inhibition, 158 
inhibitor, 74 
innovator, 79 
inspections, 11, 25, 61 
inspectors, 25 
integration, 2, 12, 15, 24, 28, 29, 31, 33, 37, 59, 63, 
64, 66, 68, 69, 70, 86, 90, 127, 128, 137, 138, 
152, 158, 166, 167, 173, 175, 177, 178, 179, 180, 
182, 185 
integrators, 33, 154 
integrity, 61 
intelligence, x, 12, 149, 152, 161, 162, 163 
interconflict arena, 150, 154, 155, 160, 168 
interconnectedness, x, 150, 159, 162, 165, 168 
interdependence, 152 
interface, 83, 150, 154, 168, 191 
intermediaries, 28, 154, 155, 166 
interoperability, 167 
intervention, 32, 74, 86, 149, 159, 160, 161, 162, 
163, 164, 165, 166, 167 
intraconflict arena, 149, 151, 168 
investment(s), 4, 5, 8, 29, 34, 86, 87, 97, 128, 134, 
161, 164, 177, 179, 182 
Ireland, 71, 88 
isolation, 94, 176 
issues, ix, 14, 21, 22, 23, 24, 36, 42, 83, 128, 129, 
133, 138, 149, 150, 156, 157, 162, 165, 167, 175, 
176, 185 
J 
joint ventures, 64, 152, 157, 160, 166 
jurisdiction, 152 
K 
kill, 136 
L 
labeling, 11, 84 
labor relations, 151 
lack of control, 29 
landscape, 149, 156 
laptop, 62 
laws, 81, 151, 156 
lawyers, 152, 156, 164 
leagility, 77 
leaks, 158, 167 
lean management, 76 
lean production, 16 
Lean Six Sigma, 77, 82, 89, 90 
learning, 17, 33, 74, 77, 82, 86, 130, 160, 168, 189, 
204 
learning process, 86 
LED, 94, 102, 111, 125 
legality, 17 
legislation, 4, 61, 178 
lens, 63, 177 
life cycle, 77 
lifetime, 74, 94, 113 
light, 94, 102, 111 
linear function, 49, 50 
linear programming, 71, 95, 139, 190 
litigation, 150, 152, 156, 159 
location strategy(s), ix, 59, 60, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 
69, 70, 185 
logistics, ix, 2, 16, 32, 41, 42, 70, 76, 77, 89, 140, 
150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 174, 175, 179, 181, 184, 
185 
lumen, 111 
M 
majority, 24, 36, 66, 176 
Malaysia, x, xi 

Index 
214
manpower, 28, 62, 79, 128, 129 
manufactured goods, 22 
manufacturing, x, 2, 9, 11, 13, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 
23, 25, 34, 38, 59, 60, 61, 64, 66, 67, 68, 76, 78, 
88, 89, 130, 137, 138, 140, 177, 178, 182, 183, 
184, 190, 191 
manufacturing companies, 67 
mapping, 17, 70, 74, 183 
market position, 135 
market share, 6, 64, 74, 154 
marketing, 8, 174, 184 
marketplace, 3, 8, 90, 177, 179, 181, 182 
Marshall, John, 93 
mass, 44, 45, 46, 51, 75, 76, 78, 83, 178 
mass customization, 75 
material resources, 179 
materials, 2, 3, 34, 35, 61, 64, 65, 68, 85, 127, 137, 
153, 167, 179 
mathematical methods, 95 
mathematics, 45 
matrix, 71 
matter, x, 9, 128 
measurement(s), 4, 18, 22, 38, 62, 71, 85, 88, 106, 
108, 140, 176, 185 
media, 61, 94, 137, 156, 157, 169 
median, 79 
mediation, 149, 152, 164 
membership, 151, 167 
mergers, 166 
meter, 103, 106 
methodology, 38, 70, 73, 84, 89, 95, 125, 183, 189, 
191, 195 
Mexico, 8, 64, 65, 67 
Microsoft, 187, 192 
migration, 82 
mission(s), 79, 82, 130 
mixing, 75, 78, 80, 164 
mobile communication, 179 
mobile phone, 166 
modelling, 86, 188, 205 
models, 11, 12, 16, 56, 57, 62, 74, 75, 77, 79, 80, 82, 
83, 95, 124, 134, 138, 149, 152, 153, 156, 162, 
163, 164, 166, 167, 168, 187, 188, 191 
modifications, 165 
modules, 97, 180, 191, 192, 204 
moral hazard, 77 
motivation, 68, 80 
multidimensional, 164, 177 
multinational companies, 129 
multinational enterprises, 16 
N 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), 
126 
natural disaster, 63 
natural resources, 61 
negative experiences, 133 
neglect, 56 
negotiating, 33, 74, 151, 155, 169 
negotiation, 132, 135 
networking, 31, 138 
neutral, 152, 156, 166 
next generation, 138 
niche market, 182 
nodes, 42, 154, 156, 165 
North America, 65, 173 
NPC, 115, 116, 117, 123, 125 
O 
obstacles, 26, 79, 107 
offshoring, ix, 22, 26, 39, 61, 129, 178 
oil, 25 
operating system, 166 
operations, 1, 2, 3, 8, 12, 17, 18, 22, 24, 26, 36, 38, 
42, 44, 56, 59, 64, 67, 76, 89, 91, 129, 131, 132, 
133, 134, 140, 160, 161, 162, 163, 174, 176, 184, 
185, 196 
opportunities, 9, 13, 15, 77, 80, 81, 82, 88, 89, 128, 
130, 137, 170 
optimal performance, 163 
optimization, 17, 29, 42, 74, 76, 94, 95, 125, 158, 
188, 205 
optimization method, 95 
organizational culture, 67 
oscillation, 14 
outpacing, 78, 84 
outsourcing, ix, x, 2, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 
30, 31, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 76, 78, 127, 128, 129, 
130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 
140, 168, 176, 178 
oversight, 11 
ownership, 3, 9, 77, 157, 160 
P 
pain, 85, 130 
Pakistan, 183 
palliative, 167 
Panama, 16, 70 
parallel, 164 
paralysis, 86 

Index 
215
parents, x 
Pareto, 161 
parity, 33 
participants, 151, 160 
pasteurization, 11 
patents, 157 
pattern recognition, 161, 174 
payback period, 179 
peace, 158 
percolation, 167 
performance dimensions, 73, 79, 81 
performance disablers, 84 
performance enablers, 84 
performance indicator, 74, 159, 164 
performance measurement, 4, 74, 89, 93, 160, 163 
personal communication, 175 
pharmaceutical, 152 
Philippines, 23 
pilot study, 199 
piracy, 154 
plants, 11, 64, 67 
platform, 37, 88, 150, 153, 181, 192, 204 
polar, 79, 161 
policy, 18, 42, 43, 57, 71, 184, 187, 188, 189, 190, 
191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 
201, 202, 204, 206 
pollution, ix, 64, 93, 94, 179 
polybutylene terephthalate, 205 
poor performance, 188 
population, 62, 68 
portfolio, x, 17, 78, 161, 163, 164, 165, 170 
portfolio management, 78, 161, 165 
positive correlation, 175 
positive relationship, 4 
power generation, 94 
precipitation, 106 
preparation, 137 
primary parties, 151, 156, 166 
principles, 3, 14, 74, 80, 137, 158, 173 
private information, 132 
probability, 25, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 51, 63, 68, 84, 87, 
95, 125, 159, 161, 162 
probability distribution, 43 
problem solving, 4, 159, 168, 180 
process control, 136, 190 
process innovation, 78 
procurement, 140, 155 
procurement systems, 140 
producers, 7, 83, 153, 156 
production costs, 16, 26, 69, 74, 135 
production level, ix, 9 
production process, ix, 9, 24, 25, 26, 65, 68 
professionals, 66 
profit, 2, 5, 8, 26, 60, 61, 74, 137, 182 
profit margin, 5, 8, 137, 182 
profitability, 67, 70, 129, 180, 181 
programming, 22, 102, 136, 188, 189 
programming languages, 189 
project, 17, 18, 76, 79, 95, 96, 140, 153, 161, 163, 
185 
proliferation, 60 
propagation, 76, 88, 150, 156, 161, 166, 167 
proposition, 49 
protection, 64, 79, 99, 133 
prototype(s), 95, 96 
publishing, xi 
purchasing power, 180 
Push-pull-systems, 78 
Q 
qualifications, 178 
quality assurance, 18, 28, 140 
quality control, 2, 6 
quality improvement, 16 
quality of life, 61, 63 
quality of service, 23 
quality standards, 66, 76 
quantitative research, 62 
question mark, 164 
R 
radar, 161, 162 
radiation, 103, 104, 106, 107, 108, 109, 111 
radius, 6 
rate of change, 156 
raw materials, 2, 8, 60, 61, 65, 68, 81, 150, 196 
real estate, 59 
real time, 31, 62, 124 
reality, 132, 158, 183 
reasoning, 162 
recession, 136 
recognition, 161, 168 
recommendations, 93 
reconstruction, 158 
recovery, 77, 131, 179 
recruiting, 23 
recycling, 77, 150, 179, 185 
redundancy, 82 
regional facilities, 65 
regulations, 10, 11, 12, 81, 133, 150, 151, 167 
relationship management, 1, 3, 66, 74, 140, 153, 169 
relevance, 80, 153, 155, 161, 164, 168 
reliability, 28, 37, 74, 95, 97, 108, 128 

Index 
216
renewable energy, ix, 93, 94, 100 
repair, 38, 39, 182 
replication, 196, 199 
reputation, ix, 3, 9, 68, 128, 131, 133, 138, 152, 168, 
178 
requirement(s), 22, 23, 26, 29, 33, 34, 35, 63, 73, 81, 
85, 86, 87, 94, 95, 96, 106, 131, 136, 158, 174, 
176 
RES, 94 
researchers, ix, x, 26, 33, 62, 63, 70, 94, 175, 177, 
183, 189 
reserves, 65 
resilience, ix, 17, 70, 73, 74, 76, 77, 79, 82, 84, 88, 
90, 91, 183 
resistance, 100 
resolution, 34, 93, 95, 102, 124, 151, 165, 168 
resources, 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 13, 17, 57, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 
69, 74, 78, 83, 85, 86, 94, 96, 128, 129, 130, 133, 
149, 153, 156, 157, 159, 160, 165, 175, 176, 180 
response, 31, 33, 47, 73, 75, 79, 80, 95, 125, 180, 
205 
response time, 80, 180 
responsiveness, 2, 5, 37, 61 
restaurant chain, ix, 59, 66, 67 
restaurants, 61, 66 
restrictions, 178 
retail, 13, 14, 33, 60, 62, 67, 70, 154, 166, 175 
retaliation, 157, 163 
revenue, 24, 26, 36, 37, 60, 61, 67, 68, 69 
risk factors, 134 
risk management, 70, 73, 75, 77, 79, 83, 85, 91, 127, 
151, 159, 162, 165, 167 
ROI, 5 
root(s), 32, 154, 155, 162, 169 
routines, 159 
Royal Society, 169 
rules, 32, 44, 50, 56, 133, 150, 152, 153, 158, 163 
S 
safety, 10, 11, 18, 22, 28, 61, 85, 98, 124, 190 
Sanyo, 97, 98, 102, 114, 115, 116, 123, 124 
SAP, 37, 38 
satellite technology, 31 
savings, 23, 25, 130 
scarce resources, 154, 163 
school, 83 
science, 170 
SCO, 5 
scope, 69, 73, 82, 86, 151, 153, 155, 159, 163, 164, 
168 
Secondary parties, 152 
security, 28, 37, 78, 80, 81, 85, 132, 133 
security guard, 133 
self-organization, 158 
seller(s), 7, 8, 138 
sensing, 33 
sensitivity, 93, 115, 116 
sensor(s), 102, 103 
Serbia, 64 
service firm(s), 61, 140 
service organization(s), 60, 61, 66, 67, 68 
service provider, 32, 37, 38, 128, 177, 185 
service quality, 22, 26, 28, 36, 37, 38, 127, 136, 138, 
185 
services, ix, 2, 7, 11, 21, 22, 23, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 
33, 36, 105, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 135, 136, 
150, 152, 153, 154, 156, 159, 164, 166, 167, 168, 
176, 180, 181, 183 
shade, 107 
shape, 78, 110, 154, 160 
shelf life, 13 
shelter, 108 
shortage, 67, 93, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 
124, 187, 188, 189, 194, 196, 198, 200, 201 
showing, 3 
side effects, 14 
signals, 85, 155, 159, 161, 162 
significance level, 199 
signs, 11, 80 
silicon, 98 
simulation(s), ix, x, 42, 47, 50, 51, 76, 93, 95, 104, 
124, 125, 161, 162, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 
193, 194, 195, 196, 198, 199, 204, 205, 206 
Singapore, 90 
single chain, 12 
Six Sigma, 17, 74, 76, 77, 79, 81, 89, 90, 140 
skilled workers, 25, 36 
slack, 80, 82, 85, 167 
slavery, 61 
Slovakia, 64 
social capital, 159, 176 
social conflicts, 168 
social construct, 62 
social interaction, 169 
social life, 77 
social network, 167 
social quality, 175 
social responsibility, 61 
social standing, 15 
sodium, 111 
software, ix, 29, 33, 42, 45, 93, 95, 124, 150, 153, 
180, 181, 184, 189, 204 
solar cells, 98 
Solar PV panel, 113 
solar system, 94 

Index 
217
solidarity, 151 
solidification, 167 
solution, 15, 29, 30, 31, 33, 42, 43, 50, 55, 62, 82, 
131, 137, 168, 187, 188 
South America, 23, 65, 178 
South Korea, 184 
specialists, 130, 133 
species, 75, 77, 80, 150, 155, 168 
specifications, 7, 22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 34, 100, 174, 
193 
spending, 67 
spillovers, 149, 166 
Sri Lanka, 139 
stakeholders, 61, 63, 69, 80, 151, 153, 166, 178, 180 
standard deviation, 106, 193 
standardization, 37, 74, 76, 86, 159, 174 
state(s), 10, 49, 59, 61, 66, 80, 117, 124, 159, 181 
statistics, 15, 79 
steel, ix, 11, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 103 
steel industry, 64, 69 
steel production company, ix 
stock, 13, 34, 42, 43, 57, 179, 180 
storage, 35, 36, 41, 94, 95, 101, 115, 116, 124, 125, 
196 
strategic management, 63, 177 
strategic planning, 174, 175, 178, 180 
stratification, 135 
street-lighting, ix, 93, 94, 95 
stress, 133 
structure, 5, 37, 137, 139, 154, 162, 163, 170, 176, 
188, 189, 193 
style, 67, 168 
substitution, 43, 168 
Suntech, 97, 98, 114, 115, 117, 118, 123, 124 
supervision, 150 
supervisors, 150 
Supply Chain Management (SCM), ix, x, xi, 1, 2, 3, 
4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 15, 18, 29, 30, 63, 64, 65, 76, 
77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 103, 
139, 140, 141, 145, 148, 153, 170, 173, 174, 176, 
177, 179, 180, 182, 184 
supply chain partnerships, ix 
supply disruption, 206 
supply network, x, 31, 33, 87, 153, 154, 155, 156, 
159, 160, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168 
surplus, 43 
sustainability, 9, 71, 87, 88, 89, 184 
sustainable growth, 182 
Switzerland, 38, 91 
symmetry, 167 
symptoms, 162 
synchronization, 5, 34, 176 
syndrome, 154 
T 
talent, 23, 61, 130 
tangible benefits, 66 
tanks, 10 
target, 3, 68, 69, 162, 167, 182, 202 
tax rates, 59 
taxes, 60 
teams, 153, 170 
technical support, 36, 136 
techniques, 2, 6, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 62, 94, 173, 174, 
188 
technology(s), 11, 29, 30, 31, 33, 37, 38, 62, 76, 78, 
79, 81, 83, 85, 94, 97, 125, 126, 129, 130, 133, 
174, 175, 181, 182, 184 
temperature, 11, 97, 102, 106, 108, 113, 117 
Temperature Effect, 117, 123 
tensions, 80 
Tertiary parties, 152, 155 
testing, 11, 94, 96 
text mining, 161 
Thailand, 18, 71, 185 
theft, 63 
third dimension, 152, 155 
threats, 76, 77, 80, 84, 89 
time constraints, 7 
time series, 103 
top-down, 158 
total costs, 42, 52, 53, 56, 63, 64 
total energy, 179 
total product, 62 
total revenue, 60 
Toyota, 33, 137 
toys, 22, 28 
trade, 50, 53, 74, 81, 82, 150, 179, 185 
trade-off, 50, 53, 74, 81, 82, 185 
trading partners, 12 
traditions, 67 
trafficking, 61 
training, 29, 181, 182 
transaction costs, 1, 5 
transactions, 33, 153 
transfer pricing, 168 
transformation, 33, 79, 160 
translocation, 166 
transparency, 15, 61, 167 
transport, 10, 11, 16, 18, 45, 70, 71, 74, 185 
transportation, 8, 24, 25, 34, 42, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 
65, 66, 67, 68, 184, 198, 201 
transportation infrastructure, 8, 63 
transshipment, 42, 57 
treatment, 157 
triggers, 155 

Index 
218
truck drivers, 65 
turnover, 4, 182 
U 
U.S. Department of Commerce, 38, 39 
unemployment rate, 23 
uniform, 66, 198, 199 
unions, x, 138 
United States (USA), 61, 64, 98, 183 
universities, 66 
unresolved conflict, 165 
updating, 106 
V 
value net, 153, 154 
vapor, 111 
variables, 14, 35, 93, 115, 116 
variations, 12, 97, 106, 189 
vegetable oil, 71, 139 
vehicles, 77 
velocity, 33 
venture capital, 61 
versatility, 10 
vessels, 25 
victims, 152, 155, 161, 166, 167 
virtualization, 87 
viruses, 133, 167 
vision(s), 80, 158, 176 
visualization, 31 
volatility, 12, 13, 14, 65, 81, 83, 156 
Volkswagen, 184 
W 
wage level, 25 
wages, 25, 60, 61 
waste, 26, 76, 77, 80, 82, 86, 98, 142, 145, 146, 147, 
179 
waste management, 76, 77 
water, 65, 80 
waterways, 65, 68, 69 
weakness, 80 
wealth, 185 
weather patterns, 25 
web, 153, 156 
web service, 156 
websites, 63 
well-being, 10 
Western Europe, 5 
wholesale, 57, 154, 166 
wholesaler, ix, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 
51, 52, 54, 55, 56, 187, 188, 189 
Wi-Fi, 182 
wind power, 115, 117, 121, 125 
wind speed(s), 99, 101, 104, 107, 109, 110, 111, 124 
wind turbines, 93, 94, 98, 99, 101 
wires, 103 
withdrawal, 151, 159, 167 
work ethic, 60 
workers, 23, 26, 28, 33, 61 
workflow, 34 
workforce, 129 
working class, 39 
worldwide, 28, 69, 94, 137 
worry, 8, 9, 131 
writing process, 132 
Y 
yield, 34, 126 
 

