
Symbolizing and Communicating  
in Mathematics Classrooms
Perspectives on Discourse, Tools,  
and Instructional Design


 Symbolizing and Communicating 
in Mathematics Classrooms 
 Perspectives on Discourse, Tools,  
and Instructional Design 
Edited by
Paul Cobb 
Vanderbilt University
Erna Yackel 
Purdue University-Calumet
Kay McClain 
Vanderbilt University
LAWRENCE ERLBAUM ASSOCIATES, PUBLISHERS
Mahwah, New Jersey	
London

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2009.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s 
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
Copyright © 2000 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in 
any form, by photostat, microfilm, retrieval system, or any other 
means, without prior written permission of the publisher
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers 
10 Industrial Avenue 
Mahwah, NJ 07430
Cover design by Kathryn Houghtaling Lacey
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Symbolizing and communication in mathematics classrooms: 
perspectives on discourse, tools, and instructional design/ 
edited by Paul Cobb, Erna Yackel, and Kay McClain. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-8058-2975-X (hb: alk. paper)— 
ISBN 0-8058-2976-8 (pb: alk. paper) 
1. Mathematics—Study and teaching. 2. Mathematical notation. 
I. Cobb, Paul. II. Yackel, Erna. III. McClain, Kay. 
QA11.S873  1999 
510′.71–dc21	
99–52381 
	
CIP
ISBN 1-4106-0535-3 Master e-book ISBN

We dedicate this book to Jenny Cobb 
with thanks for the numerous and varied 
ways in which she has supported our work 
over the years.


vii
Contents
	
Preface	
ix
	
	
Erna Yackel, Paul Cobb, Kay McClain	
1	
Introduction: Perspectives on Semiotics and 	
 1 
Instructional Design
	
Erna Yackel
PART I THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS
2	
From Representations to Symbolizing: Introductory 	
 17
	
Comments on Semiotics and Mathematical Learning
	
	
Paul Cobb
3	
Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being—Or How 	
 37
	
Mathematical Discourse and Mathematical Objects Create 
	
Each Other
	
	
Anna Sfard
4	
Means for Meaning	
 99
	
	
Willi Dörfler
5	
The Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols: 	
 133
	
A Psychosemiotic Approach to Mathematics Learning
	
	
Bert van Oers
6	
“If You Look at it the Other Way…”: An Exploration Into 	
 177
	
the Nature of Symbolizing
	
	
Ricardo Nemirovsky, Stephen Monk

viii  Contents
PART II INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN ISSUES RELATED 
TO SYMBOLIZING, COMMUNICATING, 
AND MATHEMATIZING
7	
Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design	
225
	
	
Koeno Gravemeijer, Paul Cobb, Janet Bowers, Joy Whitenack 
8	
Designs for Environments That Invite and Sustain	
 275
	
Mathematical Thinking
	
	
John Bransford, Linda Zech, Dan Schwarts, Brigid Barron,
	
	
Nancy Vye, and The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt 
9	
The Innerrelated Development of Inscriptions and 	
 325
	
Conceptual Understanding
	
	
Richard Lehrer, Leona Schauble, Susan Carpenter, David Penner
10	 Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing: 	
361
	
Key Components of Models and Modeling
	
	
Richard Lesh, Helen M.Doerr
11	 Postscript: Integrating Themes on Discourse and Design	
 385
	
	
Janet Bowers
	
Author Index	
399
	
Subject Index	
405

ix
Preface
In 1993, we, in collaboration with Koeno Gravemeijer of the Fruedenthal 
Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands, began working on a National Science 
Foundation-funded 
project 
titled 
“Mathematizing, 
Modeling, 
and 
Communicating in Reform Classrooms.” A major purpose of the project 
was to investigate the role of models and symbols in mathematical learning, 
thereby addressing a previously underdeveloped area of learning theory. 
Our intention was to build on and extend previous research by coordinating 
a cognitive analysis of the role of modeling in mathematical development 
with an analysis of the fundamentally social nature of model and symbol use 
in innovative classrooms. To that end, we conducted a series of classroom 
teaching experiments in first-, second-, and third-grade mathematics classes 
where mathematics instruction followed an inquiry tradition. These teaching 
experiments differed significantly from those that we had conducted in our 
previous work in that, in these, we were guided not only by our understanding 
of individual students’ mathematical conceptual development, but also by the 
instructional design theory of Realistic Mathematics Education (RME). Of 
particular importance in each case was developing one or more realistic (in 
the sense of RME) scenarios that could serve as starting points for students’ 
initial informal activity and that had the potential to facilitate students’ 
development of more formal mathematical reasoning. In the process we 
were able to investigate the role that student-generated models can play in 
supporting their transition from informal, situated problem solving to more 
formal yet personally-meaningful mathematical activity.
As the project progressed it became apparent to us that it would be helpful to 
engage in in-depth discussions with others who were also grappling with issues 
of communicating, symbolizing, modeling, and mathematizing, particularly as 
these issues relate to learning in the classroom. It was for this purpose that we 

x  Preface
assembled a small international group at Vanderbilt University in the fall of 
1995 for a symposium on symbolizing, communicating, and mathematizing. 
This volume is a result of that symposium.
This book is intended for those who are seeking to expand their understanding 
of the complexity of learning as we are, so that we can enhance the learning 
experiences students have in schools.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to acknowledge the assistance of a number of people who contributed 
significantly to the successful production of this book. We are grateful to 
the National Science Foundation, and especially to our program officers, 
Richard Lesh and Barbara Lovitts, for supporting the symposium which led 
to preparation of the book itself. We also thank the Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement and especially Thomas Romberg, Director of 
the National Research and Development Center on Achievement in School 
Mathematics and Science, for supporting the development of the book. We are 
grateful to Andy Anderson, for providing a detailed review that contributed 
significantly to the improvement of this volume, and to Naomi Silverman of 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates for her assistance with the preparation and 
publication of this book. We are also indebted to Cheryl Burkey for formatting 
the manuscript, and Pamela Hunter, for her invaluable assistance with the 
editing process. Finally, we thank members of our families for their support 
throughout this entire project.
—Paul Cobb  
—Erna Yackel  
—Kay McClain

1
1 
Introduction: Perspectives on  
Semiotics and Instructional Design
Erna Yackel  
Purdue University-Calumet, Hammond, Indiana
Mathematical work is work with ideas. Symbols are used as aids to 
thinking just as musical scores are used as aids to music. The music 
comes first, the score comes later.
(Hersh, 1986, pp. 18–19)
This book grew out of a symposium on discourse, tools, and instructional design 
held at Vanderbilt University in the fall of 1995. The symposium brought 
together a small international group of mathematics educators whose work 
and interests relate to the symposium theme. In organizing the conference, we 
purposefully included researchers who represent a wide range of theoretical 
perspectives including constructivism, cognitive science, sociocultural theory, 
and discourse theory. Symposium participants discussed papers that were 
prepared and read in advance of the conference, shared videotape analyses 
of classroom episodes and inter-views, and wrestled with the complexities of 
theoretical considerations and pragmatic implications of the conference theme. 
The discussions were permeated by questions such as: How do symbols acquire 
meaning? How is meaning achieved? What do we mean by “meaning”? What 
role do symbols play in the (mathematician’s) development of mathematical 
concepts? What role do symbols play in students’ mathematical learning? The 
chapters in this book are tangible products of our deliberations. They span the 
range of theoretical perspectives represented at the symposium. Each paper 
was extensively revised in light of the discussions and with an eye toward 
developing a coherent volume that would invite the broader community into 

2  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
the deliberations by setting out the various perspectives and insights of the 
symposium participants.
Symbolizing and communicating are not new areas of investigation. There 
is a long history of study in both semiotics and communication, much of which 
is reviewed in chapters in this book (Sfard, chap. 3, this volume). Yet the role 
of semiotic mediation has been an underdeveloped theme within mathematics 
education and, at a broader level, within several of the theoretical perspectives 
that form the basis for much of the current work in mathematics education. 
In addition, the relationship between symbolizing as a central aspect of the 
evolution of classroom mathematical practices and the mathematics learning 
of individual children as they participate in and contribute to the development 
of those practices is an important issue that relates specifically to instructional 
design (cf. Gravemeijer, Cobb, Bowers, & Whitenack, chap. 7, this volume, 
for a detailed discussion of this issue). This book represents an important 
step forward in responding to the need to develop semiotic theories for 
mathematics, as expressed by Dörfler (chap. 4, this volume), and the need 
to develop approaches to instructional design informed by those theories, as 
expressed by Gravemeijer et al. (chap. 7, this volume).
This volume might be viewed as a successor to the book Problems of 
Representation in the Learning and Teaching of Mathematics, edited by C. 
Janvier (1987), which resulted from a conference held at the University of 
Quebec in 1984. The purpose of the Quebec conference was to bring together 
what was considered at that time to be state-of-the-art work on representation 
in mathematics. Several of the chapters in the Janvier book were devoted to the 
attempt to develop an adequate theory of representation. The authors of those 
chapters addressed issues relating to translations among representations, the 
role of symbols in representation, and the relationship of external and internal 
representations. Other contributors challenged the notion of representation, 
because it can be interpreted in conveyor and container metaphors of 
communication, and instead argued that the focus should be on the process of 
symbolizing. In the decade since the Janvier book was published, static views 
of representation have given way to more dynamic, action-oriented views 
(Kaput, 1994). It is for this reason that the title of this volume emphasizes the 
processes of communicating and symbolizing. Further, the dichotomy between 
internal and external representations has been displaced by non-dualist 
views. In addition, knowing and doing mathematics is now seen as socially 
and culturally situated activity (Bauersfeld, Krummheuer, & Voigt, 1988; 
Schoenfeld, 1987; van Oers, 1996). This volume reflects these developments 
and extends the focus from that of merely analyzing students’ mathematical 
activity to that of proactively supporting their mathematical learning. 

Introduction  3
TWO CONTRASTING APPROACHES  
TO SYMBOLIZING AND COMMUNICATING
Before presenting an overview of the book, we invite the readers to consider 
two contrasting approaches to the analysis of symbolizing and communicating 
by presenting an example from outside of mathematics. These two general 
approaches are sometimes called the objectivist approach and the interpretivist 
approach. To emphasize the distinction between these two contrasting 
approaches and to highlight the complexity of the issues involved, we 
consider the case of music and the musical score. In a poignant essay entitled 
“Score: Imagination and Reality,” noted French conductor and educator 
Pierre Boulez (1995) described the difference as follows: “There are generally 
two approaches for composers and performers—the first is that everything is 
within the notes, and of course, the opposite is that everything is behind or 
beyond the notes” (p. 19). Boulez went on to elaborate that those who take the 
first approach see the score as an object with precise data, including pitches, 
rhythm, dynamics, and tempos. In this approach the individual (musician) is 
seen as a transmitter. The musicians’ task is to reproduce mechanically what 
they see and nothing more. Those who take this position think that they are 
“being faithful to the score” (p. 20). Composers such as Stravinsky and Ravel, 
who have taken this position, have been highly critical of what they referred to 
as the freedom of the performer. Stravinsky went so far as to compose a piece 
for a mechanical piano.
The other point of view is that the score is simply a convenient and accepted 
method of notating that which cannot possibly be easily or fully notated. The 
composers who take this point of view are aware from the very beginning 
that they cannot put into written or notational form all of the information they 
want to give the performer.1 Many aspects go beyond notation. According to 
this view, “All notations—as precise as they can be, are just indications—the 
beginning of a process which leads to a higher level of understanding” (p. 20). 
Boulez referred to this attitude as interpretivist. In this view the performing 
musician must develop a personal understanding of the score. Otherwise, the 
musician just plays notes.
As the essay continues, Boulez makes it clear that he takes the interpretivist 
position. He argues that even though the language of signs in music is 
relatively simple to learn, performing goes beyond “reading” the signs 
and symbols. When performing, a musician must combine the numerical 
1	
This same idea was expressed by G.Spencer Brown (1969) (as quoted by John Richards, 1991, in 
a chapter on mathematical discussions) when he said, “Music is a similar art form, the composer 
does not even attempt to describe the set of sounds he has in mind, much less the set of feelings 
occasioned through them” (p. 77).

4  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
proportions of rhythm and the pitch of the notes specified in the score with 
tempo, phrasing, articulation, and dynamics. Thus, musicians bring to the 
performance their own understanding of the music. Boulez’s own attempts to 
take the objective approach, including incorporating a mechanical piano into a 
concert performance, convinced him that such an approach is not viable.
The distinction made by Boulez is similar to one that Richards (1991) made 
between derivation and proof in mathematics. In the same way as a musical 
score functions to guide a musician as he or she reproduces a melody, a 
mathematical derivation functions as a logical reconstruction intended to make 
a proof objective and repeatable. However, as Richards noted, “A derivation 
entices, or leads us into seeing a proof. It does not tell us (communicate 
directly) the proof” (p. 23). In this sense, proof, like music, involves an act  
of interpretation.
In the quotation that begins this chapter, Hersh also draws an analogy 
between mathematics and music. Like Boulez, Hersh takes an interpretivist 
approach to symbolizing. All of the contributing authors to this book take this 
approach as well. However, not all would agree with Hersh’s clear distinction 
about precedence, that “The music comes first, the score comes later.” In fact, 
a number of contributors to this book take up the challenge of explicating 
the dynamic interplay between mathematical thinking and symbolizing. For 
example, Sfard argues that there is an inherent problem of circularity in a 
discourse, such as mathematics, that creates its own objects. After presenting 
examples from the history of mathematics in which symbols were introduced 
before there were well-defined concepts that they signified, she suggests that 
rather than ask which comes first, symbols or concepts, we should investigate 
the dynamic interplay between symbolizing and meaning making.
OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK
The goal of this book is to present a variety of views and perspectives on 
symbolizing and communicating that derive from emerging theoretical 
perspectives in mathematics education as well as from field-based research. 
In the process we advance our understanding of classroom discourse and tool 
use as they relate to mathematical learning. Each of the chapters presents 
a theoretical or empirical analysis of some aspect of symbolizing and 
communicating within mathematics education.
The book is organized into two sections. The chapters in the first section focus 
on theoretical issues and theory development, and those in the second section 
are devoted to symbolizing and communicating as they relate to instructional 
design. The theoretical section begins with an introductory chapter by Paul 

Introduction  5
Cobb that serves as an advance organizer for the four chapters that follow. In 
this chapter, Cobb highlights commonalities and differences in the theoretical 
perspectives taken by the authors and raises issues that emerge as important 
themes. Each of the chapters in the second section of the book is based on 
specific examples taken from research in classrooms or from instructional 
development projects. Finally, the book ends with an integrative summary 
by Bowers in which she delineates themes that cut across both sections of 
the book and uses those themes as the basis for drawing implications for  
the future.
Part I: Theoretical Considerations
The four main chapters in the first section of the two-part book focus on 
the role of discourse and semiotic processes in mathematics learning. The 
authors of these chapters capitalize on recent developments in semiotics and 
communication theory to advance new and challenging viewpoints that are 
informed by a deep understanding of both mathematics and classrooms. To 
aid communication with the reader, the authors all ground their theoretical 
discussions in a number of specific examples and cases. Although they each 
take distinct positions, the authors all broadly define symbolizing to include 
reasoning with physical materials, pictures, diagrams, computer graphics, 
and verbal expressions, as well as with conventional and nonstandard written 
symbols. In addition, they all focus on discourse and tool use as it occurs in 
the social context of the classroom. They all also challenge the traditional 
dichotomy between external mathematical representations or symbols and 
internal, mental processes. Indeed, the authors take the view that tools and 
symbols are integral to mathematical reasoning and that reasoning is not 
located entirely in the head. In this regard, their work shares a number of 
assumptions in common with distributed theories of intelligence (Pea, 1993). 
A theme shared by all of the authors is that symbols do not stand for something 
in and of themselves. Thus, the focus is not on symbols and their meaning, but 
on the activity of symbolizing and meaning making.
In her chapter, Sfard elaborates a theory of symbol use and symbolizing and 
thus extends the notion of reification that she introduced and developed in her 
earlier work. Previously, Sfard (1991) used the term reification to describe the 
process by which individuals come to take mathematical actions and processes 
as mathematical objects. The notion of reification is a psychological notion 
in that it refers to an individual’s cognitive activity. In this chapter, Sfard 
extends the discussion to include the place of symbol use and symbolizing, 
not only in the individual’s development of mathematical concepts, but also in 
the historical development of these concepts. In doing so, Sfard addresses the 

6  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
question of circularity, that is, which comes first, the meaning or the symbol. 
This question is also taken up, in one way or another, by Dörfler, van Oers, 
and Nemirovsky and Monk. As Sfard puts it, we cannot avoid the problem 
of circularity because it is “inherent in discourse that creates its own objects” 
(p. 92). She proposes that rather than ask which comes first, “we [should] 
rather give thought to the question of how to orchestrate and facilitate the 
back-and-forth movement between symbols and meanings” (p. 92). She uses 
examples from the historical development of mathematical concepts, such as 
function and complex number, to argue that symbols do not always develop 
as a means of recording already-defined notions and concepts. Instead, as in 
the case of the examples cited, symbols may be introduced and used initially 
for ill-defined notions, the meanings of which evolve over time, partly due to 
the symbols used. Likewise, in the case of students’ learning of mathematical 
concepts, Sfard argues that students may initially use symbols effectively 
and communicate with others with little difficulty even before they conceive 
of the signifier as standing for something else. Sfard refers to such usage as 
templates-driven. According to Sfard, in a second phase the use becomes 
semantically mediated. Thus, in promoting the thesis that introducing a new 
symbol is a decisive step in the creation of a new concept, Sfard is making a 
strong claim. The claim, as suggested by the title of her chapter, “Symbolizing 
Mathematical Reality Into Being,” is that (well-developed) meaning does not 
necessarily precede the use of a symbol. Instead, the relationship is reflexive. 
Symbols and meaning are mutually constitutive.
Dörfler’s chapter, more than any other in the book, will appeal to 
mathematicians and mathematics educators who are interested in the 
development of meaning for more advanced mathematical concepts. Unlike 
Sfard, Dörfler does not discuss the historical development of such meaning. 
His discussion of the “means for meaning” centers on how individuals develop 
meaning for concepts that are already part of conventional mathematical 
knowledge. He uses concepts such as vector space and the identity element to 
illustrate and elaborate his theoretical position. Dörfler argues convincingly 
that concepts such as these do not (cannot) gain meaning (for individuals) 
simply through precise (mathematical) definition. Rather, meaning develops 
as individuals participate in discursive activity. For Dörfler, a main goal of 
cognitive learning is the ability to participate in a discourse according to its 
implicit and explicit rules, norms, and conventions. In his chapter, Dörfler 
discusses types of experiences that have potential for introducing a learner 
into mathematical discourse, that is, for developing meaning for mathematical 
terms. Finally, he argues that any discourse presupposes implicit assumptions 
and beliefs. In particular, for mathematics this necessitates accepting what he 
calls an “as-if attitude” (e.g., we speak “as if” all of the natural numbers were 

Introduction  7
given with well-determined properties). In doing so, Dörfler, like Sfard, posits 
a dynamic interplay between discursive activity and mathematical meaning.
van Oers’ chapter brings a Vygotskian perspective to the discussion 
of symbolizing, communication, and mathematizing. From this point of 
view, mathematizing is seen as a culturally developing activity that can be 
appropriated by assisted participation and constructive imitation on the part 
of the learner. For van Oers, symbolizing is the heart of mathematizing. It is 
an activity of forming and using symbols, including constructing both the sign 
and the meaning of the symbol. In his chapter, van Oers attempts to deepen the 
psychological analysis of the symbolizing process by explicating the process 
of appropriation. A central tenet of his position is that symbolizing entails 
tagging a situation in some way to characterize it and make it distinct from 
others, van Oers calls this aspect of symbolizing predication and argues that 
the appropriation of symbols consists of acquiring insight into and proficiency 
in the predication process. His position is that this acquisition is based on 
semiotic activity, that is, reflection on the reflexive relationship between sign 
and meaning, as well as on the development of this interrelationship, van 
Oers argues that one complicating factor in this process of symbol use and 
construction is the immediacy of this symbol-based predication. He explains 
that this immediacy is a result of abbreviating the actions that constitute the 
predication process and claims that the improvement of the predication activity 
related with symbols should begin with the explicit execution or construction 
of this predicative act.
For van Oers, the implications for instruction of his position are that 
a developmental approach is required for promoting the improvement of 
symbolizing and mathematizing at school. That is, there must be serious 
attention to explicit, socially distributed semiotic activity and predication from 
an early age. To clarify and explicate his theoretical claims and to illustrate 
the developmental approach that he advocates, van Oers uses the example of a 
group of young children attempting to devise a means for organizing boxes of 
shoes of various types (and sizes). With the assistance of the teacher, the children 
first develop the need for some means of symbolizing the type of shoe in a box 
and then develop symbols that they find useful. In the process, the semiotic 
actions are made explicit. According to the perspective that van Oers takes, 
the teacher is viewed as a semiotically more capable individual who promotes 
semiotic actions when the latter are relevant and who evokes communicative 
and reflective actions that result in the pupils making public symbols. Thus, the 
teacher plays a critical role in the predicating activity of the children.
The final chapter in the first part of the book is, in a sense, a bridge between 
the theoretical chapters and those that focus on instructional design. Unlike 
in the chapters by Sfard, Dörfler, and van Oers, where each author develops a 

8  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
theoretical position and illustrates it with examples from his or her empirical 
work, the theoretical position that Nemirovsky and Monk advance in their 
chapter developed out of their analysis of classroom and interview data. They 
explore the nature of symbolizing by focusing on two notions: fusion and trail-
making. In their chapter, Nemirovsky and Monk use examples of children’s 
make-believe play to illustrate and clarify these notions. For example, fusion is 
illustrated by children’s acting, talking, and gesturing, without distinguishing 
between a symbol and what it represents (e.g., treating a stick as if it were a 
horse), and the notion of trail-making is illustrated by how the play is enacted 
by the child(ren) without following a script. Here, the make-believe play is an 
ongoing creation in which actions and words emerge from the activity itself in 
open-ended ways and not from a planned sequence. Nemirovsky and Monk use 
an interview conversation between Lin, a 10-yearold girl, and a researcher as 
the basis for developing and explicating their theoretical position. They propose 
that fusion and trail-making are central qualities in the use of mathematical 
symbols, using a trace of Lin’s changing interpretations of motion graphs to 
elucidate their position. They then explain how their theoretical notions can 
be used as the foundation for instructional design. For them, the core task 
of design is the creation of environments for a future that cannot be fully 
anticipated. Nemirovsky and Monk see symbols and symbolizing as playing a 
role in the creation of such environments without imposing meaning (i.e., the 
lived-in space where symbolizing takes place is not predetermined). Symbols 
and symbolizing activity can be constraining and, at the same time, can be 
instrumental in bringing unintended aspects of the situation to the forefront. 
Thus, the position these authors take is consistent with that of the others in this 
volume, all of whom highlight the dynamic interplay between symbols and 
symbolizing activity and meaning making.
As a whole, the chapters in this section present distinct but complementary 
views of the process of symbolizing and the development of meaning. The 
challenge for mathematics educators is to incorporate these theoretical 
perspectives into an understanding of the teaching and learning process and 
to use them to advance students’ mathematical learning. The chapters in the 
second section of the book take up this challenge.
Part II:  Instructional Design Issues Related to  
Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing
The authors of the four chapters in the second section of the book directly 
address issues of instructional design. In doing so, they discuss how semiotic 
processes can be exploited to proactively support students’ development of 
the types of mathematical reasoning advocated in current reform documents. 

Introduction  9
The authors all draw on their extensive firsthand experience of working in 
classrooms to give detailed analyses of students’ mathematical learning in 
instructional situations. Common themes include taking students’ authentic 
experience as the starting point for the learning process and describing how 
students might eventually come to reason powerfully with conventional 
mathematical symbols. Differences between the authors’ positions concern 
the types of tools and symbols that students use and the extent to which these 
tools and symbols emerge from students’ activity. In one approach, students 
are encouraged to develop their own increasingly sophisticated symbols and 
notations with only an occasional nudge from the teacher. In a contrasting 
approach, conventional ways of symbolizing are introduced from the outset but 
are related to students’ authentic activities via computer linkages. Collectively, 
the four chapters on instructional design illustrate a variety of ways in which 
the vision of reformers can be realized in mathematics classrooms.
In their chapter, Gravemeijer, Cobb, Bowers, and Whitenack describe an 
approach to instructional design that involves coordinating three aspects of 
learning: psychological issues that focus on conceptual development, social 
issues that involve the interactive constitution of collective ways of knowing, 
and design issues that focus on developing hypothetical learning trajectories 
(Simon, 1995) that direct the development of instructional sequences. They 
begin by expanding Doerr’s (1995) distinction between expressive and 
exploratory computer models. Their goal is to distinguish the underlying 
assumptions between the expressive and exploratory approaches by describing 
the ways in which each approach addresses the tension between capitalizing 
on students’ own self-developed models and introducing the more culturally 
accepted ways of notating. The authors describe the expressive approach as 
one that, in general, supports students’ efforts to invent ways of symbolizing, 
with occasional assistance from the teacher, and the exploratory approach as 
one that supports students’ efforts to discover the culturally approved meaning 
of conventional ways of symbolizing that are introduced readymade by the 
designer or teacher.
Gravemeijer et al. then outline an alternative approach to instructional 
design grounded in the tradition of the Dutch Realistic Mathematics Education 
(RME) instructional theory. In doing so, they address the tension between the 
expressive and the exploratory approaches by describing their work in one 
first-grade classroom teaching experiment. In this experiment, they attempted 
to create a proposed learning trajectory that begins with the students’ own 
models, but also forecasts a vision of how the teacher and students might 
collectively progress, through a series of social negotiations, toward the more 
conventionally accepted ways of Rotating. For Gravemeijer et al., instructional 

10  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
design is inextricably linked with a vision of the classroom as a social setting. 
For them, the design process cannot be executed as a straightforward application 
of theory. Instead, it has to take the form of transformational or developmental 
research that considers the social aspects of the classroom microculture.
Bransford, Zech, Schwartz, Barren, Vye, and the Cognition and Technology 
Group at Vanderbilt discuss a set of theoretical principles that guide their 
attempts to design environments that invite and sustain mathematical 
thinking. They first discuss several analyses of meaning, understanding, 
and social environments that provide the foundation for their thinking about 
instruction. They then illustrate how different sets of principles can be 
combined to create different kinds of learning environments. After outlining 
environments that incorporate only a few of the principles, they describe 
environments that incorporate all of them. In this way, they demonstrate 
the changes in thinking that they have made as they attempt to synthesize 
insights from what they describe as the “regular” cognitive literature and the 
“situative” cognitive literature. Thus, these authors give us a window into the 
evolution of their own work in instructional design as their perspective on 
meaning has evolved from that of helping students understand the meaning or 
significance of new information to that of facilitating students’ development 
of meaning in terms of relationships between and among things, events, or 
situations. In doing so, the authors take the position that the meaningfulness 
of something is determined by its place in a system of relationships. Finally, 
Bransford et al. give a detailed description of an instructional environment 
that embodies their most recent thinking about design—the use of “Smart 
Tools”—and they discuss some of their initial findings from classroom 
experiences with this environment.
Lehrer, Schauble, Carpenter, and Penner focus on the importance of 
inscription and symbolizing for teaching and learning mathematics and 
science. By contrasting two different cases in which children’s learning in 
the classroom was organized around design activity, they underscore the 
importance of a shared history of inscription, as well as the necessity to align 
forms of inscription with classroom learning and design goals. The first case 
they discuss involves a situation in which second graders designed and then 
constructed “race cars” to roll down an inclined plane at different speeds. The 
second case involves third graders designing experiments that explored factors 
affecting the growth rate of Wisconsin “Fast Plants.” In both cases, Lehrer et al. 
track the evolution and interdependence of students’ forms of inscription and 
their conceptual understanding. For example, initially students used various 
means of recording data, solely for the purpose of keeping a record. However, 
these records then became means for the students’ developing understanding 

Introduction  11
of patterns of growth or of change and for communicating about the situations, 
such as the steepness of the ramps for the cars or the variability in the growth 
of the plants. Using Latour’s (1990) notion of “cascades of inscriptions” as a 
framework, the analysis by Lehrer et al. shows that the students understood 
the natural world through a progression of increasingly powerful inscriptions. 
That is, as children’s inscriptions evolved, so did their understanding of the 
world. In both examples discussed by these authors, attention to the potential 
of various means of symbolizing for contributing to students’ meaning making 
was an integral aspect of the instructional design from the outset.
In contrast, Lesh and Doerr use the language of models and modeling, 
which is well established in both mathematics and mathematics education 
literature, as a basis for discussing issues of instructional design that relate to 
symbolizing, communicating, and mathematizing. Their intention in doing so 
is to link their discussion to existing notions and to explicate in which ways 
their current thinking differs from or extends those notions. After elaborating 
what they mean by models and a modeling approach and discussing their view 
of how models and representations are related, they address the relationship 
between a models and modeling perspective and cognitive constructivism, 
social constructivism, and mathematizing. Finally, they illustrate a models 
and modeling approach to instructional design by presenting an example from 
the classroom. In the example, seventh-grade students worked on a “Summer 
Jobs” investigation in which they used employee data from a previous year 
to make decisions about which individuals to hire again for the next summer. 
Lesh and Doerr focus their discussion on the modeling activity of the students 
and on the series of models students developed as they progressed through 
the problem. In the same way that Lehrer et al. focused on the increasing 
sophistication in the inscriptions that students developed and on the way 
in which these inscriptions contributed to students’ understanding, Lesh 
and Doerr are interested in the increasing sophistication in the models that 
students develop as they work through a complex investigation and in the 
implications for students’ mathematical development. For example, Lesh and 
Doerr have found that an important characteristic of model development is 
that students’ later models are characterized by greater stability than their 
earlier models. Also, like Lehrer et al., Lesh and Doerr note that the means of 
symbolizing that students use (Lesh and Doerr use the term representations 
whereas Lehrer et al. use the term inscriptions) organizes the situation so that 
other information might be noticed, thus making it possible, for example, to 
direct attention towards underlying patterns and regularities. In this way, the 
symbolizing activity and the resulting symbols have the potential to lead to 
further conceptual development. Lesh and Doerr thus argue that a perspective 

12  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
to instructional design that emphasizes models and modeling integrates issues 
related to symbolizing, communicating and mathematizing.
As a whole, the chapters of this section serve the important function 
of explicating the complexities that arise when taking symbolizing and 
communicating into account in instructional design. Further, these chapters 
provide the reader with concrete examples of instructional situations in which 
explicit attention to symbolizing, communicating, and mathematizing has 
been a part of the instructional design, and they give evidence of how such 
explicit attention plays out in the realization of the instructional design in the 
(classroom) learning situation.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
The contributions to this book indicate the diversity of views on symbolizing 
and communicating that exist within mathematics education both at the 
theoretical level and within instructional design. The chapters illustrate the 
complexities of the issues involved and demonstrate how perspectives within 
the field of mathematics education have evolved over the past few years. 
Together, the primary chapters and the commentary chapters are intended 
to provide an emerging framework for considering how symbolizing and 
communicating contribute to the advancement of mathematical concepts, both 
individually and collectively. In this sense, the ideas presented in this volume 
are not limited to theory development but also have important implications 
for designing instructional activities and strategies. In particular, all of the 
contributors to this book take the position that it is the activity of symbolizing, 
not the symbols themselves, that should be the central focus of attention. 
Thus, rather than focusing on how individuals interpret symbols and use 
them to represent and convey meaning, the focus is on means for developing 
meaning and for recording and communicating that meaning. The implication 
of this focus for instructional design is seen in the chapters in the second 
section of the book. There, the authors draw attention not only to the activity 
of the cognizing individual as a participant in a community, but also to the 
collective activity of the community (see especially, Gravemeijer et al., chap. 
7, this volume). These activities are seen as mutually constitutive. Thus, both 
psychological and sociological means are used in developing explanations 
and theories that account for the role of symbolizing and communicating 
in mathematical conceptual development and used in designing instruction 
that gives explicit attention to the role of symbolizing, communicating, and 
mathematizing as key aspects of the learning process.

Introduction  13
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The preparation of this chapter was supported by the National Science 
Foundation under grants DMS-9057141 and RED-9353587 and by the Office 
of Educational Research and Improvement under grant R305A60007. The 
opinions expressed are solely those of the author.
REFERENCES
Bauersfeld, H., Krummheuer, G., & Voigt, J. (1988). Interactional theory of learning and 
teaching mathematics and related microethnographical studies. In H.-G.Steiner & 
A.Vermandel (Eds.), Foundations and methodology of the discipline of mathematics 
education (pp. 174–188). Antwerp, Belgium: Proceedings of the TME Conference.
Boulez, P. (1995, December 14, 15, 16). Score: Imagination and reality. Chicago Symphony 
Orchestra Program Notes, pp. 19–28.
Doerr, H. (1995, April). An integrated approach to mathematical modeling: A classroom 
study. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, San Francisco.
Hersh, R. (1986). Some proposals for reviving the philosophy of mathematics. In T.Tymoczko 
(Ed.), New directions in the philosophy of mathematics (pp. 9–28). Boston: Birkhäuser.
Janvier, C. (1987). Problems of representation in the teaching and learning of mathematics. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kaput, J.J. (1994). The representational roles of technology in connecting mathematics 
with authentic experience. In R.Biehler, R.W.Scholz, R.Strässer, & B.Winkelmann 
(Eds.), Didactics of mathematics as a scientific discipline (pp. 379–397). Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.
Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M.Lynch & S.Woolgar (Eds.), Representation 
in scientific practice (pp. 19–68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pea, R.D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. 
Solomon (Ed.), Distributed cognition (pp. 47–87). New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Richards, J. (1991). Mathematical discussions. In E.von Glasersfeld (Ed.), Constructivism 
in mathematics education (pp. 13–52). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic 
Press.
Schoenfeld, A.H. (1987). What’s all the fuss about metacognition? In A.H.Schoenfeld (Ed.), 
Cognitive science and mathematics education (pp. 189–216). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Sfard, A. (1991). On the dual nature of mathematical conceptions: Reflections on processes 
and objects as different sides of the same coin. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 22, 
1–36.
Simon, M.A. (1995). Reconstructing mathematics pedagogy from a constructivist perspective. 
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 26, 114–145.
van Oers, B. (1996). Learning mathematics as meaningful activity. In L.P.Steffe, P.Nesher, 
P.Cobb, G.A.Goldin, & B.Greer (Eds.), Theories of mathematical learning (pp. 91–113). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.


I 
THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS


17
2 
From Representations to Symbolizing: 
Introductory Comments on Semiotics  
and Mathematical Learning
Paul Cobb  
Vanderbilt University
The four chapters in this section of the book all focus on semiotics as it 
relates to mathematical learning. The authors are therefore concerned with 
symbols and their role in mathematical communication. Each chapter offers 
a perspective on the subtle interplay between the modification and use of 
symbols on the one hand and the development of mathematical meaning 
on the other. In this introduction, I first consider common assumptions 
that cut across all four chapters and then compare and contrast the specific 
perspectives developed in each chapter. My purpose in doing so is to orient 
the reader to the general theoretical commitments made by the various 
authors. As Dörfler observes in his chapter (chap. 4), these differing 
theoretical conceptions of meaning constrain the research questions 
addressed and thus what is describable and observable. Dörfler goes on to 
note that theoretical commitments of this type have pedagogical impact in 
that teachers’ preconceptions of mathematical understanding and of the 
meaning of the subject matter strongly influence the judgments they make 
about students’ mathematical activity (cf. Thompson, 1992).
CROSS-CUTTING THEMES
It is important to note at the outset that the authors use the term symbol 
broadly to denote any situation in which a concrete entity such as a mark on 
paper, an icon on a computer screen, or an arrangement of physical materials 
is interpreted as standing for or signifying something else. Thus, to cite a well-

18  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
known example discussed by Vygotsky, a knot in the corner of a handkerchief 
serves a symbolic function when we tie it to remind ourselves to run an errand. 
Similarly, a first grader who uses blocks to solve an arithmetical word problem 
is using the blocks symbolically in that they signify numerical quantities. As 
these two examples illustrate, symbols for the authors are not restricted to 
conventional mathematical signs but can include physical materials as well as 
charts, tables, graphs, and nonstandard notations.
A second point common to the four chapters concerns the authors’ focus 
on the activity of symbolizing. This can be contrasted with an alternative 
approach in which the properties of symbols are analyzed independently of 
their use. Nemirovsky (1994) highlighted this difference by distinguishing 
between symbol systems and symbol use:
With “symbol system” I refer to the analysis of mathematical representations 
in terms of rules. For example, Cartesian graphs can be considered as a symbol 
system; that is, a rule-governed set of elements, such as points being determined by 
coordinate values in specific ways or scales demarking units regularly. On the other 
hand, with “symbol use” I refer to the actual concrete use of mathematical symbols 
by someone, for a purpose, and as part of a chain of meaningful events, (p. 390)
This focus on symbol use emphasizes that the same concrete entity can serve 
different symbolizing functions and might, in fact, be used nonsymbolically. 
For example, the child who used the blocks while solving the word problem 
might subsequently stack them while building. In the latter case, the blocks 
do not necessarily symbolize anything beyond themselves. An important 
consequence of this focus on the activity of symbolizing is that it challenges 
the notion that symbols can serve as unambiguous carriers of meaning in the 
classroom. Instead, the authors emphasize that students’ use of an entity as a 
symbol to communicate their reasoning involves a process of negotiation.
In drawing on contemporary semiotics to develop their viewpoints, the 
authors question several assumptions about meaning that are commonly made 
by mathematics educators. For example, they all reject the view that the process 
of constructing meaning for symbols involves associating them with separate, 
self-contained referents. Instead, they all argue that the ways that symbols 
are used and the meanings they come to have are mutually constitutive and 
emerge together. It is important to caution against translating this general 
theoretical commitment into an instructional prescription that bears directly 
on the issue of whether instruction should focus first on meaning or on 
symbols. Rather, this theoretical commitment provides a general orientation 
for both teaching and instructional design by emphasizing that symbolizing is 
integral to mathematical activity. The assumed reflexive relationship between 

From Representations to Symbolizing  19
symbol use and mathematical meaning implies that a student’s use of symbols 
involves some type of meaning, and that the development of meaning involves 
modifications in ways of symbolizing. Viewed in these terms, teaching 
and instructional design both involve attempts to support the development 
of students’ ways of symbolizing as part of the process of supporting the 
development of mathematical meaning (cf. Kaput, 1994). The chapters in the 
second section of this book, which focus on instructional design, illustrate 
several approaches in which designers consciously exploit semiotic processes 
to promote mathematical learning.
In addition to challenging the traditional relationship between symbol and 
referent, the authors of all four chapters also question a distinction central to 
mainstream psychology, that between external representations or symbols on 
the one hand and internal representations or concepts on the other (cf. Lesh & 
Doerr, chap. 10, this volume). The dissolution of this mainstream distinction 
is in fact a direct consequence of the focus on symbol use and symbolizing 
rather than on the properties of symbols per se. In particular, analyses that 
focus on people’s activity with symbols treat them as an integral aspect of 
their mathematical reasoning rather than as external aids to it. For example, 
the reasoning of a mathematician working alone would not, from this point 
of view, be located in his or her head. Instead, the mathematician’s reasoning 
would be located in the person’s activity and would therefore encompass that 
person’s use of symbols (cf. Hutchins, 1995).
A final cross-cutting theme concerns the significance that all the authors 
attribute to discourse. As becomes apparent, they develop a range of 
perspectives on discourse. Despite these differences, the authors all take social 
exchanges with others as constituting a primary occasion in which students 
modify their ways of symbolizing and thus their mathematical meanings. In 
addition, the authors all highlight the communicative function of symbols, 
thereby emphasizing that symbolizing is integral to collective as well as 
individual activity. Cast in this way, the process of learning to use symbols in 
general, and conventional mathematical symbols in particular, is seen to have 
a participatory aspect. Symbol use is then seen not so much as something to be 
mastered, but as a constituent part of mathematical activity in which students 
come to participate. In bringing the discursive aspect of symbolizing to the 
fore, the authors draw together the three overarching themes addressed in this 
book—those of symbolizing, communicating, and mathematizing.
It might appear from this initial overview that the authors’ positions are 
relatively similar. There are, however, significant differences in both the 
theoretical perspectives they develop and the specific questions they address. 
Taken together, the chapters offer a multifaceted view of semiotics as it relates 

20  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
to mathematics education. In contrast to the quest for a single, overarching 
theory, this plurality of approaches offers greater flexibility when developing 
instructional designs and analyzing mathematical activity in classrooms. My 
focus in the remainder of this chapter is on the relationships and contrasts 
between the chapters. To this end, I first consider the contributions of 
Nemirovsky and Monk and of van Oers, and then those of Sfard and Dörfler.
MATHEMATICAL EXPERIENCE  
AND CULTURAL ACTIVITIES
In both the chapters by Nemirovsky and Monk and by van Oers, the authors 
analyze the face-to-face negotiation of mathematical meanings and of ways 
of symbolizing. However, they do so from sharply differing perspectives. 
Nemirovsky and Monk’s orientation is phenomenological and focuses on 
the nature of individual students’ mathematical experience as they negotiate 
meanings with others. The issue they address is that of developing ways to 
describe the experience of engaging in mathematical activity, and it is to this 
end that they propose two theoretical constructs, fusion and trail-making. 
They illustrate the relevance of these constructs by analyzing several short 
episodes involving a 10-year-old student, Lin, and an interviewer, Tracy. In 
the course of the analysis, they take what might be called the actor’s viewpoint 
(MacKay, 1969) as they strive to describe the quality of Lin’s experience as 
she modified her ways of symbolizing while interacting with Tracy.
van Oers, for his part, presents a sociocultural approach in which human 
activity is treated primarily as a cultural phenomenon. From this perspective, 
mathematics is viewed as a cultural activity that involves inventing, using, 
and improving symbols. The issue that van Oers addresses is that of students’ 
appropriation of ways of symbolizing as a central aspect of their enculturation 
into established mathematical practices. In approaching this issue, he emphasizes 
the adult’s role in proactively supporting students’ learning within the zone 
of proximal development. However, in doing so, he questions individualistic 
characterizations of this zone that stress the difference between what a student 
can do unaided and with the assistance of more knowledgeable others. He 
argues that Vygotsky instead viewed the zone of proximal development as a 
dynamic context that emerges in interaction between students and adults and 
that involves the joint reenactment of preexisting cultural activities. In this 
theoretical scheme, students are seen to appropriate mathematical ways of 
symbolizing as they move from peripheral to more substantial participation 
in the meaningful reenactment of established mathematical practices. A key 
theoretical construct that van Oers proposes, that of predication, serves to 

From Representations to Symbolizing  21
clarify this process of appropriation as it occurs during students’ participation 
in culturally organized activities.
In contrast to Nemirovsky and Monk, who take the actor’s viewpoint and 
focus on the experience of the symbolizer, van Oers takes the observer’s 
viewpoint and focuses on the students’ actions with symbols as they relate 
to established mathematical practices. Despite this sharp contrast in their 
overall viewpoints, their positions are not necessarily oppositional. For 
example, van Oers follows Vygotsky in stressing that culturally established 
meanings cannot be transmitted ready made. Instead, the students have to 
figure out with others’ help the generally accepted meaning of conventional 
ways of using mathematical symbols, thereby making their own meaning. 
In other words, students actively construct meaning as they participate in 
increasingly substantial ways in the reenactments of established mathematical 
practices. This acknowledgment of students’ meaning-making activity would 
seem to leave room for phenomenological analyses of the type developed 
by Nemirovsky and Monk. Significantly, the sample transcripts presented 
in each of the two chapters lend themselves to interpretations developed in 
terms of the theoretical constructs proposed in the other chapter, van Oers, for 
example, might argue that the exchanges between Lin and Tracy presented by 
Nemirovsky and Monk involve the meaningful reenactment of the culturally 
established mathematical practice of graphing. Similarly, Nemirovsky and 
Monk would have little difficulty in using their key constructs to develop 
conjectures about the mathematical experiences of the children in some of 
the episodes presented by van Oers. This juxtaposition of interpretations 
developed from the actor’s and the observer’s viewpoints is intriguing for 
those of us who are willing to admit a multiplicity of perspectives. The two 
interpretations can in fact be seen to complement each other if one accepts that, 
although phenomenological and constructivist analyses do not go far enough 
in locating students’ activity in social and cultural context, sociocultural 
analyses do not go far enough in delineating students’ socially and culturally 
situated mathematical experience.
A further point of contact between the two chapters emerges when we focus 
specifically on symbolizing in that Nemirovsky and Monk and van Oers both 
develop their positions by drawing analogies with play. Nemirovsky and Monk 
argue that symbolizing is typically experienced by the symbolizer as “making 
the absent present.” They take care to distinguish this characterization from 
one in which the meaning of a symbol is said to emerge as it is associated with 
another entity that serves as its referent. To clarify the distinction between this 
associationist characterization of meaning and their own position, Nemirovsky 
and Monk introduce the example of two girls who are playing with stuffed 
animals by pretending that they are pets looking for food. The authors argue 

22  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
that the girls do not merely associate terms such as cat and bear with the toys. 
Instead, the girls act, talk, and gesture as though the stuffed animals really 
are pets looking for food, while remaining aware that the stuffed animals 
are not real pets. Nemirovsky and Monk note that in symbolic play of this 
type, the signifiers (the stuffed animals) and the signifieds (the pets) are fused 
in children’s experience. Their fundamental contention is that the fusion of 
symbol and meaning is characteristic of symbol use in mathematics as well 
as in children’s play. Thus, they argue that the distance-time graphs that Lin 
and Tracy created were fused in their experience with what they signified 
(the speeds of toy bears). In making these claims about the quality of the 
symbolizer’s experience, Nemirovsky and Monk question the more common 
metaphor of transparency wherein symbols are described as being meaningful 
when they become invisible and the symbolizer sees through them to what 
is signified. For Nemirovsky and Monk, in contrast, the visual attributes of 
symbols remain in the foreground and can be distinguished from the signifieds 
with which they are fused.
Nemirovsky and Monk discuss children’s play in order to clarify the 
experience of reasoning with mathematical symbols, whereas van Oers 
views children’s participation in culturally determined play activities as 
a developmental source of mathematical symbolizing. He argues that 
mathematical activity is a special form of semiotic activity and that it first 
emerges from early symbolic play activities. In developing his position, 
van Oers clarifies that semiotic activity is concerned with symbol-meaning 
relationships and involves both the construction of meaning and the constructive 
improvement of symbols (cf. Lehrer, Schauble, Carpenter, & Penner, chap. 
9, this volume). He stresses that this concurrent process of making meaning 
and making symbols involves reflecting on the consequences of modifying 
a symbol for the corresponding meaning, and vice versa. To illustrate this 
process, van Oers describes an instructional situation in which small groups 
of children were first encouraged to draw a diagram of a railway track that 
they had built. The teacher then supported their reflection on the relationship 
between their diagrams and the railway track by asking them what specific 
parts of their drawings signified and then encouraging them to verify whether 
there was, say, a bridge at a particular location on the track. In participating 
in this reenactment of the cultural activity of making diagrams, the children 
reflected on the adequacy of symbols with respect to what they signified and 
adjusted them accordingly.
In addition to investigating whether young children can reflect on symbol-
meaning relations, van Oers also explores opportunities for teaching by 
focusing on the “mathematics-like actions” that occur in semiotic play 
activities. The theoretical construct that he introduces when analyzing teacher-

From Representations to Symbolizing  23
child interactions in play situations is that of predication. He argues that in 
describing a situation of joint interest symbolically, the teacher and children 
predicate the situation by attributing additional features or qualities to the 
situation, thereby distinguishing it from other situations. As an example, van 
Oers discusses a standard textbook task in which seven birds are shown sitting 
on a roof, two more are shown coming to join them, and students are asked to 
find out how many birds will eventually be on the roof. In van Oers’ terms, a 
student who writes a number sentence such as 7+2= predicates the situation 
by attributing an additional feature to it (i.e., it is an adding situation) that 
serves to distinguish it from other situations in which one might subtract, 
multiply, or whatever. In more familiar terms, this act of predication is an 
act of mathematization that involves interpreting the situation in terms of 
relations between quantities. For van Oers, predication does not first involve 
developing a mathematical interpretation and then expressing the interpretation 
symbolically. Instead, symbolizing is integral to the act of mathematizing a 
situation. His notion of predication encompasses both the use of symbols and 
the development of the corresponding mathematical interpretation, van Oers 
goes on to characterize negotiation in these terms by describing it as the process 
of offering and testing predicates in order to develop a topic of joint attention. 
As van Oers makes clear, this process of coming to agree upon predicates 
involves both cooperatively figuring out what can be said and struggling 
for taken-as-shared meaning. Given this interdependence of meaning and 
symbols, whether written or spoken, the sequence of predicates offered 
during negotiation simultaneously traces the evolution of interpretations and 
of symbolizations.
A comparison of Nemirovsky and Monk’s and van Oers’ treatments of 
symbol use in mathematics indicates a potential conflict. Nemirovsky and 
Monk emphasize the experienced fusion of signifier and signified, whereas 
van Oers stresses the importance of reflecting on the relation between symbol 
and meaning. Nemirovsky and Monk might argue that van Oers’ approach 
is associationist in that it implies a correspondence between symbols and 
meanings that are treated as separate entities. Conversely, van Oers might 
counter that Nemirovsky and Monk fail to acknowledge the importance of 
reflecting on relations between symbols and meaning. The difference in their 
positions plays out in their contrasting assessments of Werner and Kaplan’s 
(1963) theory of the development of semiotic activity, van Oers cites Werner 
and Kaplan’s work approvingly, whereas Nemirovsky and Monk criticize a 
key aspect of the theory. Werner and Kaplan speak of the fusion and unity of 
meaning and symbolic form but also use fusion to describe the child’s inability 
to differentiate between symbol and meaning. Thus, Werner and Kaplan view 

24  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
fusion as an indicator of a relatively primitive level of development, whereas 
Nemirovsky and Monk contend that fusion is a pervasive quality of the symbol 
use of mathematicians as well as of young children.
In clarifying this conflict, it is important to note that in the episodes 
presented by Nemirovsky and Monk, Lin and Tracy did occasionally speak 
as associationists. This occurred when they became consciously aware that 
they did not understand each other’s interpretation of a graph. Nemirovsky 
and Monk take this as evidence that Lin and Tracy could both step back and 
explicitly distinguish between symbol and the signified situation when the need 
arose to do so. However, one can also conjecture that this capability to step 
back when conversational breakdowns occur is a developmental achievement. 
In other words, one can agree with Nemirovsky and Monk that fusion typifies 
the symbol use of both expert mathematicians and young children while 
accepting that young children might not initially be able to step back and 
reflect on relations between signifiers and signifieds either when breakdowns 
in communication occur or when explicitly encouraged to do so by an adult.
Nemirovsky and Monk supplement their discussion of fusion by proposing 
a second construct, trail-making. They contrast this with path-following as a 
way of solving problems. As path-following involves executing a sequence 
of directions, the solver’s attention tends to focus on cues as to the next step 
to be taken in order to complete a solution. In contrast, trail-making is a more 
creative activity in which the solver continually assesses how to deal with 
immediate circumstances in order to move closer to the final goal. Trail-
making, therefore, involves an openness to what might happen next, and is 
characterized by an awareness of the broader situation that is not restricted 
to scanning for specific cues. Following Suchman (1987), Nemirovsky and 
Monk go on to stress that although trail-making does not involve following a 
well-defined plan, it should not be equated with merely reacting to each local 
situation in an ad hoc manner. Instead, a vision of the final goal and a general 
sense of how to achieve it serve to orient local judgments, which can in turn 
lead to unanticipated modifications in both the envisioned goal and the means 
of achieving it.
Nemirovsky and Monk’s discussion of trail-making is intriguing given its 
compatibility with aspects of Lave’s (1988) analysis of the problemsolving 
activity of “just plain folks” in such settings as shopping for groceries in a 
supermarket. For example, Lave argued that the shoppers’ activity of solving 
price-comparison problems involved closing the gap between the anticipated 
resolution and immediate circumstances by repeatedly modifying both. Further, 
Lave demonstrated that the shoppers often capitalized opportunistically on 
aspects of the immediate situation such as the availability of priced packages 
of different amounts of the same product. Similarly, Nemirovsky and Monk 

From Representations to Symbolizing  25
demonstrate that Lin, the student, capitalized opportunistically on the grid 
that happened to be marked on the only paper that was readily available 
during one of her exchanges with Tracy. More generally, Nemirovsky and 
Monk echo Lave’s remarks about the emerging significance of aspects of 
the local situation when they argue that, in trail-making, initially unintended 
background details often move into the foreground and become integral to the 
problem-solving process.
This relationship between Nemirovsky and Monk’s analysis and Lave’s 
work might seem surprising, given that Lave emphasizes the socially and 
culturally situated nature of activity. Her overall theoretical position is in fact 
closer to van Oers’ perspective than to Nemirovsky and Monk’s focus on 
individual experience. Lave has, for example, been outspoken in criticizing 
the individualistic emphasis of mainstream cognitive psychology. The key in 
resolving this apparent anomaly is to tease out the assumptions that underlie 
Nemirovsky and Monk’s characterization of the individual. In their portrayal, 
Lin and Tracy are not the putative creatures of mainstream psychology who 
create internal representations and perform cognitive skills. Instead, Lin’s and 
Tracy’s intelligence is seen to be embodied, or to be located, in their activity. 
Further, rather than representing a world, they are characterized as enacting 
a taken-as-shared world of signification (cf. Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 
1991). The unit of analysis for Nemirovsky and Monk is therefore the person 
acting in the lived-in world rather than cognitive processes located in the head 
that intervene between perceptual input and observed output responses. In this 
regard, their approach is consistent with that of Lave (1988), who discussed the 
need “to incorporate the active character of experience into the unit of analysis” 
(p. 180). She also observed that “the choice of the experienced, lived-in world 
as one element in the dialectical constitution of the sociocultural order places 
emphasis on the notion that persons are directly engaged with the world” (p. 
180). It is this common focus on the self as embodied and located in the world 
that accounts for areas of compatibility between Lave’s and Nemirovsky and 
Monk’s work. This again indicates that a focus on individual experience need 
not conflict with sociocultural approaches. In fact, one of the contributions 
of Nemirovsky and Monk’s chapter is to demonstrate that mathematically 
significant activity such as that engaged in by Lin and Tracy is amenable to 
analysis in terms of acting in a lived-in world. This goes some way toward 
clarifying that Lave’s treatment of problem solving is not restricted to such 
situations as shopping for groceries in which the mathematical significance of 
the reasoning involved has been open to debate.
The final issue I consider concerns the relevance of Nemirovsky and 
Monk’s and van Oers’ analyses to instructional design. Nemirovsky and 
Monk view design as the creation of artifacts such as instructional activities 

26  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
and software environments that open up domains of contact between teachers, 
students, and historically developed mathematical practices. However, they 
argue that these artifacts do not, by themselves, determine what they are 
going to mean for students, but instead make possible a variety of trajectories 
that can be realized by trail-making. In addition, the authors caution that 
we can never totally anticipate how students will deal with a problem when 
symbols are used in a trail-making fashion. Given this lack of determinism, 
Nemirovsky and Monk’s notions of fusion and trail-making can best be 
viewed as conceptual resources that can be used when engaging in the 
process of design. In particular, these theoretical constructs offer a way of 
interpreting students’ mathematical activity in classrooms. They therefore 
serve to inform pedagogical judgments that are made when experimenting 
in classrooms and thus influence the modifications that are made to initial 
designs. In my judgment, Nemirovsky and Monk’s adoption of the actor’s 
viewpoint is appropriate to this purpose, given that such experimenting 
involves coparticipating in learning-teaching activities with teachers and their 
students. To coparticipate is to engage in communicative interactions that 
involve a reciprocity of perspectives characteristic of the actor’s perspective 
(cf. Rommetveit, 1992; Schutz, 1962).
In contrast to Nemirovsky and Monk’s nondeterminist position, van 
Oers argues that mathematical constructions are produced by the practices 
and sociocultural activities in which students are involved. Thus, although 
students make their own meanings, they do so as they participate in preexisting 
cultural practices that generate the qualities of their thinking (van Oers, 1996). 
This contention has direct instructional consequences in that it implies that 
the structure of the reasoning that students are to develop should be present 
in the interactions between the teacher and students as a precondition for its 
development. More generally, the relatively direct relation that van Oers posits 
between the structure of the practices in which students participate and the 
forms of reasoning they develop enables him to outline a theory of mathematics 
education. He describes this theory as a developmental pedagogy for the 
appropriation of mathematizing. Such a theory would specify an evolving 
sequence of practices that are to be created discursively in the classroom, van 
Oers contributes to the realization of a theory of this type when he suggests 
that mathematics, viewed as a developing form of semiosis, is rooted in 
culturally organized semiotic play activities. Thus, where Nemirovsky and 
Monk offer designers a conceptual resource that is useful at the micro-level 
of classroom experimentation, van Oers offers a sketch of broad phases in 
a developmental pedagogy. Nemirovsky and Monk’s notion of trail-making 
is helpful in clarifying this distinction given its emphasis on the interplay of 

From Representations to Symbolizing  27
long-term plans and local judgments. In these terms, van Oers’ work serves to 
inform the development of long-term design plans that orient local judgments, 
whereas Nemirovsky and Monk’s work informs local design judgments that 
can lead to a revision of these plans.
DISCOURSE AND MATHEMATICAL LEARNING
I have noted several significant differences in the theoretical perspectives 
developed by Nemirovsky and Monk and by van Oers. In contrast, the 
chapters by Sfard and Dörfler are in many ways complementary. Both authors 
view mathematics as discourse and argue that mathematical learning involves 
appropriating the use of conventional mathematical terms and symbols. In 
taking this approach, they are both careful not to reduce discourse to language 
use. Instead, discourse for them encompasses perceiving and doing as well 
as speaking and writing. Both therefore appear to follow Bruner (1986) in 
emphasizing the constitutiveness of language wherein what is spoken and the 
world spoken about are seen to be mutually constitutive. On the one hand, the 
world comes into being through discourse, and on the other hand, the world 
thus constituted constrains what can be said about and done in it. In defining 
mathematical discourse in this relatively broad manner, Sfard and Dörfler are 
both concerned with the development of mathematical meaning—with what 
teachers and students are speaking about as well as how they speak.
Further commonalities become apparent when we consider Sfard’s 
and Dörfler’s treatments of mathematical meaning. In taking a discourse 
perspective, they both reject the view that the meaning of symbols, words, 
and sentences can be isolated and described in the same way that one would 
describe the properties of physical objects. They instead both draw on 
Wittgenstein’s claim that the meaning of a term is synonymous with how it 
is used. For example, Dörfler argues that, in practice, we infer that a student 
has grasped the meaning of a mathematical term only when the student has a 
thorough command of its social use (i.e., when the student consistently uses 
the term in socially accepted ways). It is, however, important to note that a 
strict adherence to Wittgenstein’s view that meaning can be reduced to social 
use leads to an epistemological behaviorist position in which understanding 
involves nothing more than acting in accordance with the established norms 
or conventions of a discourse (cf. Rorty, 1979). As Sfard and Dörfler both 
observe, exclusive focus on social usage ignores the experiential aspect of 
meaning that includes imagery and emotions. Thus, although they define 
mathematical learning as enculturation into mathematical discourse, they also 
acknowledge the importance of focusing on the nature of individual students’ 

28  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
experience as they actively participate in their mathematical enculturation. 
Thus, like van Oers, both appear to leave room for an analysis of the type 
conducted by Nemirovsky and Monk.
The degree to which Sfard and Dörfler analyze this experiential aspect 
serves to differentiate their contributions. Sfard focuses to a greater extent on 
how students use mathematical terms and in doing so distinguishes between 
what she calls templates-driven and object-mediated usage. To be sure, this 
distinction in symbol use implies a corresponding distinction in the quality of 
students’ mathematical experience. However, Sfard’s primary concern in her 
chapter is to account for mathematical development in terms of changes in 
the ways that students are observed to use symbols. In taking this approach, 
she is careful to clarify that her focus on social use does not translate into 
a philosophical claim about the essence of mathematical meaning. Instead, 
based on the assumption that meaning has much to do with linguistic use, 
her purpose is to illustrate how the development of mathematical meaning 
might actually be investigated. The motivation for her focus on symbol use is 
therefore primarily methodological.
In concert with Sfard, Dörfler contends that a theory of students’ 
development of mathematical meaning should explain how they come to 
participate successfully in mathematical discourse. However, rather than 
focusing on students’ observable use of symbols, Dörfler is concerned with the 
evolving nature of their mathematical experience as they learn to participate 
successfully in mathematical discourse. He clarifies that his purpose in 
introducing two theoretical notions, prototypes and protocols, is to delineate 
an experiential basis with concrete and perceivable entities (including 
symbols) that mathematical discourse can be viewed as being about. Thus, 
Sfard repeatedly points to the experiential aspect of meaning while focusing 
primarily on symbol use, whereas Dörfler attempts to describe the experience 
of the symbolizer, frequently by reflecting on his own activity as a practicing 
mathematician. It is in this respect that their contributions can be viewed 
as complementary. There is therefore a parallel with the first two chapters 
discussed in that Sfard, like van Oers, adopts the observer’s viewpoint, whereas 
Dörfler, like Nemirovsky and Monk, develops his theoretical approach from 
the actor’s perspective.
An issue addressed by both Sfard and Dörfler is that of how students 
come to have the experience of talking about and acting on mathematical 
objects when they participate in mathematical discourse. Sfard approaches 
this issue by analyzing the metaphorical relations between everyday discourse 
about physical objects and the mathematical discourse about experienced 
mathematical objects. Her analysis can therefore be interpreted as an 
elaboration of Bloor’s (1976) observation that physical reality constitutes the 

From Representations to Symbolizing  29
ultimate metaphor with which we think. In her view, the process by which 
mathematical reality is constructed in the image of physical reality involves a 
metaphorical projection in which the virtual reality discourse of mathematics 
is built in the image of actual reality discourse. In developing her position, 
Sfard uses a rigorous criterion for the meaningfulness of mathematical terms, 
namely, that the terms are experienced as signifying mathematical objects. 
It is with reference to this criterion that she argues that “in the beginning 
was the word,” before terms are experienced as signifying mathematical 
objects and thus before fully developed meanings have been established. A 
central question for her is therefore that of explaining the process by which 
experientially real mathematical objects retroactively come into being for 
students as a consequence of their use of symbols that are said to represent 
them. The distinction that she makes between the templates-driven and object-
mediated use of symbols bears directly on this question.
Sfard argues that students’ use of a mathematical term necessarily involves 
an initial templates-driven phase in which the term is not experienced as 
signifying a mathematical object and is therefore relatively empty of meaning. 
In this phase, students can only use the term in already-familiar phrases or 
linguistic templates. She contrasts this with the subsequent object-mediated 
phase in which the more flexible and creative use of the term is mediated 
by the mathematical object it is experienced as signifying. For Sfard, it is 
students’ attempts to participate in discourse in which mathematical terms 
are used as though they signify independently existing mathematical entities 
that account for the terms eventually becoming fully meaningful. The strong 
discourse perspective that Sfard develops in her chapter therefore challenges 
more traditional psychological approaches that treat changes in how students 
speak as expressions of internal conceptual developments.
Dörfler follows Sfard in arguing that experienced mathematical objects 
come into being exclusively within a discourse that attributes to them both an 
existence and properties of an objective character. He therefore concurs with 
Sfard’s claim that it is not until students attempt to speak as if such objects exist 
that they can become experientially real for the students. One of the important 
contributions that Dörfler makes in his chapter is to describe an experiential 
basis that might make it possible for students to eventually use mathematical 
terms in an object-mediated way. It is to this end that he introduces the 
theoretical notions of protocols and prototypes, both of which can serve as a 
means of supporting students’ induction into mathematical discourse.
Dörfler describes a protocol as a cognitive process in which one reconstructs 
the stages, phases, and results of a prior activity when interpreting a symbolic 
record of that activity. It is important to note that in giving this definition, 
Dörfler emphasizes the students’ interpretative activity. The protocol is not 

30  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
the symbolic record per se but is instead a particular way of interpreting the 
record. The subtlety of this distinction between the symbolic record as the 
carrier of the protocol and the interpretation of that record as the protocol 
serves to illustrate Nemirovsky and Monk’s observation that the signifier (the 
record) and signified (the phases of prior activity) are frequently fused in the 
experience of the symbolizer. We can also note that, in van Oers’ terms, the 
protocol serves to predicate the prior activity by attributing to it stages and 
phases that serve to differentiate it from other activities.
The significance that Dörfler attributes to protocols as a means of supporting 
the development of mathematical meaning stems from his view that certain 
specific actions and their results constitute the developmental origins of many 
mathematical concepts and symbolizations. Thus, for Dörfler, mathematical 
development is a process of reorganizing activity rather than of abstracting 
structures from specific situations in the world. In this regard, he rejects what 
Dewey called the spectator view of knowledge and instead treats knowing as 
activity in which one engages. It is also important to note that Dörfler uses 
the term action broadly to encompass conceptual actions as well as physical 
actions. For example, a symbolic record of a permutation serves as a protocol 
if it is interpreted as signifying phases in the process of arranging the relevant 
elements. Based on this view of the origin of mathematical concepts, Dörfler 
proposes that students’ induction into mathematical discourse should involve 
first carrying out the relevant actions and then reflecting on the actions and 
their results. In this approach, protocols function as a means of reflecting on 
just those aspects of the actions that constitute what Dörfler calls the germ 
of the intended mathematical concepts. Throughout the discussion, Dörfler 
stresses that it is the student who constructs the protocol as a cognitive tool by 
coming to interpret the symbolic record in a particular way. He also clarifies 
that this requires appropriate social guidance. Given the significance that he 
attributes to discourse, one can infer that the construction of protocols involves 
coming to speak about symbolic records in a way that makes reference only to 
schematized and general aspects of the actions that they signify.
In introducing the related construct of prototype, Dörfler differentiates it 
from Rosch’s (1981) analysis of meaning in which the notion of prototype 
also features prominently. For Rosch, a prototype is a central, paradigmatic 
case in a category of referents associated with a particular term. In contrast, 
the important aspect of a prototype for Dörfler is that it serves to guide 
mathematical activity such as calculating, proving, and arguing. As an initial 
example, Dörfler notes that the number line can serve as a prototype for Z, the 
integers, in that one can use it to think about integers and their relations. As 
he did in the case of protocols, Dörfler stresses students’ interpretive activity 

From Representations to Symbolizing  31
by observing that students must develop a specific way of viewing the number 
line in order for it to serve this function. He illustrates this point by noting that 
the number line can also serve as a prototype for Q, the rationals, provided 
that it is viewed as a continuous line composed of points rather than as a line 
broken into segments of equal length.
Dörfler argues that prototypes should not be viewed as representations of 
abstract mathematical concepts such as Z and Q. Instead, when students use 
the number line to support their thinking, it serves to regulate mathematical 
activity that is viewed as meaningful by others. In other words, although the 
students speak about integers, they are actually thinking about the number 
line. Cast in this way, a prototype is a means of relying on experiences with 
specific objects and activities in order to use linguistic terms in a socially 
accepted manner. It would therefore seem that a student’s initial use of 
mathematical terms based on a prototype is consistent with Sfard’s discussion 
of templates-driven use in which new terms are utilized only in already 
familiar phrases. In the case of the integers, for example, the new terms might 
first be employed in phrases previously used to talk about the number line. 
The two analyses therefore complement each other in that Dörfler clarifies the 
source and nature of meaning in Sfard’s templates-driven phase whereas Sfard 
delineates observable features of students’ use of symbols. The compatibility 
of the analyses becomes even more apparent when we note that both Sfard and 
Dörfler highlight the role of metaphors in the development of mathematical 
meaning. Sfard, for example, argues that certain metaphors came into play 
and specific expectations are established as to the nature of the signified when 
a new term is used for the first time. Dörfler’s example of the number line 
illustrates this phenomenon in that the number line becomes a metaphor that 
makes it possible to use integer terminology in a socially accepted manner.
In discussing students’ subsequent mathematical development, Dörfler 
suggests that once students have acquired, say, “integer theory” discourse, 
they can reason independently of the prototype. By this point, the students’ 
use of mathematical terms has taken on a life of its own in that it no longer 
requires the guidance that the imagery of specific objects and activities such 
as the number line provide. This type of symbol use appears to correspond to 
Sfard’s object-mediated phase in which mathematical terms are experienced 
as signifying mathematical objects. In discussing these experienced abstract 
entities, Dörfler notes that the discourse proceeds as though the signifieds of 
mathematical terms are unique entities that determine what is to count as a 
representation of them (e.g., the number line counts as a representation of the 
integers because it captures important properties and relations of the integers). 
However, both his and Sfard’s contention that mathematical objects come 

32  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
into existence exclusively within discourse calls this apparently self-evident 
intuition into question. In Dörfler’s view, it is the so-called representations, 
and the relationships between them, that determine the discourse about 
abstract objects, rather than the other way around. He argues, for example, 
that a prototype such as the number line suggests properties and operations 
that are formulated in discourse as properties and operations of the integers. In 
this view, abstractness is a quality of mathematical discourse. A symbol such 
as “−5” does not refer to an entity that exists independently of the discourse. 
Instead, it is used to express experiences with various prototypical objects in a 
general manner. As a consequence of this way of speaking, “−5” is experienced 
as signifying an entity with numerous properties that are, for Dörfler, suggested 
by prototypes such as the number line. The implication of this view is that 
induction into mathematical discourse requires a willingness on the part of 
students to speak as if there are independently existing mathematical entities 
as a precondition for such entities becoming experientially real. In this regard, 
Dörfler concurs with Sfard that students’ attempts to use mathematical terms 
necessarily precede the full development of meaning. This general point of 
agreement has far-reaching pedagogical implications.
In discussing pedagogical issues, Sfard argues that it is impossible to 
prepare what she calls an easy, meaningful landing for students by first 
supporting their development of mature mathematical meanings that the new 
terms are then introduced to baptize. In addition, she critiques instructional 
approaches in which everyday discourse about physical reality is viewed as 
the only possible source of mathematical meaning. She contends that although 
the roots of all language games go back to everyday discourse, the sequence 
of links between this discourse and the discourse of mathematics might be 
too extensive to reconstruct during 10 or 12 years of schooling. This leads her 
to consider what she calls intradiscursive sources of meaning—sources that 
originate within mathematical discourse and that do not reach beyond it to 
everyday discourse. Dörfler’s example of the number line as a prototype for 
the integers illustrates this notion in that discourse about the number line is 
of a mathematical rather than everyday nature. Sfard supports her position by 
observing that mathematical ideas that are firmly situated in a mathematical 
context can be as meaningful and relevant as those from everyday-life 
situations. Her point in making this argument appears to be that, although the 
instructional starting points might involve mathematical rather than everyday 
discourse, they should nonetheless be experientially real for students. In this 
regard, it is worth recalling that, strictly speaking, the number line itself is 
not a prototype for the integers. Instead, the prototype is a particular way of 
interpreting and talking about the number line. This indicates that the number 
line cannot serve as an intradiscursive source of meaning for the integers until 

From Representations to Symbolizing  33
students have developed these ways of interpreting it. Sfard subsequently 
elaborates her view of intradiscursive sources of mathematical meaning by 
suggesting that in time it might eventually be possible to return to everyday 
discourse that would then be endowed with new mathematical significance. 
She argues that, in such an approach, the physical world would seem to 
students more orderly than before in that real-world structures do not come 
into existence by themselves, but instead have to be symbolized into being. 
One can imagine an illustration of this approach in which students who have 
been successfully inducted into discourse about the integers subsequently 
mathematize everyday situations in these terms. In such a case, the process of 
mathematizing would symbolize into being relationships between quantities 
in the everyday situations.
We have already noted that Dörfler’s analysis complements Sfard’s focus on 
symbol use by describing the experiential basis for induction into mathematical 
discourse. For example, he clarifies that protocols can serve as an important 
means of supporting students’ reflection on and restructuring of prior activity. 
In addition, he discusses the value of offering students appropriate carriers 
of prototypes and of negotiating ways of interpreting and talking about them 
so that students might construct viable prototypes. Thus, Sfard’s theoretical 
analysis gives rise to general reflections that alert us to potential pitfalls in 
several currently popular approaches to instructional design, whereas Dörfler 
outlines a particular approach to design in which symbolizing serves as a 
means of supporting students’ induction into mathematical discourse.
SUMMARY
Two broad ways of contrasting the four contributions in part one of this book 
become apparent when we review the authors’ theoretical stances. The first 
concerns the distinction between the actor’s and the observer’s viewpoints. 
Nemirovsky and Monk and Dörfler both focus on the quality of students’ 
experience as the latter engage in mathematical activity. In contrast, van Oers 
and Sfard both adopt the observer’s viewpoint and focus on students’ observed 
activity. However, both also seem to leave open the possibility of conducting 
analyses from the actor’s perspective. Sfard, for example, repeatedly points to 
the experiential aspects of mathematical meaning. Similarly, there is nothing 
in van Oers’ theoretical approach that appears to delegitimatize an experiential 
analysis of students’ participation in culturally organized activities. 
The second contrast concerns the way in which the authors characterize 
mathematical learning. Sfard and Dörfler both characterize it as a process of 
induction into mathematical discourse. For his part, van Oers treats mathematical 

34  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
learning as a process of coming to participate in preexisting, historically 
developed mathematical activities. In all three cases, learning is viewed as 
a process of enculturation, and individual students’ mathematical activity is 
framed as an act of participating in communal practices. This contrasts with 
Nemirovsky and Monk’s contribution in that they treat mathematical learning 
primarily as a process of construction and locate students’ activity within 
ongoing communicative interactions rather than within broader communal 
practices. The distinction can be clarified by comparing Nemirovsky and 
Monk’s contribution with Dörfler’s in that both adopt the actor’s perspective 
and focus on students’ mathematical experience. In their discussion of the 
sample episodes involving Lin and Tracy, Nemirovsky and Monk analyze 
Lin’s mathematical experience as she interacts with Tracy in the immediate 
here and now. Dörfler, however, is concerned with students’ mathematical 
experience at a broader macrolevel as it relates to their induction into 
mathematical discourse. Thus, in contrast to Nemirovsky and Monk, he might 
describe Lin’s experience while graphing in terms of her development of a 
prototype that might subsequently support her induction into discourse about 
functions. Described in this way, the contrasting characterizations of learning 
lead to differences both in the detail with which the experiential aspect of 
symbol use is analyzed and in the overall scope of the analysis.
A final issue concerns the relationship between Sfard’s and Dörfler’s 
interests in discourse on the one hand, and van Oers’ focus on historically 
developed mathematical practices on the other. It is worth reemphasizing that 
neither Sfard nor Dörfler equates discourse solely with language use. Instead, 
discourse for both encompasses perceiving and doing as well as speaking and 
writing. This broad definition might in fact be acceptable to van Oers as a 
general characterization of a communal mathematical activity. Despite this 
broad area of compatibility, it does seem possible to differentiate between the 
three contributions in terms of the extent to which they focus on symbolizing 
per se or on symbolizing-in-interaction.
Sfard and Dörfler both focus on students’ induction into mathematical 
discourse. To this end, they explain how students are able to participate in 
this discourse in a peripheral manner before they have developed the full, 
mature meanings for mathematical terms, and how they are eventually able 
to participate in the discourse in a more substantial fashion. Although Sfard 
and Dörfler repeatedly indicate that this process involves interactions with 
more competent symbolizers, the detailed analysis of such interactions is not 
part of their agenda. In contrast, van Oers brings to the fore the process of 
negotiating mathematical interpretations and ways of symbolizing when he 
develops his notion of predication. In doing so, he focuses on the cultural 
activity that the teacher and students reenact in the course of their interactions 

From Representations to Symbolizing  35
rather than on students’ symbolizing in relation to the developmental 
endpoint—mathematical discourse. Thus, for example, he describes the 
students’ symbolizing as they and the teacher participate in culturally 
organized play activity and discusses how, with the teacher’s guidance, it 
might become a mathematics-producing activity. In taking this approach, 
van Oers characterizes students’ mathematical enculturation in terms of their 
participation in a sequence of cultural activities with the support of more 
competent others (cf. the Gravemeijer et al. discussion of the proactive role 
of the teacher, chap 7, this volume). Sfard and Dörfler follow an alternative 
approach and view students as participating in mathematical discourse when 
they use mathematical terms. The issue for them is how students’ ways of 
participating in this cultural activity evolve.
At the beginning of this chapter, I suggested that the authors together offer 
us a multifaceted view of semiotics as it relates to mathematics education. The 
distinctions I have drawn when summarizing their contributions indicate that 
they do not fall into neat, oppositional camps. Instead, we have a network of 
commonalities and contrasts. This might be disturbing to those who revel in 
“paradigm wars” and who continue to argue that their own favored position 
constitutes an overarching viewpoint that gets things right independently of 
history, situation, and purpose. In my view, essentialist arguments of this 
type indicate a striking lack of self-awareness that contributes to the relative 
immaturity of mathematics education as a field of inquiry. Rather than playing 
the contributions off each other, I have instead drawn contrasts in order to 
tease out some of the interests, concerns, suppositions, and assumptions that 
underlie the various theoretical perspectives. In addition, I have discussed 
the potential relevance of each perspective to instructional design. My intent 
in doing so is to demonstrate that the authors collectively offer us a range 
of theoretical constructs and approaches that allows considerable flexibility 
when we frame issues that emerge while developing specific instructional 
designs and while analyzing mathematical activity in classrooms. To be sure, 
we might well view one theoretical perspective as more appropriate than 
another for a particular purpose. However, in taking this pragmatic stance 
toward theorizing, we give up the quest for a God’s-eye point of view once 
and for all.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The analysis reported in this chapter was supported by the National Science 
Foundation under grant RED-9353587 and by the Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement under grant R305A60007. The opinions expressed 
do not necessarily reflect the views of either the NSF or OERI.

36  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
REFERENCES
Bloor, D. (1976). Knowledge and social imagery. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kaput, J.J. (1994). The representational roles of technology in connecting mathematics 
with authentic experience. In R.Biehler, R.W.Scholz, R.Strasser, & B.Winkelmann 
(Eds.), Didactics of mathematics as a scientific discipline (pp. 379–397). Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics, and culture in everyday life. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
MacKay, D.M. (1969). Information, mechanism, and meaning. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Nemirovsky, R. (1994). On ways of symbolizing: The case of Laura and the velocity sign. 
Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 13, 389–422.
Rommetveit, R. (1992). Outlines of a dialogically based social-cognitive approach to human 
cognition and communication. In A.Heen Wold (Ed.), The dialogical alternative towards 
a theory of language and mind (pp. 19–44). Oslo, Norway: Scandinavian University 
Press.
Rorty, R. (1979). Philosophy and the mirror of nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Rosch, E. (1981). Prototype classification and logical classification: The two systems. In 
E.Scholnick (Ed.), New trends in cognitive representation: Challenges to Piaget’s theory 
(pp. 73–86). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schutz, A. (1962). The problem of social reality. The Hague, The Netherlands: Martinus 
Nijhoff.
Suchman, L.A. (1987). Plans and situated actions: The problem of human-machine 
communication. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Thompson, A. (1992). Teachers’ beliefs and conceptions: A synthesis of the research. In 
D.A.Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 
127–146). New York: Macmillan.
van Oers, B. (1996). Learning mathematics as meaningful activity. In P.Nesher, L.Steffe, 
P.Cobb, G.Goldin, & B.Greer (Eds.), Theories of mathematical learning (pp. 91–114). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Varela, F.J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and 
human experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Werner, H., & Kaplan, B. (1963). Symbol formation: An organismic developmental approach 
to language and the expression of thought. New York: Wiley.

37
3 
Symbolizing Mathematical Reality  
Into Being—Or How Mathematical  
Discourse and Mathematical Objects  
Create Each Other
Anna Sfard  
The University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel
THE QUESTION OF MEANING  
IN VIRTUAL REALITY DISCOURSE
According to Bertrand Russell (1904), “Mathematics may be defined as a 
subject in which we never know what we are talking about, nor whether what 
we are saying is true” (p. 84). Thus, for Russell, “not knowing what we are 
talking about” is the unique characteristic of mathematics, something that 
sets mathematical discourse apart from other discursive formations. To have 
a better grasp of what Russell might have had in mind, let us compare the 
following two utterances:
1.	The expressions “the founder of psychoanalysis” and “Sigmund Freud” 
mean the same because they refer to the same person.
2.	The symbols “ ” and “
” mean the same because they refer to the 
same number.
The two sentences are similar in many ways. Both speak about something 
being signified by something else. Both lead the attention of the reader from 
one kind of thing to another: from objects that refer to something (the name 
Sigmund Freud, the symbol 
) to those that are referred to (the person, the 

38  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
number). Thus, on the face of it, the way to understand a sentence and to 
decide about its truth value should be basically the same in the two cases. 
Summoning one’s knowledge of the history of modern psychological thought 
or of mathematics, one has to verify that in each of the sentences the two 
referring objects (e.g., Sigmund Freud and the founder of psychoanalysis) 
have the same object as their referent.
Those, however, who take the verifying business seriously will soon 
discover a subtle difference between the two instances. In the first, all one has 
to do to convince an interlocutor of the equivalence of the two expressions 
is to point out the person who is supposed to be their common referent. This 
straightforward method would not work for the second. Unlike the Austrian 
psychiatrist, rational numbers are not palpable objects that can be seen, heard, 
and touched. Thus, the only way to prove the equivalence of the symbols  and 
 is to use an indirect procedure, such as the one that shows how the fraction 
 may be obtained from 
 by dividing the numerator and denominator by 
the same number. This method is neither immediate nor does it display the 
object whose existence is presupposed by the sentence. Throughout the whole 
procedure, the implied entity remains behind the scene and its existence can 
only be inferred from the processes performed on its “representations.”
To put it more succinctly, whereas the referent of “Sigmund Freud” 
and of “The founder of psychoanalysis” may be identified “ostensively”1 
(e.g., by showing Freud’s portrait), the object allegedly referred to by the 
symbols 
 and 
 can at best be imagined. Unlike the former, the latter 
cannot be communicated to others just by pointing to something. In this case, 
a straightforward appeal to one’s senses would be useless.2 The common 
referent of the symbols 
 and 
 is an elusive entity, the ontological status 
of which has been puzzling philosophers for ages.
One may highlight the difference between utterances 1 and 2 metaphorically, 
by saying that the two sentences belong to fundamentally different types of 
discourse: The first comes from actual reality (AR) discourse whereas the 
second belongs to virtual reality (VR) discourse. This figurative description 
1	
As argued by Wittgenstein (1953), the apparent straightforwardness of ostensive definitions is 
misleading and, in fact, it is impossible to determine the meaning of words by simply pointing to 
their referents. Please note, however, the difference between the present use of the term ostensive 
and the use made by Wittgenstein in Philosophical Investigations (Wittgenstein, 1953). Although 
Wittgenstein is concerned with the logical soundness of the idea of “ostensive definition” (which 
he rightly views as problematic), I am dealing with an entirely different and more practical issue 
of the means that keeps a discourse in focus and which makes the different utterances meaningful 
to the discourse participants.
2	
At this point, one may object by saying that the equivalence of the symbols 
 and 
 can be 
demonstrated by pointing to two pieces of a whole (of a pie, say), one of them being composed of 
two-thirds of the whole and the other of 12 eighteenth parts, and by showing that these two pieces 
are equal. However, none of the particular pieces of a particular whole may be regarded as a proper 
referent of the symbols, because in this case, the referent is conceived of as a universal entity.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  39
underlines the basic disparity in the ways the meaning of the two types 
of sentences is constructed and communicated. To put it in a somewhat 
simplistic way, actual reality communication may be perceptually mediated 
by the objects that are being discussed, whereas in the virtual reality discourse 
perceptual mediation is scarce and is only possible with the help of what 
is understood as symbolic substitutes of objects under consideration. This 
description should not be read as a statement on an ontological status of the 
“realms” underlying the discourses. In introducing the metaphor of the two 
realities, I was psychologically, rather than philosophically, minded. That is, 
the distinction was drawn with an eye to the differing actions and experiences 
of the participants of the discourses rather than to ontological questions.
When seen in this light, the virtual reality metaphor not only gives an idea 
about the rather unique mode of communication characteristic to mathematics, 
but also conveys a message as to the particular rights and obligations the 
mathematical discourse confers upon the participants. The demands seem 
more obvious than the rights. Those who really wish to communicate, not 
being able to rely on their senses, have to use all their mental faculties in 
an attempt to reconstruct for themselves the realm within which the moves 
of their interlocutors make sense. On the other hand, VR discourse frees 
its participants from responsibilities typical of the AR discourse. The latter 
kind of discourse mediates concrete human actions and, as such, may have a 
tangible influence on people’s physical condition and on their environment. 
Think, for example, about possible effects of a medical prescription on a 
patient or about the influence of an architectural plan of a house on the lives 
of its inhabitants (cf. Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 6, this volume). The VR 
discourse, in contrast, being much less likely to have an immediate impact on 
the actual reality, creates an atmosphere of freedom that for some students is 
a source of enjoyment whereas for some others seems rather disturbing. For 
learners of the latter type, lack of real-life responsibility and constraints may 
mean lack of importance, and thus lack of interest.
To sum up, the mathematical discourse was presented here as a VR 
discourse, which can be defined in opposition to the AR discourse. The 
distinction, drawn along the experiential axis, proved quite fundamental. In 
light of this, the question may rightly be asked why the AR discourse was 
juxtaposed to mathematical discourse in the first place. Indeed, why AR 
discourse and not, say, scientific or literary discourse?
AR discourse may not be the only one against which the particularities 
of mathematical discourse would stand in full relief, but for my present 
purpose it is certainly the most appropriate. First and foremost, in the fervor 
of pinpointing differences, we should not overlook striking similarities. One 
example substantiating this claim has already been given in the form of 

40  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
sentences 1 and 2. Clearly, the two are almost identical structurally. They both 
speak about two objects being, in fact, the same entity. This surface similarity 
is so great that we had to make a certain effort to notice and understand the 
way in which they differ. An additional glimpse at mathematical textbooks 
or classroom exchanges should be enough to convince ourselves that the 
similarity is quite general and that mathematical discourse, in almost all 
its manifestations, is structurally very close to AR discourse. Indeed, in 
descriptions of mathematical processes and objects, the same linguistic forms 
are used as in AR narrative, even though the AR narrative is concerned with 
physical procedures performed on concrete material objects.
Another way to characterize the similarity between AR and VR discourses 
is to say that, in both, the use of symbols is often mediated by objects. Within 
our present discussion, in which a psychological perspective has been adopted, 
object mediation means a certain distinctive way of manipulating symbols, of 
solving problems and of communicating—a mode that reminds us of what can 
be observed when people talk about physical objects, whether actually present 
or only recalled. The claim that a discourse is object mediated signifies that in 
their attempt to communicate, interlocutors can help themselves with a reference 
to entities conceived as external to, and independent of, the discourse itself (this 
is what people do, e.g., when discussing the appropriateness of a given kind of 
fabric for a certain type of garment, or when they judge the applicability of a 
given function as a model for a certain biological phenomenon). My use of the 
phrase “conceived as external” rather than “which are external” with regard 
to the mediating entities (objects) comes to emphasize that in the present 
discussion, the question of the “real” ontological status of these entities is of 
no relevance, if not entirely out of place. It is very important to understand 
that in our context, the word objects does not stand alone and does not signal 
an existence of special entities which regulate the discourse. In phrases 
such as “the discourse is object mediated,” “the student has constructed a 
mathematical object,” or “a new object emerged (in discourse),” its use is 
essentially metaphorical. The term object mediation refers, metaphorically, 
to a certain set of discursive competencies and underlying psychological 
processes, and should by no means be read as a statement on the nature or the 
extradiscursive existence (or nonexistence) of the mediating entities.
A detailed description of this mode of symbol use and discursive 
competencies is given later. Here, I restrict myself to illustrating the idea with 
the example presented in Fig. 3.1. A 12-year-old boy named George, who has 
learned about linear functions but has never before tackled a linear equation, is 
given a problem that he is only able to solve thanks to his ability to “see” more 
than algebraic expressions themselves. He speaks and acts as if the symbols 
were mere representations of some invisible objects. He clearly refers to a 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  41
structure that cannot be seen on the paper. What is remarkable about George’s 
behavior is that he is able to manipulate this structure “in his head” exactly 
as he does in the case of concrete objects. His actions may be compared, for 
example, to those of a person who speaks about moving furniture in a room and 
tries to figure out the final outcome. As can be learned from mathematicians’ 
testimonies (Sfard, 1994a), what George is able to attain by “drawing in his 
head” is often achieved by expert practitioners by imagining objects that 
cannot be actually drawn on paper or even on a computer screen.
FIG. 3.1. Object-mediated mathematical discourse—a sample.
As can be seen from this example and from those that follow, object-
mediated use of mathematical symbols is the use that gives the VR discourse 
the leading characteristics of AR discourse: Object-mediated mathematical 
discourse is conducted as if “with an eye to” a certain entity that keeps this 
discourse in focus and integrated (cf. Dörfler, chap. 4, this volume). The 
expression in focus refers to a discourse in which the participant has a clear 
sense of knowing what his or her utterances are all about. A discourse is 
integrated if there is a general agreement between interlocutors about the 
focus of the conversation. In AR discourse, thanks to object mediation, that is, 
to the perceptual accessibility of concrete objects to which participants refer, 
both of these features are attained without particular difficulty. Indeed, when 
the discourse is about “a table,” there is little danger that the interlocutors 
would have doubts about the focus of the conversation (and this is true even 
if the table in question cannot be seen at the moment). Focus and integration 
are much more difficult to attain in mathematical discourse, in which object 
names and symbols bring almost no perceptual hints as to the relevant aspects 
of the situation—those aspects that should be attended to in the conversation. 
Thus, for example, young students asked to formulate a question for which the 

42  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
answer could be 
 would often reply with something like the following: “The 
cake was divided into nine equal parts; children ate seven of them. How many 
parts were left?”3 This is a classical example of an out-of-focus response, which 
shows that “two ninths” does not yet refer to a well-defined mathematical 
object for the students; rather, it signifies a certain type of situation.
Let me add that the decision to contrast mathematics with AR discourse 
has also to do with a possible developmental connection between the two. 
Because of the already mentioned similarities in structure and in use on the 
one hand, and in light of the primary, basic character of AR discourse on the 
other hand, one has good reason to hypothesize that AR discourse may be 
the earliest link in the long developmental chain from which mathematical 
discourse eventually emerges. The hypothesis of a developmental connection 
between AR and VR discourses is examined in the reminder of this chapter 
with particular attention to mathematical symbols and to the role they play in 
the construction of mathematical meaning.
WHAT IS IN THE SYMBOL AND  
HOW DOES IT GET THERE?
The Problem
When stating that in mathematics we do not know what we are talking about, 
Russell certainly did not intend to say that mathematical symbols have no 
meaning or that mathematicians talk about nothing. Indeed, it seems that his 
only claim was that, unlike in AR discourse, the participants of the mathematical 
discourse have no direct access to this special “something” which is supposed 
to be signified by mathematical expressions. Using the traditional language of 
theories of meaning, one may say that the question Russell was posing was 
that of the referent: Mathematical symbols refer to something—but to what?
Let me put the problem in clearer terms. Traditionally, symbol has 
been understood to be an entity that points to another entity (the referent). 
Encouraged by Eco (1976), one of the central figures in today’s semiotics, 
we may say that symbol “is a lie” because it stands for something else. This 
classical dichotomy imposes a series of questions about the nature of the 
entities to which mathematical symbols are supposed to refer. What is the 
ontological status of these entities? Where do they come from? How can one 
get hold of them (or construct them)? These are the most prominent of the 
issues to be dealt with.
3	
The example is taken from my experiments with students of different ages. The experiment has 
shown that this kind of utterance is very frequent, and not only among young children.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  43
In the preceding section, I argued that the words mathematical object 
are only meaningful in certain phrases and have, at best, some metaphorical 
meaning. As a consequence, I objected to ontological questions such as 
those asked earlier. This objection, far from being immediately obvious, is 
nevertheless an inevitable conclusion from centuries-long debates on the 
nature of the relation between symbol and its referent. Before we continue our 
deliberations on the object mediation in mathematical discourse, it would be 
useful to have a quick look at the way this debate evolved.
Parting From the Referent: A Brief History
What follows is a story of the gradual shift from the objectivist symbol/referent 
dichotomy to the relativist theories of signification based on penetrating 
insights into sociocultural mechanisms of meaning production. Three basic 
positions on the nature of meaning have been proposed over the centuries. 
First, there is the classical realist/objectivist viewpoint, according to which 
the referents of mathematical symbols have a real existence of a kind, whereas 
seeking the objective truth about these abstract entities is the mission of the 
mathematician. For the followers of Plato and Descartes it was, therefore, 
only natural to view meaning as independent of, and primary to, symbols 
that, consequently, were regarded as mere vehicles for forwarding an external 
semantic “load” from one person to another (cf. Reddy, 1979). Taking the 
realist position as a point of departure, it was only natural to ask what should 
come first in the process of learning: the knowledge of mathematical objects, 
or the use of the symbols representing these objects. Should the student “have 
the idea” of, say, negative numbers, before the student can actually talk about 
them or symbolize them? The problem is a theoretical one, but with a potential 
for crucially important pedagogical implications. Many would say that, even 
if not absolutely necessary, this previous knowledge of the object denoted 
by the new symbol would be as helpful to learners of mathematics as having 
an experience of a physical object is useful to a child who learns the word 
signifying this object. The belief that, indeed, the knowledge of the world is 
helpful in the acquisition of language has been aptly expressed in Bruner’s 
Alerting Hypothesis: “It is immeasurably valuable, in learning a code, to know 
already what the code stands for” (Bruner, 1983, p. 29). It is only natural 
that this maxim would be extended by realistically minded educators to the 
learning of mathematics.
The realist/objectivist position has been questioned first by the founders of 
the constructivist movement, who denied the possibility of a God’s-eye view 
and transmitted the power of creation from God and nature to the individual 

44  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
human mind; and then by the interactionists, who claimed that “the meaning…
is derived from, or arises out of, the social interaction that one has with one’s 
fellows” (Blumer, 1969, p. 2). Both these changes of view were concurrent 
with a shift of general attention from ontological questions to the mechanisms 
underlying human experience. The old conceptions of symbolic content as an 
externally determined “cargo” carried by the signifier gave way to the vision 
of meaning as lying “in the eyes of the beholder” or in an interpersonal sphere. 
From now on, one of the focal issues will be the question of to what degree the 
experience (the knowledge) of a mathematical object depends on symbolic 
representation of this object.
Be the constructivist and the interactionist paradigms as far removed 
from the objectivist framework as they might, they still have proven to be 
compatible, at least initially, with Platonism and with theories of meaning that 
have sustained a clear-cut distinction between symbols and meaning.4 These 
theories have tended to admit that meaning, whether received or constructed, 
is quite independent of symbols and may, in principle, develop prior to the 
introduction of any kind of notation. This applies, of course, to mathematical 
objects—this principal manifestation of mathematical meaning. There is 
therefore no reason why the maxim of “objects before symbols” should not 
find its advocates also among constructivists and interactionists. Indeed, many 
would agree with Thompson’s advice that, as teachers, we should better “focus 
on having students use signs and symbols only when they (students) have 
something to say through them (symbols)” (Thompson & Sfard, 1994, p. 8).
Further revision of the objectivist doctrine and the advent of semiotics put a 
question mark on the clear-cut distinction between the symbol and its referent 
and eventually led to a reconceptualization of the issue of the construction of 
meaning in general, and of mathematical objects in particular. The conception 
of a sign and its meaning as independent entities was replaced with the claim 
of an indissoluble unity of the two. This was the message brought almost 
simultaneously, although quite independently and in different ways, by the 
founders of semiotics, Saussure (1916/1986) and Peirce (1931–1935).5 It was 
also promoted by the Russian school of thought that originated in the work of 
Vygotsky (1962, 1987).
4	
Radical constructivists, who take a clear antiobjectivist position on epistemological issues, are 
likely to say that ontological questions are of no relevance to their project. Most of them would 
simply refuse to make any ontological commitments (cf. von Glasersfeld, 1991, 1995; see also 
Cobb, 1994, 1995; Cobb, Jaworski, & Presmeg, 1996), which means that they would not describe 
themselves as either realists or nonrealists. It also implies, however, that if a constructivist wishes 
to take an ontological position, realism is a viable option.
5	
French linguist Saussure lived from 1857 to 1913, and the American philosopher Peirce was born 
in 1839 and died in 1914.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  45
The rejection of the classical dualist view expressed itself, above all, in the 
Saussurian change of terminology. Defining the notion of sign as denoting 
an indissoluble union of signified and signifier, Saussure exorcised the idea 
of symbol as an empty container and of an independent referent that fills 
it with meaning. The emphasis here is at the untenability of the traditional 
dichotomy of sign and meaning. A similar idea is conveyed by Vygotsky 
through the metaphor of decomposing water into its components: Just like 
there is no possibility to learn about properties of water by simply studying 
properties of oxygen and hydrogen, there is no way to understand human 
conceptual thinking by severing signifieds from signifiers and by their separate 
investigations (Vygotsky, 1987, p. 45).
This reconceptualization of the relation between semiotic form and 
content made it necessary to revise common conceptions about mechanisms 
underlying production of meaning. The claim that one cannot consider 
signifieds independently of signifiers implies untenability of the belief in 
“meaning before symbols.” It is only natural that Vygotsky (1962) thought of 
language, and symbols at large, as having a constitutive, rather than only a 
representational, role. He claimed: “Thought is not merely translated in words; 
it comes into existence through them” (p. 125).6 Approximately at the same 
time, Peirce began to pursue the idea of meaning as originating in the intricate 
interplay of signifiers. The American semiotician viewed the signification and 
construction of meaning as an ongoing process in which an interpretant of one 
sign becomes a representamen of another. (The interpretant and representamen 
are Peirce’s terms for two of his three components of sign; the last element in 
the triple is object; see Peirce, 1955.) Thus, for example, in response to the 
symbol (representamen) x2, one may draw a parabola. The parabola would be 
an interpretant of the sign. When seeing the graph, another person may say, 
“This function has no negative values.” This utterance is an interpretant of the 
parabola, which, in the context of the new sign (the utterance), functions as a 
representamen.7 The motif of such “cyclic,” hierarchic signification recurs in 
works of the French semiotician and psychoanalyst Lacan (1977), who may 
be viewed as both a successor and a reformer of Saussure. In Lacan’s writings, 
one finds the idea of a sign turning into a signified of another sign. Thus, for 
instance, in the preceding example, the symbol x2, in itself a signifier (of the 
6	
In Vygotsky (1987), this sentence appears in a different translation: “Thought is not expressed but 
completed in the word” (p. 250). The message about the priority of word with respect to meaning 
becomes slightly weakened. Without consulting the Russian original, I would opt for the earlier 
translation because it seems to me more in tune with the rest of Vygotsky’s writings.
7	
Please note that in semiotics every linguistic expression, as well as every action, thought, or 
feeling, counts as a sign. Thus, an utterance “This function has no negative values” can be treated 
as a sign, or as representamen.

46  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
basic quadratic function), may be viewed as a signified of parabola. In turn, the 
parabola may become a signified of the expression “the basic quadratic curve.” 
Excellent illustrations of such “chains of signification” were given by Walker 
dine (1988) and by Cobb, Gravemeijer, Yackel, McClain, and Whitenack (1997) 
(see also Gravemeijer, Cobb, Bowers, & Whitenack, chap. 7, this volume).
The notion of meaning as emerging from an interplay of signs was a 
significant step toward freeing the theory of meaning from the need to 
consider externally given, preexisting referents. The antireferent position has 
been explicitly declared in this way or another by almost all contemporary 
semioticians (cf. Gottdiener, 1995). For example, French thinker Michael 
Foucault (1972, 1973) objected to “treating discourses as groups of signs 
(signifying elements referring to contents or representations)” and preferred 
to treat them “as practices that systematically form the objects of which they 
speak” (p. 49). Referring specifically to the theme of madness, he explained 
that its “object” (mental illness), like all the other objects around which 
discourses are built,
was constituted by all that was said in all the statements that named it, divided it up, 
described it, explained it, traced its developments, indicated its various correlations, 
judged it, and possibly gave it speech by articulating, in its name, discourses that 
were to be taken as its own. (Foucault, 1972, p. 47)
For Foucault the conclusion is obvious: “There can be no question of 
interpreting discourse with a view to writing a history of the referent” 
(Foucault, 1972, p. 47).
Dreyfus and Rabinow (1982) translated this position into “practical” advice 
by stating that “The tendency to think of language in terms both of referents, 
and of words pointing to objects, must be resisted” (p. 62). If not referents, 
however, then what? How can one investigate the issue of meaning when, on 
the one hand, the idea of a referent as a meaningrendering device has been 
given up and, on the other hand, the conception of meaning as beginning 
and ending in the free play of signifiers (as Derrida, 1967/1976, and other 
deconstructivists would have it) does not seem to tell all of the story? One 
viable alternative to both of these positions may be found in Wittgenstein’s 
famous statement, “The meaning of a word is its use in the language” (1953, 
Remark 43, p. 20). The use, in turn, is not unrestricted and arbitrary. It has a 
well-defined, although infinitely complex, set of rules, which, by determining 
discursive forms, also determines their meaning.
The assumption that meaning has much to do with linguistic use is central 
to this chapter. It is also important to stress, however, that the position adopted 
along these pages is much less formal and less restrictive than implied by 
the equation of “meaning=use in language.” Although there is full agreement 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  47
as to the utmost importance of linguistic use, there is also a conviction that 
from a psychological point of view, the issue of meaning cannot be captured 
through linguistic analysis alone. In such an analysis, the gestalt effect, which 
seems to be the gist of the experience of meaningfulness (and of “having a 
mathematical object”), is inevitably lost. The experiential facet of meaning 
includes imagery and emotions, among others. As Lotman observed while 
referring to the exclusive use of linguistic analysis, “If we put together lots 
of veal cutlets, we do not obtain a calf. But if we cut up a calf, we obtain 
lots of veal cutlets” (quoted in Eco, 1990). To say it differently (and in a 
less “bloody” way!), understanding the parts of a whole, which is the kind of 
understanding we gain while analyzing use, does not translate automatically 
into an understanding of the whole. The collection of pieces is not enough to 
reconstruct the “living creature,” this unique experience of “seeing” a meaning 
of a symbol.
In the Beginning Was the Word: The Role of Signifier
In the rest of this chapter, I grapple with the question of what it means to 
participate in a discourse on mathematical objects and how this participation 
is made possible by an appropriate use of mathematical symbols. The central 
thesis that is expounded and examined among these pages is that mathematical 
discourse and its objects are mutually constitutive: It is the discursive activity, 
including its continuous production of symbols, that creates the need for 
mathematical objects; and these are mathematical objects (or rather the object-
mediated use of symbols) that, in turn, influence the discourse and push it into 
new directions.
Before I start explaining this thesis and examining its implications, I must 
make some lexical preparations. The vocabulary that we all use to speak about 
issues of meaning still brings to mind the old symbol/referent dichotomy and 
is, therefore, somehow incompatible with the general spirit of the present 
dispute. The objectivist approach, which rendered the referent a separate 
existence and primacy over the symbol, is immortalized in the notions that 
are still in use. Whether we talk about symbols, signs, or representations, we 
always imply the existence of another entity for which the entity at hand (a 
mark on paper, a word) is intended to be a discursive replacement. Indeed, each 
one of these terms invites the follow-up phrase “of something” (see Lesh and 
Doerr’s use of model and representation, chap. 10, this volume). For instance, 
a symbol is always a symbol of something, as are sign and representation. 
Thus, if there is room for the word representation in the present framework, it 
is under the condition that we interpret it in a novel way, tacitly agreeing that 

48  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
representations are not necessarily born as such, and more often than not earn 
their “representational” status only much later, if at all.8
To be able to tackle the process through which the objects “represented” 
by the symbols come retroactively into being, I need a vocabulary that can be 
trusted to minimize the impact of the objectivist metaphors for meaning. Not 
having much choice, I decided to use the words sign, signifier, and signified 
in the sense similar to those of Saussure and Lacan. The word sign should be 
understood as anything experienced as meaningful, whether it is a spoken word, 
a written symbol, or any other artifact used for communication. The words 
signifier and signified refer to two inseparable aspects of human relation to signs: 
The former implies that a sign must have a perceptually accessible form, and the 
latter makes it clear that from the user’s point of view there is more to the sign 
than what meets the eye (or ear). In this chapter I refer mainly to three types of 
mathematical signifiers: names (words), algebraic symbols, and graphs.
Having made these lexical clarifications, we are now in a position to delve 
into a more detailed analysis of the role of signifiers in the development 
of discourses on numbers, on functions, and on sets. Within our present 
framework, naming and symbolizing can no longer be considered “baptizing 
an object” (Wittgenstein, 1953, p. 38), a mere introduction of linguistic 
pointers to already existing entities. Rather, they must be viewed as crucial 
components of acts of creation. Although generally true, nowhere is this claim 
more prominent than in VR discourse. Unlike in AR discourse, in which the 
way toward a new concept (object) may sometimes begin not with the help of 
symbolic tools but with a visually accessible physical object, in VR discourse 
name and symbol are the only public means for focusing attention—indeed, for 
creating the discourse that, in its turn, creates the object that we speak about. 
Thus, we can metaphorically say that in the process of learning mathematics, 
the role of discourse in creating the virtual reality of mathematics is no less 
significant than the role of this reality in creating the discourse.
As may be learned from the history of mathematics, the introduction of new 
8	
While I was embarking on the present project, these limitations of the existing terminology gave 
me quite a headache. I put much effort into an attempt to find a word that would denote a written 
or spoken sign without the connotation of something standing for something else; but in vain. 
None of the candidates—be it representation, symbol, sign, ideogram, or mark—proved free of 
the unwanted semantic load. One word that looked more promising than the others, from this 
point of view, was the term inscription (see Lehrer, Schauble, Carpenter, & Penner, chap. 9, this 
volume). I rejected this possibility because of the restriction to the written signs that it clearly 
imposes. It may well be that my problem was aggravated by the limitation of my English. I invite 
the readers to think about better alternatives. In the meantime, I have to settle on the generally 
accepted terminology, hoping that I will manage to convey some innovative messages in spite of 
the unwanted connotations it brings. Incidentally, this little story may serve as a case study for 
those interested in the dynamics of discourse evolution. It brings into full relief the phenomenon 
of language constraints influencing conceptual change.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  49
mathematical signifiers is rarely preceded by formal definitions. Moreover, 
when a new symbol is introduced, the mathematicians may be unable to give 
any description at all of the “object represented by” this symbol. Contrary 
to what seems to be a quite common conviction, mathematical names and 
symbols may become a regular part of mathematical discourse at the stage 
when mathematicians have only a very faint notion of their signifieds.
In this chapter, I am trying to promote the idea that the introduction of a new 
structural signifier, and thus the creation of a new discursive focus, can be seen 
as an act of conception of a new mathematical object. The words structural 
signifier refer to those mathematical symbols that appear in propositions dealing 
with objects—as opposed to propositions that focus on, say, operations. Thus, 
for example, while +, −, *, 
 and 
 play the role of operational signifiers in 
most of their appearances (such as in “In order to find the area of a rectangle, 
you have to perform the multiplication: width*length”), the symbols −3 and 
f(x) would more often than not be used as structural (such as in “−3<0” or in 
“Multiply f(x) by 7”). The distinction, therefore, is made with regard to the 
linguistic uses of the symbols. This means that the suggested categorization 
of symbols is not absolute: The distinction between structural and operational 
signifiers is relative to the discursive context in which they are employed, and 
the same symbol may sometimes be used as operational, and sometimes as 
structural. As argued elsewhere (e.g., Sfard, 1991; Sfard & Linchevski, 1994), 
most of the known mathematical symbols display such structural/operational 
dualism (this dualism has been epitomized in the notion of “procept” introduced 
by Gray and Tall, 1994). It should be understood, therefore, that while using the 
adjectives structural and operational with reference to symbols, I am hinting 
at the way they are used in the discourse under consideration.
It can be shown that many important historical developments in mathematics 
occurred due to ontological turns that followed an introduction of structural 
symbols into a discourse that until now focused on operations. This is 
certainly what happened when such symbols as −3 and i were proposed. 
But the lives of negative and complex numbers began even earlier than that. 
These two types of numbers emerged from symbolic operations such as those 
that can be presented by the expressions 5−8 or 
 These operations led 
to talking about objects that did not seem to exist; they enabled discursive 
activities where the interlocutors seemed to be manipulating these nonexistent 
entities. Surprisingly, the discursive manipulations over the “empty symbols” 
occasionally produced perfectly legitimate objects. (This is what happens 
when, for example, Cardan’s algorithms are applied to such an equation 
as x3=15x+4, producing 
as an intermediate result and x=4 as a final 
solution.) Sometimes, the structural upheaval in discourse would be an almost 

50  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
inevitable result of the inner dynamics of the existing symbolic system. 
Talk about negative numbers could begin by admitting into mathematics 
nonstandard combinations of existing symbols (e.g., 5−8), which owed their 
existence to the fact that the rules of operating over the known symbols could be 
usefully extended. As is customary in mathematics, the expression “5−8” itself 
could be used both operationally, as denoting an operation, and structurally, 
as signifying an object (the result of an operation). The fact, however, that 
the same signifier had to be employed in two seemingly incompatible roles, 
operational and structural, certainly aggravated the difficulty of reification 
(transition to the structural mode). Indeed, process/object duality defies our 
perceptually conceived intuitions. In the perceptual reality, processes and 
objects are two different things. The questions, “But what is [the result of] 
?” or “How much is 
?,” which we can often hear from students, 
show that the learners of mathematics may experience exactly this kind of 
difficulty. No wonder, then, that special symbols were evidently necessary to 
play the role of objects, as opposed to symbols that signified the operations. 
The structural turn in discourse was completed and the new types of numbers 
were generally accepted only after the numerals preceded by minus were 
introduced to denote “the result” of some subtractions and the letter i was 
proposed by Euler to stand for “the result” of square root extraction from −1.
The history of negative and complex numbers shows how a symbolically 
induced ontological change in mathematical discourse may bring about the 
emergence of new mathematical objects. As another example, let me take the 
concept of function. The biography of this notion has been analyzed many 
times in many different ways. Here, it is dealt with from a semiotic point of 
view.9 Looking at the earliest events in the history of function through the 
lens of the theories of meaning summarized earlier, one immediately notices 
that this central mathematical concept, like many others, began its life as 
a symbol, and as quite an empty symbol at that. (“Empty” does not imply 
“meaningless”; it only says that those who agreed to use the symbol and knew 
how to do so were, nevertheless, puzzled about the nature of its signified; 
the signified was supposed to be an object, but they could not figure out the 
nature of this object.) Let us examine, for example, the first two definitions of 
function that are known in the history of mathematics, presented in Fig. 3.2.
In order to understand the point I wish to make here, one has to look at the 
language used in the two definitions rather than through this language. This 
change from looking-through to looking-at may be metaphorically compared 
9	
The analysis presented here should not be regarded as an alternative to these earlier analyses, but 
rather as a complement to them.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  51
to the shift of focus that occurs when one switches from looking through a 
window to looking at the window (cf. Lave & Wenger, 1991, on the use of tools; 
see also Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 6, this volume). The surface features of 
the phrases used by both Bernoulli and Euler are what indicate the ontological 
status of function. Both of these phrases contain the same message: they point 
to certain symbolic expressions as genus proximum of function. To put it 
in a simpler language, function is identified with a certain type of algebraic 
symbol and not with anything that might be represented by this symbol. This 
is obviously true for Euler’s definition, which explicitly equates function with 
an analytical expression. Some of the readers may remain unconvinced about 
the accuracy of this statement with regard to Bernoulli’s definition because 
of the use it makes of the term quantity. (Ontologically speaking, quantity is 
not a symbol.) These readers are advised to consider the fact that this quantity 
is said to be composed of variables and constants. Because the distinction 
between variable and constant can only have sense with respect to algebraic 
symbols, one has good reasons to conclude that, indeed, Bernoulli’s definition 
is similar in its implicated ontology to that of Euler, even though its message 
is conveyed in a less direct way.
The emergence of the notion of function has, therefore, much to do with 
the advent of algebraic symbolism. By the end of the 16th century, and due 
mainly to the work of Vieta and Descartes, “analytical expressions” involving 
letters, numerals, and operators began deluging mathematical texts in spite of 
widespread doubts about their exact meaning and about the validity of their 
use (see, e.g., Kline, 1980). The doubts, it seems, stemmed precisely from 
the fact that the introduction of the symbolism preceded a good idea of what 
the symbols stand for, and about the exact nature of the rules of their use. As 
a result, the newborn algebra was treated with caution. Newton, who used it 
quite extensively, described it as the “analysis of bunglers.”
Let me dwell a little longer on the nature of these historical doubts. On the 
FIG. 3.2. Early definitions of function.

52  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
face of it, there is no reason why the symbols themselves could not serve as 
objects called functions. This is, evidently, what Euler believed possible when 
he conferred the title of function on the multifarious algebraic expressions 
that, in the late 16th century, grew out of the mathematical discourse as if by 
themselves. If his definition were accepted, the transformation of the discourse 
from purely operational to structural would be accomplished in no time. After 
all, anything one wants to know about mathematical objects—their properties 
and the ways in which they can be manipulated—could be easily derived from 
the former “language games.” Indeed, the rules of use imposed themselves on 
the users. Why is it, therefore, that mathematicians could not, in fact, relax 
and acknowledge these new symbols as being the thing itself, not standing for 
anything else? Why couldn’t they do what Hilbert and other formalists tried 
to do over 200 years later? What were they looking for when complaining that 
they were compelled to deal with “empty” symbols?
It is interesting to note that it was Euler himself who questioned his definition 
of 1748. Seven years after he equated function with analytic expression, he 
announced that one is dealing with function whenever “some quantities depend 
on others in such a way that if the latter are changed that former undergo 
changes themselves.” He went on to formulate a new definition: “If…x denotes 
a variable quantity then all the quantities which depend on x in any manner 
whatever, or are determined by it, are called its functions” (Ruthing, 1984, pp. 
72–73). The ontology of this new description is dramatically different from 
that of the old one. This time, there is no mention of symbols. Rather than 
being a mark on paper, function presents itself now as a disembodied abstract 
entity, existing independently of its perceptually accessible “avatars.” It is 
enlightening to look at the events that brought about this conceptual turn. They 
reveal the reason why mathematicians cannot accept the idea that symbols, as 
such, are the objects they are talking about.
It was his famous dispute with d’Alembert on the possible solutions of the 
problem of a vibrating string (see, e.g., Kleiner, 1989) that eventually forced 
Euler to reconsider his idea of function. While analyzing the possible solutions 
to the problem, Euler faced a dilemma. There were two basic assumptions that 
appeared to contradict each other. On the one hand, each state of the vibrating 
string, and thus every continuous line in a plane, was supposed to correspond 
to a function; on the other hand, there were shapes that could not be described 
by any (single) “analytical expression.” There were only two ways out of this 
quandary: Either some states of the string were not functional, or the definition 
of function as an analytic expression had to be changed. Euler chose the latter 
solution and decided that, in order to broaden his conception of function, he 
must make it independent of any kind of symbolism. (As an aside, let me note 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  53
that d’Alembert went the other way; that is, he decided to adhere to the idea 
of function as an expression.) It was, therefore, the attempt to bridge the two 
different kinds of symbolism—algebraic and graphical—that brought about a 
conclusion that one needs a symbol-independent entity if one wants to account 
for the complex relationships between the symbols themselves.
Once again, we are witnessing here the effects of metaphorical projection 
from AR discourse to VR discourse. In order to account for the isomorphism 
between symbolic systems, one brings into play a mathematical object that 
unifies the respective symbols the way that Sigmund Freud, the person, unifies 
the pictures presented in Fig. 3.3b. It is for a similar reason that teachers and 
textbook authors feel compelled to talk to children about function when they try 
to account for symbolic equivalencies, such as 2+x+3x=2+4x or 3(x+2)=3x+6. 
They need these intangible objects in order to answer the question, “What is it 
that remains the same when the symbols themselves change?” The question, in 
fact, could be reformulated: “What is it that makes two symbolic expressions 
such as 3(x+2) and 3x+6 fully interchangeable in mathematical discourse?” It 
is this discursive interchange ability, therefore, that makes the introduction of 
mathematical objects indispensable.10
Let me finish with a general remark on possible reasons for the introduction 
of structural symbolism. Whether we are talking about numbers or functions, 
these symbols played a crucial role in turning the discourse onto itself and 
making its former practices an object of reflection. In all the cases discussed 
here, the new signifiers did fulfill the mission for which they were meant: 
They helped to thematize the former discursive processes and turn them into 
the focus of the mathematical conversation. In this way, they catalyzed a new 
discursive formation and raised the discourse to a metalevel where mathematical 
processes previously merely executed became a reified object of study. At this 
higher level, the process could be reflected on and combined into ever more 
complex units. Because the discourse itself was new, however, the signifieds 
of the new signifiers were yet to be built. The process of construction would 
often lead into directions unforeseen by those who introduced the signifier 
in the first place. It is in this sense, therefore, that the phrase signifier before 
signified is being used in this chapter. Although meaning construction is an 
ongoing process with no beginning and no end, there are, nevertheless, certain 
events that influence the course of further development in a crucial way and 
10	 Another possible way to define the equivalence is to specify the operations that transform formulae 
into equivalent ones. If this approach is to work, the rules of transformations must be introduced 
axiomatically. Thus, rather than trying to explain the roots of the observed linguistic equivalence, 
the axiomatic treatment carries the message of the arbitrariness of the rules of algebra.

54  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
may, therefore, count as beginnings of a “new chapter.” These are events 
that redirect the discourse and bring a new discursive focus. Introduction of a 
new signifier is one of these events. In the long run, it is bound to bring about 
the development of a new signified. The exact course of this development, 
especially as it takes place in the process of learning mathematics, is the topic 
of the next section.
FIG. 3.3. Symbols as representations in VR discourse and in AR discourse.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  55
Pump Mechanism: How Signified Is Built out of Signifier
Notwithstanding the generally accepted view of learning as construction, there 
is a substantial difference between historical and individual symbolizing. 
Whereas mathematicians were the first inventors of mathematical symbols 
and the pioneer builders of the structural discourse, today’s student is usually 
thrown straight into a predetermined mathematical conversation, governed by 
a set of ready-made rules (cf. Freudenthal’s notion of anti-didactical inversion 
as discussed by Gravemeijer et al., chap. 7, this volume). In this discourse, 
many symbols are readily available and their use is structural from the moment 
of their introduction. In other words, the structural interpretation of symbols 
is imposed by the way in which the symbols are used—the ontological 
assumptions are implicit in the expert-participants’ language. In most cases, 
the act of introduction is performed by a teacher. No special effort has to be 
made by the latter in order to evoke the metaphor of, say, −3 as an object. This 
metaphor is inherent in the language the teacher uses. The way in which −3 is 
incorporated into mathematical discourse puts it naturally into one category 
with the numbers the student already has used before. The realization of this 
fact may well be the beginning of the dialectic process of object construction 
that is going to be carried out from now on. This process will be fueled and 
shaped by social interactions all along the way. Aside, perhaps, from the 
extremely rare cases of exceptional creativity (and the radical interactionists 
are likely to argue against the very possibility of this exception), eventual 
transition to object-mediated use of symbols is only made possible by students’ 
ongoing exchange with others. The “others” may be teachers, peers, parents, 
or the authors of the texts the student is reading.
Introduction of negative numbers, as it is usually done in schools, is a good 
illustration. When the negative numbers are first mentioned in the process of 
teaching, they are usually defined by a reference to some symbols. Figure 3.4 
presents a sample of an introduction to signed numbers, taken from a Hebrew 
textbook. If the look-at-the-language approach is assumed, one immediately 
realizes that negative numbers are presented here as new symbols. Indeed, 
they are introduced as names for points on an extended number line (the 
points themselves are not the numbers!). In view of the previous claims on 
the use of symbolism and object mediation, this approach, even if seemingly 
undesirable, could not, in fact, be easily modified. 
As strange as it may seem, this state of affairs is not but one possibility 
out of many. In view of the basic assumptions about meaning adopted in this 
study, at certain levels of VR discourse this order of things—signifiers before 
signified—is the only possibility. If we agree with Wittgenstein and Foucault 
that discourse creates its own objects and that discursive relations and uses of 

56  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
symbols are perhaps most crucial components of what we previously called 
the signified, then there are no mathematical objects without designated 
signifiers; or, to put it differently, before a symbol enters the language and 
becomes a full-fledged element of the discourse, there is simply no object to 
talk about.
All of this means that any discourse, and mathematical discourse in 
particular, suffers from an inherent circularity. Signifieds can only be built 
through discursive use of the signifiers, but at the same time the existence of 
these signifieds is a prerequisite for the meaningful use of the signifiers. This 
circularity, seemingly a serious trap for the prospective participants of the 
discourse, is in fact the driving force behind its incessant growth. This is what 
fuels the process of coemergence in which the new discursive practices and the 
new signified spur each other’s development. In this process, the discursive 
forms and the meaning, as practiced and experienced by interlocutors, are 
like two legs that make moving forward possible due to the fact that they are 
never in exactly the same place, and at any given time one of them is ahead 
of the other.
In this section I take a closer look at this intricate, somehow circular, process 
of object construction that follows introduction of a new structural signifier. 
This process consists, basically, of two stages. These stages differ from each 
other by the type of use that is made of the symbol under consideration. The 
first hint of the distinction I have in mind may be found in the study carried 
out early in this century by two psychologists, Woodrow and Lowell (1916), 
and repeated later with similar results by many others (Brown & Berko, 1960; 
Ervin, 1961; Palermo, 1963; Palermo & Jenkins, 1963). The researchers 
tested the free associations arising in children and adults in reaction to simple 
everyday words. They found an interesting age-related difference: The children 
tended to make associations with words that would usually follow the stimulus 
word in a sentence; in contrast, the majority of adults thought of words with 
FIG. 3.4. Introduction of negative numbers in a Hebrew textbook. From Mashler (1976). 
Translation and emphasis added.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  57
a related or opposite meaning. Thus, for example, the young subjects would 
follow table with eat, and deep with hole, whereas adults associated table 
with chair, and deep with shallow. One may say that the words presented to 
the children activated in them ready-made linguistic templates in which the 
stimulus word and the response word represented different parts of speech and 
together formed a meaningful phrase. Adults, on the other hand, associated 
words belonging to the same semantic categories, words that fit the same 
“slots” within propositional structures. To put it differently, the children’s 
associations brought syntactic complements of the stimulus words, whereas 
grown-ups’ associations led to syntactic equivalents. Using Sausserian 
language, one may say that the children associated syntagmatically, whereas 
the adults associated paradigmatically.11
This interesting result indicates a substantial difference between the way 
children and adults control the use of words in language. Children’s use of 
words may be termed templates-driven, whereas that of the adults is mediated 
by their former knowledge and by their ability to classify words into semantic 
categories. This difference is the basis for my characterization of the two 
stages of meaning production in general, and of the development of object-
mediated use in particular.12
In this chapter, the focus is on structural signs. According to what has been 
said before, an act of introducing a new structural name or a new symbol 
cannot be viewed as a “finishing touch” in the creation of a new mathematical 
object. On the contrary, this operation is often a beginning rather than an end 
of the process. As mentioned before, when the symbol of the fraction, say 
 
is presented to children for the first time, one can hardly expect the young 
students to have the underlying abstract object, that is, to view the symbol 
as but an “avatar” of another, intangible, entity. In spite of this, the students 
do not remain idle until the new mathematical object is fully formed. They 
do use the new signifier even though they may still only be able to see the 
11	 Syntagmatic relationship is the relationship that occurs between words that can be combined 
together to create a sentence. Thus, the words she, is, and hungry are syntagmatically related. The 
relationship is paradigmatic if, from a grammatical point of view, the words may replace each 
other in a sentence. Thus, he and she, or hungry and heavy are paradigmatically related.
12	 All this brings to mind Vygotsky’s (1978) claim that, “For the young child, to think means to 
recall; but for the adolescent, to recall means to think” (p. 51; italics in the original). What 
Vygotsky seems to be saying is that children’s thinking is grounded in collections of concrete 
instances, whereas adolescents and adults have recourse to abstraction, which effectively mediates 
the use (and recall) of concrete instances. Thus, thinking-by-recall means, among others, solving 
problems with the help of concrete recipes fitting these particular problems. Recalling-by-thinking 
refers to summoning general algorithms and heuristics to tackle the concrete cases at hand. In this 
chapter, this difference is not considered to be solely age related. On the contrary, it is expected 
to be found repeatedly in the processes of symbolization, whether the person who symbolizes is a 
child or an adult.

58  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
symbol and not what should be seen through the symbol. However, the way 
they use the symbol at this early stage is quite different from the way they 
will do so later, when the symbol develops in their minds as a fully fledged, 
signifier-signified couple. It is the central thesis of this chapter that when 
structural symbols (symbols that refer to objects) are introduced for the first 
time, their use is mainly templates driven, and it is only some time later that it 
becomes object mediated. Moreover, I claim that this order of things, far from 
being undesirable, is inherent in the logic of the process of symbolization. If 
this sounds somehow too strong, let me add that in certain cases the period 
of templates-driven use may be so brief that it goes virtually unnoticed.13 In 
some other instances object mediation would be very slow to develop, and in 
most extreme cases it would remain out of reach forever.
Of particular interest to us in the present discussion is the phase in which 
the discursive practices outgrow the meaning, which takes place during the 
period immediately following the introduction of a new signifier. This act 
of introduction creates a “semantic space” yet to be filled with meaning. 
The signifier enters the language game before the rules of this game have 
been sufficiently specified and before the signifier has acquired the power of 
evoking a familiar experiential resonance (cf. Dörfler’s notion of protocols, 
chap. 4, this volume). “Filling in” the semantic space occurs in a gradual 
manner. At the first stage, the symbol starts establishing its place within the 
discourse in the only way possible—by following in the footsteps of some 
other, already well-established, element of this discourse. If sneaking into 
old discursive “slots” is an opening move, slipping out of these slots, due to 
some basic misfit, marks the beginning of a new stage—a stage at which new 
discursive forms are generated. These new forms are what eventually defines 
the symbol’s unique use and, thus, its particular meaning. The meaning of 
mathematical symbols may come from within the mathematical discourse 
itself— from gradual realization of its relations with other mathematical 
signs. Such an intradiscursive creation of meaning is known only too well 
to today’s mathematicians. However, the meaning of a symbol may often 
originate in the interdiscursive space, in the process of carrying a symbol 
over from one discourse to another. In the latter case, the links with the AR 
discourse are the most significant. Endogenous mathematical signification—
13	 Moreover, one cannot exclude the possibility of some experience of mathematical objects prior 
to the introduction of any symbolism. According to mathematicians’ testimonies (Hadamard, 
1949; Sfard, 1994a), a sensation of mathematical objects would sometimes appear without any 
symbolical support, simply as a result of a long period of particularly intensive thinking. It is 
evident, however, that even among mathematicians this is a rather rare event and, in any case, one 
that, in the absence of symbolism, cannot be adequately communicated and studied.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  59
creation of new signifieds that occur exclusively within the closed system 
of mathematical discourse—may be a common practice since the advent of 
the formalist movement, but for many centuries the links between the AR 
and VR discourses were a central source of mathematical meaning. They 
may still be indispensable in today’s mathematics classroom. As shown in 
the next sections, the mechanisms of reification (Sfard, 1991, 1992) and of 
metaphorical projection (Johnson, 1987; Lakoff, 1987; Sfard, 1997) underlie 
the creation of mathematical chains of signification, both those internal to 
mathematical discourse and those that link the latter to AR discourse.
This whole process, drawn here in very rough strokes, brings to mind the 
mechanism of a pump. Introduction of a symbol is like lifting the piston in that 
it creates a new semantic space. The gradual emergence of object mediation is 
analogous to the procedure of filling in the space thus created. Based on this 
metaphor, I talk about the process of symbolization as governed by the pump 
mechanism. It is through an intermittent creation of a space “hungry” for new 
objects and through its subsequent replenishment with new discursive forms 
and relations that the participants of mathematical discourse steadily expand 
its limits.
In the next section I focus on the phase of “lifting the piston”—the phase 
of creating semantic space by the introduction of new structural signifiers. 
This is the stage in which the use of a new symbol is governed by old rules. 
The subsequent stage, in which the new sign gets life of its own and becomes 
an integrated signifier-signified unit, is presented in the section that follows. 
Theoretical reflections on both of these phases are illustrated, among others, 
with vignettes taken from my recent studies.
MEANING FROM SYMBOLS, ACT ONE:  
CREATING OBJECT SPACE
Templates-Driven Use
Summing up what has been said up to this point, the VR discourse of 
mathematics may be viewed as an autopoietic system, which is continually 
self-producing.14 The discursive practices and mathematical objects have been 
presented as being mutually constitutive and as being in a constant dialectic 
process of coemergence. As is always the case with autopoietic systems, 
by adopting this model we doom ourselves to the dilemma: How does the 
ongoing process of coemergence begin? According to what has been said, 
14	 For discussion of autopoietic systems, see Maturana and Varela (1987).

60  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
structural symbols cannot become fully meaningful before they are used; 
however, how can one use a symbol before it becomes meaningful?15 On the 
face of it, reducing meaning to use, as Wittgenstein suggested, may help us 
out of the entanglement. In the reductionist case, in which there is no longer 
any use-meaning dichotomy, the question of “What comes first?” seems to 
lose its grounds. However, the problem still exists except that this time it is 
translated into the question of “How does old use produce new use?”
There can be no question that new uses originate in old uses. To illustrate 
this claim, let us help ourselves with a thought experiment.
Thought Experiment. You have never heard the word krasnal before, but 
you have just read the sentence: A krasnal woke up and got up from his bed. 
Does the sentence tell you what krasnal means? Certainly not. However, the 
fact that you do not know the meaning of the word does not leave you unable 
to make certain uses of this word. Indeed, after hearing only one accidental 
sentence about krasnals, you are certainly able to take some steps toward 
incorporating it into a discourse. Even though no one told you what krasnals 
are, you may be expected to be able to distinguish between meaningful and 
absurd sentences about krasnals, and even say a few things about krasnals that 
you believe must be true. Did you shrug at my use of what rather than who in 
this last sentence? Well, this is the first evidence of your having recourse to 
certain well-established propositional templates. You expect krasnal to point 
to a person rather than to a thing; thus, for you the use of the word krasnal 
along with the word what is incorrect. Let us test it further.
Which of the following propositions seem to you to be correct and 
meaningful sentences about krasnals, and which of them do not?
Yesterday, a krasnal went to a supermarket.
A krasnal was divided by three and then squared.
Some of the krasnals were cheerful, some of them sang.
This krasnal is raised by public subscription.
A krasnal begins at 5:30 p.m.
This krasnal is younger than this one.
All these expressions are syntactically correct propositions, but only some of 
them seem meaningful (possibly true). Now, can you complete the following 
sentence in a meaningful way?
15	 We seem doomed to entanglement in vicious circles. The present quandary immediately brings to 
mind the other circles known from literature: the hermeneutic circle (see e.g., Bauman, 1978), the 
learning paradox (see e.g., Bereiter, 1985). The present dilemma is, in fact, equivalent to the circle 
of reification, as presented in Sfard (1991).

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  61
Krasnal A is wise, whereas krasnal B is…
Finally, try to construct a possibly meaningful sentence about krasnals 
yourself. Build one you believe cannot be meaningful.
The example we have just seen shows that the way out of the autopoietic 
circle leads through old habits—through language games that are already well 
known and deeply rooted. Indeed, it is only natural that in order to circumvent 
the dilemma of having to use new words before we are aware of their unique 
uses, we resort to uses with which we are already familiar. We do it by putting 
the new words and symbols into slots of well-known, remembered-by-heart, 
prepositional templates (e.g., “___ is younger than ___”, “___ is cheerful”) 
into which they seem to fit. (It is interesting to explore the sources of our 
intimations about this linguistic fit. This is done a little later.) This is why I 
called this early kind of use templates-driven.16
Let me immediately follow this decision about terminology with the 
following disclaimer: Templates-driven does not mean meaningless. Rather, 
we are talking here about a certain special, even if not most effective, type of 
meaning. (Indeed, because, for pragmatic purposes, meaning can be equated 
to use, and because we are talking here about a kind of reasonable use, it 
clearly follows that we are also talking about a kind of meaning.) As was 
shown in the thought experiment earlier, this is the kind of meaning that we 
may acquire through an exposure to just one sentence containing the new 
name. It expresses itself in our ability to make some limited linguistic use of 
the new signifier. This use is characterized by rigidity. The new signifier does 
not have existence of its own and it can only appear within certain ready-made 
phrases. Often, we use and complete such phrases mechanically, just as we 
complete a familiar melodic piece after hearing its first notes. There are no 
general rules for the use, only a number of concrete cases. Thus, at this point 
the signifier certainly does not have a well-developed signified. I am tempted 
to paraphrase Derrida’s famous maxim and say that at the stage of templates-
driven use, the signifier is the thing itself.17
The ability to make use of symbols that were never seen before was 
observed many times by my colleagues and me in studies with children who 
16	 As was remarked by a reader of the early draft of this chapter, the templates-driven use may be 
mediated by imagery—by sometimes quite vivid mental images evoked by the first utterance. As 
reported by this reader, the sentence A krasnal woke up and got up from his bed brought to mind a 
cartoon-like vision of a little creature getting up from a bed.
17	 Derrida (1967/1976) declared that in spite of our need of an “absolute object” that would safely 
put an end to the free play of signifiers, we have no choice but to admit that there is “nothing but 
the text” and that “the thing itself is the sign” (pp. 48–49).

62  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
were not yet acquainted with algebra but, nevertheless, displayed a certain 
intuitive understanding of algebraic symbolism (see, e.g., Sfard & Linchevski, 
1994). When faced for the first time with an expression 2x+3x=___, many 
students would spontaneously complete it to the proposition 2x+3x=5x. As 
reported by Demby (1994), students usually explain their decision by saying, 
“Two apples and three apples make five apples.” Clearly, the new symbol, 
x, was substituted here instead of “apples” and thus x took the role of a 
label rather than of a number. This tendency to view algebraic variables as 
fitting label slots in nonmathematical discourse may account for a frequently 
observed error of completing such expressions as 2x+3 to 2x+3=5x. This error 
was observed many times in the study Carolyn Kieran and I carried out in 
Montreal. We conjectured that the mistaken completion may have been due to 
the underlying reliance on the template of “Two ___ and three more make five 
___” (e.g., Two apples and three more make five apples). The plausibility of 
this explanation was then reinforced by the fact that, when the multiplication 
sign was explicitly written in the expression (2·x+3), the error usually 
disappeared. Indeed, the multiplication sign redirects the student to a different 
discourse and associates the expression with a cluster of mathematical, rather 
than everyday, templates. In the arithmetical templates, a slot on either side 
of an operator can only be filled with a number. Thus, once the multiplication 
sign appeared, it became clear that the x is a replacement for a number and 
that 2x+3 should be used according to rules differing from those that had been 
initially assumed.
Interestingly, at a later stage in the study, our 12-year-old Montreal students 
who were just introduced to algebra provided an explicit confirmation of this 
interpretation in a classroom discussion that developed around the expression 
“15000−300w.” This expression was constructed by the children and was 
supposed to present one person’s dwindling savings as a function of time 
measured in weeks (thus the letter w). A difference of opinions developed 
when one of the students requested inclusion of 300w in brackets, hinting that 
otherwise, in the absence of the multiplication sign, the w might be interpreted 
as “weeks” rather than as “number of weeks.” The excerpt in Fig. 3.5 speaks 
for itself and requires no comment. I added italics in order to stress those 
students’ utterances that were most revealing.
Later in our course, we saw how the letter-as-a-label use hindered the 
understanding of the rule 2x+3x=5x as a special case of distributive law 
application. Obviously, one does not “take a common divisor out of brackets” 
when adding apples! Even the teacher seemed startled when we first mentioned 
the connection between the formula and the rule. 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  63
FIG. 3.5. A classroom discussion on the need of brackets in the expression  
“15000–300w.”
The fact that the introduction of a multiplication sign brought about such a 
radical change in the further use of the formula brings into full relief another 
important feature of the templates-driven use. Templates scome in clusters. As 
we saw in the thought experiment, certain uses of words go along with some 
other uses, yet clearly disagree with still others. This phenomenon underlies our 
ability to judge meaningfulness of the propositions about krasnals. We could see 
how the very first use of a word directed us to a particular kind of discourse—to 
a cluster of templates that seemed to come together with the one underlying the 
original proposition. To put it more simply, the very first use already framed the 
discourse and greatly delineated the set of possible linguistic applications.
Co-occurrence of templates is a matter of former experience and habit. 
The bond between the co-occurring templates is not necessarily that of logical 
dependence. The templates in a given cluster have been brought together 
in former uses, where their slots were filled with well-established signs. (It 
seems that certain prototypical uses are particularly forceful in this respect. 
In the case of discourse about numbers, all types of meaningful propositions 
about, say, a prototypical number 5 will tend to cluster together also when the 
signifier “5” is replaced with a new symbol.) Templates cumulated around 
each sign, and as time went by the clusters thus formed acquired a cohesion 
that still keeps them together when a new signifier is substituted for the old. 
This helps to account for the fact that mathematicians knew how to manipulate 
such symbols as −3 or 
 even before the negative and complex numbers 
entered their discourse as fully fledged mathematical objects. 

64  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
To give yet another example, let me recount a very restricted informal 
experiment that I recently carried out among my colleagues. I approached 
them with the following sentence:
a and b are pexons and a+b=c.
Pexon is a word I invented myself so, naturally, none of my respondents 
could know any more about it than was available through this one sentence. 
Nevertheless, when asked to decide among other propositions containing the 
word pexon, which could, under certain circumstances, be true or which could 
only be meaningless, they had their answers and none of them claimed that 
the task was impossible. First and foremost, nobody seemed to doubt the fact 
that pexons belong to a mathematical discourse and that they signify an object 
(rather than, say, an operation or a relation). Moreover, it was evident that 
most respondents associated it with algebraic or maybe even with arithmetic 
templates. Pexons were expected to appear within propositions that contain 
operations of all kinds, even operations that were not explicitly mentioned in 
the original sentence (“John often makes mistakes when multiplying pexons”). 
Similarly, it did not seem impossible that pexons might be combined with the 
inequality symbol (“a>b”). On the other hand, and in contrast to krasnals, 
pexons appeared unlikely to go along with adjectives such as wise or cheerful 
or with verbs such as sing or type. Notably, all the respondents univocally 
claimed that the proposition, “If a and b are pexons then a+ b is a pexon,” is 
meaningful, and probably true. A similar conviction may well be the source 
of the idea of negative number. If the first two slots in a template of the form 
“___−___=___” are filled with numbers, then the sign in the last slot must 
also be a number. When negative numbers are introduced as mere symbols 
(historically, as signifiers that replace expressions such as 5−8; in today’s 
classroom as “names of points” on the number line), it is their placement 
within arithmetic templates that frames them as numbers (conceived as 
abstract objects).
As can be seen from the examples already given, the old templates for new 
uses may come from many different kinds of discourse. Thus, for example, the 
word “function” appeared initially in the context of computational processes on 
the one hand (as we have seen, Bernoulli and Euler associated it with variable 
quantities), and in relation to geometric shapes on the other hand (Leibnitz 
applied it in the context of curves in the plane; compare Kleiner, 1989; Sfard, 
1991). This multiplicity of discursive sources will play a key role at the later 
stage. As a result of a crossbreeding between discourses, a new, unique kind 
of discourse will eventually emerge. It will include language games that only 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  65
the new signifiers can play. Sometimes, the discursive crossbreeding will be a 
relatively straightforward cumulative process, with an immediate acceptance of 
the new transplant and no adverse side effects. At other times, when there is a 
clash between the uses within different discourses (as happened many times in 
the history of function, before the geometric and the algebraic discourses agreed 
to combine), it will require a total restructuring of all the discourses involved.
Another important aspect to stress is that the new uses may be endogenous—
coming from purely mathematical templates (e.g., the uses of a variable 
originating in arithmetic discourse), and they may be exogenous—formed by 
habits acquired outside mathematical discourse (e.g., templates within which 
a letter is a label). Clearly, wherever new uses have their roots, the mechanism 
at work is that of a metaphorical projection (Johnson, 1987; Lakoff & 
Johnson, 1980; Sfard, 1994a, 1997). The family resemblance between AR 
and VR discourses is the recurring theme in this chapter. The virtual reality of 
mathematics that emerges from VR discourse is made in the image of actual 
reality. In light of the preceding discussion, the reason for this seems to be 
clear. AR discourse, due to the fact that it certainly was here before all other 
kinds of discourse, seems to be the primary source of all the templates we 
use and of all our linguistic habits, and therefore may be regarded as a great-
grandmother of all the other discourses.
Let me now make a summarizing comment. Throughout this section, I 
have been describing and analyzing processes that take place following the 
introduction of a new mathematical signifier. I tried to make my point with a 
fairly artificial example—that of the word krasnal, the meaning of which has 
been significantly framed by a single sentence. In this final remark, I wish to 
stress the fact that the artificiality of the example only fortifies its message. 
Unlike in a real learning situation, the sentence about krasnal came as if out 
of nowhere, completely detached from the ongoing discourse, and thus almost 
entirely context free. Even so, it managed to evoke responses that show that 
already in this very limited and uninformative appearance it did not remain 
devoid of any meaning. Let us now consider the fact that real learning is never 
a matter of one isolated sentence, and whatever new symbols we encounter 
usually appear within the context of some ongoing discourse. In this situation, 
the mechanism that proved quite effective in the least favorable circumstances 
may be expected to become truly powerful. After all, this is the mechanism that 
underlies children’s learning of their mother tongue. Let me also stress that, 
when I am talking about context, I mean more than purely linguistic elements 
of the discourse. The general circumstances in which the new signifier appears 
may play a crucial role in the process of meaning construction. Thus, for 
example, when the term color is encountered within the context of a physics 

66  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
lesson, it is understood differently than when it is introduced in, say, an art 
lesson. Except for the dramatic difference in the immediate treatment of the 
concept, these two situations provide noncomparable sets of expectations 
as to the possible uses of the notion. Moreover, the word color itself when 
introduced as a scientific concept (in the sense of Vygotsky) is already laden 
with meaning constructed through its use in everyday discourse. When it 
comes to construction of a new meaning within a new discursive context, this 
former meaning is both a prop and a hurdle. The same mechanism through 
which contexts shape new meaning helps overcome polysemy, which is 
so ubiquitous in mathematics.18 To sum up, if a single sentence proves so 
powerful as a “meaning activator,” the effectiveness of a rich, thoughtfully 
engineered discursive context can hardly be overestimated.
Before closing this section, let me raise again the issue of the social nature 
of the processes that have been presented. The mechanism of templates-
driven meaning construction is only effective because it is accompanied by 
an ongoing discursive interaction. It is through this interaction that public 
signifiers are turned into private signs. Conversational feedback plays a central 
role in preparing discursive and experiential background for the introduction 
of the sign. It is essential in the act of bringing the signifier to the learner, 
and it remains crucially important during the subsequent meaning-building. 
In particular, the templates-driven use becomes increasingly successful due to 
its being regulated by discursive negotiations.
Expectations and Verifications
One consequence of the things said in the last section is that the very first use 
of a new signifier frames the discourse, that is, has the power of directing us 
toward certain uses rather than toward other uses. Together with old templates 
come old uses, old meanings. The new and the old are now linked together 
for better and for worse (cf. Nemirovsky & Monk’s discussion of fusion and 
confusion, chap. 6, this volume). The effects of the permanent link between 
the old and the new will be scrutinized in this section.
We may say that we are dealing here with the issue of expectations and 
verifications. With the first appearance of a new signifier, certain metaphors 
come into play and some expectations as to the nature of its signified are 
conceived. From then on, we are testing the expectations, sometimes finding 
18	 The word polysemy refers to the phenomenon of the same signifier having a number of different 
meanings (signifieds). Mathematics, which has been described by Poincaré (1929) as “the science 
that calls different things the same names,” seems to be afflicted by the phenomenon of polysemy 
in a particularly acute way.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  67
that they were justified and at other times proving that they were untenable. 
As shown in this section, the expectations may come from the very first use of 
the new signifier, or they may arise from associations evoked by the signifier 
itself. In any case, the mechanism of metaphorical projection from familiar to 
unknown is at work.
In her recent book devoted to framing in discourse, Tannen (1993) 
emphasized the centrality of expectations in shaping both our perception and 
our abstract thinking. As she explained, talk about expectations deals, in fact, 
with the well-known truth that old knowledge shapes new knowledge.
I have been struck lately by the recurrence of a single theme in a wide variety 
of contexts: the power of expectation…. The emphasis on expectation seems to 
corroborate a nearly self-evident truth: in order to function in the world, people 
cannot treat each new person, object, or event as unique and separate. The only 
way we can make sense of the world is to see the connections between things, and 
between present things and things we have experienced before or heard about. These 
vital connections are learned as we grow up and live in a given culture. As soon 
as we measure a new perception against what we know of the world from prior 
experience, we are dealing with expectations, (pp. 14–15)
Expectations are known also as prejudgements, prejudices, intimations, 
or intuitions. The motif of meaning constructed through the to-and-fro 
movement between what we expect and what we find goes back to Heidegger 
and Gadamer, on the one hand, and to Bartlett, Piaget, and Vygotsky on the 
other hand. In the immediate context of mathematics, it became known as an 
issue of conjecturing versus proving/refuting (Lakatos, 1976; Lampert, 1990). 
In the present chapter the focus is on linguistically induced expectations.19
Ontological Framing and Reification. If I do not wish to end up writing 
a book, I should refrain from discussing the possible types of expectations 
and framing. Indeed, if framing (or expecting) is understood to be directing 
toward particular discursive formations and hinting at the statements that 
may be made about the signifier, then the issue is much too rich and complex 
to be treated in passing. Different discourses overlap and interact with each 
other in such intricate ways that any attempt to isolate and categorize them is 
doomed to failure. (Compare Wittgenstein’s reflections on language games.) 
Moreover, any sign belongs simultaneously to many different discourses, and 
these discourses, in turn, may be classified and stratified according to such 
diverse criteria as theme, level (e.g., one may distinguish between object level 
19	 Those who identify meaning with linguistic use would say that there can be almost no other source 
for our expectations. I use this opportunity again to warn against such reductionism.

68  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
and metalevel), ontological status of the focal notions, and so forth. Let me 
only tackle this last type of framing, because it is of particular importance for 
the present discussion. In the following paragraph, I elaborate on the theme 
that has earlier been dealt with only in passing—that of the “ontological 
upheaval” caused by an appearance of a new structural signifier.
It has already been said that when it comes to mathematical objects, 
introduction of a new name should be viewed as an act of conception rather 
than of baptism. Indeed, naming plays a most crucial role in the process of 
reification. Introduction of nouns into those places in which, until now, people 
had only been talking about processes (e.g., counting or subtracting 8 from 
5) refocuses the discourse. If there was nothing but a certain process up to 
this point, now the attention may split between the process and its hitherto 
nonexistent product (a natural number, a negative number). This ontological 
shift from an operational to a structural focus is well felt, for example, in the 
transition from the expression These things cost five dollars to the expression 
The cost of these things is five dollars. It is echoed in the more abstract 
example—the transition from The class numbers twenty students to The 
number of students in the class is twenty. Because nouns fit those template 
slots that are reserved for objects (as opposed to verbs or adjectives that refer 
speakers and listeners to different ontological categories), it is expected that 
the new signified will have the properties of an object: existence, permanence, 
manipulability. The anticipation of these features is reinforced repeatedly 
by the way in which the new name is used within language. The templates 
activated by nouns are direct descendants of templates coming from AR 
discourse, in which, more often than not, nouns are names of perceptually 
accessible material objects. As mentioned before, the effect of transferring 
templates from discourse to discourse is known as metaphor. We may say, 
therefore, that what we call mathematical objects are metaphors resulting 
from certain linguistic transplants. As may have been already learned from 
our discussion about function, introduction of a new mathematical symbol 
is often enough to spur an ontological shift in the discourse—and to bring 
about reification. In the case of function, focusing the discourse on “analytical 
expression” was a decisive step in reification of computational processes 
which had been in use for many centuries. Introduction of the name function 
gave a further push in the direction of the structural approach.
To summarize, templates we use bring with them ontological messages. If 
we write a new name or a new symbol in the slot reserved for objects, the new 
signifier will eventually spur an emergence of a new mathematical object. The 
history of negative and complex numbers, of functions, and of groups may 
certainly be read this way. 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  69
Expectations That Work—Building New Uses for a New Signifier. Let me 
now turn to an example that will show the dialectic process of expecting and 
verifying in an action. The episode is taken from my recent study in which a 
mathematically precocious 14-year-old student—let us call him Dan—learned 
a number of new mathematical notions.
The aim of the experiment was to try to understand more clearly the 
discursive construction of mathematical objects and, more specifically, to 
expose the linguistic elements of this mechanism. I wanted to see the “wheels 
of the symbolism” turning on their own. To put it differently, I strove to see 
how much could be attained by a formal introduction of symbols, unsupported 
by a meaningful context. This is why I created a learning situation that, by 
constructivist standards (in fact, any standards), must appear extremely 
“unfriendly.” I created teaching material in which new symbols were introduced 
within a sterile context of formal manipulations. Examples of operations that 
could be performed on these symbols were the only available source of their 
meaning. In this experiment, therefore, the new concept was presented to 
the student as purely artificial in the Vygotskian sense, that is, as one that 
grows neither from a network of already-constructed concepts nor from its 
earlier “spontaneous” version.20 Thus, while solving the problems that were 
presented to him after a brief exposure to the examples, Dan could only rely 
on deductive reasoning and on his linguistic associations. In this clinically 
sterile setting, I had hoped to be able to find out how much could be achieved 
through “symbol games” alone, unsupported by links to previous knowledge 
or by relation to a student’s needs. It was Dan’s job to build these links for 
himself, and it was my job as a researcher to watch the processes through 
which these links were constructed—if they were constructed at all.21
The first of a series of new mathematical notions to which Dan was 
exposed in the course of the experiment is presented in Fig. 3.6. Because 
the intention of the study was to observe an intramathematical production 
of meaning, the whole process began with a formal introduction of a new 
20	 Although I prefer, as probably most of the readers do, to see this “clinical” situation as purely 
theoretical and far removed from the reality of today’s classrooms, the sad truth is that many 
would recognize it as only too familiar. Even if it becomes more and more rare in schools, it is 
still quite frequent in colleges and at universities. I am also sure that the conversation between Dan 
and me, which resulted from my experimental script, is likely to be considered by some people as 
a classical mathematical discourse—the kind of discourse that is generated by those who transmit 
mathematics to others by lecturing or through professional mathematical texts.
21	 It is important to remark that Dan made truly impressive progress in this extremely “unfriendly” 
situation. Not every student could be expected to reach the point he did. It seems that Dan was 
exceptionally motivated. His outstanding ability to cope with mathematical problems was evidently 
a very important element of his self-image, and this made him a willing participant in the kind of 
discourse we led. Dan seemed to recognize the situation as normal, and he complied with the rules 
of the symbolic game, never questioning them or wondering about them.

70  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
signifier. In the experiment, I acted both as an instructor and a researcher. 
During ten 1-hr-long meetings, I observed Dan closely while he worked his 
way toward meaning.
The new signifiers introduced during the first meeting were pairs of whole 
numbers that could be multiplied and added in certain well-defined ways.22 A 
careful reader will immediately recognize the pairs as another “representation” 
of rational numbers. For Dan, however, the isomorphism with rational 
numbers remained unnoticed until the third meeting. Therefore, for more than 
2 hr he acted as a tabula rasa as far as the new signifiers were concerned. It is 
important to stress that during the first two meetings I refrained from referring 
to the pairs as “numbers,” lest this particular name frame the discourse in 
ways that might distort the processes I wished to observe. I wanted Dan to 
arrive at certain conclusions totally on his own and not just because some 
particular kinds of behavior could be expected from objects called numbers. 
The dialogue between Dan and me was in Hebrew.
After Dan discovered the general formulas for addition and multiplication 
(problem 1 in Fig. 3.6) and applied them to a number of concrete cases (items 
a–f in problem 2), he unexpectedly encountered the operation of division (g), 
which had not been introduced to him thus far. The conversation that followed 
is presented in Fig. 3.7.
FIG. 3.6. Introducing calculus of whole-number pairs.
22	 In full accordance with the theory of chains of signification, the new signifier made a reference to 
previously-established signs.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  71
As can be seen, Dan did not have much difficulty deciding how division 
should be performed. Moreover, he was also very eloquent about the reasons 
for his decisions. In [9], after criticizing the teacher (me) for using the familiar 
multiplication sign to denote a nonstandard kind of operation (between pairs), 
he stated that this was that very sign that had made him act the way he did. 
(“Since you gave me this in that form [with multiplication sign], I tried to solve 
it according to what I know…that division is an inverse of multiplication.”) 
In an exchange that took place a few minutes later, after Dan had successfully 
verified his result by multiplying (1, 2) and (5, 2), he explicitly confirmed the 
role of signifier-induced expectations (Fig. 3.8, utterances [25] and [27]–[29]).
It is noteworthy that Dan’s decision was grounded exclusively in 
linguistically evoked expectations. The appearance of signs with some 
previous meaning was the only reason for the way in which he chose to 
broaden the use of the new signifiers. Rather than stick to deduction (which, 
in this case, would leave him empty-handed because of the insufficiency of 
the information at hand), he decided to rely on intuition and analogy.
What Dan created constituted a consistent whole. It was now up to me 
as a teacher to confirm his interpretation or try to change it. The role of the 
social aspect in the process of sign-building stands in full relief again. My 
instructional interaction with Dan was an interplay between Dan’s individual 
constructions and my regulatory interventions.
FIG. 3.7. Dan defines division between whole-number pairs.

72  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Expectations That Do Not Work. After demonstrating the strength 
of linguistically driven expectations, let me turn to the obvious pitfalls of 
projecting the old to the new. First, by activating old uses, the new signifiers 
may lead to beliefs that obstruct creation of new meaning, and create 
interdiscursive contradictions. Second, the expectations may be superficial 
and fuzzy, so that their implications are difficult to implement or test.
The overprejection of old uses results in the phenomena known as 
misconceptions. This may be best illustrated by the example of the notion 
of infinity. One may envision the following scenario. A person first becomes 
familiar with utterances of the form, “Function f grows infinitely.” This may 
well be the phrase through which “infinity” makes its first appearance. At this 
point the new signifier has no existence of its own. The basic meaningful units 
are the expressions “function f” and “grows infinitely.” Then, borrowing the 
template “Function f grows/tends to ___” from the discourse on functions and 
numbers (“Function f grows/tends to a number y0 (when x tends to X0).”), the 
learner would say, “Function f grows/tends to infinity” or even in the symbolic 
form, “Function f grows/tends to ∞.” Once inserted into a slot originally meant 
for numbers, the word infinity and the symbol ∞ have a tendency to sneak into 
any place destined for numbers. Thus, because the phrase “Function f tends 
to a number y0” may be translated into “The limit of function f equals y0,” it 
seems only natural to say, “The limit of function/equals ∞.” Here, because 
of a clear ontological shift (from operational grows infinitely to the structural 
equals (is) infinity), the name infinity and the symbol ∞ acquire a life of their 
own and start acting in language as signifiers of an independently existing 
object. This is a perfect example of hypostasis— bringing a new mathematical 
object into existence just by a change in the rules of the language game. To 
this point, everything seems fine. However, if not restricted, the expectation 
that ∞ should fit any slot meant for numbers would soon produce statements 
FIG. 3.8. Dan explains why he defined division the way he did.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  73
creating intradiscursive anomalies and contradictions. The common error 
∞/∞=1 is a good example.
The fact that using an old template is a “package deal” finds its other 
expression in the common expectation that whatever appears within 
expressions with arithmetic operators must also be applicable in utterances 
about quantities and magnitudes. Thus, the fact that complex numbers are not 
ordered appears counterintuitive.
The other weakness of expectations—the one resulting from their blurred 
inexact nature—may be illustrated with yet another episode taken from 
the study with Dan. I have just shown how the appearance of known signs 
(operators · and :) enabled Dan to act in a meaningful way in an unknown 
situation (division of pairs of whole numbers). Dan’s expectation that division 
should be “an inverse of multiplication” proved sufficient as a basis for 
constructing a working definition of this new operation. As may be seen from 
the excerpt in Fig. 3.9, this was not the case with the operation of subtraction. 
The mention of subtraction (the appearance of the sign −) invoked the phrase 
“Subtraction is the inverse of addition” but did not give precise directives 
about the way the term inverse should be applied. Thus, Dan’s first impulse 
was to reverse anything that could be reversed—all the operations on numbers 
that appeared in the formula for addition of the pairs. After all, reversing the 
component operations did work in the case of division. The only difficulty in 
the present case was that there seemed to be more possibilities for combining 
different reversals.
By testing the suggested formula in a concrete case, Dan soon realized that 
reversing all the operations did not work—it did not result in a pair of whole 
numbers that when added to the subtrahend would produce the minuend. 
Thus, he ventured a new conjecture, as presented in Fig. 3.10. 
FIG. 3.9. Dan looks for a definition of subtraction—first trial.

74  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
FIG. 3.10. Dan looks for a definition of subtraction—second trial.
More often than not, the certain difficulty stemming from an inexact nature 
of expectations is not an insurmountable obstacle. Substantial progress may 
be made either in a gradual way, by a succession of trials and errors, or in 
one big step—by translating the anticipation into an algorithm for finding a 
working definition. The latter is how Dan eventually overcame the present 
difficulty. He translated the claim about the relation between addition and 
subtraction into a symbolic statement:
(a, b)−(c, d)=(x, y) iff (x, y)+(c, d)=(a, b)
and then, after applying the formula for addition, solved the resulting equations 
for x and y.
Can Definitions Help?
The limitations of reasoning based on analogy are obvious. It is an ambition 
of mathematicians to ground the mathematical discourse in more reliable 
principles. Indeed, mathematical discourse may be the only one that aspires to 
derive decisions about co-occurrence of different templates (and utterances) 
from purely deductive considerations. Here, an introduction of a new signifier 
is usually accompanied (or at least, according to the rules of the mathematical 
discourse, should be accompanied) by a definition. Like any other utterance, 
a definition is a statement that has the power of activating clusters of other 
of utterances. The way it operates, however, is intended to be quite special. 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  75
Definition is an utterance that formally minded mathematicians would like to 
regard as the sole generator of the entire discourse involving the signifier that 
it defines. Mathematicians recognize as legitimate only those utterances that 
may be presented as a result of formal deductive derivation from definitions, 
or at least that may be shown to be consistent with these definitions.23
Thus, those who reduce meaning to linguistic use would claim that 
definitions fully determine the meaning of signifiers. As teachers and 
researchers, we know only too well that, in practice, this is hardly the case. 
Definitions certainly help in establishing meaning of signifiers, but they do 
not tell the whole story. It is a well-known fact that people often hold to 
certain beliefs about scientific and mathematical signs in spite of the dictum 
of definitions. On the face of it, it may seem truly surprising that people may 
have robust preconceptions about a signifier they have never seen before. The 
following example shows, however, that even in the case of mathematical 
inventions, the mechanism of expectations is not only possible, but may even 
play a very central role. In fact, the power of framing and analogy may be 
greater than that of deductive reasoning (cf. Dörfler’s notions of prototypes 
and protocols, chap. 4, this volume).
In a new mathematics text for schools that I was recently asked to review, I 
found a curious redundancy. Aiming at the concept of derivative, the authors 
first introduced the concept of the slope of a graph at a point (presented as the 
slope of the tangent to the graph at that point). Then, in the very next sentence, 
they defined a derivative at a point as the slope of the graph of the function at 
this point. At the meeting with the project team, I pointed out the double naming 
(slope, derivative) of exactly the same thing and asked the authors for the reason 
underlying their decision to pass through slope on their way toward derivative.
This question incited a fierce discussion. Quite clearly, all the participants 
felt intuitively that, in spite of the mathematical equivalence of slope and 
derivative, these two do not bring the same message. One of the speakers, G., 
put it this way:
No, they are not the same…’cause slope is the basic notion and derivative exists 
only as a function [rather than in its local sense of “derivative in a point”]. Slope tells 
them [the students] something…. They know this is a number from the beginning. 
You tell them “slope” and they see something—an angle. “Derivative” does not tell 
them anything. It’s a function dependent on [another] function. Yeah, everything 
must start with the slope. [With slope] the kids understand something. They have 
something in their head. [Translation from Hebrew and emphasis mine]
23	 To put it in a slightly weaker form, a definition of a signifier S regulates the entire discourse about 
S by being a touchstone against which the admissibility of another statement about S is tested.

76  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
What G. was clearly trying to say is that the different names have a different 
framing power. They evoke different expectations and connect the new notion 
to different discursive formations and different template clusters. With the 
term slope, one is directed toward the geometric context within which the new 
notion comes complete with connections to other related notions and with 
well-developed mental images. In the case of derivative, all these helpful links 
and pictures are initially absent. The difference may be as great as expressing 
itself in the possibility that within one frame the notion will be semantically 
mediated while in the other its use will continue to be templates-driven.
This example brings quite a number of noteworthy messages. First, it 
shows in a persuasive way that definitions are not the only source of signifieds. 
Definitions as such introduce new signs in a skeletonized form, with almost no 
links to previous discourses. Indeed, cutting such links seems to be the very 
essence of formalization and abstraction. Using an expression Bruner (1987) 
applied in a different context, we may say that formal mathematical definitions 
are “all reference and no sense” (p. 119).24 These definitions, therefore, may 
be very well suited as tools for testing hypotheses and expectations, but they 
are not equally effective as generators of the expectations themselves. Thus, 
contrary to what some people may believe, definitions cannot be regarded as 
always effective short-cuts to meaning.25
More often than not, the signifiers themselves become more or less 
powerful meaning activators, with their signifying strength depending on 
their history. Thus, the name slope obviously brings a much richer semantic 
heritage than the word derivative.26 The same distinctions can often be made 
when it comes to mathematical symbols. For example, the symbol a/b for 
a rational number is certainly a more powerful meaning generator than the 
symbol (a, b). The former brings an immediate association with division, thus 
connecting rational numbers to the computational processes that constitute 
their operational source.
The final implication regards the nature of the meaning. An important moral 
of the story of slope and derivative is that there is much more to meaning than 
24	 The terms sense and reference are to be understood, after Frege, as referring to “relation to other 
things and other concepts” and to “extension of the concept to the world of instances,” respectively 
(Frege’s original German terms, often used by those who quote him, are Bedeutung for reference 
and Sinn for sense).
25	 Bakhtin spoke to this effect when he contrasted “contextual meaning” with definitions that only 
“contain potential meaning” (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 145).
26	 In our work as researchers, the awareness of a potential impact of names and symbols makes us very 
careful in choosing terminology for new theoretical frameworks. It has already been observed that 
researchers are analogical reasoners who, in creating new theories, avail themselves of metaphors 
(Knorr, 1980). The decisions about names and symbols may have far-reaching consequences. A 
felicitous choice, through a chain of associations with previous meanings, will bring important 
new insights; an unlucky choice will result in a cluster of counterproductive connotations.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  77
logically regulated use. The example casts doubt on the reductionist position 
that tries to do without reference to anything but forms of use. Except for 
saying that different names activate different discourses, G. was stressing 
that they evoke different experiential resonance. According to G., the word 
slope brings about a spectrum of mental phenomena, including spontaneous 
associations and “seeing something” (a mental image of an angle), whereas 
derivative has almost no such effect. Thus, in spite of the fact that slope and 
derivative are mathematically indistinguishable and have exactly the same 
definition, the former is believed to be readily accessible to the student as a 
signifier-signified pair, whereas the latter is initially no more than an empty 
signifier. The emergence of these and other aspects of meaning is dealt with 
in the next section.
OBJECTS FROM SYMBOLS, ACT TWO:  
FILLING IN THE SEMANTIC SPACE
Object Mediation
In the templates-driven phase, the use of a new symbol may be quite effective 
and a person may have little difficulty communicating with others, but this 
ability is not accompanied by an awareness of the reasons why things work. 
Using Vygotsky’s language (1987), one may say that in this phase, names 
and symbols are but “signs-for-others.”27 It is important to stress again that 
templates-driven does not mean meaningless, and that the period of templates-
driven use may be extremely brief. When it comes to learning, it seems likely 
that the length of this period may be regulated by instructional intervention.
When employed in the templates-driven way, the signifier is not yet 
conceived by its user as standing for something else. In fact, the user may 
not even perceive the sign as a self-sustained entity. The basic meaningful 
units are all those more-or-less constant phrases within which the sign makes 
its appearances. It is usually only much later that the name or symbol gains 
independence. The liberation of the signifier from the confinement of constant 
phrases is usually accompanied by a reference to entities different from the 
signifier itself. Thus, for example, a student presented with an equation, 
3(x+1)−2=3x+5, may transform it into 3x+1=3x+5 and then say that “The 
equation has no solution because the two sides represent linear functions 
the graphs of which do not cross each other.” Here, the mediating entities 
are functions, which, according to the way the word function is used in 
27	 As opposed to “signs-in-themselves” and “signs-for-oneself.” Vygotsky made this distinction 
when analyzing development of concepts.

78  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
the sentence, are independent objects that should not be identified with the 
signifiers (3x+1, 3x+5, graph) themselves.
Let us take a closer look at the main characteristics of object mediation.
Flexibility and Generality of Use. As was just mentioned, the salient 
attribute of this new stage in the life of a structural sign is that its use becomes 
flexible. The sign gets life of its own, and the user is now able to incorporate the 
signifier into utterances that he or she has never heard before. This change may 
be compared to the transition from a mechanical use of a musical instrument, 
say, piano, to the use based on a knowledge of music. A person who has no 
musical education but who has learned to play a few melodies by memorizing 
the sequence of necessary keystrokes may be able to repeat these melodies at 
any time, and may even enjoy this greatly, but the person will probably not be 
able to play a new melody, even if that person can sing it. For such a person, 
finding the necessary keystrokes would be an uphill struggle. Others, who can 
decompose melodies into basic elements, understand the principles of harmony, 
and know how the elementary sounds may be produced by appropriate actions, 
are able to compose, or at least reconstruct by themselves, melodies they have 
never played before. This ability to create novel uses is often regarded as an 
ultimate criterion of meaningfulness and understanding. As Rotman (1994) 
put it while summarizing Wittgenstein’s (1978) observations on meaning, “It 
is the move to new cases, and the subsequent use of the label [signifier] that 
constitutes its meaning” (p. 24).
The Symbol Starts Functioning as a Representation. Another salient 
phenomenon indicative of the phase of object mediation is a change in the 
role of a symbol: Rather than being the object of discourse (as, e.g., analytic 
expression in Euler’s first definition of function), the symbol now becomes a 
representation of another entity. This new identity is conferred on the signifier 
by the way it is used. The “analytic expression,” for instance, turns into a 
means of talking about a certain abstract object (e.g., a set of ordered pairs), 
which may also be represented with other symbols (e.g., a curve in the plane). 
From now on, if we wish to be precise, we should no longer say This is a 
quadratic function while pointing to the symbol x2 or to a parabola; rather, 
now we should say that This is an expression of (or a graph of) a quadratic 
function, or This expression (graph) represents a quadratic function.
The distinction between “the object itself” and its representation is more 
difficult in the case of numbers, but it is still possible. Nowhere is the sense 
of the split made more evident than in the following statement by the French 
mathematician Alain Connes, who complains about people’s frequent inability 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  79
to see the “obvious” difference between a number and a numeral: “it would 
be wrong to attribute significance to the numerals that appear in the number. 
(Consider that very soon we will be celebrating the year 2000. The importance 
of this number is a purely cultural phenomenon: in mathematics, the number 
2000 is utterly devoid of interest!) (Changeux & Connes, 1995, p. 13).28
As aptly expressed by Cassirer (1957), the developmental importance of 
the mental split between the signifier and the object signified can hardly be 
overestimated. The transition from signifier-as-an-object-in-itself to signifier-
as-a-representation-of-another-object is a quantum leap in a subject’s 
consciousness:
The ontogenic development shows that wherever the function of representation 
stands out as such, where, instead of giving himself wholly to the actuality, [to] the 
simple presence of sensuous content, man succeeds in taking it as a representation of 
another, he has achieved an entirely new level of consciousness….
When the representative function of names has thus dawned on a child, his whole 
inner attitude toward reality has changed—a fundamentally new relation between 
subject and object has come into being, (pp. 112, 113)
In this context, it is important to stress two things. First, the change in the role 
of the symbol—from the-thing-in-itself to a representation— would usually 
not happen unless there are other symbols that can be regarded as signifying 
the same entity. The features that make us consider two symbols as referring 
to the same third object are discussed later. Second, once the symbol takes the 
role of representation, the whole discourse undergoes a modification. The old 
ways of expressing mathematical truths give way to new formulations. One 
glimpse into any old mathematical text would be enough to realize how far-
reaching this change may be. Thus, the ongoing mathematical conversation, 
perhaps more than any other type of discourse, is similar to a living organism 
that incessantly grows and mutates without losing its identity.
The transition from signifier-as-an-object-in-itself to signifier-as-a-
representation can be spurred by the teacher who insists on using language 
that underlines the separate existence of signifier and signified. Thus, rather 
than say, “Function x2,” the teacher would say, “Function represented by x2.” 
However, the awkwardness of such language, whose effectiveness is highly 
28	 Our language does not always help in separating the number and the numeral the way Connes 
did. We say “78 is a two-digit number” whether we mean the signifier (which is sometimes called 
“numeral”) or the number itself—the abstract object supposedly represented by this signifier. (A 
counterpart of this expression in AR discourse would sound rather funny; to say “78 is a two-digit 
number” is like saying that “Shakespeare is an eleven-letter person.”) This difficulty in separating 
the signifier from the signified in speech and in writing is a permanent reminder that “referents” 
have no existence without symbols.

80  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
doubtful, may be too high a price to pay. The mental split between signifier 
and signified can hardly occur without a certain experience of the signified, 
and this experience is not a matter of language alone (see the later discussion 
of the experience of the signified).
The Symbol Is Often Inadvertently Exchanged With Other Signifiers. 
One of the most telling indications of semantic mediation is a phenomenon 
of a change in wording that may often be witnessed when people try to 
recapitulate a former statement or when they are asked to use a particular 
word or symbol in a sentence. For example, Dan (see the previous section), 
when requested to compose a sentence using the words “one and a half,” 
replied: “Mother gave Yossi a shekel and a half.”29 In spite of the explicit 
request, the words one and a half did not appear in the utterance. Similarly, in 
another study, an 11-year-old boy who was asked to construct a sentence with 
the word zero said: “I gave all my apples to friends, so now I have nothing.” 
The mechanism of semantic mediation is obvious here. In both cases, the 
students did not look at the words but rather through them, to the entities 
that these words seem to represent (the quantities one-and-a-half and zero, 
respectively). Without noticing, they then made a transition to different words 
that, for them, represented the same entities but for some reasons were more 
easily applicable within sentences. Incidentally, it is probably not by chance 
that in both of these cases the utterances constructed by the children came 
from AR discourse. The physical reality is the greatest provider of object 
mediation. It abounds in perceptually accessible objects that are ideal to think 
with and to use as signifieds.
Economy of Expression. As a result of object mediation, there is a 
substantial gain in the efficiency of discourse: Much more can be said now 
with one signifier. By assuming the role of a mere “representation,” the given 
symbol becomes, in a sense, equivalent to other signifiers (think, e.g., about 
algebraic expressions and graphs), and thus, what until now had to be said 
twice—for each of the different signifiers separately—from now on may be 
said just once. Due to the mediation of an abstract object supposedly referred 
to by both of these symbols (function, in the case of the expression and graph), 
what is said with one signifier usually has meaning for the other.
Experience of the Signified (Abstract Object). One can hardly argue 
with the claim that there is more to “grasping a meaning” than can be found 
29	 Shekel is an Israeli monetary unit.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  81
through purely structural linguistic analysis. We saw this in the discussion 
of slope and derivative reported earlier. In fact, convincing evidence for 
this can be found everywhere: from well-controlled clinical studies to field 
observations and to mathematicians’ testimonies. Repeatedly, people report 
having vivid images of abstract objects, thinking without words, and having 
recourse to metaphorically transformed perceptual experiences (Hadamard, 
1949; Johnson, 1987; Lakoff, 1987; Sfard, 1994a). As in a virtual reality 
game, the presence of mathematical objects may seem to a person to be real 
even if it is difficult for the person to communicate it to others. So it seems 
to be in Connes’ case, judging from his statement on numbers and numerals 
given earlier. Indeed, the way he spoke shows that for him there is not much 
difference between numbers and physical objects when it comes to questions 
of existence: Both types of entities exist independently of human mind. To 
the psychologist, the experiential aspect of meaning seems too central to be 
neglected only because it does not yield easily to scientific investigation.
To summarize, the transition from templates-driven to object-mediated use 
of a symbol is a rich and multifaceted event. The remainder of this section 
is devoted to observations of how it happens. I have already mentioned two 
possible sources of object mediation. One of them is located within the closed 
system of mathematical discourse, and the other crosses its boundaries and 
reaches as far as AR discourse. We now take a closer look at each.
Intradiscursive Creation of Mathematical Objects
In this section I focus on the ways in which endogenous mathematical meaning 
is constructed. I show how the semantic space created by the introduction 
of a new signifier may be replenished with content coming from within the 
mathematical discourse itself.
As mentioned earlier, one typical indication of object mediation is the use 
of a number of signifiers as if they were but different representations of the 
same entity. All this begins with the awareness of some sort of “kinship” 
between signs. Such awareness may come about spontaneously or may be 
evoked by others (e.g., the teacher). It is important to stress that, more often 
than not, it is prior to any mention of an object (“referent”), and therefore 
may be viewed as a direct reason for its emergence. The already analyzed 
development of the notion of function is a good example. 
There is also another type of kinship between symbols, one that expresses 
itself in an isomorphism of discursive formations built around these symbols. 
By isomorphism of discourses I mean a relations-preserving correspondence 
between the two discourses. This kind of relationship exists, for example, 

82  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
between a discourse that evolves around algebraic expressions with one 
variable and one that concerns two-dimensional curves. Indeed, any utterance 
about expressions (e.g., “2x+1=26−3x when x=5”) may be mapped onto an 
utterance about curves (e.g., “The straight lines with the slopes 2 and −3 
and y-intercepts 1 and 26, respectively, cross each other at the point (5, 
11)”) in such a way that the logical relationships within each one of the two 
discursive formations are preserved. Once again, creation of an intermediate 
entity (function) that may be regarded as a common referent of the two 
symbols—the algebraic formula and the curve—is a feasible way to account 
for the isomorphism.
To summarize, endogenous semantic mediation in general, and 
mathematical objects in particular, arise between symbols as a result of an 
attempt to account for discursive equivalencies and isomorphisms. (The 
adjective discursive has been added to stress that these equivalencies and 
isomorphisms are phenomena that express themselves in the discursive use of 
signifiers.) It is noteworthy that the way we deal with linguistic equivalencies 
and isomorphisms in mathematical discourse is parallel to the manner in 
which these phenomena are accounted for in AR discourse. It is also worth 
mentioning, however, that the order of things seems to be reversed. In AR 
discourse perception of an object can sometimes be primary to any linguistic 
treatment, whereas the abstract objects of mathematics seem to be secondary 
to the awareness of discursive equivalence of a number of signifiers. This 
may be viewed as additional evidence of the perceptual sources of all human 
thinking and the metaphorical, embodied nature of imagination (Johnson, 
1987; Lakoff, 1987; Sfard, 1994a, 1997).
As an illustration of the intra-discursive creation of object-mediation, I 
refer to another example from my study with Dan (see earlier discussion in 
this chapter). As the reader may recall, I presented Dan with new mathematical 
symbols—pairs of whole numbers on which some operations, called addition 
and multiplication, had been defined. Dan successfully constructed subtraction 
and division as reversals of these two operations. The resulting structure 
was that of rational numbers, but Dan had not been told that at any stage. 
Moreover, in spite of his intensive work with the pairs, he remained unaware 
of the isomorphism for the duration of the first meeting. By the end of the 
meeting, a problem appeared: Some of the divisions and subtractions yielded 
pairs of fractional, rather than whole, numbers (e.g., (5, 3):(1, 4)=(5, 
)). 
According to the definition, these were not legitimate members of the new 
structure. After a brief discussion in which possible solutions were considered, 
the instructor suggested:

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  83
How about the following idea: We will not distinguish anymore between all the 
possible pairs. We shall see some of them as equal. Some of them will be considered 
equivalent to each other. There will be pairs that, from our point of view, will be the 
same, even if they are written with different numbers. For example, (3, 2) and (6, 4) 
for us will be the same [writes: (3, 2)=(6, 4)].30
From this, Dan concluded that two pairs should be considered as equal if the 
relation between them could be presented in the following way:
[1] the numbers [in the original pair] are multiplied…the two numbers are multiplied 
by the same number [and this is how the second pair is obtained].
This is a purely operational description: Dan identified the transformation that 
has to be performed on a pair in order to turn it into an equivalent pair. In the 
attempt to trace the subsequent transition to a structural definition, it is most 
enlightening to follow gradual changes in Dan’s use of language. Even before 
the end of the first meeting Dan declared:
[2] We can decide that pairs are equal according to the ratio…to the ratio of the 
two numbers.
The change with respect to utterance [1] is quite significant—and most telling. 
The transformation of a pair into an equivalent pair has been reified into a 
mathematical object called ratio. Rather than consider the two pairs alone (as 
in [1]), Dan helps himself with this third entity. This new object will be the 
touchstone of the equality between pairs. Dan’s use of the words according to 
shows, however, that at this early stage, although it is obvious that the ratio is 
strongly related to the pairs, these pairs are not yet regarded as representations 
of the ratio.
During the second meeting, I could witness a gradual metamorphosis of the 
whole-number pairs from objects-in-themselves into representations of some 
other objects. First, when recalling the decision made during the previous 
meeting, Dan told me:
[3] We said that some pairs of numbers will be equal because the ratio between the 
first and the second number is equal….
30	 As can be seen here, the idea of equivalence of symbols was suggested and then defined by the 
instructor rather than being intuitively raised by the learner himself. However, in spite of the lack 
of spontaneity in the opening move, I believe that the processes I was able to observe later were 
not much different from those that can be seen in more “natural” circumstances.

84  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
This is but a repetition of [2]. However, a few moments later, the formulation 
changed. After I suggested that we may call the pairs numbers and asked Dan 
whether this proposal seemed to him acceptable, Dan replied:
[4] Yes, I think it is possible [to call the pairs “numbers”] because what really 
counts is the ratio between the two numbers in the pair, and I think that in fact we 
could write this [writes 8/5] instead of this [writes (8, 5)]. We could write it as eight 
divided by five?
Here, for the first time, Dan identified the pairs with the ratio. This, however, 
was put in an interesting and telling way. Rather than say that a pair (8, 5) is 
the ratio 8/5, he talked about replacement of the pair by the ratio. Thus, Dan 
pointed to a very close relationship between the pair and the ratio—so close 
that one may be replaced by the other. However, this still was not necessarily 
a relation of signifier-signified.
The transition to this relationship happened some time later, when on a 
certain occasion Dan unexpectedly declared:
[5] You just took numbers that I know and you represented them in a  
different way.
This time, Dan said explicitly that the pairs are representations of another 
entity. This other entity is a number already known to Dan from his past 
learning. This, incidentally, is how the chain of signification builds: the familiar 
numbers (of the form a/b), which once began their life as mere signifiers, are 
now fully fledged signs, which, in their turn, become signifieds of the new 
signifiers (the pairs (a, b)).
Several aspects of this story merit special attention. For Dan, the symbols 
2/5, 11/5, and so on, are full of meaning. They bring with them a rich network 
of both intra- and interdiscursive relationships and a long history of abstract 
objects that evolved through the process of reification from the processes of 
division. (The symbol/within the rational number sign commemorates this 
history.) By assuming the role of “a representation” of rational numbers, the 
pairs (a, b) inherit all of this meaning. Above all, they become reconnected to 
the operational origins of the notion. Dan’s later utterances make it quite clear 
that in his eyes the two symbols, a/b and (a, b), differed in their roles. Indeed, 
there could be little doubt that for him the pairs (a, b) acted as signifiers 
whereas the ratios a/b functioned as signifieds. When requested to perform 
any operation or investigation on the whole-number pairs, Dan invariantly 
switched to ratios. He did it even in a recall task, where he was asked to look 
at a series of pairs and recapitulate them later.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  85
As may be seen from episode [6], which took place by the end of the 
second meeting, the bond between the signifier (the pair) and the signified 
(the rational number) soon became so strong that Dan would not distinguish 
between them anymore. The pair (a, b) and the rational number a/b were now 
referred to as the same (this is true at least in the case of the pairs of the form 
(0, b) and the number 0).
[6] D: The moment I write zero comma something, (0, b) for example, and I change 
it to 0/b which, according to what we said, is equal [to the pair (0, b)] then this is 
automatically equal to 0.
A:	 What does it tell you about the pairs?
D:	 That all the pairs with left component equal to 0 are equal.
A:	 Equal to each other?
D:	 Equal to 0.
To summarize, this example instantiates the process of intradiscursive 
construction of a mathematical object. Once certain signifiers were declared 
equivalent (equal), the need was created for an object that would give meaning 
to this equivalence. The object was eventually found,31 and from then on the 
equivalent signifiers played the role of representations.
Interdiscursive Creation of Mathematical Objects:  
Connecting VR Discourse to AR Discourse
In the last section we saw how mathematical discourse produces its own 
meanings. One can hardly overestimate the importance of another process 
leading to the emergence of object mediation: metaphorical projection from 
one discourse to another. As noted before, AR discourse occupies a special 
position. I have already discussed some distinct structural similarities between 
AR and VR discourses. The focus in this section is on another kind of link 
between the two: the link created by names and symbols that are shared by 
both discourses. Such symbols are well known to all of us and can be found in 
abundance in everyday language. The names and symbols of positive integers 
31	 In this case, it was not built totally on its own because some previously constructed objects could 
be used as signifiers. When talking about constructing objects, I intend to say that the signifiers 
“referring” to these objects have already entered the phase of semantically mediated use, that 
is, the phase characterized by all the phenomena presented in a previous section (including the 
experiential aspects).

86  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
and rational numbers, which are almost as common in everyday talk as they 
are in a classroom mathematical discourse, are the simplest examples.32
Naturally, mathematical signifiers are not always a shared property of 
AR and VR discourses. The existence of some of them, at least for some 
people, may be fully confined to mathematical discourse. This is certainly 
the case for such notions as matrix or complex number, provided the user 
knows nothing about their scientific applications. Some other mathematical 
signs are not mathematical at all for a person who is only able to use them 
within AR discourse. Much has been said lately about different brands of AR 
discursive formations that evolve around signifiers shared with mathematical 
discourse. There is talk about “everyday mathematics,” “street mathematics,” 
“market-place mathematics” and “ethno-mathematics” (Lave, 1988; Nunes, 
Schliemann, & Carraher, 1993; Saxe, 1988; Walkerdine, 1988). While 
marveling at Brazilian street vendors’ ability to make appropriate calculations 
when selling their goods, and at similar skills displayed by uneducated women 
buying provisions for their families, the writers emphasize that the same 
people are usually stymied when faced with a requirement to make paper-
and-pencil numerical manipulations. Clearly, for those who only know how 
to use numbers in everyday discourse, the number is not the same object as it 
is for the learner of mathematics in school. Although the same names appear 
in both discourses, these names lead to entirely different connotations and, 
thus, constitute different signs. Whereas a street seller thinks of numbers in 
terms (and images) of coins, school children identify numbers with written 
number symbols. To put it differently, if an abstract mathematical object 
that functions as a signified of, say, the term five is a totality of symbols, 
linguistic uses, and experiences related to this signifier, then the Brazilian 
vendor and the European pupil refer to completely different objects using the 
same number name.
For many people, a signifier—either mathematical or otherwise—must 
find its place in AR discourse in order to be meaningful. More than that, 
some researchers would claim that AR discourse is the only possible source 
of meaning for mathematics. This claim is usually supported with argument 
about the situatedness of learning (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Lave, 
32	 Of course, the uses of these signifiers may be quite different in the different discourses. Here is, 
for example, a sentence I read in the British Guardian (24.4.95), describing the celebrations of 
Shakespeare’s birthday: “Six or 700 celebrants walked through the shrine in Henley Street.” Here, 
700 is used not as an indivisible number symbol, but as a shorthand for the words “seven hundred,” 
so that each one of the two components has its own independent role within the sentence.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  87
1988; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Walkerdine, 1988).33 In this chapter I have been 
trying to show that this position may be too extreme. Arguments have been 
brought forward to show that the intradiscursive production of mathematical 
meaning is not just possible; sometimes, it is the essence of mathematical 
creation. Nevertheless, it is now time to stress the importance of meaning that 
comes from outside mathematical discourse.
If a sign exists and functions in both AR and VR discourses, it is likely to 
be meaningful in the latter mainly due to the perceptual-world connotations 
it brings with it from the former. Thus, the symbols 
 and 17 carry with 
them the metaphor of physical quantities (see Sfard, 1994b, 1997), and this 
metaphor is what mediates and regulates the uses of the signifiers both in 
AR and in VR discourses. If we take the ability to use a mathematical sign 
in AR discourse as a touchstone of understanding, then a small test I carried 
out recently among my university students has shown that not many of them 
could boast of having an object-mediated understanding of the concept of 
negative and irrational numbers. First, 18 students were asked to construct 
sentences with the numbers 1.5, 
 and −3. Later, they were requested to 
compose questions, the answers to which could be 
 −2, and 
 In both 
cases, they were encouraged to look for utterances with “everyday content.” 
Although both tasks—construction of everyday sentences and questions—
proved easy in the case of the positive rational numbers 1.5, 
 (see Fig. 
3.11), for the rest of the numbers not many everyday utterances were provided. 
Students’ responses were taken mostly from mathematical discourse itself. 
The few “everyday uses” of negative numbers were made solely in the context 
of temperature, latitude, and bank overdraft. In the first two examples, the 
number was applied as a label rather than as a measure of quantity. Most of 
the “everyday” questions to which the answer was supposed to be −2 suffered 
from out-of-focus syndrome; that is, although the negative quantity was 
somehow involved in the situation presented in the question, the actual answer 
to the question should be 2 rather than −2 (see the example in Fig. 3.11).
In my experiment with Dan, the request to compose sentences and questions 
with numbers of different kinds recurred several times. The student repeatedly 
stressed his difficulty with negative, irrational, and complex numbers (the 
33	 In fact, the sweeping call to teach mathematics through solving real-life problems may be a 
product of a misinterpretation of the doctrine of situatedness. The whole point about this doctrine 
is that situations in which problems are being solved frame these problems in ways irreproducible 
in other situations. Thus, all those characteristics of a problem that are so helpful to its solving in 
a supermarket or at home are inevitably lost when the problem is transferred to school (cf. Lesh 
& Doerr’s discussion of solving real-life problems, chap. 10, this volume). Moreover, nothing can 
be done about it since the loss is due to a fact that simply cannot be changed: that the school is not 
a supermarket.

88  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
latter were introduced to him beginning with the fourth meeting as pairs of 
real numbers and under the name “novel numbers”). He explicitly complained 
about his inability to compose “everyday” sentences and questions for these 
numbers. Here are representative samples of his utterances:
On complex number (2, 3), meeting 7: I still don’t know how to write (2, 3) 
in a sentence. The two [real numbers] I can… I can say this as a mathematical 
sentence.
On −2, meeting 9: A question: “What is 1 minus 3?” [pause]… All I can think 
about is in a mathematical context. 
On 
, meeting 9: A question: “Give an example of an irrational number”…
[pause] I don’t really have any question to ask.
FIG. 3.11. Examples of sentences and questions composed by the students.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  89
Some other utterances have shown that the only link to AR discourse could 
come from the relation of order. Dan said this quite explicitly during the 
ninth meeting, while explaining the difficulty he experienced when trying to 
compose a sentence with 
 (Fig. 3.12).
Evidently, the symbol 
 was for Dan still operational rather than structural 
and, in order to account for its structural use, Dan needed object mediation that 
could only come from AR discourse. His concept of number was inextricably 
tied to AR notions of quantity. This is why the numbers that could not be easily 
located between rational numbers (e.g., irrational, complex) did not count for 
Dan as “true” numbers. When I asked, during the ninth meeting, what the 
word number meant to him, the exchange presented in Fig. 3.13 took place.
The inability to incorporate negative, irrational, and complex numbers into 
AR discourse was for Dan an evidence that “these are not true numbers.” 
Several times he made a distinction between the numbers that “exist in the 
world” and those that are but man-made. During the eighth meeting, he tried 
FIG. 3.12. Numbers must have a precise magnitude.

90  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
to explain his inability to incorporate negative numbers into AR discourse, as 
presented in Fig. 3.14.
The claim about “unnaturalness” of irrational, negative, and complex 
numbers may be seen as an indication of Dan’s uncertainty about the legitimacy 
and meaningfulness of these numbers. All of this means that Dan’s sense of 
understanding numbers, like that of 17th- and 18th-century mathematicians, 
depended very strongly on his ability to use them in AR discourse. This 
example illustrates the point I am trying to make in this section. It shows 
that AR discourse is a very important, and sometimes irreplaceable, source 
of mathematical meaning. To put it differently, in certain circumstances 
transition to object mediation becomes possible only due to the “import” of 
signifieds from AR discourse. 
FIG. 3.13. Numbers measure quantity.
FIG. 3.14. Negative numbers are a human invention.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  91
MAKING WORD FLESH—SOME DIDACTIC 
CONSIDERATIONS
Summary
In this chapter, mathematical discourse has been presented as an autopoietic 
system in which an intricate interplay of signifiers is a principal source of 
meaning. Although the discourse on numbers, functions, sets, and the like 
bears striking structural resemblance to the discourse on physical objects, 
there is no point in talking about objects of mathematics as entities existing 
independently of the discourse itself. In fact, the very idea of mathematical 
object is only metaphorical, and it refers to a particular use of signifiers. To 
be a fully fledged participant of mathematical discourse means, among others, 
to be able to use mathematical names and symbols with proficiency and with 
experiences similar to those that are characteristic of the use of structural 
signifiers in communication on material objects. However, because of a 
relative scarcity of perceptual support, the ability to make such an object-
mediated use of mathematical names and symbols is not easy to attain.
In spite of the difficulty, new structural signifiers are being introduced to 
mathematical discourse all the time. The eventual gains of such additions 
are significant enough to recompense the effort necessary to develop object-
mediated use of the new symbols. By changing the ontological status of focal 
mathematical notions from operational to structural (or from referring to 
processes to referring to objects), new signifiers enable turning the discourse 
onto itself; that is, they make it possible to initiate a higher level mathematical 
discourse—a discourse on the discursive procedures developed and practiced 
so far.
There is an inherent circularity in the process of construction of such a 
higher level mathematical discourse. On the one hand, introduction and use 
of the structural signifier have a constitutive role in establishing the objects 
of this discourse; on the other hand, participants’ sense of existence of these 
objects is a condition for the effective use of the signifiers. This circularity 
is a source of additional difficulty, but is also the driving force behind the 
discursive growth: The lack of equilibrium between discursive practices 
and the participants’ sense of the objects of the discourse is what impels 
this growth.
The way out of the circularity leads through the stage of templates-driven 
use of new signifiers, that is, use that is guided by old discursive habits and 
forms. The employment of new signifiers within previously established 
discursive templates is regulated through expectations and verifications. A 

92  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
former experience with signifiers deemed to be somehow analogous to the 
new ones engenders expectations about possible discursive uses of these new 
names or symbols. These expectations are then tested and, if confirmed, the 
given templates are added to the repertoire of the new signifier’s possible 
uses; if refuted, the templates are deleted from the list. The confirmations and 
refutations are a product of either communicative interactions or deductive 
considerations. The object-mediated use will eventually develop endogenously, 
as a result of attempts to account for intradiscursive equivalencies and 
isomorphisms between symbolic systems, and exogenously, with the support 
of meanings developed by applying the signifier in other discourses.
Conclusions
After the detailed discussion of the mechanisms that underlie the growth 
of mathematical discourse, it is time to give some thought to the practical 
implication. Those who renounce the traditional vision of symbols as coming 
to capture ready-made meaning and to represent mind-independent intangible 
objects are likely to be critical also about traditional instructional practices.
As was mentioned before, it is widely believed these days that mathematical 
symbols should not be introduced before the concepts represented by these 
symbols are already understood, at least partially. However, if one accepts 
the thesis that there can be no talk about mathematical objects without 
mathematical symbols, then the request to prepare an easy, meaningful 
landing for symbolic newcomers seems inherently difficult—if not outright 
impossible. Thus, instead of asking “What comes first?” we would rather give 
thought to the question of how to orchestrate and facilitate the back-and-forth 
movement between symbols and meanings. This seems to be the only way to 
cope with the problem of circularity that is inherent in discourse that creates 
its own objects.
The roots of all language games people play go back to AR discourse. 
However, sequences of template transplants and chains of signification forged 
on the way from AR to VR discourse of mathematics may be so long that 
their AR sources are no longer visible from the distant VR end. They may 
be much too extensive to be fully reconstructed during 10 or 12 years of 
schooling. Indeed, as long as mathematical contents taught in today’s high 
schools remain basically as they are, it seems hardly possible that the starting 
point of every instructional sequence is placed within AR discourse, or that 
the bridges between AR and VR discourses are constantly kept in sight when 
mathematical symbols are being manipulated. As I already mentioned, this 
is something that many mathematical educators find increasingly difficult to 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  93
accept.34 There can be little doubt that they have good reasons for their protests 
against mathematics for its own sake. As was shown in the last section, what 
seems natural and fully understandable for a mathematician brought up in a 
strict formalist tradition may be as inconceivable for the student as it was for 
the Medieval and Renaissance mathematicians who rejected the notions of 
negative and imaginary numbers because of the impossibility of incorporating 
them into AR discourse. Today’s mathematicians may pay lip service to the 
requirement of AR usefulness by saying that AR applications “will be found 
one day.” The necessity to postpone the relinking with AR discourse (possibly 
ad infinitum) does not affect their work and does not disturb their peace of 
mind. For the student, such a delay may be highly consequential.
The problem seems quite complex indeed: Only too often, linking VR and 
AR discourses is either too difficult to be feasible, or is simply impossible. 
However, two didactic avenues offer a certain promise. First, the bridging 
may sometimes be done in reverse order—something that may also save time 
and effort. Indeed, if we begin with purely mathematical discourse and then 
return to AR discourse already endowed with new mathematical signifiers, 
these new signifiers would often serve as looking glasses through which the 
tangible world would readily seem more orderly than before. As Miller (1991) 
put it, “We do not take signifiers as that which describes reality. We take 
signifiers as what enters the real to structure it” (p. 32). This, in fact, is to say 
that starting with mathematical signifiers may sometimes be the right thing 
to do. Not only abstract mathematical objects, but also real-world structures, 
do not come into existence by themselves, but rather have to be “symbolized 
into being.” The claim that the structure is symbol independent, objective, 
and just waiting to be captured in symbols sounds as equally unconvincing as 
Michelangelo Buonarroti’s modest assertion that his only role as a sculptor 
was to expose the forms that were “already there” in the stone.
For the sake of skeptics who doubt the possibility of meaningful activity with 
links to AR discourse temporarily suspended, let me remark that mathematical 
ideas that are firmly situated in mathematical context and are well connected 
to previously constructed concepts may appear as meaningful and relevant 
as those that grow from real-life situations. Here, the emphasis is, of course, 
on the issue of understanding and accepting the rules of purely mathematical 
discourse—something that is quite difficult to attain and is, therefore, rarely 
34	 The “extremists” would be most happy if the intramathematical creation of meaning was banned 
from schools altogether. However, rejecting endogenous mathematical meaning would be 
tantamount to the rejection of major portions of mathematics itself. Today’s mathematicians might 
say that it would be banning all mathematics.

94  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
found in schools. Another point to stress is the issue of context. Whether 
“real-life” or purely mathematical, it is the context that makes budding ideas 
meaningful and helps establish object mediation. If we recall how much 
was achieved by Dan in the clinically sterile situation in which the links to 
his former knowledge were deliberately withheld, we have every reason to 
assume that in a richer context his progress could be even more impressive.
Yet another argument in support of the possibility of learning mathematics 
intradiscursively has to do with the ways of incorporating new signifiers into 
mathematical discourse. Although in no situation should we expect the new 
mathematical objects to emerge without symbolical support, the symbols 
themselves do not have to be arbitrarily introduced. In the optimal case, within 
an appropriate context, they can be expected to grow as if “of themselves,” 
just as in the late 16th century algebraic expressions emerged almost against 
mathematicians’ better judgment out of the simple idea (which, nevertheless, 
required an exceptional ingenuity to be invented) of denoting unknown and 
given quantities with letters. The symbolic turnaround was triggered by the 
need to make the growingly complex discourse on numerical computations 
more manageable, integrated, and focused. Today’s student may be similarly 
motivated while engaging in the activity of symbolizing.
The other promising direction is one that has opened up with the advent 
of computerized virtual reality. This special technological advance has 
brought an artificial extension to tangible reality. By rendering figments 
of human imagination perceptually real, it has increased dramatically the 
assortment of objects particularly well equipped to play the role of mediators 
within mathematical discourse. It seems quite plausible that great parts of 
mathematical reality, which until now could only be imagined, will soon 
materialize on the computer screen. If such a turn indeed takes place, its 
impact on students’ ability to talk mathematics may be immense. Because of 
perceptual mediation, the learner will now be able to engage in VR discourse 
the way he or she conducts AR discourse. Giving mathematical objects 
“flesh” may be expected to substantially increase students’ understanding of 
mathematics. This is what one can learn, for example, from the story told 
by Davis and Hersh (1981), on the impact of computer-generated images of 
“three-dimensional slices” of a four-dimensional cube. One of the authors 
reported that there was a quantum increase in his understanding when, after 
the images had been manipulated and explored for a while, “The hypercube 
leaped into palpable reality” (p. 404).
Whatever path we chose to usher young people into the world of 
mathematics, we may be better off if we think of this world as symbolized 
into being rather than merely represented with symbols. If we accept this, 

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  95
then one of the immediate conclusions will be almost identical with what may 
be learned from Shaw’s “Pygmalion”: If we wish our students to feel at ease 
in the virtual world of mathematics, we have to follow in Professor Higgins’ 
footsteps and see to it that young people learn to speak mathematical language 
fluently and with a proper, “objected-mediated” accent.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The ongoing interchange between Paul Cobb and me was instrumental in 
bringing the ideas proposed in this chapter to their present form. I wish to 
thank Paul for his patient reading through several drafts, for his felicitous and 
ever-so-tactful criticism, and for his helpful suggestions.
REFERENCES
Bakhtin, M.M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays (V.W.McGee, Trans.; C.Emerson 
& M.Holoquist, Eds.). Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bauman, Z. (1978). Hermeneutics and social sciences. London: Hutchison.
Bereiter, C. (1985). Towards a solution of the learning paradox. Review of Educational 
Research, 55, 201–226.
Blumer, H. (1969). Symbolic interactionism: Perspectives and method. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. 
Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32–42.
Brown, R.W., & Berko, J. (1960). Word associations and the acquisition of grammar. Child 
Development, 31, 1–14.
Bruner, J. (1983). The acquisition of pragmatic commitments. In R.Golinkoff (Ed.), The 
transition from prelinguistic to linguistic communication (pp. 27–42). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bruner, J. (1987). In the search of mind. Essays in autobiography. New York: Harper and 
Row.
Cassirer, E. (1957). The philosophy of symbolic forms: Vol. 3. The phenomenology of 
knowledge. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Changeux, J.-P., & Connes, A. (1995). Conversations on mind, matter, and mathematics. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cobb, P. (1994). Where is the mind? Constructivist and sociocultural perspectives on 
mathematical development. Educational Researcher, 23(7), 13–20.
Cobb, P. (1995). Cultural tools and mathematical learning: A case study. Journal for Research 
in Mathematics Education, 26, 362–385.
Cobb, P., Gravemeijer, K., Yackel, E., McClain, K., & Whitenack, J. (1997). Mathematizing 
and symbolizing: The emergence of chains of signification in one first-grade classroom. In 
D.Kirshner & J.A.Whitson (Eds.), Situated cognition: Social, semiotic, and psychological 
perspectives (pp. 151–233). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cobb, P., Jaworski, B., & Presmeg, N. (1996). Emergent and sociocultural perspectives on 
mathematical activity. In P.Nesher, L.P.Steffe, P.Cobb, G.Goldin, & B.Greer (Eds.), 

96  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Theories of mathematical learning (pp. 3–19). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Davis, P., & Hersh, R. (1981). The mathematical experience. London: Penguin Books.
Demby, A. (1994). Rozwoj procedur stosowanych przez uczniow klas V-VII przy 
przeksztalcaniu wyrazen algebraicznych [Development of procedures applied by fifth- to 
seventh-grade students while transforming algebraic expressions]. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, Gdansk University, Gdansk, Poland.
Derrida, J. (1976). Of grammatology (G.C.Spivak, Trans.). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press. (Original work published 1967)
Dreyfus, H.D., & Rabinow, P. (1982). Michael Foucault: Beyond structuralism and 
hermeneutics. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Eco, U. (1976). A theory of semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Eco, U. (1990). Introduction. In Y.M.Lotman (Ed.), Universe of mind (pp. vii–xiii). London: 
I.B.Tauris.
Ervin, S.M. (1961). Changes with age in verbal determinants of word-association. American 
Journal of Psychology, 74, 361–372.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge. New York: Pantheon Books.
Foucault, M. (1973). Madness and civilization: A history of insanity in the age of reason. 
New York: Vintage/Random House.
Gottdiener, M. (1995). Postmodern semiotics. Material culture and the forms of modern life. 
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Gray, E., & Tall, D.O. (1994). Duality, ambiguity, and flexibility: A “proceptual” view of 
simple arithmetic. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 25, 116–140.
Hadamard, J.S. (1949). The psychology of invention in the mathematics field. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Johnson, M. (1987). The body in the mind: The bodily basis of reason and imagination. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kleiner, I. (1989). Evolution of the function concept: A brief survey. College Mathematics 
Journal 20, 282–300.
Kline, M. (1980). Mathematics: The loss of certainty. New York: Oxford University Press.
Knorr, K.D. (1980). The scientist as analogical reasoner: A critique of the metaphor theory of 
innovation. In K.D.Knorr, R.Krohn, & B.Whitley (Eds.), The social process of scientific 
investigation: Sociology of sciences (Vol. 4, pp. 25–52). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. 
Reidel.
Lacan, J. (1977). Ecrits: A selection. London: Tavistock.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and refutations. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things: What categories reveal about the 
mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). The metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Lampert, M. (1990). When the problem is not a question and the solution is not an answer: 
Mathematical knowing and teaching. American Educational Research Journal, 27(1), 
29–63.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Mashler, M. (1976). Algebra for seventh grade. Tel Aviv, Israel: Hakibutz Hameuhad.

Symbolizing Mathematical Reality Into Being  97
Maturana, H.R., & Varela, F.J. (1987). The tree of knowledge. Boston: Shambhala.
Miller, J.-A. (1991). Language: Much ado about what? In E.Ragland-Sullivan & M.Bracher 
(Eds.), Lacan and the subject of language (pp. 21–35). New York: Routledge.
Nunes, T., Schliemann, A., & Carraher, D. (1993). Street mathematics and school 
mathematics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Palermo, D.S. (1963). Word associations and children’s verbal behavior. In L.P.Lipsitt & 
C.C.Spiker (Eds.), Advances in child development and behavior (Vol. 1, pp. 31–68). New 
York: Academic Press.
Palermo, D.S., & Jenkins, J.J. (1963). Word association norms: Grade school through 
college. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Peirce, C. (1931–1935). Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce (Vols. 1–6, C.Hartshorne, 
& P.Weiss, Eds.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. (1955). Philosophical writings of Peirce. New York: Dover Publications.
Poincaré, H. (1929). Science and method. In G.B.Halsted (Trans.), The foundations of science 
(pp. 359–546). New York: Science Press.
Reddy, M. (1979). The conduit metaphor—A case of frame conflict in our language and 
about language. In A.Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and thought (pp. 284–324). New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Rotman, B. (1994). Mathematical writing, thinking, and virtual reality. In P.Ernest (Ed.), 
Mathematics, education, and philosophy: An international perspective (pp. 76–86). 
London: Falmer Press.
Russell, B. (1904). Recent works on the principles of mathematics. International Monthly, 
4, 84.
Ruthing, D. (1984). Some definitions of the concept of function from John Bernoulli to N. 
Bourbaki. Mathematical Intelligencer, 6(4), 72–77.
Saussure, F. de. (1986). Course in general linguistics (C.Bally & A.Sechehaye, with A. 
Reidlinger, Eds.; R.Harris, Trans.). La Salle, IL: Open Court. (Original work published 
1916)
Saxe, G.B. (1988). Candy selling and math learning. Educational Researcher, 17(6), 14–21.
Sfard, A. (1991). On the dual nature of mathematical conceptions: Reflections on processes 
and objects as different sides of the same coin. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 22, 
1–36.
Sfard, A. (1992). Operational origins of mathematical objects and the quandary of reification—
The case of function. In E.Dubinsky & G.Harel (Eds.), The concept of function: Aspects 
of epistemology and pedagogy. MAA Notes, 25, 59–84.
Sfard, A. (1994a). Reification as the birth of metaphor. For the Learning of Mathematics, 
14(1), 44–55.
Sfard, A. (1994b). Mathematical practices, anomalies and classroom communication 
problems. In P.Ernest (Ed.), Constructing mathematical knowledge (pp. 248–273). 
London: Falmer Press.
Sfard, A. (1997). Commentary: On metaphorical roots of conceptual growth. In L.English 
(Ed.), Mathematical reasoning: Analogies, metaphors, and images (pp. 339–371). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sfard, A., & Linchevski, L. (1994). The gains and the pitfalls of reification—The case of 
algebra. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 26, 191–228.
Tannen, D. (1993). Framing in discourse. New York: Oxford University Press.
Thompson, P., & Sfard, A. (1994). Problems of reification: Representations and mathematical 

98  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
objects. In D.Kirshner (Ed.), Proceedings of Sixteenth Annual Meeting of the North 
American Chapter of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics 
Education (pp. 3–34). Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University,
von Glasersfeld, E. (Ed.). (1991). Radical constructivism in mathematics education. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Press,
von Glasersfeld, E. (Ed.). (1995). Radical constructivism. A way of knowing and learning. 
London: Falmer Press.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society. The development of higher psychological processes. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1987). Thinking and speech. In R.W.Rieber & A.S.Carton (Eds.), The 
collected works of L.S.Vygotsky (Vol. 1, pp. 39–285). New York: Plenum Press.
Walkerdine, V. (1988). The mastery of reason. London: Routledge.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1978). Remarks on the foundations of mathematics. Oxford, UK: 
Blackwell.
Woodrow, H., & Lowell, F. (1916). Children’s associations frequency table. Psychological 
Monographs, 22(5).

99
4 
Means for Meaning
Willi Dörfler  
University of Klagenfurt,  
Klagenfurt, Austria
There are many different ways to use the term meaning. It is modified by 
such adjectives as subjective, objective, universal, referential, pragmatic, 
mathematical, context-bound, context-free, shared, and taken-as-shared, 
to name a few. Such modifying adjectives could lead one to suspect that 
the word meaning is not very meaningful or is even meaningless. From 
the Wittgensteinian (1977) standpoint, different meanings of meaning are 
connected to each other by a family resemblance, without their sharing any 
common core (such as in Wittgenstein’s famous example of the concept of 
game). For my part, I take the position that it does not make sense, in a general 
way, to ask a question such as, “What is meaning?” One might ask for the 
meaning of a specific term, such as for the number two. But even that question 
quickly leads everywhere and nowhere, because for any answer that can be 
formulated finitely, one can surely point out some aspect that has not been 
included yet. And, even more important, any relevant answer will refer to 
many other words or concepts and their meaning(s).
Nevertheless, I find it unacceptable to be bound by these negative and 
limiting views. Because many individuals, laymen and scholars alike, use 
the word meaning, albeit in many different meanings, there must be some 
rationality to such widespread use. We are steadily confronted with the 
phenomenon that we can seemingly understand spoken and/or written 
utterances of other people and that we can make sense of our own writing and 
speaking. The term or concept of meaning postulates a quality or property of 
linguistic units that mediates between communicating people. If we know the 
meaning of the relevant words and sentences, we are able to understand. If we 
do not know, we do not understand. If we do not know the correct meaning, 

100  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
misunderstandings arise. This shows the close connection and relationship 
between the concepts of meaning and understanding. In fact, there is a strong 
interdependence or circularity between these two concepts. Understanding is 
the grasping of meaning, and because there is understanding, there must also 
be meaning associated with what we hear, read, speak, or write. Depending 
on our own philosophical or epistemological perspective, understanding 
depends on access to an objective meaning or on the individual construction 
of subjective, but socially mediated, meaning. Typical language use and also 
personal psychological experience lead to the view or the impression of an 
experiential reality in which meaning (of words, sentences, and terms) can 
be isolated, fixed, described, defined, and investigated, as though it were a 
physical property of material objects. Similarly, understanding is conceived of 
as a psychic or cognitive process comparable to a chemical process. (Perhaps 
meaning can almost be considered a type of catalyst.)
In explaining, that is, in developing theories for, human behavior beyond 
mere description, there is no choice other than to posit theoretical terms/
concepts, such as meaning or understanding, and to develop perspectives 
about how human behavior is regulated by the corresponding entities or 
processes that are stipulated. This can be very productive, as the success of the 
natural sciences proves, but we should remain aware of the theoretical nature 
of the concepts involved. In addition, it is essential to take into account the 
empirical/ecological validity of the theories that are developed. These theories 
should be viable means for describing or modeling our experiences. And even 
without being able to substantiate such a claim here, I contend that many 
theories of meaning do not meet these criteria. Some of them make sense only 
for completely codified fields of knowledge, such as formal mathematical 
theories, and do not take into account related human activity.
Depending on the theoretical conception of meaning, different research 
questions will be asked. Certain meanings of meaning will exclude specific 
questions and research methods. The basic theoretical terms function 
like a lens or a prism through which we observe our experiences. What is 
describable, and thus observable, is highly determined by the theoretical 
conceptualizations that we bring to our experience. This certainly applies 
to the term understanding and the way it is operationalized in school. The 
basis for judging students’ understanding depends heavily on the teacher’s 
preconceptions of understanding and of the meaning of the subject matter in 
question. In addition, the teaching itself is strongly influenced, if not regulated, 
by those views held by the teacher. This clarifies the didactic impact of 
theories of meaning and understanding on the theory and practice of teaching 
and learning. 
Despite this apparent untidiness about the ambiguous term meaning, we 

Means for Meaning  101
have to take a view on it. In this chapter, I take the following position. The only 
available and observable indicator that a subject has grasped the meaning—
whatever this is—of a linguistic or symbolic entity is that the subject has a 
thorough command of its social use. Or, one could say, this is the way the 
word meaning is used. Thus, command of a discourse is taken to be based on 
meaning that the subject has constructed, that is, on subjective understanding. 
An analogy to physics might be useful here. When objects fall, such actions 
are taken to be indicators of gravitational force, which, as a theoretical term, 
is not observable. That is, we could have an adequate linguistic/discursive 
behavior corresponding to gravitation as that phenomenon that is driven by 
the meaning of the discursive elements. This analogy is supported by the 
everyday observation that all arguments concerning the meaning of a word 
or text are essentially arguments concerning usage. This is true even in those 
cases in which meaning is interpreted simply as the reference to a well-defined 
class of entities.
For me, a consequence of this position is that everything that enhances an 
individual’s induction into a given discourse is taken as contributing to that 
person’s construction of meaning. Further, it is only by participating in the 
discourse that individuals can receive enough feedback to assure themselves 
of having constructed the socially accepted meaning. (In the preceding 
sentences, I use the word meaning in the same way as I use gravitational 
force.) Thus, developing a theory of meaning is an attempt to explain how we 
can successfully participate in a discourse (cf. Sfard’s emphasis on discursive 
activity, chap. 3, this volume). The title of this chapter, therefore, also could 
have been: “Means for Participation in a Discourse.”
Throughout this chapter, I synthesize and extend ideas and notions that I 
have presented and developed previously. Also, several new ideas are offered. 
An essential feature of them is the network-like character of the means for 
meaning. Induction into a discourse is a complex, multidimensional process 
that demands many faculties of the individual. The reference list acknowledges 
references I used in my prior work. Not all of these references are made 
explicit in this chapter. However, I have included them to indicate to whom 
I owe much of the basic stance I take here as I substantiate and explicate my 
case of mathematics and mathematics learning (e.g., see Dörfler 1989a, 1991; 
Rotman, 1993).
The reader might ask what justifies the inclusion of my chapter into this 
volume on “Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing.” Let me begin 
with communication. Any type of communication takes place within, and 
by the means of, discourse. Further, successful communication presupposes 
mutually compatible meanings on the part of its participants. Thus, the means 
for meaning discussed as follows are means for communication as well. In 

102  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
this chapter, I elaborate on the notions of prototypes, protocols, and an as-
if attitude. I argue that shared experiences with prototypes or protocols will 
enhance the compatibility of these two cognitive structures for individuals. 
On the other hand, communication, even if deficient or fragmentary, is 
an important social framework of and support for being introduced into a 
discourse and its means. Therefore, I consider communication to be the social 
medium for the individual construction of prototypes and protocols and also 
for the development of what I call an “as-if attitude,” even though I do not 
stress this point explicitly in every case.
Similar remarks apply to symbols and their use. Specifically, many 
prototypes in mathematics (or rather, their carriers, as explained later) are 
based on symbolic structures (cf. Sfard’s notion of templates-driven use, chap. 
3, this volume). These structures are frequently used tools for constructing 
protocols as schematized records of actions and the results of those actions. 
In other words, I make the case that the construction of a protocol can be 
viewed as a special case of symbolizing or as a building up of a model of 
the (mathematically) relevant traits of recorded actions. More generally, any 
discourse makes extensive use of conventional symbolic means, and initiation 
into the discourse, in part, consists of appropriating those symbolic means. 
This is especially true for any mathematical discourse.
Mathematization, in my view, has so many different aspects and appears in so 
many different forms, for such a variety of purposes, that I refrain from relating 
it to the topics in my chapter here. Nevertheless, we could consider protocols 
as a special case of mathematization and we could consider an as-if attitude as 
being a precondition for understanding the role of mathematical models.
PROTOTYPES
In this section I elaborate my use of the word prototype, which, although 
close to that found in the literature (e.g., refer to G.Lakoff, 1987), also differs 
in several important ways. In the literature, prototypes are considered central 
elements in the category of referents of a word. Further, the use of words in 
vernacular language is often regulated and monitored by associating them 
with paradigmatic cases of their use. With the view that meaning is a reference 
to objects of some kind, these cases are specific examples of the potential 
referents of the respective word. They are prototypes. For example, some 
birds are better exemplars of the concept bird than others. They are prototypic 
birds. The decision to call an animal a bird is made by its resemblance to the 
prototypic birds. 
My use of the term prototype is broader because I admit situations, actions, 
systems of actions, symbol systems, and other entities as well. Further, the 

Means for Meaning  103
main aspect of a prototype is not the centrality in a category of referents, but 
is the capacity to guide activities of many kinds, not (just) linguistic use. For 
mathematics, such activities can be calculating, drawing, proving, arguing,  
or reading.
Initial Examples
The first example I present is the number line, which can serve as a prototype 
for the system Z of whole numbers. I emphasize that, in my view, the number 
line does not represent Z in an objective manner. However, the number line 
can be used to think “about” whole numbers and their operations and relations. 
The number line and other so-called “representations” make it possible to take 
part in the mathematical discourse “about Z.” We also use the number line as 
a means of communicating purportedly about Z (cf. Sfard’s discussion of the 
number line as a means to introduce negative numbers to students, chap. 3, 
this volume). Discourse about Z is essentially a discourse about the number 
line. And it is only in this sense that the number line represents Z.
As a second example, Rn can be a prototype for the concept of a (finite-
dimensional) vector space. The sensible, or socially acceptable, use of vector 
space terminology is based on our experiences with Rn (or even with R5). Here, 
I emphasize the word experiences strongly. Just as the adequate use of bird is 
based on socially guided experiences with birds, we need experiences with R5 to 
be able to use it as a prototypic vector space. The latter requires the developing 
of a specific view on R5 by such experiences as adding vectors, multiplying by 
scalars, determining subspaces or hulls, and determining linear dependence 
or independence. Although time-consuming, such activity can serve as 
an experiential basis for the learner in the difficult process of “constituting 
meaning.” I do not say that the activity is the meaning. Instead, the activity of 
the individual that is meaningful in the eyes of others can be regulated by the 
prototype R5. Thus, R5 can be a means for thinking and talking in vector space 
theory. In the process, the prototype can even be refined and become further 
articulated. Conversely, having acquired the vector-space-theory discourse, 
one can become more independent of the prototype. That is, one knows how to 
use the terms. So, we might say one has constructed meaning.
As still another example, consider the concept of identity element with 
respect to an operation such as in group theory. Prototypes can be the number 
zero in the whole numbers with addition or the identity in any permutation 
group. As with our experiences concerning birds, experiences with various 
identity elements are the basis for adequately using the term identity element. 
We come to know when to apply the word identity in the same way that we 
come to know when to apply the word bird—through a socially guided learning 

104  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
process. There is even one advantage in the case of identity element. We can 
make all of the determining properties explicit in a formal definition. But again, 
the discursive use of that definition is, in principle, moderated by reference 
to the prototypes. Nevertheless, eventually one becomes inducted into the 
discourse around the term identity to such an extent that the discourse stands 
on its own and does not need support or guidance from the outside. Then one 
relies exclusively on the linguistic formulations, such as “xoe=x for all x.”
As a further example, take the term operation as it is used, for instance, in 
the definition of a group. One way to learn how to use it is to gain experiences 
with various kinds of operations. The latter acquire the status of a prototype 
for the learner through these experiences. There are many possible candidates 
for a group, including various types of numbers, matrices, and permutations. 
Then, by operation we designate something or everything that shows the 
same essential features as those experienced: We take one (symbolic) object 
and another, and by certain rules, derive or “calculate” a third object. To call 
something an operation, then, means just that. Similarly, one might learn the 
use of the word tennis—either by playing the game oneself or by observing 
others playing it. The latter is a possibility for learning how to use operation as 
well. Of course, as with any comparison, this one only grasps several features. 
Usually, for tennis there is no symbolic expression as there is for operation 
(aob=c).
Aspects of Prototypes
I now turn to listing various aspects that describe how I use the term prototype 
for this chapter. Although these aspects neither characterize nor define the 
term, a description of them is important to distinguish my idea of prototype 
from such related terms as representation or model.
First, a material object, including symbols, is not a prototype in itself, but 
gains that quality by virtue of a specific view an individual takes of it. This 
view primarily focuses on, or constructs, certain properties and relations, or 
executes actions. Thus, prototypes cannot be shown or perceived. They must 
be conceived of as a relationship to the respective object, as its carrier, which 
is expressed by a specific use or treatment. Strange as it may seem, this implies 
that the same objects can play different prototypic roles and that very different 
objects can be prototypic of the same concept.
As an illustrative example, consider the number line once again. By virtue 
of equidistant markings for the whole numbers, the line has the potential of 
being a prototype for (a finite segment of) Z. Here, we make use only of this 
subdivision of the line and various kinds of movements on it, thus leading 
to the arithmetic operations for Z. Thus, a prototype for Z emerges from this 

Means for Meaning  105
specific use of the number line and the operations on it. If we augment our 
use of the number line by arbitrarily finite subdivisions (which are idealized 
operations) of any interval, we are led to a prototype for the rational numbers 
Q. But we must keep in mind that this necessitates imposing a structure and 
specific operations on the number line. The rationals cannot be read off the 
line: They have to be read into it. This applies even more to the number line 
as the carrier of a prototype for the reals R. The irrationals are conceived of 
as the result of specific limit processes on the number line, starting from Q. 
That presupposes breaking the continuous line into single points. Therefore, 
the prototype arises as a conceptual structure from an intricate interplay 
between its material carrier and its user. This conceptual structure includes 
the executability of certain operations that are imposed on the prototype by 
the user.
As another example, consider the Cartesian graph of a real function. 
The graph can be the carrier of a prototype for function as a univalent 
correspondence. However, specific graphs can serve as prototypes for 
functional properties such as monotonic, oscillating, constant, and linear. 
Again, what the curve is a prototype of depends on the focus of attention of 
the user or the learner.
A second aspect of prototypes, related to the first, is that they are, of 
necessity, not universal. Instead, they are individual or even idiosyncratic, 
at least in the first phases of their development by the learner. To some 
extent, standardization and objectification occur in the process of social 
communication and negotiation. One agrees with others on certain prototypes, 
even though some degree of uncertainty may exist. In a broad sense, we can 
observe this in the common use of such words as town and village or creek 
and river and stream. In mathematics, however, this uncertainty is (almost) 
eliminated by the use of formal and symbolic definitions.
Third, to be more precise, prototype is a theoretical construct that designates 
a specified cognitive mechanism, by which one relies on one’s experiences 
with specific objects and activities with them for the socially accepted use 
of linguistic terms. I should point out that linguistic terms and their use can 
gain the status of “objects” or carriers for prototypes (cf. Sfard’s notion of 
reification, chap. 3, this volume). This rarely occurs in everyday language but 
is quite common in mathematics.
Fourth, the position developed here should be sharply separated from a 
representational view. I do not consider prototypic objects as representing the 
relevant abstract concept or abstract object. Rather, for me, an abstract concept 
or object is a specific way of talking about the prototypic objects based on 
experiences with them. Abstractness is better viewed as a manner of talking 
or as a quality of the respective discourse. The abstractness of the concept bird 

106  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
does not reside in an abstract object. Instead, it is a way of talking about birds 
as we experience them. Similarly, the abstract concept identity element does 
not refer to an esoteric object. Instead, it is a way of expressing experiences 
with various symbolic objects in a general manner. Formal definition should 
not be considered as creating an abstract entity but, rather, as an explicit rule 
for a correct discourse.
Fifth, in many cases, the prototype is a schema that is expressed by using 
symbols as variables. For instance, the formula for the identity element, 
xoe=x, for all x, might first arise as a symbolic description of a concrete 
case. By turning the referential symbols (x, o, e, =) into variables that stand 
for themselves, we obtain a schema or a general type of formula that might 
be interpreted in a multitude of ways. This schema is a kind of symbolic 
prototype (discussed later in this chapter) for what is meant by being an 
identity element. Such a schema can also be viewed as a diagram, in the same 
way we use graphs of unspecified functions as diagrammatic prototypes for 
such functional properties as “increasing,” “decreasing,” “containing local 
maximum or minimum,” and many others. My thesis is that these prototypes 
are used, to some extent, to monitor pertinent mathematical discourse, together 
with formal definitions and many other mathematical experiences.
The sixth aspect of prototypes that I wish to discuss relates to learning. In 
this case, prototypic exemplars should not be used only as a methodological 
means for teaching the relevant concepts with the verbal definition as an 
ultimate aim. Detaching a definition from its prototypes will reduce it to a 
purely linguistic formula. For example, forgetting what a bird is like will 
threaten the correct use of the word bird. However, recurring reference to 
the prototypes will greatly enhance adequate work with definitions. Perhaps 
the relevant concept could be viewed as the mutual relationship between 
symbolic description and prototypes, neither of which, by itself, suffices to 
regulate talking, thinking, writing, or understanding. Especially in advanced 
mathematics, I concede that there is a powerful possibility of purely verbal 
definitions that do not presuppose any reference to prototypical exemplars. 
This occurs in all those cases in which, by principle, entities that are not 
describable in finite terms are postulated by the definition. Examples include 
non-Lebesgue measurable sets in R and inaccessible sets in set theory. Yet, 
one could argue that the methods that constitute those mathematical entities, 
according to the accepted rules of formal mathematics, are a substitute for the 
non-available prototypes.
In the following sections, I further explicate the concept of prototypes by 
discussing these three classes: figurative, relational, and operative. In doing 
so, I clarify what it means when I state that a prototype has to be considered a 
specific relationship between the subject and the object. 

Means for Meaning  107
Figurative Prototypes
I speak of a figurative prototype in those cases in which the physical/
geometrical form and properties of the object are its constitutive aspects. 
There are no transforming actions. The relation to the object is restricted to 
perceptive activities. The external appearance is the determining feature. The 
perceptive activity is guided by salient properties of the form and structure 
of the relevant object. What counts as salient must be socially mediated and 
depends on the prior experiences of the individual. In any case, the prototypical 
objects lend themselves in a perspicuous way to adequate perceptive activity. 
The figurative prototype is best described as a specific way of seeing or, more 
generally, perceiving the relevant object. It is a schema of perception that can 
also be employed to produce copies of the object such as by drawing.
Examples. Examples abound in everyday language. In mathematics, 
geometric figures are associated with figurative prototypes. Focusing on 
the essential properties of a drawn square, such as four equal sides and four 
right angles, will give rise to a figurative prototype of square. Guiding the 
learner to avoid his or her inclusion of nonessential or irrelevant features is 
crucial. The prototype of square is not the marks on the paper but is one’s 
way of perceiving these marks. That is, the prototype has to be developed or 
even constructed by the individual. Whether one’s subjectively constructed 
prototype is adequate or not can only be checked by social communication 
and collaborative work.
Other examples of figurative prototypes are general graphs of functions 
(such as sinusoidal, linear, and exponential), in which what is of interest 
is the geometric shape. The geometric shape is related to such aspects as 
monotonicity, periodicity, and concavity. Of course, this figurative prototype 
is not sufficient for grasping the concept of function. However, it is one way of 
relating a holistic and qualitative view to the graph. Here again, the prototype 
develops through guided experience with graphs, by using, talking about, 
and thinking with them. I conceive of concept development as the socially 
regulated development of a variety of activities on and with the prototypic 
exemplars. To be specific, I could even say that the concept should be viewed 
as the network or system of those activities. Thus, concept is to be understood 
as a psychological term.
Although purely figurative prototypes are rare and extreme cases in 
mathematics (see other types discussed later), in some instances they present, 
nevertheless, certain relevant aspects. Geometrical features play a decisive 
role even in symbolic notation such as algebraic terms. To me, there is 
something like a figurative prototype of a polynomial or of a system of linear 
equations. This might be a specific polynomial or system, or an arbitrary one 

108  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
with variables as coefficients. In any case, the geometric structure is relevant 
for many pertinent cognitive functions, including memory, reproduction, 
recognition, and arguing.
Relational Prototypes
I return to the graph of functions to show the profound difference between relational 
and figurative prototypes. A graph in a Cartesian coordinate system expresses 
a relation of the x-values to the y-values in the usual but highly conventional 
way. Strictly speaking, this relation is not perceivable but must be constituted 
through the use of the graph. One way is to construct the graph pointwise, or 
to read the values of f(x) for any given x. The graph is a type of carrier for the 
functional relationship. A graph can play this role for a specific function, whose 
graph it is, or for the concept of function in general. Again this depends on the 
focus of interest and attention. The prototype is not the marks on paper but is the 
specific use made of them. And the relevant relations emerge in the material and 
cognitive activities on, with, and through the graph (cf. Nemirovsky and Monk’s 
discussion of Lin’s activity with graphs, chap. 6, this volume).
For geometric concepts such as square, rectangle, circle, and ellipse, the 
figurative prototypes need to be complemented by relational prototypes that 
are based on the very same drawings as their carriers. This is necessary for 
advancing the mathematical treatment of those concepts because it is the 
constitutive relationships that are usually formalized in symbolic notation. 
Thus, a symbolic description of a circle with midpoint M as {X|d (X, M)=r} 
reflects the relation of a constant distance between the midpoint M and the 
points X on the circumference. Of course, this defining relation cannot be read 
from the drawing but it must be inferred, for example, from the construction of 
the circle with compasses. In this view, the drawing changes from a figurative 
prototype to a relational one.
A similar transition occurs when one third of a disk is no longer viewed as a 
piece with a certain shape. Instead, the portion is viewed in relation to the whole 
disk, for example, when the former is copied three times to cover the latter. This 
action can be carried out or can be imagined. In this way, the prototype for the 
concept of one third, which, of course, has to be relational, emerges.
One important advantage of relational prototypes is their generalizability. 
A figurative one third of a disk is fairly fixed. But the relational view can be 
transferred to any whole, via the relevant action of dividing and combining. 
Mentally, the relation can be more easily detached from its carriers. With 
regard to the relational circle, one can detect the very same relation in the 
case of the sphere, or conceive of a square as a circle with respect to another 
measurement of distance. 

Means for Meaning  109
Because most, if not all, mathematical concepts express relationships or 
even systems of them beyond some figurative aspect, the development of 
relational prototypes by the learner is an important process. This process has 
to be initiated, moderated, controlled, and corrected by social feedback from 
a teacher and from other learners. One has to offer appropriate carriers and 
activities with them in order to permit the relations to emerge for the learner. 
An important step, then, is their symbolic/linguistic description and focus, 
which, in turn, gain meaning partly from their prototypes. For their part, the 
symbolic notations can gain the status of prototypes themselves, if viewed 
appropriately. For instance, take the case of a system of linear equations 
viewed as a symbolic expression of a complex system of relations between 
the unknowns. One could even coin the term symbolic prototype, which is 
based on the conventions of how to read the symbols.
Operative Prototypes
Several times during the discussion of relational prototypes, I referred to actions 
that serve to exhibit the relations in question. For the actor, who is usually a 
learner, the potential carriers for a prototype have to admit the relevant actions 
or operations. An object is the carrier of an operative prototype if, in the view 
of the user, it lends itself to the execution of specific actions. Actions use the 
object, transform it or produce it. Then, the pertinent prototype is the schema 
of those actions rather than the carrier, even though the schema is associated 
with its carrier. Generally, the actions are applicable to different objects. At 
the same time, the different operative prototypes can be associated with the 
same object. It becomes clear that operative prototypes (more so than other 
kinds of prototypes) have to be learned, experienced, applied, and used, in 
order to become effective cognitive tools.
As a first example, take the number line again. To be rendered a prototype 
for Q, the line must be considered to admit arbitrarily finite subdivisions of 
any interval and to consist of separated points that result as the subdivision 
points. Similarly, this holds for the number line as the carrier for the real 
numbers. Or, as a more extreme case, consider an “extended” number line 
as it is used in nonstandard analysis as the carrier for the hyper real numbers. 
It is conceivable that some people might object to the executability of some 
actions or operations and, thereby, deny the sensibility of certain mathematical 
concepts (as in intuitionism or in constructive mathematics). Compare this 
with the section in this chapter that deals with an as-if attitude.
For other simple examples, consider geometric figures with their 
constructions viewed as operative prototypes. Also, specific transformations 
such as rotations or transformations of symmetry can constitute operative 

110  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
prototypes for those geometric concepts. For instance, rotating a circle, in itself, 
can have this status because its applicability is characteristic of a circle.
Small sets can be figurative prototypes for the relevant numbers. But the 
operative aspect is prominent for larger sets. A set of five elements becomes 
an operative prototype of the number five by applying a constituting counting 
action. Once again, I do not consider a set of five elements as a representation 
of the number five. For me, this is misleading terminology. Instead, the 
discursive object five is an abstracted way of speaking about our experiences 
with the various prototypes and their many uses. A set, being a representation 
of five, should only be seen as expressing the fact that certain (counting) 
actions are applicable to it.
To further illustrate what I mean by an operative prototype, consider the 
concept of even number. Arranging a finite set into two sets, so that their 
elements are paired, is an operative prototype for the concept even number. 
Analogous descriptions can be given for odd number and prime number.
Choosing r balls in sequence (without replacement) from an urn containing 
n different balls constitutes an operative prototype for r permutations of n 
objects. Noting their names in the given order produces another prototype 
of this concept (and this is a protocol of the prior action, as discussed in the 
next section).
The Cartesian graph is the carrier of a specific operative prototype by 
virtue of the action that exhibits the functional relation, of which the graph 
simultaneously is the relational prototype. Or, we might say that the graph is 
the result of noting the pairs (x, f(x)) that express the functional correspondence 
f. Here again, the carrier of an operative prototype is a kind of protocol of the 
results of the relevant actions, be they actual or imagined. This refers to the 
network character of the “means for meaning,” which I am emphasizing in 
this chapter.
In all the examples and cases of prototypes mentioned so far, there is 
the specific issue of the cognitive construction of the prototype, based on 
adequate experiences with the various carriers. From a constructivist point of 
view, the carrier does not force the learner to focus attention on those features 
that will guide the development of the prototype. More often than not, such 
processes as trial and error and imitation will be involved and will sometimes 
lead to inadequate (cognitive) prototypes. This will only be detected in an 
intensive discourse, based on those protocols, when the learners find out that 
their prototypes and their discursive usage do not fit the socially accepted way 
of speaking (e.g., about the carriers). The other participants in the discourse, 
and especially the teacher, will have to point to such “misconceptions” and 
even look for them. Despite this absolutely necessary feedback and the 
potential of feasible prototype carriers that exclude many viewpoints, there 

Means for Meaning  111
will always remain a degree of uncertainty of the prototypes as constructed 
by the learner. However, the now broadly accepted notion of “taken-as-
shared” (see Gravemeijer et al., chap. 7, this volume) aptly describes the state 
that is ultimately possible—namely, the state in which participants in the 
discourse have developed sufficiently compatible prototypes, enabling them 
to communicate with one another without contradictions. I should emphasize 
that a recourse to the prototype carriers, even in well-developed discourse, 
often offers great support. The carriers (via the possibly differing prototypes) 
are objects and means of the respective discourse. The same remarks and 
deliberations apply also to the topic of the next section, the protocols of action. 
But they are not repeated there.
To conclude this section on prototypes, I emphasize that, in most cases, for 
a successful concept development in the learning process, one has to rely on 
various prototypes taken from all of the types discussed here. This process is 
open-ended, showing that neither meaning nor understanding has fixed limits 
or has well-defined content or structure. Both meaning and understanding 
are better viewed as cognitive processes of an individual rather than as static 
properties. Further, I point to the important role played in this process by 
nonlinguistic objects as carriers of the various prototypes and, complementary 
to that, of the constitutive role of the activity of the learning individual (either 
in his or her perception or transforming actions). Meaning and understanding 
develop as a complex interplay between subject and object that must be 
socially mediated.
PROTOCOLS
Prototypes might be based on natural objects that we find in our surroundings. 
In many cases, however, artificially produced objects, such as symbols, 
serve as the carriers of prototypes for mathematical concepts. These artificial 
objects are, in many cases, a kind of record either of their construction or of 
the resulting outcome of this construction. Generally, this process of recording 
the essential stages, phases, and products of actions is one of the sources for 
mathematical notation, symbol systems, and concepts. I use the term protocol 
to designate the related cognitive process of focusing attention on those 
stages, phases, results, and products of one’s actions and constructions, and of 
describing and notating them by some means.
Thus, protocols are part of the experiential world of the learning subject, 
either through the learner’s own activity or by observation of the activity of 
others. Now my thesis is that protocols can be a supportive means for an 
individual to be inducted into the mathematical discourse about a concept 
using specific terms and phrases. Use of such terms and phrases can be based 

112  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
on the protocols and on pertinent experiences. Again, as with prototypes, 
those subjective experiences have to be socially guided and monitored, for 
example, by a teacher or by communication within a social group.
Initial Examples
As already indicated, many geometric figures can be viewed as the result 
of a construction process, which, in turn, gives rise to a protocol. For the 
circle and its construction by compasses, the protocol is based on the circular 
line obtained and on the constant distance of this line to the mid-point. The 
protocol can also be expressed verbally by describing the construction process 
and its main features and phases.
Similarly, a construction of a square in LOGO, by REPEAT 4[FW 100 RT 
90], gives rise to, or even denotes, a protocol that is, of course, closely connected 
to the figure obtained. The latter, itself, can also serve as a protocol for the 
concept of square. From a mathematical point of view, both the protocol and 
the resulting figure can serve the purpose of analyzing the construction (that is, 
the action), and both exhibit the defining properties of a square. Other properties 
can be deduced from the protocol or its “trace” (i.e., the resulting marks on the 
paper or on the screen). Other LOGO procedures also provide good examples 
for protocols, either by themselves or by their trace on the screen.
Another illustrative example is the LOGO circle, which is the trace of 
walking and turning in a specific, regular manner, namely, that of constant 
curvature. It is an interesting (and not-so-rare) observation that different kinds 
of actions can give rise to the same carrier for a specific protocol. Thus, for 
the circle we have the LOGO procedure and the more common generation 
via compasses. The constitutive actions can be repeated on the trace or on the 
carrier of the protocol, with the latter functioning as a guide for the action.
As we know from LOGO research, the learner needs close guidance in 
developing protocols. This can be accomplished by drawing the learner’s 
attention to the relevant steps, phases, and results of the action. Those 
experiences based on protocols, together with others, might provide the basis 
for participating in the pertinent discourse.
The Cartesian graph of a function provides another example of protocols. 
Assuming the availability of the Cartesian coordinate system as a cognitive 
tool for the learner, the pertinent action can be measuring values of f(x) for 
various values of x. Marking the pair (x, f(x)) on the coordinate system, and 
thereby focusing attention on the correspondence of x to f(x), produces the 
graph as a protocol of the measuring activity. The imagined execution of 
this action for all conceivable x leads to the common Cartesian graph of the 
relevant function f, which, in this sense, is the carrier of the protocol of an 

Means for Meaning  113
imagined action. The extension of this imagined action for an infinite number 
of values has to be stipulated as an ideal or as a thought experiment (cf. the 
next section). Thus, the graph of a function, considered as the (carrier of a) 
protocol, can be viewed as contributing to the development of the function 
concept by the learner and as supporting the learner’s induction into the 
mathematical discourse about functions.
Various other ways of taking note of the correspondence of x to f(x) are 
possible, all of which can play the role of a carrier for a related protocol; these 
include a table of function values, a list of pairs (x, f(x)), an arrow diagram, 
and a formula for producing f(x) from x. Here we observe the phenomenon of 
having different protocols for the same type of action. Each kind of protocol 
permits the reconstruction of the essential steps of the action. Further, the 
various protocols can be transformed into one another. Note that, in this 
way, the (carriers of the) protocols do not appear as representations of an 
abstract concept for the learner. However, the abstract function concept is a 
way of talking about the protocols, which typically become schematized and 
generalized. One does not study the function concept, as such, but studies 
the properties suggested by the protocols (i.e., the common representations). 
Further, each of those protocols (or rather the schematic carrier of each) can 
serve as (the carrier of) a prototype for the notion of function. The whole field 
of these experiences can serve to monitor and guide the abstract discourse 
on functions. Talking about and using prototypes and protocols can also be a 
kind of initiation into that discourse, in the same way that common discourse 
is based on taken-to-be-shared experiences.
The central idea of the notion of a protocol, therefore, is the following. 
Epistemological analyses of mathematical concepts and symbolizations show 
that many of them are structurally and genetically related to certain systems of 
actions and their products (cf. Dörfler, 1984, 1989b). The specific form of this 
relationship depends on the relevant concept. The cognitive reconstruction 
and development of such a concept by the individual can start from his or 
her carrying out the pertinent actions, where these can be actual actions with 
concrete material objects, including symbols, or mental operations with 
imagined objects. The actual or imagined reproduction or observation of the 
actions of other people can serve the same purpose. Now, the concept is neither 
the action alone nor simply its schema. Nor does the action by itself suffice 
to reconstruct the relevant concept. The latter can only occur by reflecting on 
the action and its outcome. This reflection needs specific means. The protocol 
is suggested as a cognitive tool for that purpose. Supplying the student with 
opportunities for adequate actions and their protocols is, therefore, a didactic 
means for teaching and learning both mathematical concepts and the discourse 
based on and governed by them. This is in accordance with my view that 

114  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
meaning and understanding can be interpreted as the subjective, socially 
accepted and sensible way of talking, writing, and arguing through the use of 
relevant words. Further, this has to be based on adequate experience.
These examples show that an important precondition for the development 
of protocols by the individual is the availability of specific means as cognitive 
tools for the learner (cf. the use by Bransford et al. of a catalogue of SMART 
tools, chap. 8, this volume). Compasses, LOGO software, and the Cartesian 
coordinate system are examples. It cannot be expected that students in school 
invent these tools themselves. Instead, the teacher must provide them for 
the students. Through the use of these tools, the construction of protocols 
also leads to their apprehension by the learner. Material or cognitive tools 
need to be used in order to become effective means for acting and thinking. 
Generally speaking, a central aim and goal of schooling should be to introduce 
the student to a variety of socially provided tools and means, including basic 
mathematical concepts and methods. The provision of some tools, such as 
these, might lead to the development of others, via protocols.
Further Examples
At this point, the reader should bear in mind that the presentation of the 
following examples is sketchy due to space limitations. Further, I always 
presuppose that the necessary tools for establishing the protocol and taking 
the relevant notes are available. Such tools might be the result of prior 
developments by the students or they might simply be supplied by the teacher. 
Finally, the description of the examples does not purport to suggest a didactic 
program, although possibly one could be developed along such lines.
Sets. The formation of a finite set is a kind of bringing together of various 
objects, which then are viewed as forming a common whole. The action (material 
or imagined) of building up a set as a collection of objects (its elements) can 
give rise to many different protocols. Such actions include notating the names 
or images of these objects, verbally describing the collection, and giving a 
symbolic expression that generates the (names of the) objects. In this way, 
the conventional mathematical set notations arise as special cases of carriers 
for the protocols of the sets. The notion of a set appears as the protocol of the 
relevant action. Even in this simple case, different protocols and carriers are 
possible and sensible. 
Natural Numbers. Here, the action clearly is any kind of counting activity. 
Protocols may be the verbal uttering of the number words, or the using of 
fingers or other representatives, such as tally marks, for the counted objects. 

Means for Meaning  115
All of these give a precise account of the main steps of the counting procedure 
with respect to the question of “How many?” On the other hand, those 
protocols (themselves) permit replication of these essential steps because the 
protocols are prototypes of (sets of) countable objects.
Decimal Numbers. Here again, a counting activity is the starting point. But 
now the activity is organized in a certain way by using counting symbols with 
the values of 1, 10, 100, 1000, and so on and by always changing to the next 
higher unit whenever possible. As in all of the examples, we assume that the 
learner is in a cognitive stage that enables the user to adequately carry out the 
actions. For instance, here the user must be able to mentally form higher order 
units, which can themselves be counted. That granted, the resulting protocol 
will be something equivalent to the decimal representation of the number of 
counted elements. Clearly, this representation reflects the main phases or steps 
of “decimal counting” and permits its replication in a very condensed form, 
if we assume that all of the higher order units have already been formed. A 
similar approach holds for other bases of the number system.
Decimal Fractions. Consider a measuring process by which one wants 
to exhaust a quantity of, say, less than one unit by tenths, hundredths, 
thousandths, and so on of the unit. This process naturally leads to a decimal 
fraction as its protocol and result. By reading this protocol, one can mentally 
reconstruct the process. First, take d1 tenths, then take d2 hundredths, and so 
on, until the whole quantity is obtained. Here, as in other cases, the protocol 
can further be used as an action plan to produce an object (a quantity) that will 
give rise to the protocol when the actions are carried out on it. Again, one can 
use different bases for the measuring process.
Fraction. A fraction can be viewed as a very curtailed or abridged protocol 
of a measuring process: m/n represents “m copies of quantity A are equal to 
n copies of quantity B,” or “m copies of the nth part of quantity A yield the 
quantity B.” Again, a wealth of different activities is possible concerning this 
relation of m/n to measuring processes from which, for instance, concepts 
such as equivalence of fractions, ratio of quantities, and addition of fractions 
can be derived. This example makes very clear that a pattern of signs has to 
be explicitly related to the actions that constitute (part of) the meaning of 
the signs (as an action protocol). In this specific case, the protocol m/n itself 
does not permit replication of the action. However, replication is possible if 
m and n are replaced by protocols (for the related counting processes). This 
corresponds to combining the counting and measuring processes. The number 
symbols can be viewed as names for the respective protocols or for the actions 

116  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
themselves. Then, m/n becomes a composed protocol. Still, this example 
makes clear that producing and reading a protocol relies heavily on the use of 
signs whose meaning is determined by convention.
Matrix. Consider two sets of elements (objects, properties, etc.) A and B 
and some way of measuring the “value” of a relation between elements of A 
and B. A protocol will very likely take the form of a matrix. Thus, a matrix 
can be viewed as a way of notating the values of (binary) relations. Further, 
the arrangement of its elements in rows and columns mirrors the step wise 
process of determining these values. In this sense, a matrix then is not simply 
a static array of elements. Instead, it inherently has a dynamic structure or 
even several structures, such as, for example, the structure of scanning by 
rows or by columns. It is a schema of writing down symbols. Conversely, the 
idea of the matrix as the intended protocol determines the order of the steps in 
any measurement of this kind. Similarly, any type of table can be viewed, in a 
broad sense, as the protocol of some measuring.
Binary Operation. A binary operation on a set is usually defined as a mapping 
that maps every ordered pair of elements of the set onto an element of the set, 
with the latter being considered the result of the operation. In concrete (finite) 
cases of binary operations, one can easily record these results as a list or as a 
table with two entries. Then the protocols that arise and their carriers have the 
potential of exhibiting the feature which is captured in the static mathematical 
definition. I point to the subtle difference in how, for example, group tables 
are viewed here and how they are usually used. Here, the table results from 
completing all the single operations, and only the table leads to viewing the 
binary operation as an accomplished whole. In mathematics, the operation is 
considered to be given and the table is an illustration or representation of it. I 
think that cognitively this distinction makes a big difference.
Graph. Similarly, the act of drawing a combinatorial graph can be considered 
as recording a relation in a given set of elements. “Reading” this protocol 
gives a full account of the formal properties of the relation. A weighted graph 
even reports the strength of the relation between any two elements. As is well 
known, this type of protocol has become a topic of extensive mathematical 
investigation in the area of graph theory. 
Binary Relation. In addition to a graph, there are many other ways of 
producing a protocol for binary relations, in which the action consists of 
checking whether two objects are related or not. Other carriers for protocols 

Means for Meaning  117
are as follows: a list of lists (indicating for each object to which objects it 
is related), a matrix, a list of pairs (of related objects), and a bipartite graph 
(especially for relations from a set M into a set N). All of these protocols make 
it possible to reenact the relation and to replay the steps of those actions that 
are essential for the relation. Further, it is possible to translate a protocol into 
any other protocol by noting the outcomes of the reenacted actions on the first 
by the second.
Angle. Typically, angles are viewed as static geometric objects that are 
defined in various ways. But angles can also be used as the protocol of a 
rotation (around the vertex of the angle): The first side is rotated into the 
position of the second. The very same protocol then results from angles that 
are considered to be equivalent. These equivalent angles (static or figurative) 
correspond to actions that everyone will naturally view as the same. Here 
again, the action can be replicated directly on the protocol or its replication 
can be easily imagined.
Algebraic Terms. These can be viewed as protocols that record some 
calculations or, better still, as the schema of the calculations. Conversely, 
an algebraic term tells me what calculations are to be made in which order 
(according to agreed-on conventions). Tree representations can play an 
equivalent role. In my opinion, an adequate understanding of elementary 
algebra would be facilitated if the concept of algebraic terms and their 
manipulations was based on the following understanding: Such terms are 
schematic protocols of (my own) calculations that I can use to give an account 
of them to myself or to others. As in all previous examples, an algebraic term 
viewed in this way makes it possible to reflect on the calculation (e.g., to study 
the influence of certain numbers on the outcome).
Permutations. If we draw r different numbers out of an urn with n numbers 
and we note the numbers in the order drawn, we obtain an r-permutation of 
the numbers 1, 2,…, n. This can be viewed as the (carrier of the) relevant 
protocol. Thus, the concept of r-permutation can be interpreted via an 
appropriate protocol. Similarly, r-combinations result when we disregard the 
order of the chosen numbers. Different kinds of protocols arise from various 
ways of notating rearrangements of objects in locations numbered from 1 to 
n. One way is to note, for each location, the number of the location to which 
its object is transferred. This can easily be done in the form of a table with two 
entries. This protocol, once again, is a record of an enacted rearrangement and 
also can be used as an indication of how to rearrange the objects. Another way 

118  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
is simply to note something such as 1 to 5, 5 to 7, 7 to 1, 2 to 3, and so on. Of 
course, this protocol of cycle presentation serves the same purpose.
Aspects of Protocols
In the following paragraphs, I discuss various aspects of the notion of a 
protocol in an arbitrary order because all of these aspects appear to be of 
equal relevance. However, not all of them apply to each individual case to the 
same extent.
A completed protocol, or rather its carrier, will be a static structure of signs 
forming a certain pattern that represents certain relationships between the 
signs. In a sense, this pattern can be treated as the resulting outcome of actions, 
or as a (rather symbolic) representation of it. However, just as good minutes 
of a meeting not only state the decisions made but also give an account of the 
discussions and deliberations leading to them, action protocols must make 
it possible to trace the stages of the process that lead to the final protocol. 
Thus, the protocol must reflect, in some way, a certain temporal pattern that 
is fundamental for the action as well as for the constituted mathematical 
concept. Very often, the temporal succession will be expressed by a spatial 
order in the protocol.
It might be appropriate here to emphasize that the related mathematical 
concept, in most cases, reflects only general and schematic aspects of 
the actions onto which the attention of the learner must be deliberately 
and consciously focused, for instance, by cues from the teacher. To “see” 
mathematical features in one’s own actions is by no means trivial and further 
depends on the interests and the motivation of the learner. The problems 
related to this cannot be treated here, although they are very important for the 
didactic realization of the model presented.
In many cases, the (or a) mathematical structure that can be associated 
with actions of a certain type consists of transformations exerted on the 
objects on which the actions are carried out or of relationships between those 
objects that are induced by the actions. The protocol of the action, that is, the 
cognitive reconstruction of the concept, should reflect or make possible the 
reconstruction of these transformations and relationships. In this sense, the 
signs for the protocol play the role of objects on which those schematized 
actions that induce only the constitutive transformations and/or relationships 
can be instantiated. In other words, the protocol may be used to carry out by 
and on it just those steps of the actions that are the “germ” of the intended 
concept (and that have been recorded by the protocol). The protocol records 
or represents the (mathematically) essential features of the actions and makes 
it possible to replicate them. 

Means for Meaning  119
The protocols (or, rather, their carriers) for natural numbers, as described 
earlier, demonstrate this feature very clearly. Each of them makes it possible 
to reenact or repeat the counting process that leads to the protocol itself. One 
way this can be done is by executing a counting process on the elements of the 
carrier itself (e.g., a list of tally marks). Alternatively, the symbols of the carrier 
of the protocol provide a prescription of how the counting is to be done (as 
in decimal notation). Of course, this presupposes that the user of the relevant 
carrier has constructed the related protocol as a cognitive tool. As another 
example, consider a square or a circle as a protocol of the related actions. 
Tracing the carriers (drawings) is a reenactment of such original actions that 
led to them, that is, a distinctive way of moving or walking. Similarly, the 
protocol of a permutation shows (to its cognitive owner) how to arrange the 
objects involved. In all of these cases, the importance of the transformation 
of the temporal succession (in the action) into a spatial order (in the protocol 
carrier) can be noticed. I presume for the learner that this reenactment of the 
constitutive actions or their distinctive steps and phases is a valuable way of 
developing the protocol itself as a stable cognitive structure. The translation 
between different protocols for the same mathematical notion might contribute 
to this. For instance, a different protocol can be used to record the relevant 
features of the reenactment of a specific protocol. Think of the various so-
called representations of the function concept taken as the carriers for relevant 
protocols. The use of multirepresentational software is also related.
The intended reflection on the actions consists of recording the protocol that 
gives an account of the actions and their main goal. Because the protocol is a 
permanent record (in contrast to the transient action), it can be used repeatedly 
for analyzing the action by replicating it, for instance, in a schematized way on 
the protocol. It is very important for the individual cognitive process that the 
protocol is a record of the mathematical characteristics of one’s own actions. 
The protocol should be a personal account of what one is interested in when 
carrying out the action. If the protocol is not experienced as an account of 
one’s own actions, it cannot be really understood and will not be related to the 
actions in a meaningful way (cf. the use by Lehrer et al. of inscriptions with 
elementary school students, chap. 9, this volume).
In a didactic context, this means that the learner must be guided by the 
teacher to carry out the actions, to find out those objects and stages that are 
of essential relevance for the action, and to produce a protocol that represents 
those objects and stages. It should be emphasized that an action protocol is 
not uniquely determined by the actions. It will depend on how the learner 
structures and organizes his or her actions and, further, will depend on those 
means that are available for obtaining a protocol. A protocol can be formulated 

120  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
by different media and in different sign systems. Perhaps one will begin with 
a verbal protocol, which, by using natural language, gives an account of those 
aspects in the flow of the action that are viewed to be the most important from 
a mathematical point of view. In some cases, it might be possible to translate 
this protocol into one that uses geometric or iconic objects. In other cases, it 
can be expressed in algebraic language. It might even be useful to produce 
several distinct protocols and to interpret the actions in all of them, thereby 
establishing a kind of translation from one protocol to another. One should 
never forget that the protocol receives its meaning, along with the rules for 
how to interpret and act on it, from the actions that it represents.
The protocol is potentially much more general than the action itself because, 
in most cases, it will be a schematic representation of certain aspects or features 
of the actions and their objects. This will often be reflected in that the signs 
used in the protocol have the character of variables or at least are considered 
as variables. In this way, the same protocol can be used as an account of many 
different actions, as long as these have the same “mathematical structure” as 
that expressed by the protocol and represented by the relevant mathematical 
concept. A didactic consequence is that the learner should experience this 
varied use of the protocol in as many different situations as possible. Thus, 
the protocol might also be used as a tool for structuring and planning concrete 
actions by substantiating the general schema (the protocol) in a given concrete 
context. In this regard, it is important to keep in mind that the protocol, by its 
very form and structure, makes it possible to carry out certain specific steps 
of the actions or at least to reproduce them. These are those steps that are 
constitutive for the related mathematical concept. This acting on the protocol 
or by the protocol, in a paradigmatic and prototypical way, exhibits the stages 
in the actions that are essential and the relationships that are important (from 
a certain point of view).
Usually, the carriers of the protocols are patterns of material signs and 
objects and, as such, can become the topic of further analysis and study. This 
is what might be called a mathematical analysis. Various properties of the 
protocols, possible transformations of and relations among protocols, and so 
on, can be devised and investigated through such analysis. Actions (material 
or imagined) that use the established protocols as objects to be acted on are 
most important. This can give rise to a new layer of concepts (and protocols), 
thus establishing a kind of hierarchy.
I do not pursue this topic any further here but simply give a few illustrative 
examples. In many cases, the protocol carriers can be combined in a specific 
way to obtain another carrier. Consider the arithmetic operations as instantiated 
on any of the aforementioned protocols for natural numbers. Or, consider the 

Means for Meaning  121
various operations with sets that give rise to appropriate operations with the 
protocol carriers, namely, union, intersection, or difference. Other cases can 
simply be counting all possible protocol carriers (e.g., for permutations), 
or subjecting them to transformation such as deleting or adding edges in a 
graph, transposing a matrix, and skewing a square. Structural properties of 
the protocol carriers are used to define properties of the related conceptual 
mathematical objects. Consider monotonic or convex real functions, periodic 
decimal fractions, prime, even, or odd numbers, or properties in graph theory 
(such as connectedness, tree, or path). In addition, I should mention that the 
remarks stated here also apply to prototypes.
Another important consideration is the introduction of names for the 
protocols. These names can be words from natural language or any other 
conventional signs. As the examples show, the naming of protocols makes 
it possible to establish compound protocols of more complex actions from 
simpler building blocks.
Because protocols by their very nature are based on actions (actual or 
imagined), their range of applicability is restricted to those concepts that 
are related to some kind of action or system of actions. This often implies 
some finite structure. In particular, the action must be finitely describable in 
principle, although we might imagine carrying it out infinitely many times, as, 
for example, in the case of the sine graph. For infinite or infinitesimal processes 
such as limits, derivatives, and integrals, we cannot devise a protocol whose 
structure reflects the structure of the intended mathematical concept. There is 
no conceivable symbolic structure that reflects the structure of, say, taking the 
derivative of f(x) at x0 with the same fidelity as we find in the examples given 
earlier in this chapter. This might be one explanation for the many problems 
with learning advanced calculus beyond a purely rule-driven approach. For 
instance, it is difficult to base the limit concept on experiences as they are 
provided by prototypes and protocols. In my view, these concepts depend 
very much on the prior development of very advanced discourse about the 
real numbers, about functions, and so on, permitting their introduction into 
the discourse from the means provided by it. If one looks at the definitions 
for limit or derivative, this becomes fairly clear. These definitions can be 
illustrated and exemplified. However, in my view, none of these examples 
can be prototypic, in the sense of exhibiting what it means in that the limit or 
the derivative exists in general.
Allowing oneself to be inducted into a discourse and accepting it as a 
sensible attitude, such as that described in the next section, is of great help. 
Here, I only want to point out the limitations of the notion of protocols that 
show that, for “meaning and understanding” in mathematics, no single device 

122  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
is sufficient. In any case, a multitude of activities and attitudes appears to be a 
precondition for entering into mathematical discourse of any kind, if the goal 
is to genuinely participate in it.
In concluding this section on protocols, I emphasize that one of my 
purposes in stressing an action approach to finite mathematical concepts, 
via their protocols, is to counteract the prevailing static and figurative 
conception of school mathematics. In my view, the usual question of “What 
is the concept xy?” should be substituted, or at least complemented, by such 
questions as “Which actions can be recorded and/or guided by the concept 
xy?” This brings the mathematics closer to the individual and makes it part 
of his or her experience beyond the purely linguistic realm. Consequently, it 
is possible that the student then can experience the concepts and methods in 
question in a more personally sensible and meaningful way. On such a firm 
basis, then, access to advanced mathematics, in which approaches applicable 
to elementary mathematics are no longer viable, appears to be possible. As I 
discuss in the next section, sufficient confidence has to be acquired in order to 
indulge in the advanced discourse.
AS-IF ATTITUDE
As already has been discussed in the two previous sections, prototypes and 
protocols are conceived of as cognitive mechanisms that support an introduction 
into and a usage of (parts of) mathematical discourse. Both serve the purpose 
of supplying an experiential basis with concrete and perceivable objects that 
the discourse can be viewed as covering. Both are deeply rooted in the socially 
regulated activity of the individual. I have already pointed to major limitations 
of these mechanisms, inherent in the conception of many mathematical objects, 
that are constituted solely within conventional discourse.
My thesis in this section is that the conventions of mathematical discourse, 
beyond a cognitive understanding, need to be accepted and agreed on. 
Learners must indulge in the discourse, and this participation cannot be forced 
on them by cogent arguments. Indulgence in mathematical conventions and 
ways of speaking is partly an emotional willingness. And it proves sensible 
and justifiable only after hard, demanding work within the discourse and only 
after obeying its (often only) implicit rules (cf. Sfard’s notion of templates-
driven use, chap. 3, this volume). I assert that a specific view, called an as-if 
attitude (cf. Vaihinger, 1911/1986), can be of much support for accepting 
mathematical discourse.
This as-if attitude reflects an epistemological stance regarding quality and 
existence of mathematical objects. For me, mathematical objects (like any 

Means for Meaning  123
so-called abstract objects) are discursive objects. This means they come into 
existence exclusively by and within the discourse, even if this discourse ascribes 
to them existence and properties of an objective and independent character.
With respect to meaning and understanding, a consequence of this 
description is that meaning for mathematical concepts has to be partly 
ascribed or agreed on. In other words, there is nothing completely from the 
outside that could lend meaning to the discourse. But the discourse itself 
creates its meaning and sensibility (cf. Dörfler, 1993a, 1993b, 1995). This 
relates strongly to the Wittgensteinian position that the meaning of a term 
resides within its discursive use. I now try to explicate this general sketch with 
several examples.
Natural and Whole Numbers
Discourse about natural numbers at a somewhat advanced level (as in number 
theory) is about unique entities with names of 1, 2, 3,…and their properties, 
relations, and operations. According to this discourse, there is a specific 
mathematical object, say, 6, and to this object are attributed a great many 
properties and it is related to other objects of the same kind by many, often 
complex, relations: 6 is even, 6 is divisible by 2, 6 times 6 is 36, 6 is perfect, 
6 is not a prime. Theorems in number theory, such as that there are infinitely 
many pairs of consecutive primes or the Prime Number Distribution Theorem, 
treat natural numbers as abstract objects. Similarly, in a notion as that leading 
from Z to Zm, the integers must be considered as entities similar to material 
objects that enjoy distinctive properties, which can be combined, composed, 
or assembled. Consequently, the common names for integers are taken to 
refer to those abstract entities as their referents. The discursive creation of 
such objects as 3 and −4 is implicitly embedded in the discourse through 
such discursive elements as definitions, use of nouns, and the attribution of 
properties via adjectives. In a strict sense, these objects are not representable or 
imaginable. None of the common representations enjoys all of the properties 
we attribute to natural or whole numbers. For instance, a point on the number 
line is neither even nor odd. The purpose of the representations is, rather, 
to suggest properties and operations that, through discourse, are formulated 
as being properties and operations of the respective numbers. Evenness of a 
natural number can be read from a representation or, better still, from what is 
taken to be a representation (e.g., a prototype or protocol).
To make the point completely clear: The discourse flows as if there 
were uniquely determined entities (the numbers) with given properties and 
relations. These abstract entities can be materially represented in a faithful 

124  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
manner to determine their properties. In one sense, the discourse suggests 
that the abstract objects determine what counts as a representation. My 
position is quite the contrary. The system of representations and their mutual 
relationships determine the discourse about the abstract objects. Eventually, 
the discourse receives more independence and develops without directly 
referring to representations. New properties can then be introduced in a purely 
discursive manner, by basing them on those already known.
Developing Confidence
In the previous two sections, one can observe a progression in the development 
of mathematical discourse. It starts out as a discourse about relatively concrete 
and material activities, perceptions, and experiences about material objects 
and their properties and transformations. This discourse posits abstract objects 
and progresses to a discourse only about (and through the use of) them.
It should be clear that it is necessary to do more than just present 
representations, in order to understand this type of discourse and the 
concepts used by it. If metaphysical beliefs are excluded as a sensible basis, 
one viable way might be to assume the attitude described as follows. We 
speak as if there were those natural numbers with all of their properties 
and we speak as if we could use the representations to investigate them. 
We do this provisionally, as long as we do not detect contradictions or 
other shortcomings. We agree that this way of speaking and the methods 
developed for defining or deriving properties of the abstract objects are 
accepted as sensible. I emphasize that assuming an as-if attitude is the result 
of agreement, acceptance, indulgence, concession, and willingness on the 
part of the individual who trusts in others already fluent in the discourse. 
Most likely, after some experiences with the usefulness and power of the 
discourse, the individual develops more confidence and is prepared to be 
inducted into new realms of mathematical discourse. One could also view 
this process as a kind of progressive socialization or enculturation, both of 
which primarily are based on induction into a specific discourse.
Confidence in abstract objects might also be related to extensive experiences 
with their “representations.” (Note that it is impossible to step out of the 
current discourse.) For instance, this applies to the extension of properties 
and operations to large or even to all natural numbers. Because everything 
works well with small numbers, we feel entitled to carry all that over to such 
discursive entities as 101000 or even to all natural numbers. To speak about all 
natural numbers necessitates an as-if attitude because no one can convince 
us cognitively of any kind of existence of the set N as a completed whole. 

Means for Meaning  125
Positional notation systems and the number line might suggest that it is 
sensible to discursively extend the realm of numbers indefinitely. Experiences 
with their surveyable parts give enough legitimacy to say, “This can be 
continued arbitrarily in the given manner.” But we have no means to force 
anyone to accept, for example, that any two natural numbers have a sum and 
a product. Consequently, arithmetic is a kind of thought experiment exploring 
the consequences of our as-if assumptions.
Although I cannot offer any empirical support, beyond personal experience 
and introspection, it is my thesis that understanding advanced mathematical 
discourse and experiencing it as meaningful also depend on some kind of as-if 
attitude. A consequence is that the teaching of mathematics must deliberately 
guide the development of this attitude and all the related processes. The goal 
should be a deliberate and conscious decision(!) on the part of the learner to 
accept the discourse as meaningful. Therefore, I view some of the commonly 
used teaching methods as inadequate because they attempt to lure the learner 
into the discourse by neglecting the inherent problems. In a sense, the discourse 
itself supports this by deceiving not only the learner, but possibly the teacher 
as well. The numbers and their operations exist in the ready-made discourse, 
making the problems of the transition to this stage no longer visible. Yet there 
is a great danger of learning only the surface features of the discourse in a rote 
manner. Such learning most likely leads to a parrot-like behavior, which is 
prone to mistakes and which impedes any further development and progress 
in the discourse.
In my view, the widely documented failures of manipulatives and 
other methodical means of teaching reside, to some extent, in the fact that 
learning mathematics and its discourse is not a purely cognitive constructive 
process. It is not sufficient just to build up imagination and mental models 
of representations for mathematical objects and concepts. Alone, this will 
not lead the learner to the discursively stipulated quality of the mathematical 
objects. There is a qualitative leap consisting of viewing the representations 
as representations of something that, of itself, is not accessible (and has no 
existence beyond the respective discourse).
Geometric Figures
I now turn to other examples. A very instructive one is the case of geometric 
figures, which we have also treated in the previous sections in relation to 
prototypes and protocols. The advanced geometric discourse of, say, 
Euclidean geometry has a quality similar to that of natural numbers. Drawings 
are viewed as representations of the actual geometric figure, which is an 

126  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
abstract object. This, of course, is not made explicit by the discourse. But 
to be understandable, the discourse presupposes this view or interpretation. 
For instance, it is clear that there is a unique square with a side of given 
length of which we have a multitude of more or less accurate drawings or 
sketches. The theorems of geometry, strictly speaking, are sensible assertions 
only for the abstract, ideal geometric figures. The Pythagorean Theorem holds 
only for mathematical right triangles and not for their empirical drawings. 
Generally, geometric discourse is two-sided. On the one hand, it is a discourse 
about empirical regularities of the drawings. On the other hand, it is about 
the mathematical objects. Very often these two functions are blended and not 
separated, which is both a strength and a weakness (cf. Nemirovsky & Monk’s 
discussion of the notion of fusion, chap. 6, this volume). In fact, for the novice 
and the student it might be quite confusing and unsettling. Again, I assert 
that the conscious adoption of an as-if attitude might support understanding 
of and confidence in the geometric discourse. In that way, one can make the 
qualitative leap from using triangle as referring to the marks on paper to 
referring to a discursive object amenable to experience and reflection. This is 
connected with still another decisive change. First, the abstract concept is a 
way of talking about and expressing our geometric experiences with concrete 
drawings or other objects in a schematized and idealized manner. Later then, 
in a converse direction, the drawings are a means to talk about the abstract 
figures as mathematical objects. To determine the properties of the latter, one 
uses those of the former.
Various other as-if assumptions lurk beneath geometric discourse as follows: 
the infinite variety of figures; the infinite extension of the Euclidean plane; 
exact straightness of lines; exact flatness of planes in Euclidean space; and so 
forth. In the common discourse, all this appears completely unproblematic. 
Perhaps it is, as long as one remains inside the discourse. But these features 
might be severe obstacles for entering the discourse because, in principle, they 
are not, and cannot be, based on subjective experiences. As noted earlier, the 
concrete experiences and their reflection in the discourse can only serve to 
motivate and legitimate the extended discourse and support confidence in its 
sensibility. In the learning process, there will inevitably be a phase in which 
one has to trust and take a position such as, “Well, let’s see what happens if we 
proceed in this manner.” Meaning and understanding of a discourse reside to 
a large extent in its use and therefore cannot be provided beforehand from the 
outside. To learn and understand a discourse, one has to enter it and engage 
in it. This is a multifaceted process with cognitive, affective, emotional, and 
social components. 

Means for Meaning  127
Complex Numbers
Another example, among many that are possible for substantiating my 
claims, is the field C of complex numbers. The pertaining discourse posits C 
as a unique construct comprising all uniquely determined abstract complex 
numbers. The theoretical discourse about C is based on and regulated by 
various “models” for C as follows: symbolic expressions a+bi, pairs of real 
numbers, 2×2 matrices, classes of polynomials modulo (x2+1), the Gaussian 
plane, and the Riemann sphere. The properties of, and operations with, the 
complex numbers are defined via these models. In principle, the abstract 
theory can be interpreted as a way of talking about the different models 
(which then would not be considered as models of C but possibly as models 
of each other). Yet, at some level, one has to take the view that there are 
abstract objects about which their taken-to-be models can provide relevant 
information. Consider sentences such as “Let z be a complex number” or 
“For all complex numbers z with….” To feel comfortable with that kind of 
discourse presupposes assuming an appropriate as-if attitude with regard 
to complex numbers (cf. Sfard’s discussion of Dan’s uncertainty about the 
legitimacy of complex numbers, chap. 3, this volume).
For their common conception, the various potential models have to already 
be conceived of in a way that essentially transcends the realm of what can be 
presented concretely. For example, in the Gaussian plane we can show (also 
in imagination) only very finite portions with the relevant arrows, their sum, 
and their product. Extended experience with these finite portions gives rise 
to a kind of confidence or substantiated trust that one could carry out all the 
respective actions and operations also “far out” with very, very long arrows.
The finite portion can be treated as though it were a window, such as on a 
computer screen, that can be moved arbitrarily over the already taken-to-be 
infinite plane. Or, one can develop the view that takes finite drawings as a 
prototype, by focusing attention on the relevant relations and operations of 
the vector arrows. In any event, there must be some subjective experiential 
basis on which one can ground the as-if attitude, making it possible to accept 
an infinitely extended Gaussian plane and the unlimited executability of all 
the operations. Once more, I assert that this is a discursive process related 
to notions such as thought experiment or speech act, both of which can be 
motivated but not enforced. The acceptance of such as-if processes can be 
supported by relationships to construals that have already been proven to be 
sensible. Thus, if we have already taken as sensible the reals as a completed 
manifold, modeling C by pairs of real numbers might be quite convincing. 
In this way, as-if attitudes spread very quickly and eventually appear to be a 

128  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
natural position that cannot be doubted. By this point, one has been socialized 
as a mathematician. It is then difficult to step out of the discourse one is 
immersed in and think of a phase in which all that now is unquestionable, such 
as the infinity of C, was rather mysterious.
Real Function
Using still another example, I want to demonstrate that as-if attitudes must have 
a network-like character. A specific as-if view needs support from many others 
and, conversely, enhances legitimacy to others previously held. Each new 
success or progress lends more plausibility, credibility, or viability to the basic 
assumptions (e.g., about abstract objects as a sensible matter to talk about).
The example concerns real functions such as the sine function or exponential 
function. A great many as-if assumptions lurk beneath the common discourse 
about them and, according to the discourse, appear to be completely 
unproblematic. The relevant theory assures us that for every real number x, 
sine x and exponent x are well defined as numerical values. But for most, in 
fact for uncountably many, of those x, we cannot have a finite description 
and therefore can never get to know f(x). Further, for those x in R that we 
can present finitely, we must apply an infinitely long procedure to evaluate 
f(x), namely, the Taylor series. Again, this prevents us from ever knowing 
f(x). Nevertheless, we speak about sine and exponent as though all this had 
been accomplished. We feel entitled to calculate approximations to the taken-
to-exist exact values, for example, by a computer. We base the graphs of 
the functions, which again we take to present their exact behavior, on these 
calculations. And, of course, all of this extends to all of R based on an infinite 
number line. We group together all those inherently unknowable pairs (x, f(x)) 
and take them as a kind of new mathematical object to which we ascribe 
properties (continuity, differentiability, etc.) In addition, we can combine this 
new object with other such objects (e.g., consider the vector space of C(R) of 
all functions continuous on all of R, which by necessity “contains” functions 
we will never conceive of).
Concluding Remarks
I do not criticize that kind of mathematics, but I want to exhibit to what degree 
it is based on acts of faith and is essentially of a discursive character. Neither 
the notion of material nor the notion of mental models makes sense or is 
applicable here. One has to rely on language and the conventional use of 
symbols. Similar observations that apply to previous examples are applicable 

Means for Meaning  129
to sine and exponential functions, too. At first, the abstract terms might serve 
the purpose of talking about a variety of concrete, even physical, experiences 
such as describing observations of growth processes or oscillations. This 
abstracted manner of talking then acquires some independence from the 
experiences and experiential phenomena referred to, so that the abstract objects 
gain discursive existence. First, the abstract description lends “meaning” to 
the experiences. Later, the abstract objects derive their “meaning” from their 
taken-to-be representations or applications.
One can justifiably ask why quite a few students accept, without hesitation, 
the sensibility of these kinds of mathematical constructs and their pertinent 
discourse, whereas other students never feel comfortable with, or may even 
refuse to accept, the necessary agreement. One theoretical explanation might 
be offered by the theory of image schemata that was developed by Lakoff 
(1987) and Johnson (1987). According to these authors, schematized bodily 
experiences are the sources for associating metaphorical meaning with words 
that are used in an abstracted context. For instance, our experiences with material 
objects are schematized in an image schema that is projected metaphorically 
to terms such as abstract object or mathematical object. Neither object is a 
palpable entity at all. But to each we ascribe properties that are experienced 
with concrete objects. For this to be possible, we do not even need mental 
imagery or the mental models that are now often encountered. Instead, the 
metaphoric use of terms is conceivable as a linguistic or discursive process, 
although starting from experientially constituted image schemas. At times, 
these image schemas might even be exteriorized by symbolic expressions 
that, in turn, can serve as generic terms. For instance, the general form of 
a decimal number or of an infinite decimal fraction can acquire this generic 
character for the student, thus serving as (the carrier of) the prototype for 
an arbitrary natural or real number. Generally, prototypes and protocols will 
have this generic character.
A cognitively oriented explanation for the failure to be inducted into the 
mathematical discourse is, therefore, the lack of image schemata on which 
to base the discursive extension and the many as-if attitudes. Again, this 
lack might result from an absence of pertinent experiences (which can be 
either quantitative or qualitative). Of course, there can be differences in the 
abilities of each individual to schematize his or her experiences and to make 
metaphoric use of words.
As already has been pointed out, there are mathematical notions that cannot 
be based on a generic prototype that is expressed by a symbolic schema. 
Although this holds for continuous functions, it holds even more for Lebesgue 
integrable functions because there is not a generic schema that describes an 

130  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
arbitrary member of these classes of functions. Yet we group all of them 
together to form sets, vector spaces, or Banach spaces. I think that an as-if 
attitude certainly is required to make these groupings acceptable, if one wants 
to avoid metaphysical or Platonistic faith. Prior experiences with the success 
of these discursive processes provide a strong motivation for assuming such 
an attitude.
In this section, I have attempted to state that a didactic approach to 
mathematics, based on imagery, concrete experiences, prototypes, protocols, 
or on theories of representations and mental models, has to be complemented 
at least by both linguistic and affective/emotional aspects. Many mathematical 
construals can be interpreted only as part of a specific discourse, which 
cannot be forced on the student by purely rational arguments. A conscious 
decision to enter the discourse is necessary and can be supported, in my 
view, by the taking of an as-if attitude, for example, in regard to the existence 
of mathematical objects. This opens up a way of understanding advanced 
mathematics that does not look for (the principally impossible) mental models 
for abstract objects.
REFERENCES
Dörfler, W. (1984). Actions as a means for acquiring mathematical concepts. In B.Southwell, 
R.Eyland, M.Cooper, J.Conroy, & K.Collis (Eds.), Proceedings of the Eighth International 
Conference for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (pp. 172–180). Sydney, 
Australia: International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education.
Dörfler, W. (1989a). Prototypen und Protokolle als kognitive Mittel gegen Bedeutungslosigkeit 
und Entfremdung im Mathematikunterricht. In Zukunft des Mathematikunterrichts (pp. 
102–109). Remscheid-Lennep, Germany: Soest.
Dörfler, W. (1989b). Protocols of action as a cognitive tool for knowledge construction. In 
G.Vergnaud, J.Rogalski, & M.Artigue (Eds.), Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference 
of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 
212–219). Paris: International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education.
Dörfler, W. (1991). Meaning: Image schemata and protocols. In F.Furinghetti (Ed.), 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of 
Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 17–32). Assisi, Italy: Universita di Geneva.
Dörfler, W. (1993a). Fluency in a discourse or manipulation of mental objects. In 
I.Hirabayashi, N.Nohda, K.Shigematsu, & F.Lin (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth 
International Conference for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 145–
152). Tsukuba, Japan: Program Committee of the 17th PME Conference.
Dörfler, W. (1993b). Haben wir Mathematik im Kopf. In G.Pickert & I.Weidig (Eds.), 
Mathematik erfassen und lehren. Festband für Vollrath (pp. 63–71). Stuttgart, Germany: 
Klett Verlag.
Dörfler, W. (1995). Mathematical objects, representations and imagery. In J.Mason & R. 

Means for Meaning  131
Sutherland (Eds.), Exploiting mental imagery with computers in mathematics education 
(pp. 82–94). NATO ASI Series F: Computer and System Series. Berlin-Heidelberg, 
Germany: Springer Verlag.
Johnson, M. (1987). The body in the mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire and dangerous things. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Rotman, B. (1993). Ad infinitum. The ghost in Turing’s machine. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Vaihinger, H. (1986). Die Philosophie des Als Ob. Aalen, Germany: Scientia Verlag. 
(Original work published 1911)
Wittgenstein, L. (1977). Philosophische Untersuchungen [Philosophical investigations]. 
Frankfurt, Germany: Suhrkamp.


133
5 
The Appropriation of Mathematical 
Symbols: A Psychosemiotic Approach  
to Mathematics Learning
Bert van Oers  
Free University Amsterdam  
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
There is probably no dispute about the importance of symbol use in 
mathematical thinking. Nevertheless, the appropriation of symbols remains 
one of the stumbling blocks in mathematics education for many pupils. In 
this chapter I discuss the appropriation of mathematical symbols from the 
perspective of action psychology, drawing to a large extent from the works 
of Vygotsky and his followers. The first part of the chapter gives a theoretical 
account of my psychological approach, putting it into a historical context 
and describing some of its core concepts. Action, activity, and meaning are 
key concepts in this approach. In the later sections of this chapter, I analyze 
mathematical symbol formation and mathematical concept learning from this 
psychosemiotic perspective. In addition to the psychosemiotic analysis, it is 
argued that a developmental approach to these learning processes is needed to 
fully understand the construction of mathematical meanings. In a last part of 
the chapter, I give some examples of how the promotion and development of 
symbol-meaning construction can be initiated during early education, laying 
a basis for the appropriation of mathematical symbols later on.
A DYNAMIC VIEW ON MATHEMATICAL THINKING
The conception of mathematics as a special type of human activity enjoys 
a growing popularity in modern thinking about mathematics education. 
Mathematics as a discipline is now generally conceived of as an activity in 

134  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
which constructive representation, with the help of symbols, plays a decisive 
role (Bishop, 1988; Freudenthal, 1973, 1991; Kaput, 1987). From the analysis 
of the historical context of mathematics education, it can be maintained 
that the connection between communication and knowing can only become 
imaginable by understanding symbolic means as means of the system of 
human activity, which is subjective as well as social (see for instance Otte, 
1974). Elsewhere I have also argued for a conception of mathematics education 
that acknowledges the written-language characteristic of mathematics, thus 
emphasizing the importance of the symbol in the process of meaningful 
appropriation of mathematics as a cultural activity (van Oers, 1996b).
It is no wonder that this conception of mathematics is also reflected in 
modern discussions about mathematics education. Reading literature on 
the history of mathematics teaches us that problem solving and the use of 
symbolic technology always formed essential elements in the self-concept of 
mathematics. As Cassirer (1955, p. 75) put it: “Mathematics and physics were 
the first to gain a clear awareness of this symbolic character of their basic 
implements.” These disciplines were the first to recognize the artificial nature 
of their instruments and to consider their results as mental constructions. By 
the same token, these disciplines traditionally tended to be as interested in the 
activity of doing mathematics as in mathematical results.
Not surprisingly, this approach to human thinking also spread to 
epistemology in general. The activity approach indeed gained much attention 
in the academic world during the past centuries. Since the 17th century, the 
approach was elaborated substantially in Europe, where Spinoza emphasized 
the constructive character of human thinking, and Leibnitz tried to overcome 
Cartesian dualism by proposing a monistic, active conception of human 
consciousness. Eventually this way of thinking also influenced educational 
thought. In the 17th century, Comenius put forward the idea that the best 
way of teaching an activity is to show it. As a general approach to learning, 
this view never lost its influence in European educational thought, although it 
was not dominant in educational practice for a long time. In the 19th century, 
von Humboldt tried to implement this view of knowledge and knowing into 
general education (in Germany) by emphasizing “activity” (energeia), rather 
than “product” (ergon). However, due to a variety of cultural circumstances 
(such as the urge to transmit the products of cultural history, rather than 
illuminate the strategies involved), this activity approach to school subjects 
did not become very popular in school practice until recently.
In one of his first substantial books on mathematics education, Freudenthal 
(1973) quoted Comenius’s view on learning as follows: “The best way to 
teach an activity is to show it,” or, as Freudenthal himself read this principle, 
“The best way to teach an activity is to perform it” (Freudenthal, 1973, p. 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  135
110). And this concept runs through all of his reflections on mathematics 
education. According to Freudenthal, mathematics is basically an activity of 
mathematizing: that is, organizing a (concrete empirical or abstract mental) 
domain, representing it with the help of symbols, finding problems, solving 
problems, and experimenting with symbolic means (as in a thought experiment), 
in order to become better acquainted with the properties of the domain under 
consideration (see also Gravemeijer, 1992; Gravemeijer, Cobb, Bowers, & 
Whitenack, chap. 7, this volume). In mathematics education, for Freudenthal, 
the “activity of structuring” is far more important than the mere mastering 
of fossilized mathematical structures (Freudenthal, 1979). In his approach 
to mathematics education, Freudenthal was clearly pursuing this old activity 
tradition with respect to education and learning (see also Freudenthal, 1991).
The same goes for the mathematics educationalist van Hiele (see, e.g., 
van Hiele, 1985). He was absolutely confident that it was possible to help 
students gain insight into mathematics if the teaching-learning process were 
adequately organized. His level theory about the organization of practices 
of mathematics education gained some influence in the movement for the 
innovation of mathematics (Gravemeijer, 1994; Hoffer, 1983).
More than Freudenthal, van Hiele was interested in the psychological 
aspects of mathematics education. He emphasized the importance of symbols 
in mathematics for grasping mathematical meaning. For him, symbols ideally 
become signals for relevant actions in a particular context, indicating those 
properties and relations in the situation that deserve special attention in the 
problem-solving process. According to van Hiele, appropriating the meaning 
of symbols is primarily a communicative process in a problem-solving 
context. However, in an educational setting this communication is not a 
straightforward transmission of information from the teacher to the pupils, 
because symbols may mean different things to different participants in the 
communication. Hence, the teacher and the pupils must come to a mutual 
understanding of the meaning of the symbols used. Only then can an attempt 
be made to bring these symbol-related meanings more into conformity with 
the mathematical conventions. Nowadays, this communicative process would 
be called negotiation of meaning.
With respect to his view on learning, van Hiele was clearly influenced 
by the Dutch learning psychologist van Parreren, who developed an action 
psychological theory of learning by elaborating on the ideas of Lewin.1 I 
address this learning theory in a more detailed way in the next section. At 
1	
After the late 1960s, van Parreren broadened his theory by integrating the views of the Vygotskian 
cultural-historical approach. By doing so he and his colleague Carpay introduced Vygotsky into 
the Dutch academic discussions in the early seventies.

136  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
this moment it is important to recognize that the general activity approach 
to human thinking influenced both mathematics education and learning 
psychology. It is not surprising then that the dynamic view on mathematics 
and the psychological theory of activity consistently go together and are, 
actually, interdependent with respect to the design of mathematics education 
(see also van Oers, 1990).
One of the core concepts in all dynamic views on mathematics is the 
concept of symbol. Symbols are indispensable as means for coding the 
results of thinking. More importantly, however, symbols also function 
as means for the regulation of the thinking process. They introduce new 
ways of organizing in the course of thinking, as argued by Vygotsky and 
his followers. Not surprisingly, mathematics educators starting out from a 
dynamic, activity-oriented view on mathematics also discovered the essential 
role of language-in-use as a fundamental symbol system for mathematical 
thinking (see, among others, Cobb, Wood, & Yackel, 1993; Ernest, 1991; 
Pimm, 1987). The invention, use, and improvement of appropriate symbols 
are characteristic features of the mathematical enterprise (see, e.g., Struik’s 
1990 magnificent description of the history of mathematics; see also Davis 
& Hersch, 1981).2 Obviously, the efforts of the pupils to get a better grip on 
symbols in a meaningful way should be considered one of the core objectives 
of education, especially in the domain of mathematics.
In this chapter I focus on one contribution of an activity-theoretical 
approach to mathematics education, starting from this dynamic, activity-based 
view on mathematical thinking (mathematizing). In particular, I develop an 
activity-psychological view of the symbol, “the most significant of man’s 
instrumentalities” (according to Werner & Kaplan, 1963, p. 11; see also 
Nemirovsky and Monk’s discussion of Werner and Kaplan’s work, chap. 6, 
this volume). From this perspective I deal with the activity of symbol formation 
and symbol use or, that is to say, with symbolizing. In the elaboration of this 
point of view, the basic psychological concepts are drawn from the works of 
Vygotsky, Leont’ev, Werner, and the Dutch psychologist van Parreren.
Acknowledging the importance of the symbol in the development 
of mathematical thinking is evidently consistent with recent empirical 
findings as well. According to empirical investigations of the development 
2	
This is not to suggest that mathematics is a once-defined, unchanging discipline. Nevertheless, the 
passion of mathematics, that is, the passion to comprehend things (such as music, measurement, 
space, number systems, ethics, eternity, solar systems, market economy, chaos, to name just a few) 
via analysis of orderly representations, remained the same existential precondition for mathematical 
activity throughout history. What changed, in accordance with the cultural-historically developing 
self-concept of mathematics, were the norms, rules, concepts, and conventions for how to 
accomplish this existential aim.

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  137
of mathematical thinking in pupils, the failure of meaningful appropriation 
of mathematical symbols has turned out to be one of the main problems 
in mathematics learning (see, among others, Hughes, 1986; Walkerdine, 
1988; see also research examining the relationship between dyslexia and 
mathematics, Miles & Miles, 1992).
The ultimate educational concern of this activity-oriented approach to 
(mathematics) education is to foster the development of autonomy in pupils 
with respect to their (mathematical) actions. Pupils must be educated to 
become responsible for their own mathematical actions, not by inventing their 
private mathematics but by collaboratively reconstructing “old” mathematical 
means and meanings and by discovering the relevance with respect to their 
current life activities.
At this moment, our understanding of this educational process is far from 
complete. In order to gain further insight into the processes involved and to 
enhance our educational abilities to foster the pupils’ development, we will have 
to refine the core concepts, such as constructivity, activity, and symbolizing, 
as psychological phenomena. Mathematics educators show a tendency to 
get deeply involved in phenomenological analyses of subject matter (e.g., 
Freudenthal) or in curriculum and instructional problems (e.g., Howson, Keitel, 
& Kilpatrick, 1981; Malone & Taylor, 1993), without giving much attention 
to the psychological concepts they use.3 Sometimes the psychological nature 
of these phenomena is taken for granted or simply overlooked. (See the critical 
review of recent developments in constructivism and socioconstructionism by 
Shotter, 1995.) In the next section, I briefly describe an action-psychological 
framework that might deepen our understanding of what it means to learn 
mathematics, especially with respect to the development of symbolizing in 
the mathematical domain.
TOWARD A PSYCHOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
FOR ANALYSIS
As a consequence of the general philosophical approach to the human mind 
and the act of knowing, the activity approach was a vital, although sometimes 
peripheral, paradigm in social science as well during the last few centuries in 
Europe. In the 20th century, the activity approach to learning and development 
was elaborated in the works of Werner, Lewin, Vygotsky, Leont’ev, van 
Parreren, and many others.4 It was even exported to the United States by the 
3	
As always, there are good exceptions to this. See Gravemeijer (1994).
4	
The works of Kurt Lewin and Heinz Werner substantively influenced both Vygotsky in Russia 
(see, e.g., van der Veer & Valsiner, 1991) and van Parreren in the Netherlands.

138  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
works of Dewey, Lewin, and Werner, but it did not have much influence there5 
until the last decade. Still, most of the recent elaborations of Vygotskian theory 
are biased toward linguistic, semiotic, and anthropological interpretations of 
Vygotsky, rather than being elaborations of the action-psychological aspects 
of the cultural-historical approach of Vygotsky, Leont’ev, and Lurija. The next 
three subsections give a brief account of an action-psychological approach 
to learning and the construction of meaning (see also van Oers, 1996b, 
1996c). This frame of reference will be needed in my theoretical account of 
symbolizing and the appropriation of symbols later on.
General Tenets
The basic tenets of the activity approach to human behavior and development 
are most extensively formulated in the context of discussions concerned with 
Vygotsky’s cultural-historical (sociocultural) theory. Thanks to publications 
of Wertsch (e.g., 1985), Cole (e.g., 1990), Moll (1990), Forman, Minick, and 
Stone (1993), and many others, there is no need at this moment for an extensive 
introduction into this approach (see, for a recent synopsis, Wertsch & Toma, 
1995). Here, I describe only those issues that are important to understanding 
my further argument (see also van Oers, 1996c).
For Vygotsky, human behavior is essentially a cultural phenomenon. Current 
forms of behavior are the joint products of human biological equipment, the 
cultural history, and the characteristics of individual development. Adults are 
responsible for the development of the next generation in so far as they can 
actually influence the characteristics of individual developmental processes in 
a decisive way. By creating a zone of proximal development in his interaction 
with the child and by promoting learning processes within that zone, the adult 
can not only introduce culture into the child’s life in a meaningful way, but 
can even promote the child’s development as a cultural human being.
An important question now is how to define the zone of proximal development. 
Most Western interpretations of the zone of proximal development start from 
the definition given in the following English translation of Vygotsky’s essay 
(1978) on the interaction between learning and development: 
5	
We may have to make an exception for social psychology in the United States, and, undoubtedly, 
for Piaget, whose work is intrinsically connected to this European tradition. The position of Piaget 
vis-à-vis the activity approach (as conceived here) cannot be analyzed here. Michael Cole was one 
of the first in the United States to recognize the significance of activity theory. He still is one of the 
leading figures of this approach.

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  139
It is the distance between the actual developmental level as determined by 
independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined 
through problem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more capable 
peers, (p. 86)
However, even though this translation is a correct rendition of what Vygotsky 
himself wrote about the zone, a narrow focus on this discrepancy formula 
of the zone leads to a distortion of the real meaning of the concept. As this 
working definition zooms in on the developmental state of an individual’s 
performances, it leads to an individualistic and static interpretation of the 
zone, capitalizing on individual actions or functions. For Vygotsky, however, 
the zone is a dynamic concept referring to some culturally articulated context 
emerging in the interaction between adult and child (see Wertsch, 1985, pp. 
67–76). Therefore, Vygotsky reiterated throughout his written work that 
imitation should be conceived of as the essential element in the definition of 
the zone of proximal development (see, e.g., Vygotsky, 1934/1982, p. 250). 
However, imitation is not to be interpreted as indiscriminate copying someone 
else’s actions, but as a form of meaningful reenactment of some cultural 
activity, based on interactive reconstruction and on the reflexive exchange 
of meanings. By calling this process imitation, Vygotsky emphasized the 
important fact that human beings are always participating in preexisting 
cultural activities that they have not invented themselves, but that have been 
gradually developed in the foregoing cultural history. The zone of proximal 
development, then, should be conceived of primarily as a cultural activity 
in which children become involved with the help of adults (or with more 
capable peers). Within this activity, all individuals take part on the basis of 
the actions they have already mastered and that have a meaningful relation 
to the sociocultural activity. At least their actions need to be accepted by the 
other participants in the activity and ought to be consistent with the activity 
as a whole.
Vygotsky did not elaborate his concept of activity in great detail. From 
his use of the concept and from what he wrote about it, we can definitely 
infer that, for him, it is a sociocultural (metaindividual) phenomenon in which 
different individuals can take part and collaboratively perform their activity-
related actions. Later on, Leont’ev elaborated a theory of activity in which he 
distinguished the conceptual difference between activity (as a meta-individual, 
cultural phenomenon) and actions (as particular individual performances). 
In his perspective, activity is an interpretative concept for the understanding 
of the cultural-historical dimension in the development of action systems. 
Basically, human behavior can only manifest itself through actions. It is 
only by interpretation that a person’s individual actions can signify cultural 

140  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
activity. In general, activities are characterized by a motive and by their 
possible action-structures. The structure of any particular realization of an 
activity is determined by its goal structure and its goal-directed actions at the 
individual level. Learning can only be based on the individual’s own actions 
(as Vygotsky, 1991, wrote in his work concerning pedagogical psychology).
In the wake of Leont’ev, we can call this definition of activity (as distinct 
from actions) the qualitatively determined concept of activity. The already 
mentioned concept of activity refers to a culturally developed category of 
related actions held together by a motive. Obviously, not every possible action 
should be performed every time in every situation. Individuals have to make 
choices for the relevant actions, according to their goals in the given situation. 
They have some freedom with respect to the choice and the sequence of 
their activity-embedded goals and actions. But not just anything is allowed 
when one intends to accomplish a specific sort of cultural action. Take, for 
example, football playing as an activity. No one prescribes exactly how it is 
to be played. Actually, football actions are “chosen,” by the player in the field, 
within the constraints of the rules and physical conditions of the game. Thus, 
every player has some degree of freedom as to the choice and sequence of his 
actions. But there are restrictions, such as that some actions (accidentally or 
deliberately) are not accepted as long as the players agree to play football, and 
these actions are sanctioned.6 New football actions (such as heading, stopping 
a ball, jinking past someone, etc.) are to be learned within this activity, and 
(for the learner) they must have a meaningful relation to this activity. Indeed, 
the best way to learn an activity is to perform (or imitate) it.
As an aside, I have to add here that the qualitatively determined concept 
of activity must be strictly distinguished, according to Leont’ev, from a more 
quantitatively determined concept of activity that refers to the intensity of an 
activity, (i.e., the amount of effort on the part of an acting individual). This 
“activity” is the antithesis of “passivity” and indicates how much (mental) 
effort the individual invests in his actions. It is this latter interpretation of 
activity that is sometimes involved in discussions about the constructive 
character of human cognition. It must be distinguished from the qualitative 
version, which can be determined only by specifying the actions, motives and 
goals involved.7
6	
It would not be too difficult to develop a similar example about mathematics as an activity.
7	
There is a language problem here. Leont’ev used two different Russian words for the distinguished 
forms of activity: dejatel’nost and aktivnost, respectively. In many languages (such as in English, 
French, and Dutch), there is only one word available for the translation of both. In German both 
terms can be distinguished as Tätigkeit and Aktivität, respectively. In the other languages, there is 
often confusion about what exactly is meant (even in translation from Russian). When I use the 
term activity, I always refer to the qualitatively determined concept (dejatel’nost’; Tätigkeit).

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  141
The qualitatively construed concept of activity entails several very 
important educational implications. First of all, we must acknowledge that 
every activity has an individual form (the way it is realized in the situated, 
goal-directed actions of an individual) and a collective form. For mathematics 
education, this suggests that it is both necessary and useful for educational 
practices to characterize mathematics in terms of a reflexive relationship 
between an individual and a collective activity. This seems to be consistent 
with one of the conclusions of Cobb, Yackel, and Wood (1992) about the 
nature of mathematics education.
Another important consequence that I would like to point out here is that 
a participant in an activity can be considered the real agent of that activity 
only because he or she has social assistance. This assistance can be given by 
another human being or can be embodied in instruments (such as a calculator) 
or in other supportive systems (such as guidelines for actions, operating 
instructions, algorithms, a compiler program in a computer, etc.). The 
requirements for a realistic imitation (or personally meaningful reenactment) 
of a cultural activity are distributed, so to say, over different agents and means 
(cf. the Bransford et al. discussion of distributed support for knowing, chap. 8, 
this volume). As a result, no one needs to master all of the actions necessary to 
accomplish an activity. Neither is it necessary to carry out all of the required 
actions by oneself. By participating in a sociocultural activity, as well as by 
being allowed and able to use the various resources available, people can act 
as cultural agents. This explains, for instance, how a pupil can do mathematics 
without first having to become an expert mathematician.
As Lave and Wenger (1991) pointed out, such participation is peripheral in 
the beginning, but it may become more and more substantial if the participation 
lasts long enough. Lave and Wenger described many illuminating examples 
that show how a person grows into a practice. In a similar way, we can 
explain how a child grows into a speech practice just by being involved in 
communication and gradually developing abilities to participate actively in 
this communication. Likewise, the development of numeracy also follows 
this general pattern. For example, it is meaningless to ask whether children 
should have acquired prior knowledge of counting principles in order to learn 
counting. Both counting actions and the required rules need to be present 
in the same activity, although they need not be available in one and the 
same person. Expertise is not only the final measure that the pupils have to 
eventually achieve. But the expert is a collaborator in the activity from the 
beginning, bringing the future into the present (Cole, 1995). In other words, 
the structural endpoint of any mature activity needs to be present “in the 
interaction between child and adult as a precondition for this new structure 
to appear as an individual psychological function in the child” (Cole, 1995, 

142  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
p. 44; see also Cole & Engeström, 1993). This is one crucial implication of 
Vygotsky’s emphasis on imitation. By the same token, this also signifies an 
important requirement for any educational implementation of this concept of 
the zone of proximal development.
The importance of this cannot be overrated. In every activity, there is a 
distribution of functions among agents and means. (See Salomon, 1993, for 
further analyses of the idea of distributed cognition.) The nature of the social 
organization of the activity is eventually reflected in the style of intramental 
functioning (see van Oers, 1996b; Wertsch & Toma, 1995).
An Action Psychological View on Learning
The zone of proximal development defines the context for meaningful learning 
but does not account for learning itself. Learning, according to the action-
psychological view, is always based on the situated manifestations of human 
behavior, that is, on actions. An action can be defined as follows: a goal-directed 
attempt to change an object, in order to make it (more) meaningful for some 
end (see Leont’ev, 1975; van Parreren, 1954, 1971, 1978). Examples are:
•	 Tying a shoelace (changing the shoelace into a form that will prevent 
one’s shoes from falling from one’s feet).
•	 Peeling an apple (changing the apple into an edible form).
•	 Writing a note (changing a piece of paper into a means of communication 
by putting graphic signs on it).
•	 Counting (changing a collection of objects into a particular quantity).
•	 Calculating 2+2 (changing the formula 2+2 into another form that suits 
the task at hand).
Every action is characterized by its object, its goal (the intended modification 
of the object), and its means for performance. According to the nature of the 
object, the goal, and the instrumental means, the performance of the action is 
structured in a particular way. Anyone who has ever written on a chalkboard 
knows that writing on a chalkboard is structurally different from writing on 
a piece of paper with a pencil. We can graphically represent an action as a 
relationship between a person (a pupil) and an object (P=pupil; O=object) as 
in Fig. 5.1.
But it is not only the object, the personal goals, or the means that determine 
the structure of an action. Actually, the structure of an action is, to a large 
extent, a result of learning how to handle an instrument for changing an 
object to some end and is often handed down to a child during his or her 
development. It should be noted here that the performance of an action not 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  143
only refers to the process of carrying it out, but also to the mental reflections 
of preparing the action, making decisions, controlling and assessing it, and 
so on. In this broad sense, human actions are essentially culturally mediated 
actions. Hence, the representation of the mediated action must be extended as 
shown in Fig. 5.2 (A=adult, influencing a pupil’s action). However, in reality 
this is not a one-way communication because the child gives some reaction 
(feedback) concerning the adult’s attempts (action) to influence the child’s 
object-oriented actions, shown in Fig. 5.3.
FIG. 5.1. An action as a relationship between a person (a pupil) and an object (P=pupil; 
O=object).
FIG. 5.2. The representation of the mediated action extended (A=adult, influencing a 
pupil’s action).
FIG. 5.3. A process of qualitative change of an action, which depends on the object (O), the 
learner (P), and the social environment (A).
At this point, the learning process can be described as a process of qualitative 
change of an action. Referring to Fig. 5.3, we can see that this process depends 
upon the object (O), the learner (P), and the social environment (A). This 
theory of learning was developed and experimentally supported during the 
1950s by Leont’ev, Gal’perin (see Haenen, 1996), and van Parreren. There 
can be changes with respect to the structure of an action, or with respect to the 
meaning of an action.
Changes in the structure of an action can be observed most clearly in actions 
involving motor manipulation. Picture someone using a typewriter for the first 
time. Then, compare this way of acting with how he performs after 6 months 
of practicing. There is a clear difference in the structure of his typewriting 
actions. The stages in the development of counting can also be construed as a 
succession of qualitatively changing actions. For instance, we see that concrete 

144  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
pointing to the objects is a vital aspect of the performance of the counting 
action. In later stages, this structural aspect of the action disappears or, to put 
it more appropriately, is transformed into a perceptual action of looking at the 
objects to be counted. Still later the material objects themselves are not even 
necessary; the counting action deals with the quantities per se (transforming 
them into other quantity representations). Of course, other changes occur as 
well, in the developmental process of the counting action, such as the growing 
fluency in the performance of the action, the generalization of the action to 
counting by composite units, and the gradual submission of the action to 
cultural rules of counting (e.g., the “how to count principles,” Gelman & 
Gallistel, 1978).8
One very important aspect of the learning process must be described 
here in greater detail because it will be important in an action-psychological 
account of symbolizing. The qualitative transformation of an action can occur 
with respect to a variety of parameters (Gal’perin, 1969). One of them is the 
extensiveness of the action performance. At first the action is exploratory, 
tentative, hesitating (picture again the beginning typist!). But after a while, the 
action becomes abbreviated step by step, erasing the intermittent explorations 
and orientations. The actor needs to contemplate less and less during the actual 
performance, and doesn’t have to ask himself such questions as “What’s 
next?” or “How do I do it?” In fact, now the action will proceed more and 
more smoothly, be to the point, and become automatic. One could say that this 
action coalesces into one ephemeral operation.
This abbreviation process is essential for the development of recognition 
actions: that is, actions that aim at identifying situations, objects, or symbols, 
in order to find out what they mean. In the first stage of any recognition 
process, the action proceeds step by step, often checking critical features, 
working through a tree of decisions, and finally coming to a conclusion. 
Beginning bird watchers, for instance, need to check a whole series of features 
of the bird before they can conclude what bird it is that they see. After some 
practice, however, they immediately see what kind of bird it is. The extended 
identification process has been abbreviated into an “immediate” recognition.
Abbreviation processes are very important for all kinds of complex cognitive 
achievements. This is evident in the beginning reading process, but also in the 
mathematizing process (although this is often overlooked). The importance 
of this process of abbreviation for the historical and individual development 
of mathematical thinking has been shown clearly by Sfard (chap. 3, this 
8	
It is not, however, my intention here to develop an action-psychological account for the development 
of counting. Hence, I only refer to it sketchily now. There is much more to it than is pointed out 
here. See, for example, Steffe (1992).

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  145
volume; also Sfard, 1991,1992; Sfard & Linchevski, 1994). Sfard emphasizes 
the process-object duality in mathematical concepts. In the development of 
mathematical notions, the process-oriented conception of a mathematical 
symbol emerges first. However, this conception gradually becomes a structured 
object of mathematical thinking through a process of reification. To my mind, 
what Sfard identifies (at an epistemological level) as a reification process is 
parallel to the concept of abbreviation in my psychological analysis.
An additional argument for the importance of abbreviation in mathematical 
thinking was given by Bauersfeld (1995). He showed that the interpretation 
of a situation as a subtraction task (or some other mathematical operation) 
requires a process of identification in which a pupil has to “read” a situation 
(or a picture) as one that can be represented (e.g., 7–3). Bauersfeld (1995, p. 
146) stated, “The key operation of any problem solving is the mathematical 
modelling of all kinds of objects or situations, which may involve the 
selection and assignment of mathematical models.” Acquiring proficiency in 
mathematical problem solving necessarily includes the abbreviation of this 
identification process, transforming this process from an extended exploratory 
form into some sort of more or less immediate (ephemeral) recognition of 
what is to be done in a particular situation. Of course, the decision might 
be mistaken, but that is no reason for denying the cognitive importance of 
abbreviation. Rather, this is a good reason for placing these abbreviated 
actions under permanent reflective control.
This process of abbreviation was studied experimentally by Gal’perin and 
his students. They demonstrated that verbalizing is an essential part of this 
process (Sabel’nikov, 1982). Eventually, the verbal symbol sort of “triggers” 
a process that immediately yields automatic actions, or even yields knowledge 
of action results. In terms of van Parreren’s theory, we can say that the symbols 
acquire action valency. Just as the typewriter’s keyboard acquires valency 
for a typist, and eventually controls the typist’s actions corresponding to the 
words he or she has in mind, symbols also acquire a valency for particular 
actions. Ultimately, symbols suggest possible significant actions. According 
to van Hiele, symbol-related action valencies are also very important in the 
mathematizing process because they orient the person toward relevant actions 
in a problem situation.
In Gal’perin’s system, the role of language is particularly important for the 
formation of abbreviated mental actions. Not only is language a means for 
regulating an action in accordance with some predetermined culturally preferred 
form, but it is also a means of representing an action and making it into a mental 
object (cf. Sfard’s discussion of the history of negative numbers, chap. 3, this 
volume). Actually, in Gal’perin’s theory, verbal representation of an action is 
the creation of a symbol for an action, which makes it possible to think of this 

146  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
action and its results without concretely performing it! The symbol eventually 
anticipates and represents the result of the action (Gal’perin, 1976).
To this point, we have only discussed some important structural changes 
of actions during the learning process. However, actions can change also with 
respect to their meaning. As the problem of meaning is rather complex (see 
van Oers, 1996b, 1996c; Wertsch, 1985), I cannot deal with it at full length 
here. In my definition of the action, I pointed out that the meaning of an action 
is related to the goal of the problem-solving task. It must be clear by now that 
the meaning of an action is not absolute. It can change when it is embedded 
in another problem-solving activity. Take again the example of the counting 
action. The initial action of touching and replacing objects is familiar to the 
young child. When the child becomes involved in counting activities, this 
“old” action acquires new meaning: counting. Or an even more illustrative 
example is the following: The action of counting on may acquire the new 
meaning of subtracting (e.g., when trying to find the difference between two 
numbers). Or the action of subtracting can acquire a new meaning of dividing. 
In the development of mathematical thinking, the attribution of new meanings 
to “old” actions is a very important kind of learning (cf. Sfard, chap. 3, this 
volume). In the next section, I deal more extensively with the activity of 
meaning making.
Semiotic Activity
Obviously, the problem of meaning and sign was a very important element in 
Vygotsky’s thinking. He acknowledged that passing on culture to the younger 
generation is essential for the development of humanity, but he also realized 
that cultural meanings cannot be immutably transmitted to children in a ready-
made form. Meanings develop, and they develop, in particular, in the learner 
during his or her interaction with other people. The learner is a crucial factor 
in this process. With the help of other people, the child has to figure out the 
meaning of cultural elements. While doing so, the child makes his or her own 
meaning, which usually (but not always) comes close to the culturally shared 
meanings. Sometimes it diverts. In any event, it is always the learner’s own 
meaning. It takes special communicative efforts to find out to what extent 
meanings are indeed shared. We cannot do much more than assume that 
meanings are shared to some (a large?) extent. Actually, we would do better 
to speak of “taken-as-shared meanings” (see Cobb et al., 1993). As long as 
people can effectively communicate, there is a sound basis for the assumption 
that meanings are shared.
I refer to the sociocognitive endeavor of (re)making meaning and symbolic 
means (such as signs, symbols, diagrams, schemes, models, actions) as being 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  147
semiotic activity. Semiotic activity is defined as the (inter-or intra-)mental 
activity of creating meanings and signs, by reflecting on the interrelationships 
between (changes in) signs and (changes in) their corresponding meanings, 
and of adjusting signs and meanings accordingly. A few examples may 
illustrate this kind of activity. From an early age, children are involved 
in some form of semiotic activity. When a child is trying to figure out the 
meaning of a word, he or she is often carrying out a semiotic activity, as the 
following example illustrates:
Pupil: 	
Is that a blackbird, miss?
Teacher: 	 Do you think it is a blackbird?
Pupil: 	
It is black, but its bill is not orange!
Teacher: 	 Well, maybe it is not a blackbird, then?
Pupil: 	
The bill must be orange. It can’t be a blackbird! What is it, 
miss?
Teacher: 	 I think it is a jackdaw.
Pupil: 	
Must be a jackdaw.
In this example the pupil apparently reflects on the meaning of the symbol 
(blackbird) and notices a discrepancy between the meaning of his symbol 
blackbird and what he actually sees. Consequently, he changes his symbol.
A second example shows how young children count the number  
of buttons:
Child 1: 	
We got seven buttons.
Child 2: 	
No, it’s eight. If it is seven, you have to take one away.
Child 2 obviously acknowledges the strict relationship between symbol and 
meaning. If we change the symbol (seven instead of eight), we have to change 
the situation to which it refers.
One nice example was given by Karmiloff-Smith (1995, p. 31), reporting a 
short segment of conversation between Yara (4 years old) and her mother:
Yara: 	
What’s that?
Mother: 	
A typewriter.
Yara: 	
No, you’re the typewriter. That’s the typewrite.
Obviously, for this child the form of the symbol (typewriter) suggests a 
particular meaning (probably that a typewriter refers to a person). If one wants 
to refer to the machine (i.e., evoke another meaning), one must use another 
symbol (typewrite).

148  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Because this selection of examples might erroneously suggest that only 
young children are involved in semiotic activities, a final example with older 
children (about 12 years old) is given here:
Pupil 1: 	
I do not understand what pressure means.
Pupil 2: 	
Well, the book says it is “Force per area measure.”
Pupil 1: 	
I can read that, but I do not really understand. Do I weigh less 
when I lay down on the floor, instead of stand upright?
Pupil 2: 	
What?
Pupil 1: 	
Yeah. When I lay down, I’ll occupy more area, so the pressure 
will be less, isn’t it?
Pupil 2: 	
…ah…ah… I think you’re confusing “weight” and “force” 
(ah…or weight and pressure?). Look, the formula says, “Force 
per area measure,” not weight per area measure.
Pupil 1: 	
What’s the difference. Can you explain me that?
Pupil 2: 	
Let me think. Let’s take a look in our book. What is the formula 
for “weight”?
The conversation goes on, showing how these pupils are reflectively trying to 
find out the meaning of the symbols P (pressure), W (weight), and F (force). 
They seem to start from the assumption that different symbols must mean 
different things. Then, they try to develop an understanding by comparatively 
switching from symbols to their respective meanings and by reflecting on the 
relationships between symbol and meaning.
Additional examples examples of semiotic activity in children will be given 
in the last part of this chapter.
I now want to emphasize, in the same way as Werner and Kaplan (1963) do, 
that both the construction (improvement; differentiation) of meaning and the 
constructive improvement of the symbol are constitutive in semiotic activity. 
Meanings and signs are inextricably linked and develop concurrently.
Up to now, Vygotsky and the Vygotskians have paid most of their attention 
to the problem of meaning. However, the concept of meaning still needs 
further elaboration. The definition of meaning, as that which signs refer to, 
is not really satisfactory. Do signs really refer to objects (situations, actions, 
other signs)? Objects can only be referred to as long as they already make 
sense to us. Hence, meaning is already included in the concept of the object 
itself and cannot be explained by reference to an object. For example, the 
symbol R, which can be seen sometimes next to a road, refers to restaurant. 
But this does not say anything unless I already know what restaurant means. 
And to know what restaurant means is to know what can be done at such 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  149
a place: that is, what kind of special activity is to be carried out there. So 
ultimately, this symbol refers to a cultural activity (or, more specifically, to a 
pattern of context-bound desirable actions).
By attributing the symbol restaurant (or R) to a situation, we predicate 
the situation as something special (to be distinguished from other situations, 
such as a church or a warehouse). Following Vygotsky (1987, chap. 7), I 
assume that this process of predicating is essential to all activities dealing with 
meaning. A sign (or symbol) always involves a form of predication, suggesting 
actions by which the referred-to object obtains its meaning. Or, to put it more 
precisely, the symbol represents how an object (in our example, the house next 
to the road) was transformed (as a result of some action) and thus acquired its 
meaning. The description of the transformed object is actually an utterance 
that reveals something new about the object and distinguishes it from other 
objects. Linguistically speaking, this is what is generally called a predicate 
(see Hörmann, 1978; Leech, 1981). Reflection on the relation between some 
symbol and what it represents (or better, predicates) is a fundamental objective 
of semiotic activity.
Epistemologically, this approach to symbols/signs and meaning 
unavoidably forces us to abandon the idea of direct reference to objects. 
Basically, we can only refer to (identification) actions that produce a meaning 
of some object. Direct reference to objects now is exposed as an illusion, 
caused by the rapidity of an abbreviated identification action that, so to speak, 
“immediately” yields recognition.
Following a similar line of reasoning, we now can understand that the 
symbol 5 does not refer to some ideal object (see Dörfler’s discussion of “as-
if attitude” as it relates to natural numbers, chap. 4, this volume). Basically, 
it predicates a situation on the basis of, for example, a counting action. The 
meaning of this symbol can be construed as the result of this action. But in 
other situations, this same symbol may refer to a result of an ordering action, 
a summation, a subtraction, an extraction of a root, and so on. In all of these 
cases, we attribute the symbol 5 as being a predicate that will tell something 
new about a situation and make it distinct from other situations. The real 
meaning of this 5 depends on the action (such as 2+3, 10−5, etc.) by which it 
is produced. The rapidity of the abbreviated identification falsely suggests that 
the symbol immediately refers to the situation. Reflectively figuring out what 
this symbol means (i.e., identifying from what kind of action it results) is also 
a form of semiotic activity.
In his analysis of the phenomenon of meaning development, Vygotsky 
(1934/1982, chap. 7, section 4) already focused on the process of predication 
(see also Wertsch, 1985). I make use of this concept of predication in my 

150  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
further account of the symbol and symbolizing as I elaborate the concept of 
semiotic activity.9 Predication is the process of attaching extra quality to an 
object of common attention (such as a situation, topic or theme) and, by doing 
so, making it distinct from others. The predicate offers new information about 
a shared object of attention. When you are among people waiting together for a 
red traffic light, it makes no sense to say, “This is a traffic light,” but if you say 
aloud to them “Yes,” you will notice a difference. All of these people share the 
notion of the red traffic light, as well as the related command to wait. What is 
new and informative for their common concern is the remark, “The traffic light 
turned green, so we can walk.” Vygotsky noticed that most of the time there is 
no need to explicitly express the topic of shared attention in a communication 
with others, let alone with ourselves. We can abbreviate the sentence by just 
uttering the predicate in a simple (or even simplified) form (such as by saying 
“yes” when the traffic light turns green). At the social level, predicating is 
possible (and usual) when people share (presuppose) some topic of common 
concern. At the individual level, predicating is a regular psychological 
process that makes much of our thinking and communicating implicit. It is 
the psychological basis for the abbreviation and idiosyncratization of thought 
(Vygotsky, 1934/1982, 1987), which, in turn, is the real psychological cause 
for the fact that so much can be put together in one simple symbol.10
Basically, when people negotiate meanings, they (are supposed to) share 
a topic of mutual interest. Consequently, the process of negotiation can be 
interpreted as a social process of developing a topic, by pooling and probing 
predicates and by selecting socially agreed-on predicates. In other words, it 
is a struggle for shared meaning, a process of cooperatively figuring out what 
can be said validly about this topic.
Vygotskian scholars have not given as much attention to the sign as to 
the phenomenon of meaning. Sinha (1988) pointed out that most theories of 
meaning development (including Vygotskian theory) need to be supplemented 
by a theory of “materiality of representation.”
As made clear by modern semiotic theories, signs differ in character. As 
Peirce pointed out, we can differentiate between signs by their functioning. 
In his opinion, we should make a distinction between iconic signs (referring 
to a referent on the basis of a perceptual similarity between sign and referent: 
Δ→(triangle), indexical signs (referring to a referent on the basis of a real 
9	
It is necessary to keep in mind that the term predication is used here in the psychological sense 
(as Vygotsky uses it), referring to the activity of constructing predicates, and relating judgments 
(see Hörmann, 1978). This is different from the linguistic (logical) use of the word, referring to “a 
common category shared by propositions, questions, commands, etc.” (Leech, 1981, p. 124).
10	 Etymologically, the original meaning of symbol is the notion of “putting together” (because symbol 
derives from the Greek sum-ballein or “bring together,” “mix,” or also “combine,” “conclude”).

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  151
connection between sign and referent: smoke→ _ fire), and symbols (referring 
to a referent on the basis of a conventional relationship between sign and 
referent:×→multiplication).
However, Peirce’s theory is a nondevelopmental theory of signs, indicating 
that material or graphic objects may fulfill their reference function in different 
ways. The same is true for a variety of other symbol classification systems (see 
also Pimm, 1987, p. 140ff). In their seminal work on symbol formation, Werner 
and Kaplan (1963) elaborated a theory about the ontogenetic development 
of symbolic activity. According to this theory, symbolizing is a “dynamic 
schematizing activity” (p. 17ff) in which symbolic vehicles are intentionally 
constructed and reconstructed in order to represent a given object. Through 
these vehicles, symbolizing enters directly into the construction of cognitive 
objects, determining how events are organized and what they mean (Werner 
& Kaplan, 1963, p. 15).
It is important to note that for Werner and Kaplan symbolizing is an evolving 
activity. In an individual’s ontogeny, the first symbols are constructed on 
the basis of similarity to some referent. In the development of the activity 
of symbol formation during ontogeny, the symbols become emancipated 
from perceptual similarity. They refer to something else on the basis of inner 
theoretical relationships between symbol and referent. The necessity of a 
perceptual similarity now has disappeared. In this process, language plays 
a crucial role as a resource and a medium, contributing to development and 
emancipation of the symbols, and allowing a growing dissimilarity between 
the form of the referent and the form of the vehicle. Language provides the 
construction elements for new symbolic forms, such as word combinations, 
sentences, propositions, texts, and metaphors (see Pimm, 1987; Sfard, 1994, 
about the importance of metaphors as productive symbols in mathematical 
thinking!). An important tenet in these approaches is that symbols can never 
be meaningless; symbols always have meaning (although the basis for the 
association between symbol and meaning might be different, according to 
the developmental status of the subject). Development of symbolic activity 
always includes the change of both the symbol and the meaning.
In an earlier analysis of the symbol and semiotic activity, I ascribed three 
important functions to symbols (see van Oers, 1996b):
•	 Symbols refer to a particular group of actions.
•	 Symbols replace actions.
•	 Symbols provide the means for negotiation of meaning (a communi-
cative function).

152  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
My present analysis still endorses this view, but adds a new dimension by 
explicitly relating meaning and action, and by emphasizing the predicative 
nature of symbols. According to the already described view of meaning and 
sign, now we can also conceive of words and word combinations (sentences, 
utterances, texts) as symbols referring to meaning: that is, as providing 
predicates that, presumably, can be attributed to topics of conversation. The 
symbolically represented predicate actually indicates how the object (topic) 
has changed into a new, distinct form, which more clearly indicates what I 
intend to say about the topic that I presupposedly share with my interlocutors. 
By taking these predicates as new objects for mental actions, we perform 
what Peirce called a “hypostatic abstraction” (see Parmentier, 1987, p. 30). 
This modified object then becomes a new symbol (cf. the Gravemeijer et al. 
discussion of chains of signification, chap. 7, this volume), suggesting new 
possible actions and providing a starting point for further development of the 
topic (the meaning involved). The comparison of symbolically represented 
predicates is the basic mechanism of dialogue and negotiation of meaning (see 
Markovà & Foppa, 1990).
However, it is not only purely linguistic means that function as symbols. 
There is another category of symbols that fulfills a predicative function, 
but with the help of perceptive structuring (such as diagrams, schemes or 
models). In the creative production of scientific knowledge, these symbolic 
devices remain important. In semiotic activity, the examination of the 
adequacy of symbols with respect to their referents, and the examination of 
meaning structures and the adjustments of symbols to these structures, are 
very important.
In the next section I illustrate how my view on semiotic activity  
and learning can contribute to the active promotion of symbolizing in the field 
of mathematics.
ASPECTS OF SYMBOLIZING  
IN THE MATHEMATICAL DOMAIN
As pointed out in the preceding sections, semiotic activity is conceived of 
here as a general and fundamental activity of dealing with sign-meaning 
relationships. As such, it is broader than simply symbol use (or “sign-
using activity” as Vygotsky, 1978, p. 46, would call it). Semiotic activity 
encompasses both the formation and modification of symbols and the (re)
construction of meaning.
From the psychological point of view described earlier, mathematical activity 
(mathematizing) can be conceived of as a special type of semiotic activity. 
Reasoning from his dynamic conception of mathematizing, Freudenthal (1991), 
in my opinion, advocated a similar view when he wrote that mathematics is 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  153
basically “an activity of discovering and organizing in an interplay of content 
and form” (p. 15; italics added). On the basis of the already described action-
psychological theory of symbolizing, I contend here that symbols used in 
mathematics (i.e., mathematical forms) are also instruments for attributing 
meaning (new content) to presupposed mathematical objects (given and 
presupposed mathematical content). They suggest mathematical actions that 
can be performed in a given situation. Mathematizing can now be described, 
alternatively, as an activity of reflecting on the reflexive relationship of the new 
content (as suggested by the symbol used) and the old content (mathematical 
object and problem situation). Picture the somewhat boring situation of seven 
birds sitting on a roof, and two coming to join them. How many birds are 
there eventually on the roof? The operator-symbol+predicates the situation by 
suggesting that we have to add (rather than subtract, multiply, or whatever) 
to find the answer. However, adding in itself is not what makes this event an 
example of mathematizing. Mathematizing here consists of the reflection on 
the interrelationship between the situation, the mathematical objects given, and 
the actions, as well as on the conscious judgment that adding is adequate here.
Although mathematical symbols refer (abbreviatedly) to mathematically 
meaningful actions, they also may be called reifications of mathematical 
meanings associated with a term (compare again Sfard’s notion of reification). 
The availability of such terms is necessary for both horizontal mathematizing 
(symbolizing situations in mathematical terms) and vertical mathematizing 
(symbolizing parts of mathematical structures and attributing new meanings, 
“predicates,” to them). For further background information, see, for instance, 
Ernest (1991, pp. 75–79).
Mathematizing as a special form of semiotic activity is a complex process, 
consisting of many partial processes involved in meaning construction and 
symbol construction. Here, I cannot deal with mathematical semiotic activity 
in its entire complexity. I confine myself to the appropriation of mathematical 
symbols as means for mathematical symbolizing. I try to show how the 
construction of meaning can be conceived of with regard to those symbols. In this 
context, I furthermore give an account of the immediacy of symbol recognition 
as one important aspect of all complex cognitive functioning. However, it is 
not enough to master symbols and their meaning. It is equally important to be 
able to judge when a symbol can be appropriately used. Finally, in the 	
wake of a Vygotskian approach to education, I also have to take developmental 
conditions into account as a factor in the improvement of mathematical thinking 
and symbolizing. As a result of this analysis, some conclusions can be drawn 
about the improvement of mathematical symbolizing through developmental 
education. I then dwell briefly on the issue of mathematics-inducing practices 
based on my own research in early education. 

154  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
The Appropriation of Symbols and Their Meaning
A general theoretical description of the process of appropriation can be found 
in the theory of Gal’perin. Empirical investigations that he and his colleagues 
conducted show that the representation of an action and its result, in terms of 
symbols or verbal descriptions, is a very important stage in a learning process. 
This is not just a matter of coding the action. Above all, it provides a means for 
thinking of the action’s result without having to actually perform that action.
The following example may help illustrate what might be taking place. 
Imagine a situation involving a collection of objects. Someone asks, “How 
many things are there?” A 3-year-old child starts counting, “One-two-three-
four-five,” although the questioner (let’s say an adult) has already concluded 
that the number is five. (Maybe this is not the conclusion that the child will 
draw, so the adult will have to explain this to the child.) The adult continues 
by describing the situation as follows: “This is a lot of things and we would 
like to know how many of them are there. You counted ‘one-two-three-four-
five’ and we then found out that taken together” (the adult shows this “take-
together action” by making a circling gesture around the assortment), “there 
are five” (writes down the symbol or shows a card: 5). By doing so, the child 
and the adult have transformed the amorphous collection of objects into a 
quantity. The “take-together action” is important to show the cardinal aspect 
of the counting action.
In terms of my present view on symbol, I can now analyze the rather ordinary 
event just described as follows. Psychologically, we can assume that the 
presence of the collection of objects, and even the act of counting, were evident 
for both the child and the adult. Actually, this was the topic they were talking 
about. The statement of the result (it is five) was new to the situation. By saying 
(and showing the symbol) five, the situation and the action were predicated. In 
fact, this predicate summarized the entire event. By systematically repeating 
this (or similar) events, we can eventually obtain the situation that this symbol 
(5) represents the result of an abbreviated form of the counting action. This is, 
then, the real meaning of this symbol thus far. Insight into the action meanings 
of the number symbol is an important basis for the further development of 
arithmetical and mathematical activity. It is probably impossible without the 
help of language. Indeed, Hitch, Cundick, Haughey, Pugh, and Wright (1987) 
found some evidence for the involvement of inner speech in the development 
of counting. As a result of this symbolization of the counting action, numeral 
use can become a flexible routine in more complex activities.
Such a strategy of abbreviating the counting action into a symbolized result 
was successfully implemented in Davydov’s mathematics program for the 
early grades of a Russian primary school (see, among others, Davydov, 1957; 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  155
Leusina, 1977). It also formed the basis of Davydov’s strategy for the teaching 
of addition and subtraction (see a summary of this strategy in Gravemeijer, 
1994). Davydov and Andronov (1979) experimentally could confirm the 
relevance of this strategy. They demonstrated experimentally that both the 
“take-together action” and the corresponding word/symbol were essential for 
the development of the abbreviated action of counting and adding.
In a recent study, Salmina (1995) summarized her research on mathematics 
teaching in primary school. She also emphasized the importance of the 
introduction of adequate symbols to represent mathematical actions and their 
results. Moreover, she stressed the importance of semiotic exploratory activity 
of children as one of the foundations of mathematical thinking. Pupils should 
be given the opportunity to experiment with symbols and meanings, and invent 
and explore their own forms of symbolization (by way of schemes, drawing, and 
diagrams) before they are led to the generally accepted mathematical symbols.
The educational importance of such action-suggesting symbols, such as 
models and schemes, has been demonstrated in several investigations (e.g., 
Talyzina, 1995). As a particularly interesting example, I would like to comment 
on symbolic representations as invented by the Dutch group of mathematics 
educators from the Freudenthal Institute. Gravemeijer (1994) gave many 
examples of such symbolizations. One of them is the so-called “empty number 
line” (a number line on which students initially mark only the numbers they 
need for their calculations), such as the one in Fig. 5.4 for calculating 65−38. 
According to Gravemeijer (1994, pp. 125–126), initial studies, involving 
this “empty number line” as a symbolic instrument of mathematical problem 
solving, have been encouraging. This is what we would have expected, on 
the basis of our symbol theory, because this diagram is indeed suggestive 
with respect to what actions to perform. With the help of this number line, 
the intermediate steps between 38 and 65 can be filled out in a convenient 
way to find the difference. In addition, this model articulates the result of the 
action and, most importantly for the abbreviation of the “number-line-based 
actions,” allows the anticipation of future results of (intermediate) steps. The 
structure of the line can articulate some of the “footholds” of the steps to be 
carried out (marking 40 and 60). Thus, it supports the mental representation of 
the numbers to be added sub sequentially (2, 20, 5). As experimentally shown 
by Sabel’nikov (1982), the exhortation to accomplish anticipatory mental 
actions definitely promotes and supports the abbreviation of an action. This 
FIG. 5.4. An empty number line for calculating 65−38.

156  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
anticipation of future action results is interpretable as a “predication” of the 
next step in the sequence of mental actions. This is impossible without the use 
of symbols.
What makes this model even more important as a symbolic device was 
beautifully illustrated by Gravemeijer when he demonstrated how this line 
can also help to show different strategies for action in an attempt to find the 
difference between 65 and 38. Figure 5.5 shows an illustration taken from 
Gravemeijer (1994, p. 121) that needs no further comment: 
FIG. 5.5. Example of the empty number line from Gravemeijer (1994, p. 458). Reprinted 
with permission from the Journal for Research in Mathematics Education. Copyright © 
1994 by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. All rights reserved.

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  157
As most of our cognitive results can be achieved in more than one way 
(by different actions), a symbol seldom represents just one action. This is 
an important consequence of our symbol theory. The appropriation of 
mathematical symbols should always include the appropriation of the 
multiplicity of meanings. However, traditionally, mathematical symbols (like 
number symbols, or =, etc.) are often (and mistakenly) introduced as referring 
to just one exactly described meaning. This restricts the meaning of the symbol 
and leads to a variety of problems, as has often been shown with respect to 
the interpretation of number symbols. Children who have learned the meaning 
of such symbols on the basis of counting often only see the ordinal aspect 
of this symbol. Not unexpectedly, they often appear to have difficulty with 
recognizing the cardinal aspect of it. Starting with another (e.g., cardinality-
oriented) approach to number and its symbolization leads to another initial 
symbol content and to other problems as well (see Brissiaud, 1989). Recent 
discussions of the number concept show that there are different pathways to 
number (Bideau, Meljac, & Fischer, 1992). Mathematics education should 
clarify the multiplicity of meanings related to symbols by revealing the 
diversity of underpinning actions. Numerals should be demonstrated and 
explained to children as being symbols for a multiplicity of actions (such as 
for counting, adding, subtracting, etc.).
Returning to the empty number line, it is clear that this line, if used 
adequately by the teacher, can facilitate the discovery of the multiplicity 
of meaning, as well as support the abbreviation of addition and subtraction 
actions. In my opinion, this explains the success of this mediational means 
in the educational process. However, there is still one problem that I must 
address here. How do students know when this symbolic device is useful? 
How can they identify the situations in which this line is fruitfully applicable? 
I deal with such questions in the next subsection.
The Appropriateness of Symbols
It is not enough that pupils can use symbols and complex symbolic 
representations correctly. They should also be able to judge which symbols 
are relevant for a given problem situation. This brings us back to the kind of 
problems that we discussed earlier, referring to Bauersfeld (1995): namely, 
that most of the time it is not evident how to represent a situation in symbolic 
terms. Five birds sitting on a wire and three flying in the air can be represented 
as 5+3, x−3=5, or 5−3 (among others), depending on what exactly we want 
to know, so the goal and the meaning of the situation must be clear. The 
possible representations must be evaluated by considering the meaning of the 
situation and by the objective of the original query. And even then it will not 

158  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
be obvious whether different representations are false or inadequate. If we 
suppose that the flying birds are flying away and we want to know how many 
birds there were on the wire in the first place, the situation could be identified 
as a counting situation (leading to a counting action of all the birds in the 
picture) or a calculation situation (leading to such representations as x−3=5, 
or 5 +3). In order to find out, the children must be able to comprehend the 
situation (or the text describing the situation and the goal), as well as be able 
to compare and assess different representations and their anticipated results.
This activity of reflecting on the relationship between a symbolic 
representation and the situation it refers to is a form of semiotic activity that 
is basic to all (horizontal) mathematizing. It has been revealed frequently 
that pupils have problems with comprehending a written assignment of a 
mathematical task. In a recent study, Desforges and Bristow (1994) found that 
most primary school children had problems attributing significant meaning to 
a text intended to give a hint on how to mathematize the task appropriately. 
The authors’ conclusion that it might be better for children to read and discuss 
a mathematics question in the classroom is expressed by their statement, “It 
would seem that children need to be taught to read in mathematics” (Desforges 
& Bristow, 1994, p. 267).
Assessing the appropriateness of symbolic representations to the situation 
given is a result of a semiotic activity, in which different perspectives on the 
situation are symbolically represented and compared. As different perspectives 
are involved, the activity is essentially a social activity, even when someone 
is carrying out this activity mentally on his or her own (Kucinskij, 1983). The 
best way to learn this semiotic activity is through discursive means, examining 
and discussing different representations and their consequences for the 
achievement of the objective (cf. Dörfler, chap. 4, this volume; Sfard, chap. 
3, this volume). Symbolic representations and models not only schematically 
represent the (supposedly) basic structure of the situation, but also regulate 
the discussion by focusing the attention of the participants on relevant and 
shared topics (see, e.g., Rubtsov, 1991). Again, symbols with their predicating 
capacity are indispensable.
Indeed, the social nature of the development of mathematical thinking is now 
generally accepted in modern theories of mathematics education. However, 
these theories, at best, often only suggest strategies for the organization of 
the social environment. There is also often an implicit assumption concerning 
the prerequisite abilities of the pupils for accomplishing this sociosemiotic 
activity. I tend to question the tenability of this assumption. From an early 
age, young children are already engaged in sociosemiotic activities. If 
semiotic activity is a fundamental precondition for meaningful symbolizing 
(and mathematizing), the improvement of this activity, by a developmental 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  159
teaching approach that is introduced at an early age, might be an important 
contribution to the improvement of mathematics education. I will turn to this 
question in the next subsection.
The Development of Semiotic Activity
Because I interpret mathematical activity as a special form of semiotic activity, 
it is my assumption that mathematical activity emerges from semiotic activity 
in early-childhood play activities. Further, I assume that the development of 
mathematical thinking can be promoted and improved, therefore, by involving 
young children in sociosemiotic activities that are related to different kinds of 
symbolic representations involving reality or action patterns. The movement 
for improving mathematics education, then, may profit from a growing insight 
into the emergence of semiotic activity during children’s development.
One of the fundamental methodological starting points for Vygotsky is that 
the study of human behavior should be conceived of primarily as the study 
of the development of behavior. Following this line of reasoning, I would say 
that we can only obtain deep insight into (mathematical) semiotic activity 
by studying the development of semiotic activity. Consequently, attempts to 
improve education should not be limited to merely optimizing the current 
organization of activities, but should also attempt to improve the development 
of these activities. This is a basic tenet of any Vygotskian approach to 
education. It is the fundamental aim of developmental teaching.
According to Vygotsky, semiotic activity (or “sign-using activity,” as he 
calls it) is not a naturally given quality, but is a result of education. However, 
this “sign-using activity in children is neither simply invented nor passed 
down by adults” (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 46). Semiotic activity gradually evolves 
within the interaction between adults and children in the context of their shared 
sociocultural activities. As a developmentally new quality, this semiotic activity 
gains its psychological significance from its role in the overall functioning of 
the organism. By a series of transformations, the initially embedded semiotic 
actions eventually become differentiated from the original activity and can 
evolve into a more or less independent and conscious form of cognitive 
activity (cf. the Gravemeijer et al. discussion of the shift from model of to 
model for, chap. 7, this volume). This general description of the development 
of semiotic activity emerging from a more complex, miscellaneous practice is 
consistent with Werner’s orthogenetic principle in development (see Werner 
& Kaplan, 1963).
From an early moment in development, children are drawn into activities in 
which meaning making and the dealing with (variances of) meanings prevail. 
For young children, these semiotic actions are still implicit in their current 

160  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
play activities. Basically, these semiotic actions can be seen as the embryonic 
states (to use a Vygotskian metaphor) of the later (discipline-bound) semiotic 
activities. By participating in these culturally determined play activities (and 
imitating adult activities—in the Vygotskian sense!), children and adults create 
a zone of proximal development. In such activities, the semiotic actions can 
be made explicit and can be learned, if adequately dealt with by the adult.
Many studies have already tried to reveal some of the details of young 
children’s ways of dealing with meaning and representations. In their studies 
of the play-activities of young children (4 to 7 years old), Zaporožec and 
especially Venger have already shown that schematic representations 
(diagrams, drawings) can play a determining role in the child’s transition from 
manipulative and role play to the stage of explicit and conscious learning 
activity (in the sense of Davydov, 1988). The study of semiotic activity in 
young children is intrinsically related to the construction and use of such 
iconic representations by young children. More in-depth studies must reveal 
whether and how these children can deal with iconic representations as 
symbolic representations of a part of their reality, whether they are able to 
reflect at all on the relationship between a representation and its referents, 
how a transition to more abstract symbolic representations takes place, and 
so on. (The Gravemeijer et al. investigation of the evolution of classroom 
practices in an elementary school classroom addresses this issue in chap. 7, 
this volume.) Although we still have a long way to go to achieve a detailed and 
full-scale picture of this developmental process, a few interesting findings can 
already be reported concerning this issue. In my opinion, these findings are 
also of relevance for the improvement of children’s mathematical thinking.
In a long-term research program, Venger showed that iconic representations 
can indeed be inserted into play activities of young children during their regular 
activities at school (by schematizing stories, musical scores, making maps, 
and the like). Venger’s empirical data indicate that these children, indeed, 
profit from this help with schematizing, as could be concluded from their 
relatively easy transition to learning activity in a later stage of their school 
career (Venger, 1986).
Several investigators have studied the semiotic activity in young children by 
interviewing and observing them during specially constructed tasks, in which 
the children’s attention is drawn to the meaning of things and to the meaning of 
special signs referring to these things (among others, Glotova, 1990; Salmina, 
1988; Sapogova, 1992, 1993). Most of the children in these investigations 
could make a distinction between an object and its corresponding symbol, and 
had some insight into the relationship between modifications of the symbols 
and changes in the situation referred to. It was important for these children 
that the symbols used are suggestive (i.e., that the symbols provide perceptual 
cues indicating the kind of action to be performed—see Sapogova). 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  161
In her study with 6- and 7-year-old children, Sapogova (1993) was able to 
establish evidence for the relationship between the ability to deal with simple 
symbolic representations (including the ability to reflect on the symbol-
referent relationship) and the ability to experiment on a mental level with 
models and changes of models. (Sapogova called this mental experimenting 
a “thought experiment.”) This finding is especially significant for a theory on 
the development of mathematical thinking because mental experimenting is 
an important element in mathematizing activity.
In our own studies, we could confirm these results in classroom settings. 
In one of these studies (see van Oers, 1994), we observed small groups of 
children in a classroom play activity during which the teacher had encouraged 
them to carry out a representational activity (making a diagram of the railway 
track they had built). We found that reflection on the correspondence between 
the diagram and the railway track was possible for the children. Moreover, it 
turned out that predicating was a vital link in this process. By predicating parts 
of the drawing (“this is a bridge”), they could verify whether there was really 
a bridge at a particular location on the real track.
Several other conditions that fostered the appearance of semiotic activity 
were revealed as well. One is that for the promotion and maintenance of semiotic 
activity, the semiotic actions must be meaningful for the children (e.g., the 
actions must have a clear communicative function). Furthermore, there must 
be a semiotically more capable person (“a participating semiotician,” such 
as an adult or older child) involved in the children’s activity, who promotes 
semiotic actions when they are relevant and who is in charge of the semiotic 
actions that the children cannot perform (independently) yet (see van Oers, 
1995, 1997). In all of our studies, we emphasized the importance of play 
activity for the development of children of this age (following Elkonin’s 1972 
theory of development). Therefore, it was a permanently essential requirement 
for us that the attention for semiotic activity aspects did not disturb (and 
deteriorate) the quality of the play. Our research shows that focusing on the 
semiotic aspects of play does not disrupt the play activity if it can be integrated 
into the play in a functional way.
All of these studies converge, leading to the conclusion that although the 
children do not all perform equally well, semiotic activity is clearly within the 
range of these children’s abilities. This provides a solid basis for the further 
study of early semiotic activity. In another study (van Oers, 1996a), we wanted 
to find out what mathematics-like actions occur in the context of a role play, and 
we wanted to see if these actions could be dealt with from our psychosemiotic 
point of view. The teachers we worked with constructed a shoe shop in a 
corner of the school where the children (ages 4 to 8 years old and in groups 
varying in number from four to nine children) could play, pretending they 
were in a shoe shop. The teacher was always a participant in the play activity. 

162  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Most of the time she was a customer. But sometimes she was a shoe supplier, 
or sometimes she simply organized actions from a metalevel perspective 
(talking with children about their actions, asking questions, introducing 
problems, suggesting solutions, answering the children’s questions, etc.). One 
of the most important roles of the teacher, from the investigator’s point of 
view, was that of being the participating “semiotician.” Moreover, the teacher 
gave careful attention to the quality of the play (making sure that semiotic 
interventions did not disturb its quality).
Eight sessions of the play activities of groups of children were videotaped 
for later analysis. It turned out that even in the youngest groups (A, B, C, 
and D in Table 5.1) many mathematics-like actions occurred (or actions that 
TABLE 5.1 Number of Teaching Opportunities in Each Session

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  163
are generally considered to be important for the development of the number 
concept in children) without special encouragement from the teacher. The 
nature of the play situation was such that many of these actions occurred 
simultaneously. As a result, it was impossible for the teacher to deal with 
them on every occurrence. Sometimes the actions just happened. They could 
be registered at the time the tape was analyzed, but nothing could be done 
with them in the classroom setting. These events give some indication of the 
opportunities for teaching during a pretend (role) play activity. Table 5.1 gives 
a summary of the teaching opportunities in each session.
One event is described here in more detail. It shows how the teacher led 
the children into a semiotic activity requiring some kind of notation to be 
invented in order to refer to different categories of shoes. At first we see how 
children try to use perceptual indicators in their notational system to identify 
the shoes. Later, the children realize that these similarity notations are not 
very effective, so they start using additional symbols to indicate the shoes in 
the boxes. Throughout, a fundamental criterion for the children’s actions and 
decisions was the experienced adequacy of the symbolic representation with 
respect to the intended meaning.
The setting started as an activity of establishing the shoe shop together. 
The teacher only provided the basic materials and paraphernalia (real shoes, 
boxes, a counter, a mirror, shoe advertisements, money, a shoe-measuring 
mat, a block note, an abacus, etc.). When the children started their play 
activity, there was a jumbled pile of shoes and a pile of boxes. The children 
first put most of the shoes in the boxes and then put them on the shelves of 
a rack. The teacher started questioning. (Notice that the children and teacher 
are constantly attributing and testing predicates within the situation at hand).11 
The activity proceeded as follows (T=teacher; p=pupil):
(1)
T:
If someone wants to buy a shoe, and he wants a sandal, how can we quickly 
find the shoes we need?
(2)
P:
Take all the shoes, look for it.
(3)
T:
Well, that’s a lot of work, isn’t it?
11	 The translation of the protocol is somewhat stylized and abbreviated, in order to make it not too 
repetitious with respect to the children’s utterances. Some utterances of the children could be 
understood only from the situation and their accompanying gestures and such. Literal translation 
would result in incomprehensible utterances. I record these utterances here in a somewhat improved 
version, but, of course, I preserve their meaning. Moreover, some of the children’s remarks, 
interjections, half-completed or crumbled sentences, and so on, turn out to be intranslatable in 
a literal way, which would obscure their meaning. However, my adaptations of the children’s 
utterances may have slightly affected the original flavor of the children’s conversations.

164  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
[The pupils start looking in the boxes for a sandal.]
(4)
P:
Here it is!
(5)
T:
That’s not my size.
(6)
P:
No,…
(7)
T:
Do you really have to check all the boxes?
[In the meantime the children keep looking for the desired shoe by opening boxes and 
looking into them.]
(8)
T:
This is a problem. How do they do it in a real shoe shop? Are there boxes 
in the racks?
(9)
P:
No, they put the shoes on the shelves.
(10)
T:
Yes, that’s a good idea, then you can see immediately what kind of shoe it 
is.
[The children endorse the idea and start telling personal experiences.]
(11)
T:
Let’s do it.
In the first phase of this activity (lines 1–11), the pupils and teacher are 
collaboratively interpreting the situation. The process can be characterized 
as a continuous chain of predications. In line 1 the teacher adds a predicate 
that actually defines the activity as a buying situation. This situation definition 
immediately generates a problem of finding the right shoe. Notice that 
evaluating the situation as a problem (1 and 8) actually is a predication, 
as well, suggesting that it requires hard thinking. No easy solution will be 
found (contrary to what one might think!). In order to solve this problem, one 
pupil adds another predicate (2), suggesting a special category of actions to 
be performed. However, the teacher encourages the pupils to reflect on the 
adequacy of this approach and this way of predicating the situation (7). Another 
predicate develops when a pupil says, “Put the shoes on the shelves” (9).
[Children start placing shoes on top of their boxes on the shelves of the rack until one child 
discovers a problem.]
(12)
P:
But how do we do it with the boxes at the bottom, then?
(13)
T:
Yes, what are we going to do with the shoes at the bottom?
(14)
P:
You can never reach them….
(15)
T:
How about putting just one shoe on the shelf and leaving the other shoe in 
the box over here?
(16)
P:
Yes!
[The pupils immediately get to this work.]
(17)
T:
Now everyone who comes into our shop can see what shoes we have.
[The pupils are working while the teacher walks around.]

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  165
(18)
T:
Roy, which box matches with this shoe?
(19)
P:
This one.
(20)
T:
No, that one is gray. It is not the same.
[The pupil starts looking for the right shoe. The teacher continues asking children for shoes 
that go together. The pupils are very busy putting shoes on the shelves.]…
(21)
T:
Well, I think there is a problem here again. If someone wants to buy this shoe 
[teacher points to one shoe in the rack], how are we gonna find the other one?
[The pupils start opening the boxes and look for the matching shoe.]
(22)
T:
That’s a lot of work! Is there no other way we can find to do this more quickly, 
finding the right shoe? We must be sure that we find the right shoe easily.
(23)
P:
We must leave the tops off the boxes!
Having contrived the situation definition as a “matching-shoe-finding 
situation,” the children suggest different actions to solve this problem. In their 
matching activity, the children use means of showing or use verbal descriptions 
(e.g., 19, 20). Most of them are engaged in private actions, communicating the 
results to the teacher. The teacher again adds a new quality to the situation. 
She makes it a public situation (21: If someone wants to buy…[not just you 
or me]…). In doing so, she introduces certainty12 as a new (public) norm. 
She hereby predicates the situation as one that requires certainty. With these 
predications the teacher evokes new communicative and reflective actions. As 
a result the pupils begin making public symbols.
(24)
T:
Yes, but then it is difficult to make piles. Maybe it is a good idea to make 
something on the outside of the box so that you can recognize what’s 
inside?
(25)
Ps:
Yes, I know! [One pupil starts looking for a pencil or something to write 
with.] I know!
(26)
T:
Tell me what you are looking for.
(27)
P:
We’re gonna put letters on them.
(28)
T:
Which letters?
The pupil points to numbers on a number table.
(29)
T:
Maybe we can make a drawing of the shoe in the box, to be sure we recognize 
them.
[The pupils start making labels to attach to the boxes.]
(30)
T:
[Asking children] Which shoe are you drawing? And you?
12	 This requirement of certainty was assumed to be a basic condition for the beginning of mathematizing 
activity (see Freudenthal, 1991, p. 1). We had agreed with the teacher in advance that this quest 
for certainty would be introduced whenever possible and relevant. We assumed that this would 
encourage reflection on solutions and symbols (see lines 22, 34, 38). See van Oers (1996a).

166  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
[One pupil shows his label with a drawing of a shoe on it.]
(31)
P:
Look, miss, this is for that shoe.
(32)
T:
Ah, you also put letters on it? Which shoe does it match to?
[The pupil points to a shoe.]
(33)
T:
But that one is already being done by Roy! You better take another one.
[All pupils are very busy making labels for a long time (about 5 minutes).]
(34)
T:
Are you doing this shoe? [The teacher clearly shows that she is not certain 
about that.] What can we add to it? What kind of shoes do we have?
(35)
Ps:
Women’s shoes, boys’ shoes, girls’ shoes, gentlemen’s shoes,
[Roy shows a label he made.]
(36)
T:
What did you write on it?
(37)
P:
??
(38)
T:
You cannot read it yourself? Do you think that you can find again which shoe 
is in which box? [The teacher is again prompting for certainty!]
(39)
P:
Yes.
(40)
T:
Well, then stick it onto your box.
The pupils are inventing symbols to refer to individual pairs of shoes (31–32), 
but later also to refer to categories of shoes (35). Predicating the situation as 
one that requires certainty, the teacher prompts reflection on the adequacy of 
the symbols for reference to shoes (38). By introducing categories, the teacher 
suggests a new way of predicating the shoes. This is not just a shoe. It is a 
baby shoe, a father shoe, and so on.
[The pupils are very busy making labels. They show them to the teacher. Some children show 
the following labels:]
(41)
R D T I or R A I D
(42)
Ps:
What does it say?
(43)
T:
Raid. [Teacher reads: (raid)]
(44)
T:
Let’s make a pile over here. One shoe in the rack, the other one in a box over 
there.
[The children are busy making labels with letters on them. The letters are supposed to suggest 
useful predications!]
(45)
T:
Maybe not everyone is able to read it. You can also make a drawing of the 
shoes.
(46)
P:
What does it say, Miss? [Pupil shows her label with letters MAAR.]
(47)
T:
It says, “Maar.”
(48)
P:
[Repeats.] Mmmaar…these are mmmama-shoes.

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  167
(49)
T:
What a good idea of you to put an “M” on it for mama shoes! Do you think 
we could do that for all the mama shoes? Do you think you could do that, too? 
[To another pupil]
(50)
P:
No.
(51)
T:
Well, if you cannot write the letter, you may stamp it. [Teacher offers a box 
with stamping materials.]
[The pupils take over this idea immediately and start making labels with stamped letter 
combinations, such as I D P B P B or R I T m.]
(52)
T:
If you have papa shoes, which letter will you put on it, then?
(53)
Ps:
P.
[The pupils are involved in the activity of making labels with the correct letter on each. 
After a while they start to stamp whole words (mama, papa, baby) on the label, sometimes 
asking the teacher first how to write the word. The scene ends with making piles of marked 
boxes that are sorted according to the symbols of the different categories they already had 
distinguished as mama shoes, papa shoes, children shoes, and baby shoes. After setting up 
these piles, the children start playing shoe shop.]
At first we see that the pupils are making mixed labels, using shoe drawings 
with arbitrary letters (41). But this does not seem very satisfactory (41–45). 
Then some pupils start transforming their symbols in accordance with the 
meaning they want to convey: M for mama shoes (46–53). Now the pupils can 
start predicating their shoes in an abbreviated form, saying, this is an M. They 
could use this form in their communications, as well as in their reflections on 
the adequacy of the use of symbols for particular shoes. This reflection on 
symbols and meaning, changing symbols, and adapting meanings is a genuine 
form of what we call semiotic activity.
Still later, with encouragement from the teacher, the children start a 
counting activity, using the piles of shoes. The children start counting the 
number of boxes in each pile. They make a drawing of each pile, matching 
the number of boxes in the representation and in the piles. The children are 
constantly switching between reality and the representation, matching both to 
each other. Actually, the children are reinventing the histogram. The drawing 
of a pile symbolized for the children a way of ordering the collection of shoes, 
as to category and number.
In the preceding example, we demonstrated how young children (5 or or 
6 years old) were induced to participate in a mathematizing semiotic activity 
that was embedded in their pretend play. Here we clearly see how the shoe-
shop activity was a mathematics-producing practice, not only because of the 
mathematics-like actions that emerged, but, more importantly, because of the 
way this community (pupils and teacher) acted in the quest for certainty with 
respect to the meaning of the symbols.
One additional remark might be in order here to further clarify the situation. 

168  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
It is clear that the children needed some assistance in order to carry out this 
semiotic activity. In this situation, the teacher had an important role to play. 
In some of the other role-playing activities, some older children (7-year-olds) 
were also involved. They could give assistance to the younger children, when 
the latter encountered problems of counting, of classifying, or involving 
money, and so on. This way of casting initial forms of sociosemiotic activity 
acknowledges the distributed character of semiotic activity. Presumably, 
in due time each pupil can learn to be in charge of a larger part of the  
semiotic activity.
These kinds of classroom activities (leading to situated mathematics, for 
example) are typical in the school in which we conducted this investigation. 
The results of this approach in the long run still are to be assessed. Our 
investigations make clear that it is possible to involve young children in 
semiotic activity and help them improve their ability to reflect on sign-meaning 
relationships, and to improve the signs (symbols) in order to make them more 
adequate for the intended meaning.
In another case study with a girl almost 4 years old (see van Oers, 1997), I 
found that she wanted to convey her meanings to another person very eagerly 
as she made drawings. When the girl felt that her meaning was not being 
properly communicated by her drawing, she started to add verbal comments 
(eventually telling a whole story) to supplement her drawing. By doing so 
(thus actually reconstructing her initial complex symbol), she constructed a 
new symbol that she supposed would be more adequate with respect to her 
intentions. In my interpretation, this provides a first glimpse of the transition 
from iconic signs to more abstract symbols. The children in the shoe shop 
were actually doing the same. They reconstructed symbols according to their 
intentions, gradually shifting to more abstract symbolizations. 
I presume that the acquisition of some proficiency in such semiotic activity 
is a fertile basis for the meaningful appropriation of mathematical symbols 
and mathematizing. However, modern mathematics curricula seldom pay 
systematic attention to this aspect of the development of mathematical thinking. 
Certainly, some interesting beginnings have been made. Van den Brink (1989, 
1991) organized classroom activities in which young children (from the age 
of about 6) were encouraged to invent and reflect on notational systems for 
simple additions and subtractions. Moreover, these children were successfully 
taught to use nonconventional, but suggestive, symbols such as arrows for 
symbolizing arithmetical operations. However, most of these examples begin 
with somewhat older children and, without exception, they begin exclusively 
in the domain of mathematics, unnecessarily (and presumably to the children’s 
disadvantage) restricting semiotic activity to just one domain.

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  169
A STARTING POINT FOR A FUTURE  
DEVELOPMENTAL PEDAGOGY OF MATHEMATICS
One of the shortcomings of most modern constructivist analyses of 
mathematics education is that construction as a cognitive process is conceived 
of as a nondevelopmental mechanism. When we conceive of construction as 
a developing activity of meaning construction with the help of symbols (as 
I have done here), then we can recognize that the character of constructing, 
itself, changes in the course of the child’s development. The course of this 
development depends on the kind of practices and communicative interactions 
the child is brought into. Numeracy and (by all means) mathematical 
construction are produced by practices and sociocultural activities in which 
the child is involved (see also Walkerdine, 1988). An educationally relevant 
question then is as follows: Which kind of practices best produce the desired 
mathematical activities?
Obviously, one factor to consider is the educator or teacher. Quite to the point, 
Walkerdine contends that the “psychologist or teacher ‘sees’ mathematics or 
cognition in the activity in question. On the basis of this reading, the practice 
‘becomes’ cognition or mathematics” (Walkerdine, 1988, p. 97). Everyday 
classroom practices may differ to a great extent, depending on what is seen 
as mathematically significant in the pupils’ activity and, consequently, 
how the activity gives meaning to the pupils’ actions (see Forman, 1996). 
Different practices probably produce radically different results, in terms of the  
type of mathematics and symbol appropriation that result from the  
educational process.
A fundamental factor in such “mathematics-producing practices” is the 
adult’s attribution of mathematical meaning to the children’s actions (including 
utterances). It is probable that this attribution process is accomplished 
differently at different stages of development. During children’s play activity, 
it is important that the adult (teacher, mathematician) does not disrupt the 
activity as play (as this is the meaning that produces context for these young 
children). The adult must participate in the play and reveal how mathematizing 
can contribute to the play activity. By doing so, the significance of the 
mathematical actions may be revealed and examined.
By participating in the children’s activity, the adult can treat some of the 
children’s actions as “mathematical” and, consequently, try to introduce new 
means for performing these actions. Symbolizing, inventing notational systems, 
and exploring their meaning are obviously very important contributions to 
the children’s role-playing activity. Moreover, our observations show that 
children really appreciate the interventions of the adult in their play, certainly 

170  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
when the children acknowledge the adult’s contribution as an improvement of 
the reality of their imitation.
So initially, the adult’s perception and predication of the situation determine 
which kind of actions (and goal structure) are seen as relevant to the situation 
and, by the same token, how mathematics becomes constituted into the situation 
(for illustrative analyses of the development of numeracy in social practices, 
see Saxe, Gearhart, & Guberman, 1984; see also Gravemeijer et al., chap. 7, 
this volume). Our observations in the shoe-shop play are clear illustrations 
of this process. Our research gives us reason to believe that the iconic form 
of the symbols and a narrative extension of these initial symbolizations (by 
verbal comments, which are eventually abbreviated into shorthand symbols) 
are fundamental elements in this process. At least these are the ingredients for 
meaningful semiotic activity during young children’s play.
In the later stage of learning activity (from the age of about 7 years old), the 
roles are reversed. The teacher’s/mathematician’s role is now to put play into 
mathematics (rather than to put mathematics into play, as was the case in the 
previous stage). The pupils are now enticed to participate in a mathematical 
activity. When children are involved in mathematical activity, the way the 
teachers deal with the actions and solutions of the pupil is equally important. 
Of course, the mathematization then takes place cooperatively among adult, 
child, and peers, with everyone pooling and probing their interpretations 
of the situation, the task, the actions to be performed, and the symbols to 
be used. Similarly, the process of symbolizing and the appropriation of 
mathematical symbols are strongly dependent on how adults and children 
define that situation, as well as on the nature of the activity and the symbols 
used. The children are now “imitating” the mathematician’s real activities of 
organizing, symbolizing, experimenting with mental models, and so on. This 
is what realistic mathematics education is about (see, e.g., Wood, Cobb, & 
Yackel, 1995).
In our tentative attempts to reveal some of the characteristics of semiotic 
activity and the process of symbolizing, we observed that there is usually an 
element of uncertainty with respect to the appropriateness of symbols and how 
they predicate the situation. Even young children try to reduce this uncertainty 
by refining their symbols and adding verbal comments (text). I assume that 
this is not different from what happens in later mathematizing, in which the 
negotiation of meaning is also embodied in symbol use and in explaining the 
meaning of symbols by constructing new (strings of) symbols.
The analysis of symbolizing in a mathematical context has led us to the 
realization that symbol use is intrinsically related to meaning, negotiation 
of meaning, and communication. Obviously, all communication requires a 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  171
context (background) containing the implicit rules that make the meanings 
and symbols comprehensible (Hundeide, 1985), and that is the basis for the 
emergence of intersubjectivity (Rommetveit, 1985). Clearly, mathematical 
processes, such as learning and symbolizing, also need such a background. 
Symbolizing is embedded in mathematical practices that were invented 
before we (individually) came into existence and that thus preceded our 
personal lives. However, such preexisting mathematical practices are not 
abstract ideal entities but are human activities embodied in the actions and 
meanings of actual people who try to give voice to the cultural history, with 
the help of symbols and meanings, that they themselves have reconstructed 
from their legacy.
We still have a long way to go to gain a thorough insight into all of the details 
and complexities of this process. Until now, research for the improvement 
of mathematics education has primarily dealt only with negotiation of 
mathematical meanings and the automatization of mathematical operations. 
Indeed, there is no reason for playing down the educational significance of 
this research (see, e.g., Gravemeijer, 1994). However, these approaches often 
can be enhanced with the help of psychological know-how about learning 
and development, and by elaboration of the concept of constructivity and 
meaning making from a developmental perspective. Further improvement 
of mathematical education can be achieved by adopting a genetic approach, 
viewing mathematizing as a developing form of semiosis, rooted in early 
(non-mathematical) semiotic activity in young children’s play.
A future theory of mathematical education should be conceived of as a 
developmental pedagogy for the appropriation of mathematizing, discursively 
creating a continuous series of practices that can produce realistic mathematical 
activities, in which pupils and teachers can cooperatively develop autonomy 
and responsibility for their own mathematical actions and symbolizations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I am grateful to Paul Cobb, Koeno Gravemeijer, Anna Sfard, Erna Yackel, 
Rodney McNair and Sietske Roegholt for their thoughtful and stimulating 
comments on the first draft of this article.
REFERENCES
Bauersfeld, H. (1995). Structuring of the structures: Development and function of 
mathematizing as a social practice. In L.P.Steffe & J.Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in 
education (pp. 137–158). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

172  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Bideau, J., Meljac, C, & Fischer, J.-P. (Eds.). (1992). Pathways to number: Children’s 
developing numerical abilities. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bishop, A.J. (1988). Mathematical enculturation: A cultural perspective on mathematics 
education. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.
Brissiaud, R. (1989). Comments les enfants apprennent a calculer. Au-delà de Piaget et de la 
théorie des ensembles. Paris: Retz.
Cassirer, E. (1955). The philosophy of symbolic forms. Vol. 1: Language. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press.
Cobb, P., Wood, T., & Yackel, E. (1993). Discourse, mathematical thinking, and classroom 
practice. In E.A.Forman, N.Minick, & C.A.Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning: 
Sociocultural dynamics in children’s development (pp. 91–120). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Cobb, P., Yackel, E., & Wood, T. (1992). A constructivist alternative to the representational 
view of mind in mathematics education. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 
23, 2–33.
Cole, M. (1990). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline? In J.J.Berman (Ed.), 
Nebraska Symposium on Motivation: Vol. 37. Cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 280–335). 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Cole, M. (1995). Culture and cognitive development: From cross-cultural research to creating 
systems for cultural mediation. Culture & Psychology, 1, 25–55.
Cole, M., & Engeström, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In 
G.Salomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations 
(pp. 1–47). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Davis, P.J., & Hersh, R. (1981). The mathematical experience. Boston: Birkhäuser.
Davydov, V.V. (1957). Obrazovanie nacal’nogo ponjatija o kolicestvo u detej [The formation 
of a basic concept of quantity in children]. Voprosy Psichologii, 2, 82–96.
Davydov, V.V. (1988). Problems of developmental teaching. Soviet Education, 30(8, 9, 10).
Davydov, V.V., & Andronov, V.P. (1979). Psichologičeskie uslovija proizchoždenija 
ideal’nich dejstvij [Psychological preconditions for the formation of ideal actions]. 
Voprosy Psichologii, 5, 40–54.
Desforges, C., & Bristow, S. (1994). Reading to learn mathematics: A report on primary 
school children’s constructive activity in learning from text. In J.E.H.van Luit (Ed.), 
Research on learning and instruction of mathematics in kindergarten and primary school 
(pp. 251–268). Doetinchem, The Netherlands: Graviant.
Elkonin, D.B. (1972). Toward the problem of stages in the mental development of the child. 
Soviet Psychology, 10, 225–251.
Ernest, P. (1991). The philosophy of mathematics education: Studies in mathematics 
education. London: Falmer Press.
Forman, E. (1996). Learning mathematics as participation in classroom practice: Implications 
of sociocultural theory for educational reform. In P.Nesher, L.P.Steffe, P.Cobb, G. 
Goldin, & B.Greer (Eds.), Theories of mathematical learning (pp. 115–131). Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Forman, E., Minick, N., & Stone, C.A. (Eds.). (1993). Contexts for learning: Sociocultural 
dynamics in children’s development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Freudenthal, H.F. (1973). Mathematics as an educational task. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
D. Reidel.
Freudenthal, H.F. (1979). Structuur der wiskunde en wiskundige structuren; Een 

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  173
onderwijskundige analyse [The structure of mathematics and mathematical structures; an 
educational analysis]. Pedagogische Studiën, 56, 51–61.
Freudenthal, H.F. (1991). Revising mathematics education (China Lectures). Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.
Gal’perin, P.J. (1969). Stages in the development of mental acts. In M.Cole & I.Maltzman 
(Eds.), A handbook of contemporary Soviet psychology (pp. 249–273). New York: Basic 
Books.
Gal’perin, P.J. (1976). Vvedenie v psichologiju [Introduction to psychology]. Moscow: Izd-
vo Moskovskogo Universiteta.
Gelman, R., & Gallistel, C.R. (1978). The child’s understanding of number. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Glotova, G.A. (1990). Celovek i znak. Semiotiko-psichologičeskie aspekty ontogeneza 
čeloveka [Man and sign. Semiotic-psychological aspects of human ontogenesis]. 
Sverdlovsk, Russia: Izd-vo Ural’skogo Universiteta.
Gravemeijer, K. (1992). Mathematics as mathematizing. Paper for the Seventh International 
Conference on Mathematics Education (ICME-7). Quebec, Canada.
Gravemeijer, K.P.E. (1994). Developing realistic mathematics education. Utrecht, The 
Netherlands: CD-β Press.
Haenen, J. (1996). Piotr Gal’perin: Psychologist in Vygotsky’s footsteps. Commack, NY: 
Nova Science Publishers.
Hitch, G., Cundick, J., Haughey, M., Pugh, R., & Wright, H. (1987). Aspects of counting 
in children’s arithmetic. In J.A Sloboda & D.Rogers (Eds.), Cognitive processes in 
mathematics (pp. 26–42). New York: Oxford University Press.
Hoffer, A. (1983). Van Hiele-based research. In R.Lesh & M.Landau (Eds.), Acquisition of 
mathematics concepts and processes (pp. 205–227). New York: Academic Press.
Hörmann, H. (1978). Meinen und Verstehen: Grundzüge einer psychologischen Semantik 
[To mean, to understand: Outlines of psychological semantics]. Frankfurt, Germany: 
Suhrkamp.
Howson, G., Keitel, C., & Kilpatrick, J. (1981). Curriculum development in mathematics. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hughes, M. (1986). Children and number: Difficulties in learning mathematics. Oxford, UK: 
Blackwell.
Hundeide, K. (1985). The tacit background of children’s judgments. In J.V.Wertsch (Ed.), 
Culture, communication, and cognition (pp. 306–323). New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Kaput, J.J. (1987). Towards a theory of symbol use in mathematics. In C.Janvier (Ed.), 
Problems of representation in the teaching and learning of mathematics (pp. 159–195). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1995). Beyond modularity: A developmental perspective on cognitive 
science (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kucinskij, G.M. (1983). Dialog i myšlenie [Dialogue and thinking]. Minsk, Belarus: Izd-vo 
BGU.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Leech, G. (1981). Semantics: The study of meaning (2nd ed.). Harmondsworth, UK: 
Penguin.

174  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Leont’ev, A.N. (1975). Dejatel’nost’, soznanie, ličnost’ [Activity, consciousness, personality]. 
Moscow: Politizdat.
Leusina, A. (1977). Wiskunde in de kleuterschool en de betekenis ervan voor de cognitieve 
ontwikkeling [Mathematics in early education and its relevance for cognitive development]. 
In C.F.van Parreren & J.M.C.Nelissen (Eds.), Rekenen (pp. 101–116). Groningen, The 
Netherlands: Wolters-Noordhoff. Translated from: Doškol’noe Vospitanie, nr. 9, 1969.
Malone, J.A., & Taylor, P.C.S. (Eds.). (1993). Constructivist interpretations of teaching and 
learning mathematics. Perth, Australia: Curtin University.
Markovà, I., & Foppa, K. (Eds.). (1990). The dynamics of dialogue. New York: Harvester 
Wheatsheaf.
Miles, T.R., & Miles, E. (Eds.). (1992). Dyslexia and mathematics. London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul.
Moll, L. (Ed.). (1990). Vygotsky and education: Instructional implications and applications 
of sociohistorical psychology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Otte, M. (Ed.). (1974). Mathematiker über die Mathematik [Mathematicians about 
mathematics]. Berlin: Springer.
Parmentier, R.J. (1987). Signs’ place in media res: Peirce’s concept of semiotic mediation. 
In E.Mertz & R.J.Parmentier (Eds.), Semiotic mediation. Sociocultural and psychological 
perspectives (pp. 23–48). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Pimm, D. (1987). Speaking mathematically. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Rommetveit, R. (1985). Language acquisition as increasing linguistic structuring of 
experience and symbolic behavior control. In J.V.Wertsch (Ed.), Culture, communication, 
and cognition (pp. 183–205). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Rubtsov, V.V. (1991). Learning in children: Organization and development of cooperative 
actions. New York: Nova Science Publishers.
Sabel’nikov, V.K. (1982). Formirovanie bystroj myšli. Psichologičeskie mechanizmy 
“neposredstvennogo” ponimanija ob-jektov [The formation of fast thinking. Psychological 
mechanisms of “immediate” recognition of objects]. Mektep, Turkey: Alma-Ata.
Salmina, N.G. (1988). Znak i simvol v obučenii [Sign and symbol in education]. Moscow: 
Izd-vo Moskovskogo Universiteta.
Salmina, N.G. (1995). Obučenie matematike v načal’noj škole [Mathematics education 
in primary school]. In N.F.Talyzina (Ed.), Formirovanie priëmov matematičeskogo 
myšlenija (pp. 29–68). Moscow: Izd-vo Moskovskogo Universiteta.
Salomon, G. (Ed.). (1993). Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational 
considerations. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sapogova, E.E. (1992). Modelirovanie kak etap razvitija znakovo-simvoličeskoj dejatel’nosti 
doškol’nikov [Model formation as a stage in the development of the symbolic activity of 
young children]. Voprosy psichologii, 5, 26–30.
Sapogova, E.E. (1993). Rebënok i znak [Child and sign]. Tula, Russia: Priokskoe kniznoe 
izd-vo.
Saxe, G., Gearhart, M., & Guberman, S. (1984). The social organization of early number 
development. In B.Rogoff & J.Wertsch (Eds.), Children learning in the zone of proximal 
development (pp. 19–30). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sfard, A. (1991). On the dual nature of mathematical conceptions: Reflections on processes 
and objects as different sides of the same coin. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 22, 
1–36.
Sfard, A. (1992). Operational origins of mathematical objects and the quandary of reification—

Appropriation of Mathematical Symbols  175
The case of function. In G.Harel & E.Dubinsky (Eds.), The concept of function: Aspects 
of epistemology and pedagogy (MAA-Notes, Vol. 25, pp. 59–84). Washington, DC: 
Mathematical Association of America.
Sfard, A. (1994). Reification as the birth of metaphor. For the Learning of Mathematics, 
14(1), 44–55.
Sfard, A., & Linchevski, L. (1994). The gains and pitfalls of reification—The case of algebra. 
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 26, 191–228.
Shotter, J. (1995). In dialogue: Social constructionism and radical constructivism. In L.P. 
Steffe & J.Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in education (pp. 41–56). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Sinha, C. (1988). Language and representation: A socio-naturalistic approach to human 
development. New York: Harvester/Wheatsheaf.
Steffe, L.P. (1992). Learning stages in the construction of the number sequence. In J.Bideau, 
C.Meljac, & J.-P.Fischer (Eds.), Pathways to number: Children’s developing numerical 
abilities (pp. 83–98). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Struik, D.J. (1990). Geschiedenis van de wiskunde [History of mathematics], Utrecht, The 
Netherlands: Spectrum.
Talyzina, N.F. (Ed.). (1995). Formirovanie priëmov matematičeskogo myšlenija [The 
formation of methods of mathematical thinking]. Moscow: Izd-vo Moskovskogo 
Universiteta.
van den Brink, J. (1989). Realistisch rekenonderwijs aan jonge kinderen [Realistic arithmetic 
instruction for young children]. Groningen/Utrecht, The Netherlands: OW&OC.
van den Brink, J. (1991). Didactic constructivism. In E.von Glasersfeld (Ed.), Radical 
constructivism in mathematics education (pp. 195–227). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
Kluwer.
van der Veer, R., & Valsiner, J. (1991). Understanding Vygotsky: A quest for synthesis. 
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
van Hiele, P.M. (1985). Structure and insight: A theory of mathematics education. Orlando, 
FL: Academic Press,
van Oers, B. (1990). The development of mathematical thinking in school: A comparison of 
the action-psychological and information-processing approaches. International Journal 
of Educational Research, 14, 51–66. Special Issue: B.Greer & L.Verschaffel (Eds.), 
Mathematics education as a proving-ground for information-processing theories,
van Oers, B. (1994). Semiotic activity of young children in play: The construction and use 
of schematic representations. European Early Childhood Education Research Journal, 
2(1), 19–34.
van Oers, B. (1995, June). Teaching opportunities in play. Paper for the Third International 
Conference on Activity Theory and Social Practice, Moscow,
van Oers, B. (1996a). Are you sure? Stimulating mathematical thinking during young 
children’s play. European Early Childhood Education Research Journal, 4(1), 71–88.
van Oers, B. (1996b). Learning mathematics as a meaningful activity. In P.Nesher, L.P. 
Steffe, P.Cobb, G.Goldin, & B.Greer (Eds.), Theories of mathematical learning (pp. 
91–113). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
van Oers, B. (1996c). The dynamics of school learning. In J.Valsiner & G.-H.Voss (Eds.), 
The structure of learning (pp. 205–228). New York: Ablex.
van Oers, B. (1997). On the narrative nature of young children’s iconic representations: Some 
evidence and implications. International Journal of Early Years Education, 5, 237–245.

176  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
van Parreren, C.F. (1954). A viewpoint in theory and experimentation on human learning and 
thinking. Acta Psychologica, 10, 351–380.
van Parreren, C.F. (1971). Psychologie van het leren. Deel I. [Psychology of learning. Vol. 
I]. Deventer, The Netherlands: Van Loghum Slaterus.
van Parreren, C.F. (1978). A building block model of cognitive learning. In A.M.Lesgold, 
J.W.Pellegrino, S.D.Fokkema, & R.Glaser (Eds.), Cognitive psychology and instruction 
(pp. 3–12). New York: Plenum Press.
Venger, L.A. (Ed.). (1986). Razvitie poznavatel’nich sposobnostej v processe doškol’nogo 
vospitanija [The development of cognitive abilities in early childhood education]. 
Moscow: Pedagogika.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1982). Myšlenie i reč [Thinking and speech]. In Sobranie Socinenij II. 
(Translation see Vygotsky, 1987). Moscow: Pedagogika. (Original work published in 
1934)
Vygotsky, L.S. (1987). Thinking and speech. New York: Plenum Press. (Translation of 
Vygotsky, 1982).
Vygotsky, L.S. (1991). Pedagogičeskaja psichologija [Pedagogical psychology]. Moscow: 
Pedagogika.
Walkerdine, V. (1988). The mastery of reason: Cognitive development and the production of 
rationality. London: Routledge.
Werner, H., & Kaplan, B. (1963). Symbol formation: An organismic-developmental approach 
to language and the expression of thought. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Wertsch, J.V. (1985). Vygotsky and the social formation of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Wertsch, J.V., & Toma, C. (1995). Discourse and learning in the classroom. In L.P.Steffe 
& J.Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in education (pp. 159–175). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Wood, T., Cobb, P., & Yackel, E. (1995). Reflections on learning and teaching mathematics 
in elementary school. In L.P.Steffe & J.Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in education (pp. 
401–423). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

177
6 
“If You Look at It the Other Way…”: An 
Exploration Into the Nature of Symbolizing
Ricardo Nemirovsky  
Stephen Monk  
TERC, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Symbolize: Unite elements or substances of similar qualities.
(The Barnhart Dictionary of Etymology, 1988)
Imagine a child playing with other children and using a stick as a horse: The 
child jumps around his friends, goes places, feeds the horse, claims that the 
horse is lazy, and so forth. In creating this make-believe play, the child is 
making present a horse, a horse that otherwise would be absent in this child’s 
life. Furthermore, he is not only making the horse present but doing things 
with it. We say that the horse is ready at hand to convey this idea that the horse 
is made to participate in the child’s playful activities. This scene exemplifies 
what we call symbolizing: a creation of a space in which the absent is made 
present and ready at hand.
It is important to understand that when we talk about “making the absent 
present” we refer to the ways in which symbolizing is experienced by the 
symbol user. This is not a statement about a realistic correspondence between 
an entity that is objectively absent and that is brought to actual presence (e.g., 
an actual horse that lives somewhere and that the child brings to his play). 
Instead, it is an attempt to describe the symbolizer’s imaginative sense that 
something is metaphorically present around him, and his immersion into 
the pretend that what is experienced as presently there can be changed by 
handling symbols.
Conceiving of symbolizing as the creation of a space in which the absent is 
made present and ready at hand elicits at least two major issues: (a) the nature 

178  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
of such a space, and (b) the ways in which the absent is made present and 
ready at hand. Regarding the first one, we have characterized this space—a 
space populated by symbols and metaphoric presence—elsewhere1 as a lived-
in space. The expression lived-in highlights the notion that this is not a space 
in which being near or far is distance to be measured by a ruler, but instead by 
what the symbolizer experiences as being close or far away. For instance, it 
is similar to someone, talking on the phone with a close friend who is oceans 
away, feeling that her friend is closer to her than her next-door neighbor.2 We 
can talk about her experience by saying that in her lived-in space her friend is 
closer to her than her next door neighbor.
Through an analysis of a conversation with Lin, a 10-year-old girl, we 
explore the two issues just raised: the nature of the space in which the absent 
is made present, and the ways in which such a process occurs. We focus this 
exploration on two notions: fusion and trail-making. By using the previously 
mentioned scene of children’s play, we exemplify fusion as a child’s acting, 
talking, and gesturing without distinguishing between the horse and the stick: 
that is, treating the stick as if it were a horse even though he knows that it is 
not. Trail-making, on the other hand, relates to how the play is enacted by 
the child without following a script. In other words, the play is an ongoing 
creation in which actions and words, rather than stemming from a planned 
sequence, emerge from the activity itself in open-ended ways.
The section entitled “Fusion” proposes that fusion is a central quality of 
symbol-use. Throughout the chapter, the relationship between symbolizing and 
children’s play is a guiding connection. Children’s play is not simply an analogy 
to symbol use. It has long been recognized that our play as children is a crucial 
activity through which each one of us has practiced and learned to symbolize 
(Piaget, 1962; Slade & Wolf, 1994; Winnicott, 1971/1992). Fusion and trail-
making are qualities common to both symbol use and children’s play.
Our overall perspective in undertaking this exploration can be described by 
the following statement from Werner and Kaplan (1963):
Our thesis is thus opposed to the widespread view which treats symbolic vehicles 
and referents as two fully formed entities that are externally linked to each other 
through continuous pairing and reinforcement. If one accepts this latter view, one 
implicitly denies to symbolization (including language) any creative role in the 
1	
For an analysis of what we mean by “lived-in space,” see Nemirovsky, Tierney, and  
Wright (1998).
2	
Heidegger (1927/1962) elaborated on how the experience of something being more or less far 
expresses one’s interest in “making the remoteness of that something disappear, in bringing it 
close” (p. 139): “When, for instance, a man wears a pair of spectacles which are so close to him 
distantially that they are ‘sitting on his nose,’ they are environmentally more remote to him than 
the picture on the opposite wall” (p. 141).

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  179
cognitive organization of experience and thought: symbolic vehicles then become 
reduced to a complex system of markers, useful merely for routine indication of 
referents and for communication about preformed judgments and concepts, (p. 15)
Through the analysis of a conversation between Lin and our colleague, Tracey 
Wright, we attempt to elucidate the nature of symbol-use as an ongoing, joint 
and open-ended creation of meaning and communication.
THE STUDY
The interview with Lin that we discuss in this chapter was part of a teaching 
experiment conducted in a fifth-grade class at an elementary school in East 
Boston. This teaching experiment was also a pilot trial for a curricular unit 
subsequently published (Tierney, Nemirovsky, & Noble, 1995). The unit 
includes 4 weeks of classroom activities focused on the interplay between 
ways of moving, graphs and number tables. All the classroom sessions were 
videotaped. When the students worked in groups, we videotaped a small team 
of four students, of which Lin was part. In addition, we conducted individual 
interviews with the members of this subgroup. The researchers and teachers 
involved regularly discussed the design of the activities as they were tried out 
in the classroom.3
This chapter is an analysis of three selected episodes, the first of which 
took place in the classroom:
Episode 1: Does This Description Match This Graph? (Duration: 1 min.)
The other two episodes are successive segments from Tracey Wright’s 
individual interview with Lin which took place a week later:
Episode 2: Two Bears Racing and Graph 3 Revisited. (Duration: 4 min.)
Episode 3: Making a Step Graph of the Speeds. (Duration: 2 min.)
Episode 2 is the main excerpt for the section on fusion, and Episode 3 is 
the center of our discussion on trail-making. Each one of these two sections 
includes an introduction that presents the main ideas to the reader, the annotated 
transcript, and a final discussion. We end the chapter with a short essay about 
how these views on the nature of symbolizing relate to curricular design.
3	
The participants in this process were the following members of the “Math of Change” group at 
TERC: David Carraher, Steve Monk, Ricardo Nemirovsky, Tracy Noble, Analucia Schliemann, 
Cornelia Tierney, Paul Wagoner, and Tracey Wright; and two fifth-grade teachers from the Boston 
area: Barbara Fox and Jo Ann Pepicelli.

180  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
FUSION
Fusion: The figurative sense of a blending together of different things. 
(The Barnhart Dictionary of Etymology, 1988)
The most common assertion about how one makes sense of symbols is that one 
must understand what they stand for. Symbols are often defined as something 
that stand for something other than themselves. This definition implies that 
grasping a symbol as a symbol necessarily involves recognizing the thing 
“other than itself” being shown by it. So, for example, one shows that one 
grasps the meaning of the word milk by being able to refer to instances 
of that white liquid that is “the other” that the word milk stands for. This 
characterization of symbol use seems to be naturally connected to the view 
that thinking is a matter of associations, such as associations between the 
word milk and instances or qualities of milk.4 According to this view, the 
meaning of a symbol emerges through the associative process.
Associationism has an ancient history in philosophy and psychology dating 
back to Aristotle. It has evolved into many sophisticated ideas and studies. 
The questions raised by associationism are far from trivial. How is it, for 
example, that a baby learns to recognize what the word milk stands for? Or 
what rules of association may enable someone to understand that rabbit refers 
to an animal and not to the white color of its skin?
If grasping a symbol as a symbol is based on the associations elicited by 
the symbolizer, how can we describe the experience of not seeing a symbol 
as a symbol? The question is not about correct or incorrect associations. For 
someone who is learning English, for instance, the word rabbit could be 
mistakenly associated with mice, but still, she is taking the word rabbit as a 
symbol, because she perceives it as standing for something other than itself. 
Neither is the question about what is meaningful or meaningless. If one does 
not know Hebrew, say, and is shown a text in Hebrew, one still could see it 
as a symbol (e.g., of the person who is showing us the text or as a title of a 
book) even though its linguistic meaning is unavailable to us. The experience 
of not seeing a symbol as a symbol has been studied by anthropologists and 
psychologists in its many forms: fetishism, animism, magic, and so on. In 
many of these practices, the symbol does not stand for something other than 
itself, but it is that “something other.” A clay reproduction of an animal, for 
4	
Suppose that someone asks someone else, while pointing at a photo, “Who is this person?” and the 
response is, “He is George.” One might be inclined to say that such a response invites the inquirer 
to associate the image on the photo with the word “George” and the word “George” with a known 
person whose name is George, so that, as a result, the inquirer is likely to recognize such a person 
in the photo.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  181
example, can be a fetish if it is treated as being the animal itself rather than as 
standing for the animal.
We maintain that associationism and fetishism are two opposed and extreme 
ways to use symbols that do not capture the vast majority of situations in which 
people symbolize. Our intent in introducing the notion of fusion is to open up a 
broad horizon of possibilities—in between associations and fetishes—which, 
we believe, encompasses most actual experiences of symbol use.
Consider, for example, two girls playing with stuffed animals. They act 
as if the stuffed animals were their pets looking for something to eat. When 
the girls talk, they adopt the voices their pets are supposed to have and 
enact their imaginary pets’ shifting moods, such as being upset or excited. 
In this common scenario, the girls bring in many types of associations, 
such as the stuffed animals standing for pets, a pillow representing food, or 
a stick representing a tree. However, saying that the girls are establishing 
associations is an extremely impoverished and incomplete description of 
their play. Suppose that all the girls do is establish associations, so that they 
say to each other “This is a bear,” “This is my cat,” and so forth. In such 
cases, we (and the girls) would not say that they are playing at all. They 
are playing only when they act, talk, and gesture as if the stuffed animals 
were their pets looking for food. In the course of their play, they might elicit 
changing uses, often without “announcing” them (e.g., acting as if a pillow 
were food may be enough to use it as such). However, the essence of their 
play is the ongoing creation of an experiential and active world that has its 
own coherence and evolution, and in which the pillow is actively used as 
food, the stuffed animals are actively made to behave as their pets, and so 
forth. At the same time it is important to acknowledge that, as they play, the 
girls are aware that the stuffed animals are not real pets: That is, they know 
that if they get bored or have something else to do, they won’t have to take 
care of their imaginary pets. This awareness is what makes their activity play; 
for the girls, the stuffed animals are not fetishes.
We see the girls’ play as a symbolizing activity: that is, as a creation of 
a lived-in space in which the absent is made present and ready at hand. The 
absent, in this case, is all those things that the girls act on and talk about 
in spite of their not being there: their pets, food, the tree, and so forth. The 
absent is not only made present (e.g., they may comment on how delicious 
the food-pillow is), but is ready at hand—that is, they can do things with it. 
(For example, they may decide to hide the food-pillow from their pets.) As 
we have pointed out before, associationism, with its emphasis on absence 
(the girls talk about imaginary pets that are not presently with them), and 
fetishism, with its emphasis on presence (the stuffed animals are their pets 

182  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
which are presently there), are two extreme forms of using symbols that do 
not capture the nature of the girls’ symbolizing.
How can we understand this illusory presence? We characterize the girls’ 
play with the stuffed animals as a fusion experience. We define fusion as 
acting, talking, and gesturing without distinguishing between symbols and 
referents (e.g., acting as if the pillow were food), while being aware of the 
illusion (e.g., knowing that the pillow is not really food). Fusion experiences 
are pervasive in everyday life and can adopt infinite forms: from discussing 
directions on a map to commenting on a photograph; from drawing a face to 
gesturing the shape of an object. As such, it is impossible to make progress 
in our understanding of fusion unless we focus on concrete examples. This 
section is about qualities of fusion experiences with mathematical symbols as 
they emerge from an interview episode with Lin. Specifically, we elaborate 
on five aspects of fusion.
First, it is well known that ambiguity is inherent in talk because whatever 
is being said is always susceptible to many interpretations and meanings. 
A conversation involves the management of ambiguity, not its elimination; 
in many circumstances (e.g., telling jokes) ambiguity is actually pursued. 
We give examples of how, in the context of a fusion experience, ambiguity 
can be purposeful and expressive. Second, a common characterization of 
how symbols become understood describes them as being transparent to the 
symbol user. We illustrate why the metaphor of fusion is more appropriate 
to symbolizing than the metaphor of transparency. Third, we explore the 
linguistic expressions of fusion. To this end, our commentaries focus on 
Lin’s and Tracey’s ambivalent uses of the words here and path. Fourth, 
we clarify how the experience of fusion is different and unrelated to the 
experience of confusion. And fifth, our analysis reveals how fusion involves 
taking perspectives. Fusion is introduced as an adoption of points of view 
toward the visual qualities of the graph and the current and past events 
portrayed by the graph, as well as toward the actions and intentions of the 
symbolizers themselves.
Episode 1: Does This Description Match This Graph?
This vignette took place in the classroom. It was a short and inconclusive 
interaction between Lin and Tracey. Lin discussed the graph that, a week 
later, would become the central theme during the interview. 
Lin called Tracey and showed her the activity sheet of Fig. 6.1 on which 
each student was writing three “motion stories” corresponding to the graphs. 
Lin referred to Graph 3.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  183
FIG. 6.1. Graphs shown on student “motion stories” activity sheet.
(1)
Lin:
Tracey, do you think this description [written on her student sheet] 
matches this [Graph 3]?
(2)
Tracey:
You said [reading Lin’s description] “it goes faster and faster and then it 
goes the same speed again, but it goes down instead of up.” OK, so the line 
goes down instead of up. [Lin: Yeah.] Um hmm, and the trip you said goes 
faster and faster [section c]. [Lin: Um hm.] And, then, when the line goes 
down [e], you said the trip is going the same speed. As what?
(3)
Lin:
As, the other side [c]?
(4)
Tracey:
As the other side, OK. And so, so this speed, for the trip the person was 
going faster and faster [c]. And then what happened here [d]? What did he 
[a person they are imagining took the trip] do?
(5)
Lin:
He turned around.
(6)
Tracey:
And then how was he traveling here [top of e]?
(7)
Lin:
He was s-l-ow.
(8)
Tracey:
And then [bottom of e]?
(9)
Lin:
And then fast, only in reverse.
(10)
Tracey:
He went in reverse—
Lin’s interpretation of Graph 3 did not resurface during the subsequent 
group and classroom discussion. Tracey and Lin were both left with questions 
about it—questions that would become an essential part of their conversation 
a week later.
Episode 2: Two Bears Racing and Graph 3 Revisited
This 4-min episode took place a week after Episode 1, during an individual 
interview after the daily math class. Earlier in the interview, Lin and Tracey 
had been using a plastic bear to show ways of moving at different speeds. 
They moved the plastic bear up and down along a vertical scale by pulling a 

184  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
string tied to the bear. Their activity consisted of creating number tables and 
graphs to show how to move the bear. They had taken turns creating these 
representations individually, so that the other one would interpret the graph 
and try to reproduce the original motion. During Episode 2, Tracey and Lin 
talked about graphs of two “bears” racing.
The graph used by Tracey and Lin in this episode are all position versus 
time graphs. The hand-drawn graph changed during the episode. At the end, it 
looked like Fig. 6.2. The grid that appears behind the graph represents 1-inch 
squares printed on the paper. That paper was used only because it was the only 
paper readily available. Except for tracing the axis, Tracey drew the graphs 
without paying attention to the grid. For clarity of exposition, we distinguish, 
within the graph, three “lines” that we label A, B, and C, as in Fig. 6.3.
Through the classroom activities, a convention had become established in 
which position versus time graphs were represented as line graphs and step 
size versus time graphs were represented as bar graphs. Given that lines A, B, 
and C were line graphs, Lin and Tracey treated them as the type of graphs that 
depict positions over time in spite of the fact that the axes were not labeled.
Annotated Transcript. See Fig. 6.4.
(16)
Tracey:
[Finishes drawing Graph 4.] So, let’s say these are two bears. And, they’re 
having a race. And this [Graph 4] is the position of the bears. Which bear 
do you think would win the race?
(17)
Lin:
That one [pointing to top of A].
FIG. 6.2. Final version of Tracey and Lin’s position versus time graph for Episode 2.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  185
Tracey began to describe Graph 4 by saying, “Let’s say these are two 
bears.” In saying so, she made present their previous use of a plastic bear 
in which they pulled a string tied to the bear to move it up and down along a 
vertical scale. There was only one actual plastic bear used previously, but a 
strength of making present the absent is that two bears are as easy to conjure 
up as one. Note Tracey’s use of the word “these”: “these” indicated two 
lines on paper as well as two bears having a race. The word “these” referred 
simultaneously to both the lines and the plastic bears. This referential 
ambiguity was important to Tracey’s expression. In other words, she meant 
that “these” are simultaneously both. Some readers may perceive in her 
statement a lack of precision and definition. They may even prescribe that 
she “should” have said something like “these two curves represent two bears 
having a race along two parallel lines.”
In our view this typical criticism misses the point, which is that ambiguity is 
an inherent aspect of talk and gesture, and that in the course of a conversation 
ambiguity is sometimes an impediment and, at other times, a meaningful 
and purposeful contribution. Ambiguity is intrinsic to what conversants 
deal with in making sense of each other. Had Lin responded with a question 
FIG. 6.3. Labels for the three “lines” on Tracey and Lin’s position versus time graph for 
Episode 2.

186  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
such as “where are they racing?” it is likely that Tracey would have made 
clarifying remarks specifying the racing track. Two comments are pertinent 
here: (a) One does not participate in a conversation dispelling every possible 
unintended interpretation, which would make the talk unbearably redundant 
and scholarly (cf. Sfard, chap. 3, this volume). Rather, a conversant is always 
implicitly assessing what is relevant to dispel, given what she knows about 
and expects from the other conversants. (b) Often ambiguity is intended. 
For example, with the words, “say these are two bears” (16), Tracey was 
not only inviting Lin to associate Graph 4 with their previous activities with 
the plastic bear, but inviting her to make them actively present in their talk 
and gestures about Graph 4. Lin’s immediate response suggests intended 
ambiguity in conversation when she says “that one” because the “one” 
might have been simultaneously line A, the bear shown by it, and the location 
of the end of the race. 
(18)
Tracey:
How come?
(19)
Lin:
’Cause it’s curved like that [tracing A]. It goes faster and faster [pointing 
to top of A]. And this one [B] is kind of curved like, right here [bottom 
of B], then it goes kind of straight [tracing top of B] so it kind of goes 
slower and slower at first, then it goes steadily. This one’s [A] going to 
go faster and faster, and this one’s [A] in the lead so far, so I think this 
one [A] will win.
FIG. 6.4. Graph 4.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  187
Note Lin’s use of “it” (19) in her analysis of Graph 4: “Then it goes kind 
of straight [tracing top of B] so it kind of goes slower and slower at first, then 
it goes steadily.” Going straight and going steadily are both qualities of “it.” 
“It” fuses curvature of the graph line with speed of the bear’s motion. Lin’s 
utterances in (19) suggest why we think that the nature of symbolizing is better 
grasped by the metaphor of fusion than by the metaphor of transparency. 
Often it is stated that to understand a symbolic expression is to perceive it 
as “transparent,” as if its meaning becomes available by “seeing through” 
it (cf. Cobb, chap. 2, this volume; Sfard, chap. 3, this volume). However, the 
metaphor of transparency implies that symbols are meaningful when they 
come to be invisible. Imagine a wall that becomes transparent so that we 
can see through it; to say that a wall becomes transparent is equivalent, at 
least from the visual point of view, to saying that the wall disappears, that it 
becomes nonexistent to us. This is the implication that we find misleading in 
the metaphor of transparency. It is not the case that Graph 4 was transparent 
to Lin in (19). The visual attributes of Graph 4 remained in the foreground of 
her interpretation. What she expressed was a fusion of the curved aspects of 
Graph 4, with the speed aspects of the bears’ motion, by creating an “it” that 
“goes” more or less straight as well as more or less fast.5
Another clarification that emerges to us from (19) is that saying that Lin 
fused curvature and speed in the “it” that “goes” does not imply that she 
became unable to distinguish the curvature of the graph from the speed of 
the imaginary bear. Moreover, we can trace her account along separate 
descriptions of curvature and speed in Fig. 6.5.
In sum, this commentary intends to suggest through the example that fusion 
is neither a transparent “seeing through” that is blind to the specific traits of 
the graph, nor a “mixing up” that loses sight of how a graph can be different 
from two bears racing; instead, it is a way of using the graph in which 
curvature makes present the bears’ speed, so that an “it” is created, gestured, 
and talked about that “goes” at once according to certain curvatures and to 
certain speeds. Some readers may argue that this is an overinterpretation of 
Lin’s utterances and that each one of her “its” refers to different entities, 
sometimes to the graph and some other times to the imaginary bear.
5	
It is important to note that by the metaphors of transparency and fusion we refer to the common 
experiences with transparency and fusion: A glass window, by virtue of being transparent, enables 
us to see what we might see in the absence of the glass. On the other hand, some authors use the 
term transparency in more elaborate ways. Wenger (1990) defined transparency as a relational 
balance between visibility and invisibility, so that a graph might open up certain “fields” of 
visibility and invisibility, which could encompass simultaneous attributes of the graph and the 
represented situation. This particular use of the word transparency seems to be more akin to what 
we mean by fusion.

188  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
FIG. 6.5. Tracey and Lin’s account along the descriptions of curvature and speed.
To make the case that the latter is a superficial interpretation, our following 
two commentaries illustrate how Tracey’s and Lin’s linguistic and gestural 
expressions reveal more than words with separate references. The examples 
focus on their use of the words “here” and “path.”
(20)
Tracey:
Huhn. So, he’s in the lead here [top of A]? [Lin: Uh hunh.] How about 
like, here [a point just beyond the start]? Who was in the lead, here [a 
point just beyond the start]?
(21)
Lin:
Here—this one [B] was in the lead.
(22)
Tracey:
How come?
(23)
Lin:
’Cause this [B] is above [A]. ’Cause it’s closer to the finish [tracing an 
imaginary horizontal line at the top].
Let us explore the significance of Tracey’s and Lin’s talk and gestures 
regarding the word “here.” Lin had already used “here” in (19) when she 
said, “is kind of curved like, right here.” We have described the notion of 
symbolizing as a creation of a lived-in space. We think of the “here” in (19), 
(20), and (21) as a discursive articulation of the lived-in space that Tracey 
and Lin were creating. The “here” was simultaneously a certain place on the 
paper, a certain time in the story of the bears’ race, and a certain closeness to 
the “finish.” In a general sense this is not different from the phenomenon of 
someone pointing at a map and saying “I live here,” when it is obvious to the 
conversants that this person does not live on a piece of paper; the “here” that 
is pointed out is at once on the map and on a certain street that is far from the 
map. On the other hand, the lived-in space that Tracey and Lin invoke in the 
“here” of Graph 4 is not map-like because it includes a temporal sequence 
before-after, suggested by the past tense of Tracey’s “Who was in the lead.” 
It is structured around the idea of being in the lead, and a path on Graph 4 
was not viewed by them as a path on the race track. The graphical space that 
Lin talked about in (23) is marked by the special significance of the “finish,” 
a region that she demarcated at the top of the graph so that being in the lead 
was an index of relative closeness to that critical place.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  189
(24)
Tracey:
Un hun. So, if it’s more above then he’s more in the lead? [Lin: Yeah. 
Hmmm.] And how about here [point where A and B cross in Graph 4]? 
What happened when they were cross?
(25)
Lin:
They cross each other’s paths, so at this part it’s kind of like a tie, ’cause 
it’s together.
(26)
Tracey:
Un hun. So, here’s [crossing point] where they were tied in their race? 
[Lin: Yeah.] Hmm. [Pause.]
Lin completed the description of the crossing point on Graph 4 by saying, 
“They cross each other’s path.” In the ordinary usage of English, one would 
not describe the situation of two racers being next to one another as “crossing 
each other’s path.” Some readers will take this utterance as an indication that 
Lin saw Graph 4 as a depiction of the trajectory of the race, so that the bears’ 
paths crossed each other at that point. It is always possible to isolate something 
said by a student and, out of context, diagnose this utterance as a known 
mistake. This is a frequent approach among those identifying misconceptions. 
However, by paying attention to the context of this conversation, we can see 
that this is not an appropriate interpretation. Tracey and Lin had always 
played out motion along a linear path, which was also true of all the previous 
classroom activities. In addition, if Graph 4 had portrayed the bears’ trajectory 
for Lin, it would not make sense that being “above is being more in the lead,” 
that going straight is going steady, or that the curvature indicates going faster 
or slower. According to our interpretation, “They cross each other’s path” 
is a meaningful expression of fusion. The word “path” means literally a way 
along which one can walk or move. But, as we all know, in figurative speech 
“path” is used in a much broader sense. It is appropriate to talk about the 
paths of the bears on the graph without implying that the bears actually follow 
them as a physical trajectory. Not only that, if we recognize Lin’s experience 
of fusion between Graph 4 and the bears’ race, it is a natural and expressive 
use of the word “path.” Tracey, in response, found it natural to interpret Lin’s 
“crossing each other’s path” as meaning that at that time the bears were at 
the same place in their race. 
(26)
Tracey:
Um, the other day we were looking at graphs in the classroom and one of 
them went like this [tracing A] and then it went kind of like this [drawing 
C]… Remember that? [Lin: Yeah.] What—could you tell the story of this 
bear’s trip [tracing A and C]? [Refer to Fig. 6.6.]
(27)
Lin:
[Tracing A.] It went faster and faster to here [top of A] and then it went 
also faster and faster [tracing C].
(28)
Tracey:
So, he got faster and faster as he was [tracing C] coming back to the 
beginning of the race [the starting position]? [Lin: Yeah.] And um, how 
can you tell? What are you looking at?

190  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
(29)
Lin:
’Cause, the curve [C]. ’Cause if you look at it like this way [shows with 
hands, rotated 90 degrees clockwise], it’s kind of like slow here [top of C]. 
[Tracey: Yep.] And then it goes like straight up, almost straight up right 
here [bottom of C]. ’Cause it goes fast right here [bottom of C].
(30)
Tracey:
So, so straight, so straight means fast [pointing to bottom of C]?
Lin interpreted the lines A and C as each telling the same speed story: that 
is, going faster and faster, but in different directions. In (28), Tracey rephrased 
Lin’s account, while wondering about how Lin had come to this conclusion: 
“What are you looking at?” This question suggests how fusion does not 
prevent Tracey and Lin from being able to separate signifier and signified 
whenever they feel that they are not understanding each other. Tracey’s 
question shifted their talk from signified (e.g., “It went faster and faster” in 
(27)) to signifier (“’Cause, the curve” in (29)), marking an “associationist” 
turn in their conversation) that is, associationist in the sense that they tried 
to make explicit which visual feature of the graph was associated with which 
motion of the bear. It may be that these associationist turns are typical of 
conversational moments in which the participants feel that they are failing to 
communicate and need to step back.6 Lin explained how she was looking at 
Graph 5. The following figure shows how Lin “turned” her view of Graph 5 
to look at the line C, so that it was perceived by her as a speeding up similar 
to line A (Fig. 6.7).
FIG. 6.6. Graph 5.
6	
We thank Paul Cobb for his observation about this “associationist” turn and its relationship to 
conversational breakdowns.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  191
FIG. 6.7. Figure showing how Lin turned Graph 5 to look at line C.
The interpretation of Graph 5 that Lin described in (29) and in the 
subsequent dialogue was not understood by Tracey, nor by any of us on the 
research team, at the time of the interview. Only after reviewing the videotape 
a number of times did we come to the interpretation given here. We can 
recall the group meeting in which we reacted with surprise when one of the 
participants said, “Oh, she seems to be looking at the graph sideways!” It 
might be appropriate to say that at the time of the interview, Tracey and 
her colleagues felt “confused” by Lin’s reiteration of the idea that she had 
expressed in the classroom a week earlier. This observation creates an 
opportunity for us to clarify the term “confusion” and how it differs from our 
notion of fusion.
Confusion is used in common speech in at least two senses: as an 
experience and as a diagnosis. As an experience, confusion indicates a state 
of not-knowing. It can range from a very well-defined set of alternatives that 
one is incapable of deciding on (e.g., “I’m confused—I don’t know whether 
I want to do this or that.”), to a state of total bewilderment in which nothing 
seems to be in place (e.g., “I’m confused. What is he talking about?”). As a 
diagnosis, on the other hand, it implies that someone is taking one thing for 
another or not distinguishing between two different things. This diagnosis 
type of confusion can itself occur as taking one thing for another (e.g., “She 
confused me with my brother”), or as a disordered mixing up (e.g., “He 
confuses birds. He cannot tell a parrot from a sparrow—they are all the same 
to him.”). Note that confusion as an experience and confusion as a diagnosis 

192  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
can be independent. For example, someone who confuses one person with 
another may not feel confused at all. For her this person is the other one, so 
she does not perceive herself to be in a state of confusion. We are interested in 
commenting on confusion not as a diagnosis but as an experience.7
In reaction to (29), Tracey probably experienced confusion. Why was Lin 
seeing both lines A and C as speeding up? The issue that we want to address 
in this commentary is that Tracey’s “confusion” is unrelated to the ongoing 
“fusion” between Graph 4 and the racing bears. Their fusion experience was 
such that for Lin line C made present a bear going faster and faster, whereas 
for Tracey it made present a bear going slower and slower. On the other hand, 
not knowing why Lin was seeing line C as a speeding up was likely to elicit a 
feeling of confusion in Tracey. Distinguishing between fusion and confusion 
is similar to distinguishing between color and shape: They are qualitatively 
different from each other. Any color can go with any shape and vice versa. In 
other words, fusion neither prevents nor stimulates confusion.
(30)
Tracey:
So, so straight, so straight means fast [pointing to bottom of C]?
(31)
Lin:
No, it was str-, if straight up [bottom of C] is fast, [Tracey: Uh him.] 
really fast, it… And if it’s like, a straight line like this [the portion of C to 
the right (almost horizontal)] it’s kind of like stopped, [Tracey: Right.] if 
you look at it this way [normally]… But if you look at it the other way…
[rotated 90 degrees].
(32)
Tracey:
So, like, up to here [marking off a section near the bottom of C] he’s like 
stopped?
(33)
Lin:
Umm, ’cause [tracing C]. Yeah, but, if you turn around [rotated 
counterclockwise 90 degrees], like, the way that the bear’s facing, I guess 
this [bottom of C] would go fast [Tracey: Yep.] and then right here [top of 
C] is kind of stopped, maybe.
(34)
Tracey:
This [top point] is kind of like stopped?
(35)
Lin:
Like it goes sl-, slow at first [tracing C from top down] and then it goes 
faster and faster.
(36)
Tracey:
Uh huh. Because he’s turning around?
(37)
Lin:
Yeah.
(38)
Tracey:
What if we were to make a step graph of the speeds here [tracing A and 
C] of this bear’s trip?
7	
We think that, in education, confusion as a diagnosis is vastly overused and is often used as a way 
to express and deny one’s own experience of confusion. For example, it is common that, in feeling 
confused about what a student is saying, one tends to sanction that “the student is confused” and 
so immediately ceases to listen to the student and proceeds to articulate an explanation, striving to 
have the student eliminate “her” confusion.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  193
In (31), Lin distinguished between two different ways of looking at the 
graph. On the one hand, one can look at the graph in “this way,” which meant 
taking the upper part of the graphical space as being upward and the lower 
part as being downward. But one can also “look at it the other way”—that is, 
look at the graph sideways (rotate counterclockwise 90 degrees) so that the 
portion of the shaded area that was to the right of C is now above C and the 
portion that was to the left of C is now below C. Adopting the former point 
of view, the bottom of C indicates “stopping,” whereas from the latter one it 
indicates “going fast.” Note how, by adopting the rotated view, Lin pointed 
out the horizontal bottom of C as she said, “if straight up is fast.” Responding 
to Tracey’s puzzlement, Lin explained her ideas further in (33). There, in 
order to illustrate why the bottom piece of C can be seen as fast, Lin added 
a new element: “Yeah, but if you turn around [rotated counterclockwise 90 
degrees], like, the way that the bear’s facing, I guess this [bottom of C] would 
go fast…”
The main theme that we want to highlight in this commentary is that a 
fusion experience involves the adoption of a point of view. Fusion involves 
perspective-taking. To clarify this idea, it may help to recall the analogy with 
children’s play. When, for example, a child is pretending that a stuffed animal 
is a dog, she is not making present “any” dog. Rather, it is a dog with a specific 
character, distinct needs, and typical ways of being. It may be, for instance, a 
dog who gets upsets very easily, whose name is Marty, and who barks loudly. 
One way to describe this acting with the stuffed animal according to a certain 
pattern of individual proclivities is to say that the child is adopting certain 
points of view that form what could be called “Marty’s perspective.” From 
this perspective, it could be, for instance, that chasing cats is entertaining, 
candies are unpalatable, and water is scary. This is a perspective that, during 
the play, she is ascribing to both the dog and herself.
Similarly, Lin’s use of the graph involved adopting points of view that she 
ascribed to both the bear and herself. In order to account for the sharp peak 
in the graph, Lin found it natural to adopt different points of view for looking 
at the sections “before” and “after” the peak. The peak signaled for her a 
“turning around” of the bear and of herself. At the peak, the bear turned 
around (from going up to going down), and she turned sideways (from up 
toward the top of the page to up toward the right of the page). This does not 
reflect a “confusion” between the bear’s motion and the graph, but reflects 
Lin’s taking up an organized (although mistaken) point of view about the 
graphical nature of the peak and how it reflected the motion of the bear 
(Fig. 6.8). 

194  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
FIG. 6.8. Lin’s account of the peak in the graph.
What is being fused encompasses the visual qualities of the graph (e.g., the 
peak), the motion of the bear (e.g., its turn around), and oneself (e.g., “but 
if you look at it the other way.”). We hope that this commentary will help to 
make clear that a fusion experience is not a disorganized “mixup” of symbols 
and referents. A fusion experience, far from constituting a disordered mixture 
of ideas, comes to be integrated into an overall perspective from which a 
symbolizer, such as Lin or Tracey, talks, gestures, and interprets according to 
patterns that encompass the symbolizer and the symbolized.
Discussion
We use the term symbol when we wish to emphasize a fusion or 
indissolubility of form and meaning. (Werner & Kaplan, 1963, p. 15)
Through our commentaries, we have stressed five points. First, ambiguity 
is an inherent quality of human interaction that can serve purposefully and 
expressively in fusion experiences. In these contexts, ambiguity is not merely 
vagueness, but is a creative effort to highlight connectedness and to build 
a whole. Second, fusion is a more appropriate metaphor for the nature of 
symbolizing than the metaphor of transparency. Although transparency 
suggests the image of “seeing through” symbols, fusion is closer to the idea of 
“seeing in” symbols. It makes the symbolizer’s activity of merging symbolic 

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  195
expressions, which are full of idiosyncrasies, more salient with a horizon of 
experiential events, stories, and intentions. Third, fusion experiences can be 
recognized in the qualities of linguistic expression. We exemplified this point 
by examining Lin’s and Tracey’s uses of the words here and path. Instead 
of diagnosing “false” mistakes, our analysis helped us notice the fruitful 
ambiguity of their utterances. Fourth, fusion and confusion are different 
kinds of experiences. They do not necessarily evoke each other. Fusion is 
rooted in make-believe imagination. It is unrelated to feeling disoriented or 
to being unable to distinguish symbols and referents. And fifth, fusion is an 
engagement with the hereand-now of the symbolizer that involves adopting 
points of view: In other words, the symbol user points out events and qualities 
of her lived-in space and, in this way, takes up a distinct perspective—a 
perspective ambiguously ascribed to herself and to the tools at hand.
In order to broaden this discussion, we next explore the connections 
between and points of departure of our previous comments and those of 
Werner and Kaplan in their Symbol Formation (1963), which is a classic 
work in the literature on the psychology of symbol-use (cf. van Oers, chap. 5, 
this volume). In tracing the process of symbol formation, Werner and Kaplan 
often used terms such as fusion, indissolubility, unity of meaning and form, 
and others. They use these terms in two different ways. The first one, which 
is akin to the use we make in our analysis, appears when they focus on the 
general nature of symbol-use:
Consider the non-linguistic gestural expressions of such attitudes as doubt, 
puzzlement, contempt, or haughtiness…. Since such gestures are characteristically 
culture-bound and yet, attain the appearance of “naturalness,” one can see in such 
instances how material patterns (for example, body movements) become infused 
with meaning—infused to the extent that one cannot separate the pattern and its 
meaning: the gesture is the indissoluble unity of form and content, (p. 20)
Although this former statement is cognate to our analysis, their second sense 
of fusion, tied to their developmental analysis, is not. From a developmental 
perspective, Werner and Kaplan used fusion to describe the child’s inability 
to differentiate between symbols and referents, things and actions, objects 
and contexts of use, and so on. Fusion and partial fusion are, in this case, used 
as markers of primitive stages of development. This second sense of fusion 
is not like ours. We want to stress this point because, through our experience 
of discussing the idea of fusion, we have noticed a very strong tendency to 
interpret fusion as a childish attitude or as an ephemeral approach of beginners, 
which expertise dissipates. Elsewhere (Nemirovsky, Tierney, & Wright, 
1998), we argued that the difference between children and adult experts is 

196  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
not the presence or absence of fusion but that which they bring to their fusion 
experiences. An expert mathematician may, for instance, recognize unusual 
geometric properties in shapes described by a set of complex equations, in the 
same way that a musician may “hear” a piece of music described by a musical 
score. Fusion is not the province of children and “concrete” materials. Rather, 
it is a pervasive quality of symbol use found at any age level.
Werner and Kaplan’s developmental theory seems to express the perception 
of fusion as an immature phase—a view that we have found to be widespread. 
They identify progress in development through the growth of a function that 
they call distancing, through which the child becomes able to differentiate, 
thus allowing fusion to disappear. For instance:
Still another example concerns the vocable door applied by Hilde [an 11-month-old 
girl] to such diverse things as the food tray of her high-chair, cork, and door. This 
vocabulary clearly referred to “obstacle standing in her way of getting out of, or at, 
something.”… These illustrations suggest that the early names do not depict stable, 
circumscribed things but rather refer to global events in which things and the agent’s 
(the speaker’s) action upon things are intimately fused, (p. 118)
According to Werner and Kaplan, this type of fusion or lack of differentiation 
can also happen among adults who regress to “a more primitive” (p. 398) 
type of representation (e.g., a verbal description that is represented with line 
drawings).8 In our opinion, even if one accepts the idea that very young children 
cannot distinguish between symbols, referents, and contexts of use, this does 
not indicate a general developmental trend, from fusion to distancing, that can 
be used to say that a symbolic expression is primitive or advanced.
Returning to our analysis in this chapter, there is nothing primitive in what 
Lin and Tracey are talking about and acting on. Our developmental distinction 
between children and adults as symbol users (between Lin and Tracey, say) 
is not marked by the presence or absence of fusion, but by what they, as 
individuals, bring to their fusion experiences. When needed, Lin and Tracey 
did distinguish between symbols and referents. Moreover, we conceive 
of fusion not as an inability to separate symbols and referents, but as an 
engagement into the world of make-believe that animates symbols and makes 
them meaningful.
8	
Werner and Kaplan extended this argument to the analysis of cultures by arguing that the 
languages of illiterate peoples tend to be more fused and undifferentiated than those of civilized 
cultures. They ended the book with the following quote from Meillet: “The trend [in the advance 
of civilization] has been to eliminate the concrete and expressive categories of values and to assign 
to the abstract categories a role of ever-increasing importance” (p. 503).

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  197
TRAIL-MAKING
Caminante, no hay camino 
Se hace camino al andar 
Caminante, no hay camino 
Solo estelas en la mar9
—Antonio Machado
In this section we explore ways of using symbols in dealing with unfamiliar 
situations. We examine another episode in the conversation between Lin and 
Tracey (which took place immediately following the one described in the 
previous section), characterizing the qualitative aspects of their activity as 
they, in dealing with the motion graphs, made present and ready at hand their 
past experiences and expectations. We begin with an analogy that will help 
us to introduce a notion central to our analysis: the distinction between path-
following and trail-making. Consider the familiar problem of finding a way to 
go to a previously unknown place. We describe two contrasting scenarios.
First, suppose that a friend is explaining to you how to get to her house. It 
is likely that she will describe a sequence of “directions.” Each direction is 
an instruction for what to do whenever an action has to take place (“get off 
at so-and-so subway station”), or whenever several options become available 
(“when you get to the fork, take the right path”). Your friend will set the 
directions in relation to the type of landmarks that will be noticeable and to 
places that will offer several possible alternatives. Getting to the friend’s 
house by following such a sequence of directions exemplifies what we call 
path-following.
Path-following is an extremely common and useful way to go to an unknown 
place. It is efficient, requires minimal or no familiarity with the area, and, if 
the directions are “good,” provides us with a high degree of success in arriving 
at the place. Path-following has drawbacks as well. Unless we practice the 
directions frequently, we are likely to forget them, or when something goes 
wrong (e.g., we miss a certain landmark or the road is closed), the chances of 
getting lost are considerable. A more profound deficiency of path-following 
is that, by centering our attention onto the “next” marker or turning point, we 
tend to ignore the broader surroundings and disregard the overall significance 
and idiosyncrasy of each place we go through. Path-following tends to elicit a 
sort of tunnel vision focused on detecting the next landmark or looking at the 
odometer to detect how far we have traveled. 
9	
Walker, there is no path/The path is made by walking/Walker, there is no path/ Only wakes on  
the sea.

198  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Let us now imagine a different scenario. You are hiking through the woods 
in order to reach the peak of a hill. At times you encounter trails that you walk 
along because they go in the “right” direction, but at other times you have to 
make trails. Even though you cannot see the peak that you are approaching, it 
is critical to preserve a general sense of its location. Some tools can be crucial 
for maintaining this orientation (e.g., a compass, a map, or a procedure to 
derive the orientation from the position of the sun). The terrain or the vegetation 
may force you to temporarily detour in a direction different from the one in 
which you want to go. You keep in mind how long you have been hiking and 
the proximity of nightfall. You try to interpret your surroundings, searching 
for clues about where you are, for foreseeable obstacles, or for surprising 
butterflies. This type of going to a place is what we call trail-making. Trail-
making can be difficult, time-consuming, and sometimes risky. On the other 
hand, it enables us to go to places that otherwise are unreachable and it makes 
possible a close understanding of the area we go through.
We have described these two contrasting scenarios as a means to clarify 
ideas. Path-following and trail-making are experiential modes of going to 
an unfamiliar place. As such, it is not difficult to imagine conditions under 
which each of them can take place either in the city or in the wild. Their 
different qualities are what matter to us: In path-following, one is centered 
in the execution of a sequence of directions, whereas in trailmaking, one is 
constantly assessing how to deal with the local circumstances in order to 
get closer to the final destination. Further, trail-making has an irreducible 
component of improvisation in response to unexpected situations. In sum, 
in path-following, our interaction with the area we pass through tends to be 
restricted to scanning the next landmark, whereas in trail-making there is an 
openness as to what is going to happen next and how to cope with it.
We use the analogy of going places to illustrate different approaches 
to solving mathematical problems. Solving mathematical problems in the 
manner of path-following is all too common in school mathematics. It 
amounts to following a sequence of “directions” that are often described 
in textbooks (e.g., the sequence of steps to solve a pair of linear equations). 
In mathematical problem solving, as in the world of going places, path-
following can be an efficient and helpful means to arrive at a “correct” 
solution. But it has also similar drawbacks in both situations as well: It is 
easy to forget, there is the likelihood of getting “lost” when the expected 
marks do not show up, and there is a narrow “tunnel vision” that overlooks 
alternative possibilities and approaches. We need to stress that, although 
the distinction between trail-making and path-following is useful to clarify 
ideas, in the actual experience of going to a new place, or in solving a new 

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  199
mathematical problem, we often combine both or shift from one to the other 
in response to shifting needs and purposes.
Thus far, we have a sense of what trail-making is like in terms of going 
to unfamiliar places. What would it be in the areas of mathematical problem 
solving and symbolizing? This is the question that we explore in this section.
At the end of Episode 2, Tracey suggested in (38): “What if we were to 
make a step graph of the speeds here [tracing A and C] of this bear’s trip?” 
An important component of the classroom activities had been the interplay 
between graphs of position versus time and “step graphs,” which meant bar 
graphs displaying the size of the steps taken by the one walking. Figure 6.9 an 
example of a corresponding pair of position and step graphs. One can imagine 
the creation of a step graph from a given graph of position versus time, in 
terms of following a sequence of directions such as these: (a) Partition the 
position versus time graph into regular intervals, (b) mark the height of the 
graph at the end of each interval, and (c) translate each difference between 
successive heights to the step graph, and so on. However, we are going to 
see how Lin’s creation of the step graph was neither for her nor for Tracey a 
straightforward enactment of a sequence of directions. Lin came to create the 
step graph with several expectations as to what it should show (e.g., going 
from slow to fast, and then slow to fast again). As Lin added bars to the step 
graph, she encountered puzzling aspects that led her to revise her ideas and to 
FIG. 6.9. A corresponding pair of position and step graphs.

200  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
approach the task in different ways. This episode is an occasion to exemplify 
our notion of trail-making.
Our commentaries highlight three aspects of trail-making—that is, highlight 
three qualities of making present and ready at hand that further characterize 
trail-making. First, any symbol use entails a limitless background of features, 
unintended attributes, and resources, all of which have latent possibilities that 
are potentially significant (cf. Dörfler, chap. 4, this volume; Sfard, chap. 3, 
this volume). We comment on how moving these ignored “details” to the 
foreground is a pervasive quality of trailmaking. Second, we highlight how, 
in the process of trail-making, making present and ready at hand is, to a large 
extent, something that happens to the symbol user. And third, we describe 
how trail-making entails an open-ended interplay between enacting plans and 
coping with local circumstances.
Episode 3:  What If We Were to Make a Step Graph?
Annotated Transcript. Refer to Figs. 6.10 and 6.11. 
FIG. 6.10. Step graph showing heights of three points of the position versus time graph.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  201
(39)
Tracey:
[Can you] put dots [pointing to line A] to show which pieces [pointing 
to the step graph] you’re, you know, or break up this [line A] so I know 
which…?
(40)
Lin:
Half [drawing dot (a)].
Even though Tracey’s original drawing of the graph marked the axis along 
the lines of the paper’s grid, the grid had not been an outstanding element for 
her in the tracing of the graph itself. Moreover, she had used a paper with a 
grid because it was the only paper available to her. When Tracey drew the 
graph, she did not plan to situate the peak in between the grid’s vertical lines, 
nor did she intend that the crossing points between the graph and the grid 
follow a particular pattern. However, as soon as Lin started to develop the 
step graph, the grid became crucial and shaped all of the ensuing transactions. 
The centrality of the grid was unintended by Tracey.
The shifting role of the grid exemplifies how, in any symbol use, there is 
always a background of features, forgotten purposes, ignored resources and 
idiosyncrasies, which configure a wide terrain of latent possibilities: that 
is, a background that is open-ended and packed with the unintended. This 
commentary aims to illustrate how making present and ready at hand often 
FIG. 6.11. Making a step graph.

202  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
involves transforming aspects of the “background noise” into prominence 
and realizing the dormant possibilities of the unintended. Furthermore, 
we suggest that this is an important quality of what we have called “trail-
making,” which is a type of making present and ready at hand For the next 
segment, refer to Fig. 6.12.
(41)
Tracey:
OK, so that’s [dot (a)] half, [Lin draws dot (b).] that’s [dot (b)] one.
(42)
Lin:
[Lin draws dot (c).] This [dot (c)] is one. [She draws the added horizontal 
line at a height of two on the step graph.]
(43)
Tracey:
OK, so that’s…
(44)
Lin:
Yeah. And that’s, oops. I messed up on that one [crossing out the step 
graph]. I messed up [drawing a new set of axes].
(45)
Tracey:
What messed up? What didn’t you like?
Refer to Fig. 6.13.
(46)
Lin:
’Cause this is a step graph, I thought it was a…’Cause at this one [pointing 
to dots (b) and (c)] it only goes one but I did [gesturing 1, 2, 3 on the third 
bar of the step graph] three by mistake.
FIG. 6.12. Continuing the step graph.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  203
(47)
Tracey:
He only goes at a speed of one [pointing to dots (b) and (c)].
(48)
Lin:
Yeah, right here [gesturing in between dots (b) and (c)], see?
(49)
Tracey:
Un, huh. From here to here [in between dots (b) and (c)] you mean?
(50)
Lin:
Yeah.
(51)
Tracey:
Uh hun.
Lin was explaining to Tracey how she was making the bar graph; she was 
doing it by marking the points in which line A crossed the vertical lines of the 
grid, and was stating their heights as indicated by the grid’s unit. However, 
in (42) something remarkable took place. As soon as Lin drew the point (c), 
she commented about it: “This is one.” She found herself noticing something 
disturbing. At that particular moment, Lin’s former practice of creating step 
graphs in the classroom—step graphs that showed increments, not heights, of 
position versus time graphs—became present to her. The main point of this 
commentary is that making present and ready at hand is, to a large extent, 
something that happens to the symbol user. There had been no concerted plan 
by either Tracey or Lin to notice and question that dot (c) “was one.” Instead, 
as Lin drew dot (c), a way to create and talk about step graphs that she had 
practiced in the classroom came to her. first, Lin tried to account for the 
FIG. 6.13. Intermediate step graph.

204  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
“one” by adjusting the overall height of the third bar to the grid. However, 
very soon she concluded that “I messed up” and crossed out the whole bar 
graph. Lin went from creating and explicating her bar graph to seeing it 
as a mistake. Recognizing the “one” of point (c), Lin shifted her attention 
from being immersed in creating something (the step graph) to reflecting on 
it as a particular manner of doing things (an erroneous one).10 This event 
exemplifies what we mean when we say that making present and ready at 
hand in the manner of trail-making is, to a large extent, an experience that 
“happens” to the symbol user. Symbolizing is making possible the sudden and 
unanticipated encounter with past experiences that can radically transform 
the “here and now” of the symbolizer.
Refer to Fig. 6.14 for the next segment.
(52)
Lin:
One [drawing bar (a)] and another half [drawing bar (b)], then one whole 
[drawing bar (c)], then, [drawing dot (cc)] no… Wait, it doesn’t stop right 
there [crossing out dot (cc)], it stops right here [dot (d)]. About two [draws 
bar (d)]. Two, then about um… This [point (e)] is only half the second.
(53)
Tracey:
Yeah.
(54)
Lin:
So, four maybe [draws bar (e)].
(55)
Tracey:
Oh, OK.
Now refer to Fig. 6.15.
(56)
Tracey:
So, the four [bar (e)] showed which piece of that [gesturing the area of 
the peak around dot (e)]? Could you put a dot to show which piece [of the 
upper graph] the four [bar (e)] shows?
(57)
Lin:
Yeah, ’cause it’s [dot (e)] only half [halfway between the vertical lines]. 
[Tracey: Un huh.] This one [dot (d)] to here [dot (e)] is only like half of 
it; [and the height between dots (d) and (e)] is two, so I decided to double 
it so it’s [bar (e)] four.
(58)
Tracey:
OK.
(59)
Lin:
OK, now this one [dot (e)] to here [drawing dot (f)], another four? [She 
begins a new bar on the negative side.] Maybe?11
10	 This type of looking back at what one has done and seeing it as something is an attitude that 
several philosophers have called “seeing as” (Heidegger, 1927/1962; Wittgenstein, 1953). Such 
a shift is ever-present in human activity (e.g., from being engaged in a specific conversation to 
seeing the conversation as surprising, boring or intriguing).
11	 The rest of the interview is fascinating but too long to be included in this chapter. To preserve her 
sense that after the peak the bear sped up, Lin tried to parcel the steps after the peak by evenly 
dividing the vertical axis, so that right after the peak the step size was small and it increased over 
time. After several questions by Tracey, Lin changed her mind and thought that the curve after the 
peak showed that the bear was slowing down. Subsequently, she created a “correct” step graph.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  205
At this time the overall graph that Tracey and Lin had drawn was the one 
shown in Fig. 6.16.
The overall goal that Lin pursued in these exchanges was the creation of 
a step graph based on the position versus time graph. In (52) Lin initiated 
a new “trail” focusing on successive increments. However, in approaching 
this overarching goal Lin had to cope with the local circumstances of each 
increment. Figuring out how to deal with the particulars of each increment 
involved her facing unexpected issues and questions. This experience 
resonates with the notion that Suchman (1987) described as the interplay 
between “plans and situated actions.” Suchman argued that human activity is 
neither a follow-up of well-defined plans, nor the uncoordinated response to 
each local situation, but a complex dynamic in which plans are no more than 
FIG. 6.14. A further stage of the step graph.

206  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
resources contributing to how people act with regard to their local situations 
and purposes. Often plans are retrospective constructions: that is, organized 
descriptions of one’s past actions. But throughout our activities and our 
pressing toward the future, situated actions always have the potential to alter 
plans in unexpected ways. There are three instances in which Lin copes with 
the local circumstances of each increment that we will discuss.
First, Lin drew (52) the dot (cc), and then said: “no… Wait, it doesn’t stop 
right there [crossing out dot (cc)], it stops right here [dot (d)].” Note that as 
Lin marked the sequence of dots intersecting the grid with line A, from dot (a) 
FIG. 6.15. Adding another bar to the step graph.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  207
onward, this was the first time that the graph intersected with a horizontal line 
of the grid between successive dots. Probably her initial impulse in drawing 
dot (cc) was to mark it because it was an intersection between the grid and 
the graph. However, she quickly noted that dot (cc) did not belong to the 
sequence, stressing that to develop a step graph one has to “stop” at the 
vertical lines. The idea of where one has to “stop” was significant from her 
previous classroom activities. During the initial part of the interview, Tracey 
and Lin had actually moved the bear in discrete steps, stopping after each 
step and marking its position at regular intervals on the graph. We interpret 
this moment as a subtle movement from marking intersections on a grid/
graph to “stopping” at the vertical lines. Lin dealt with her first encounter 
with the grid’s horizontal lines by making present the action of stopping at 
regular intervals and so refining her overall emerging plan for the creation 
of the step graph.
Second, by the end of (52), Lin arrived at the peak of the graph. Given her 
sense that one has to stop at the vertical lines, the peak posed a problem to 
her: “then about um… This [point (e)] is only half the second.” She solved 
the problem by doubling the height of the bar so that she could imaginatively 
FIG. 6.16. Final version of the step graph.

208  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
reach the next “stop.” Note that this solution was in harmony with her overall 
expectation that the bear, traveling according to line A, moved faster and 
faster. This moment is perhaps emblematic of Suchman’s notion of “plans 
and situated actions.” From the beginning of (52), Lin was enacting an 
approach that, at least retrospectively, can be described as a plan infused 
with goals and expectations. However, the local circumstances of the point (e) 
posed a new challenge—one without a ready-to-use solution. She then took 
a turn in her “trail” that was neither an enactment of a stipulated move nor 
a fortuitous reaction to the peculiarity of the peak. Instead, it was a creative 
response that adjusted her plan, preserved her expectations, and accounted 
for the singularity of the peak.
Third, in (59) as Lin strove to figure out the increment between dots (e) 
and (f), she encountered another troublesome situation: “another four? [She 
begins a new bar on the negative side.] Maybe?” Her “Maybe?” expressed 
hesitation. Her initial suggestion of “another four” might have been stimulated 
by the symmetry between the segment (d)↔(e) and (e)↔(f). On the other 
hand, there are several aspects that might have caused part of her hesitation. 
The most central one is that she may have expected a “slow” speed for the 
bear right after the peak. Another aspect is that her process of stopping at the 
vertical lines did not require her to double the increment (e)→(f), because dot 
(f) was already on a vertical line. Lin then decided to set a negative bar of 
“two.” This was the beginning of a conversation through which she changed 
her overall interpretation of the second half of the position versus time graph, 
concluding that it described a bear going from fast to slow. It is in this sense 
that her situated action toward the increment (e)→(f) initiated a new “trail” 
along which she radically changed her original plans and expectations.
In sum, the heart of this commentary is that the open-ended interplay between 
plans and situated actions are a central aspect of trail-making. In this type of 
symbol use, making present and ready at hand bursts from the creative interweave 
between envisioning plans and coping with the local circumstances.
Discussion
Episode 3 exemplifies a manner of symbolizing that we have called trail-
making. Our notes identify three inherent qualities of trail-making: moving 
idiosyncratic and unintended “details” into the foreground, making the absent 
present and ready at hand as something that “happens” to the symbolizer, 
and noting the interplay between plans and circumstances. Trail-making is a 
type of symbol use in which the background details are an open-ended supply 
of possibilities and latent meanings that can be revealed by the symbolizer; 
in which insights “come” to the symbol user; and in which plans and goals 

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  209
are useful resources to be revised, dismissed, or made up according to the 
local circumstances.
We distinguish trail-making from path-following. The prevalent image in 
path-following is that of a symbol user who has a goal and a plan that consist of 
a sequence of actions and choices, interacting with an environment containing 
symbols to be encountered. The symbol user enacts the plan in response to the 
symbols that the user encounters. Sometimes, the subject’s plan comes from a 
teacher or a textbook. Other times it is devised in advance by the subject.
The distinction between trail-making and path-following should not be 
misunderstood as a clear-cut dichotomy with “positive” and “negative” values 
attached to each. Each refers to ways in which symbol use is experienced as 
we deal with novel or unfamiliar situations. In other words, each does not 
describe types of behavior but describes experiences of the symbolizer. Often, 
we enter into trail-making or path-following regardless of what we have been 
instructed to do. In mathematics education, it is not unusual that a lesson 
intended by the teacher to be oriented toward trail-making (e.g., investigating 
the uses and properties of Pascal’s triangle) is experienced by some students as 
a set of directions to follow in the manner of path-following (e.g., a procedure 
to calculate the coefficients of polynomial expansion). On the other hand, the 
practice of following fixed procedures to solve a problem triggers, at times, 
students’ experiences of trail-making.
Not only do we frequently combine or move flexibly from one approach to 
the other, but both manners of meeting the new and unfamiliar have their own 
legitimacy and importance. Path-following is generally prevalent when one 
is aiming solely for the achievement of a final result (e.g., to get somewhere, 
to fix an instrument, etc.), whereas trail-making reflects an attitude of 
exploration, openness to the unexpected, and fascination toward a horizon of 
unanticipated possibilities. Comparatively speaking, as a human experience, 
path-following is a confined and restricted form of trail-making because of 
its rigidity, fragility, and narrowness. But in many contexts of life these are 
precisely the qualities that one wants in order to quickly achieve an unfamiliar 
goal and to minimize the time and energy invested.
Some readers may deem that the metaphors of trail-making and path-
following are not applicable to mathematical activity because neither trail-
makers nor path-followers create the landscape through which they move; 
in other words, seemingly in solving a mathematical problem there is no 
equivalent to the terrain or path one goes through. However, one does not 
need to assume a platonic reality of mathematical ideas to recognize that 
in approaching a mathematical situation one experiences the encounter of 
contraints, unexpected patterns, promising clues, and so forth, not unlike what 
one finds in making a trail or following a path. Lin’s encounter of the peak 

210  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
being in between successive points on the grid, or the puzzling symmetry 
between the segments before and after the peak, had experiential qualities 
that resemble facing an out-of-place landmark on a street or the appearance of 
alternative and unanticipated trails.
Observations related to the dynamics of trail-making and path-following 
have been made by other researchers who focus on the careful analysis of 
students who deal with symbolic expressions (Magidson, 1992; Meira, 
1995) or on the nature of mathematics teaching (Lampert, 1990; Simon, 
1995). Magidson, for example, analyzed how 12 pairs of students defined 
linear functions, using graphing software to create a star burst—that is, lines 
radiating in all directions from a center point. She analyzed “instances in 
which students set unexpected goals or in which seemingly arbitrary aspects 
of the problem or computer program have a profound effect on the resulting 
activity” (p. 67). An example of the latter was that the star burst shown on 
the student sheet and the predefined setting in the software both displayed an 
8×8 grid. To Magidson’s surprise, many students used the 8×8 grid as a point 
of departure, leading them to explore ideas that would not have arisen from a 
grid of a different size.
One type of conclusion that we are invited to draw from these observations, 
a conclusion pointed out by Magidson, is that when symbols are used in a trail-
making fashion we can never totally anticipate how students will deal with a 
problem. We cannot fully know in advance what the problem is going to be 
in the students’ eyes. However, the fact that anticipation is not completely 
realizable is only a portion of a larger set of issues involved in the question: 
How does planning relate to play and fortuitousness? Many of the ideas we 
have described, such as the productive use of ambiguity, the unpredictable 
shift of background details to the foreground, or the provisional role of plans, 
may seem to some readers to devalue the activities of planning and curricular 
design, or even to question their plausibility. Highlighting the limitations of 
anticipation and predictability can be superficially understood as an argument 
for abandoning planning and embracing complete improvisation. However, 
this is not the reading that we intend.
To elaborate on this theme, we focus the discussion on the apparent 
contradictions between common notions of planning and design on the one 
hand, and the phenomena of play and fortuitousness on the other. We find 
it productive to explore these issues by examining the relationship between 
designers (e.g., curriculum designers) and users of the design (e.g., teachers 
and students). We argue that both designers and users cope with uncertainty 
and create what the design becomes. However, the designer’s uncertainty 
and creativity are different from those of the user. The following paragraphs 
describe these differences.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  211
First, there is the uncertainty of the designer and the creativity of the user. 
The creation of environments for a future that cannot be fully anticipated is the 
core task of design. In essence, curricular design poses the same challenges as 
designing a house, a public policy, or a newspaper. One can only conjecture 
how the house, the public policy, or the newspaper will be lived in, used, or 
read. One has to envision the inherent multiplicity of circumstances, people, 
and needs that will come into contact with the design, transforming it into 
something that is different and often unintended by the designer. An architect, 
for example, can define the layout of a house, its structure and functionality, 
but no design can determine what the house will mean to its dwellers: that 
is, the memories, feelings, activities, and images of which the house is going 
to be part. In other words, the house as a lived-in space is a creation of those 
who live in the house, who actively merge the house’s design with their own 
life experience.
Second, there are the creativity of the designer and the uncertainty of the 
user. We describe the designer’s activity as a creation of continuities and 
discontinuities within the broader culture. For example, an architect’s design 
of a house expresses certain styles (e.g., colonial, classic, etc.), relationships 
to the environment (e.g., standing within the landscape), emphasis of material 
textures (e.g., wood, glass, metal, etc.), historical conventions (e.g., choice 
of color and form), and so forth. The design of the house incorporates many 
cultural traditions and, at the same time, rejects others. The user who comes 
to live in the house enters into contact with those traditions, often without 
being aware of doing so. The uncertainty that the user experiences may be 
expressed by questions such as: Why was the house designed in this way? 
Where does the design come from? What kind of lived-in world originated 
such a house? The design of the house, like an old text or song, has hidden 
roots that embrace the dwellers’ existence.
From this point of view, a design—in any of its infinite forms: that is, a 
song, a game, a play, a device, and so forth—is an attempt to participate in 
someone else’s creation of his or her lived-in spaces and is an attempt to cope 
with the fact that one cannot fully anticipate the nature of this participation (cf. 
Sfard, chap. 3, this volume). In addition, it involves the creation of cultural 
breakdowns and continuities that the user, although unsure about its origins, 
comes in contact with.
Such is also the case with curricular design. Our design of the classroom 
activities that we piloted in Lin’s class, for example, was our attempt to 
participate in fifth-grade students’ experimentation with position and step 
graphs and with their use of these graphs to symbolize number patterns and 
motion patterns (e.g., “speeding up,” “moving steadily,” etc.). However, we 
could not foresee that Lin would create a way of looking at graphs in which 

212  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
she would see shapes according to her changing point of view. Nor could we 
anticipate the many experiences that other students developed from the same 
activities. Lin created an unintended perspective on how number patterns and 
motion patterns relate to each other. At the same time, she and her classmates 
practiced some ways of using discrete mathematical methods (e.g., partitioning 
time at regular intervals) that have a long and important history and, although 
Lin remained unaware of their historical roots, she came into contact with 
those cultural artifacts that were factors in our curricular design.
The subtle and complex dynamics relating to designers and users— both 
contributing to what the design comes to mean and coping with uncertainties—
are reflected in the conversation between Tracey and Lin, as the following 
paragraphs demonstrate.
First, both participants contribute. When Tracey and her colleagues 
designed the interview, they did not plan that the grid would be used as a 
pivotal element. Even though the grid—that is, the equally spaced vertical 
and horizontal lines—was on the paper before Lin and Tracey started to talk 
about step graphs, what it came to mean to them, the way it punctuated their 
conversation and its shift into the foreground, was their creation.
Second, both participants cope with uncertainties. In (39) when Tracey 
asked, “[Can you] put dots [pointing to line A] to show which pieces [pointing 
to step graph] you’re, you know, or break up this [line A] so I know which…?”, 
she simply wanted to understand what Lin was doing. But, at the same time, 
her request brought to the foreground issues involved in making a continuous 
curve discrete. As she drew the point (c) in (42), Lin’s comment that “This is 
one” was not the result of Tracey saying, “Look, this is one,” but of Tracey’s 
effort to dispel her own uncertainty about Lin’s actions. As Lin marked 
discrete points on the continuous curve, she found herself noticing something 
disturbing. At that particular moment, Lin’s former practice of creating step 
graphs in the classroom—step graphs that showed increments, not heights, of 
position versus time graphs—became present to her. Lin’s experience in (42) 
was one of disclosing, to Tracey and to herself, that she had not been dealing 
with the bar graph as a step graph even though she had been thinking that 
she had. The idea “came” to her. That insights “come” or “happen” to us is 
a way of saying that we often experience what we become as surprising and 
unexpected. After (42) Lin was in a different place: that is, different because 
she brought back the classroom practice of seeing a step graph as a sequence 
of increments, developed a sense that she had “messed up,” expressed her 
intent to start all over, and so forth.
The design—a blueprint, a script, or, in general, any artifact—brings 
into being a point of encounter between users and cultural threads woven 

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  213
by the designer. Artifacts make possible encounters across time, geography, 
language, history, and sensibilities. Even though what these encounters come 
to mean to the users often emerges anew, they manifest shifting streams of 
cultural continuity and discontinuity. The ending segment of the conversation 
between Tracey and Lin illustrates this artifact/encounter dialectic. The artifact 
was the graph that Tracey had drawn on the square paper. On this artifact 
Lin reencountered the idea—rooted in old mathematical traditions—of steps 
made at regular intervals of time. She encountered it anew because preserving 
the regularity of the intervals was problematic to her. In all of the transactions 
after (52), all the ideas that Lin put into practice were interpretations of what 
“making a step graph” had meant to her in the classroom activities and were a 
recognition of possible actions at hand. For example, in (52) Lin encountered 
the fact that the peak was “only half the second.” On the one hand, her sense 
was that each bar in a step graph had to span the same unit (“the second”). On 
the other hand, she could not pass over the peak because it was too remarkable. 
All these sensibilities nurtured in her classroom experience perplexed her. Lin 
solved her puzzlement by recognizing a possible course of action grounded 
in the idiosyncrasy of the peak: that is, given that it was more or less in the 
middle of two successive seconds, she decided to double the corresponding 
step, somehow forcing the peak to reach the next second.
These interpretations suggest that the artifacts of curricular design, 
like the documentation of a game or a song, are to be “played” by others 
who will encounter in them meanings and ideas that we can only partially 
foresee, and by others who will enter into contact with cultural practices 
and conventions of remote origins. In this discussion, we have analyzed 
curricular design in its relationships to design in general. The next section 
focuses on some specifics of curricular design that make it different from 
other types of design activities.
ABOUT CURRICULAR DESIGN
In this chapter, we have attempted to articulate a conception of symbolizing 
as a creation of a lived-in space in which the absent is made present and 
ready at hand. In this lived-in space, the symbolizer fuses the present with 
the absent, as well as the symbols with the referents. In the second part, we 
argued that the lived-in space in which the symbolizing takes place is not 
controlled by deterministic forces (i.e., the use of certain symbols does not 
impose meaning on the symbolizer), but is pregnant with open trajectories 
that can be realized by trail-making—a manner of symbolizing that overlaps 
the experiential qualities of uncertainty and creativity. Finally, we described 
design as a creation of artifacts that develop as tacit points of contact between 

214  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
individuals and the cultural perspectives adopted and rejected by the designer. 
Curriculum design, in particular, involves the creation of artifacts (i.e., 
description of activities, documentation of students’ ideas, manipulatives, 
software environments, etc.) intended to open up domains of contact between 
teachers, students and practices that are historically situated within the broad 
culture (cf. Bransford et al., chap. 8, this volume; Lehrer, Schauble, Carpenter, 
& Penner, chap. 9, this volume).
This section is informed by our own work in curriculum design, particularly 
in the Investigations Project (mathematics curriculum for grades K-5), which 
included the pilot-teaching experiment conducted in Lin’s classroom. We 
use situations that occurred in Lin’s classroom as examples. The theme we 
intended students to explore with this curricular unit was the interplay between 
graphs, number tables, and motion stories. We wanted fifth-grade students to 
learn about position and step graphs, and to use these graphs to express verbal 
descriptions of motion (e.g., “speeding up,” “going at a constant speed,” etc.) 
and number patterns.
It follows from the main theses of this chapter that the curricular artifacts do 
not control or determine, by themselves, what they will mean to the students. 
This is because of two factors:
1.	The lived-in space in which the absent is brought to presence and 
readiness to hand is constituted—fused—by the symbolizer, that is, 
the main source of what comes to dwell in these lived-in spaces is the 
symbolizer’s life experience.
2.	Symbol use in the manner of trail-making involves the creation anew 
of continuities and discontinuities with the cultural perspectives that 
originated the artifacts.
This lack of artifact-driven determinism shifts the role of the teacher to the 
foreground. It is the teacher who deals with the unexpected and unintended 
approaches emerging in the midst of students’ symbolizing. The teacher, like 
a sailor piloting a boat, makes decisions in response to both the issues coming 
forth in the classroom and her own sense of direction and priorities. We call 
the teacher’s sense of direction and priorities her “agenda.”
Consequently, to the extent that we care about the outcomes of education, 
the most central aim of curriculum design is to support, enrich, and influence 
teachers’ agendas. This priority is increasingly advocated in the field (Ball 
& Cohen, 1996), and is at the core of the curricular materials created by 
the Investigations project (Russell, 1997), whose audience is the teacher. 
A teacher’s agenda emerges from his or her complex, largely implicit 

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  215
background of views about the nature of mathematics, mathematics education, 
teaching and learning, social values, and so on, as well as from a background 
of concrete experiences with the use of classroom logistics and with ways 
of seizing fleeting events. Accordingly, as is the case with the Investigations 
Curriculum, important components of the curriculum materials should be 
(a) reflections on the nature of mathematics learning, and (b) vignettes of 
actual classroom episodes and students’ work. However, in order to avoid 
fragmenting curriculum design into theoretical discussions and practical 
logistics, it is important to articulate an intermediate and unifying level of 
design encompassing both—in other words, a way of shaping the curriculum, 
as the teacher must necessarily do, so that it merges into a whole the overall 
perspectives on mathematics education with classroom actions.
To describe our notions about these unifying aspects, we consider three 
aspects: the design of resources, of boundaries, and of encounters. These three 
aspects can be recognized in many types of design. For instance, designing a 
house involves designing resources (e.g., resources for cooking), boundaries 
(e.g., walls separating internal and external spaces), and encounters (e.g., areas 
to meet visitors). The following examples, chosen from our pilot experience in 
Lin’s classroom, include resources for students’ conceptualization of discrete 
motion, boundaries setting constraints to students’ activities, and encounters 
with mathematical ideas.
Designing Resources
Several classroom sessions in Lin’s class involved the use of a computer 
simulation displaying a Girl and a Boy running along parallel tracks.12 Their 
motion is defined by a set of commands with which students can set the Boy’s 
and the Girl’s step sizes, starting positions and many other parameters. Graphs 
and number tables describing the Boy’s and the Girl’s motion appear on the 
computer screen as they run. Before working in Lin’s classroom, we conducted 
a pilot trial in another school. In this earlier trial, we asked students, after they 
had set the parameters for the Boy’s and the Girl’s run, “Who is going to 
win the race?” We noticed that some students responded to the question only 
after looking very attentively at the Boy and the Girl running on the computer 
screen, as if the only way to know the answer was to observe carefully their 
apparent motion. We realized that these students were treating the software 
simulation as a system whose behavior has to be ascertained empirically, 
12	 The software is called Trips. It has been jointly developed by Douglas Clemets and Julie Sarama 
and is published together with the curriculum.

216  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
rather than grappling with it as a programmable environment—that is, as 
an environment in which setting the parameters determines in advance the 
motion of the Boy and of the Girl. These students did not envision the Boy’s 
and the Girl’s movement as events determined by the original commands.
Our sense was that the issue was not how to infer the result of a race 
from its parameters (e.g., they already knew that if runners start together, 
the winner is the one who runs fastest), but from the nature of the computer 
simulation: that is, what the software was actually doing. In response to this 
realization, we decided to design a resource: that is, an entry point into the 
inner workings of the simulation. To this end, we designed a new series of 
activities that students developed in parallel with the computer simulation. In 
these activities, students used Cuisenaire rods and a meter stick. Each side of 
the meter stick was a “track” and the Cuisenaire rods represented the step size 
of the Boy and the Girl. Students marked each step by discretely advancing 
each Cuisenaire rod. They generated number tables by recording the locations 
of the end of the Cuisenaire rods on the meter stick. The students solved 
different problems (e.g., what set of parameters can generate this motion 
story: “The Girl started way behind but she got to the end sooner than the 
Boy”) either with the computer simulation or with the Cuisenaire rods.
We tried these activities in Lin’s classroom. Students moved fluently 
between the simulation and the Cuisenaire rods, seeming to grasp their 
equivalence. At times, the students used the software to “test” whether 
their number tables in which they recorded the successive locations of the 
Cuisenaire rods were correct. We see these activities as an attempt to provide 
a resource for students, just as we might provide a map or a rope to someone 
who is going to explore the woods. The sense in which resources are valuable 
to students is something that grows out of conducting teaching experiments. 
The process of curricular design has many of the qualities that we have 
described as part of trail-making. We could not have known in advance that 
the activities with Cuisenaire rods would be useful to students. Moreover, 
there may be many other resources that could have been helpful to students, 
and it is likely that by trying the curricular activities in other classrooms 
we could have identified some of them. Designing curricular activities is a 
never-ending activity (Russell, 1997). The question is not when the design is 
finished, but when it is adequate.
Designing Boundaries
Teachers face the necessity of deciding which aspects of the stream of students’ 
activities to include and which to omit. These often-tacit decisions draw an 

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  217
intangible and mobile boundary. On occasion, as curricular designers we have 
a clear sense of a certain boundary that we want to preserve, even though how 
to convey this to the students is uncertain. In the early development of the 
“Patterns of Change” unit, for example, we wanted to focus on the speed with 
which we can walk along a line, and not on ways of walking (e.g., jumping, 
tiptoeing, walking backward, etc.). Simply asking students for different ways 
to go from one place to another along a straight line elicits an enormous range 
of possibilities. How can we deal with them? If we state a criteria for what 
“counts,” will it be perceived as an arbitrary judgment? Does it matter? To 
stress the centrality of speed in this curricular unit, we decided to require 
that walks be described in terms of variations of speed. This constraint is an 
example of curricular over specification intended to orient students’ activities 
toward the unit’s mathematical content.
In other circumstances, we were initially unaware of highly significant 
boundaries that we were setting. For instance, several activities in our unit 
involved the creation of number tables describing successive positions of 
a student walking along a 10-m tape measure at regular intervals of time. 
Individual students walked along the tape measure, dropping small bean bags 
every 2 sec (assisted by another student who said “drop” every 2 sec). Students 
discussed the different patterns of bean bags on the tape measure, how they 
corresponded to different ways of walking, and how number tables could 
indicate those patterns. We decided in advance that 2 sec is a good interval 
because it gives enough time to drop the bean bag and because the resulting 
separation of successive bean bags on the floor is suitable for revealing the 
range of speeds within which we usually walk.
However, in our initial thinking, we did not question our idea of dropping 
bean bags at regular intervals of time. After a few classroom sessions, we 
came to realize that the notion of marking positions at regular intervals of 
time (every 2 sec), no matter how natural it seemed to us, is a very particular 
way to proceed. Sometimes students tended to mark where the speed had 
changed (e.g., “from this bean bag to that one, go at two steps per second”). 
Others used the bean bags to indicate step size, so that each step indicated 
the distance between two successive bean bags. These approaches led us to 
make crucial changes in the curricular design. We realized that step size is 
an extremely useful variable because it unifies time and space; that is, the 
bean bags marking steps given at a regular interval of time (e.g., every two 
seconds) indicate simultaneously the “when” and the “where” of the walk. 
Step size became central, to the point that, as we have seen in the episodes 
with Lin, students discussed “step graphs” instead of “speed graphs.”
The new design (tried out in Lin’s classroom) was still firm on the issue 

218  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
of “every two seconds.” In part, this was because it seemed to us that the 
classroom logistics posed serious difficulties for “lifting” this boundary and, 
in part, because at that time we still had not grasped the value and origins of 
some of the students’ alternatives. The classroom observations made us aware 
that we had set a rigid boundary—marks at regular intervals of time—that 
might have prevented us and the students from seeing other possibilities. In our 
ongoing analysis of the videotaped classroom sessions, we are still grappling 
with and learning about how students used the bean bags and number tables to 
communicate motion stories.
Designing Encounters
It is often said that curricular activities should provide students with 
opportunities to encounter mathematical ideas, profound insights of the past 
thinkers, and the diversity of cultural practices. The notion of “encounter” 
elicits the analogy with encountering a person. Suppose that one wants a friend 
to meet a colleague. One might design an encounter, including its time and 
location, its context (e.g., informal but with a specific issue to talk about), the 
surrounding expectations, and so forth. The design of the encounter influences, 
but does not determine, what our friend will make of the colleague. It is never 
superfluous to inquire, after the meeting, what each thought of the other, and 
in doing so one may expect surprising answers. The same is true of students 
encountering mathematical ideas in the classroom.
One of the most critical encounters that we have designed in the “Patterns of 
Change” unit involves the relationship between distance and step graphs. This 
relationship, which we know to be intimately connected to the fundamental 
ideas of calculus, was discussed, practiced, and used by the students in 
the contexts of walking along a straight line, making patterns with blocks, 
and interpreting number tables. A crucial activity to “set the stage” for the 
students’ encounter with mathematical ideas is, we believe, the students’ 
invention of mathematical representations (Bednarz, Dufour-Janvier, Poirier, 
& Bacon, 1993; diSessa, Hammer, Sherin, & Kolpakowski, 1991). We have 
found these activities important not because we would expect students to 
necessarily develop the mathematical ideas in question spontaneously and 
independently, but because these inventing activities can generate a context 
that allows a meaningful encounter with them. For example, in Lin’s classroom 
we organized activities in which the students invented ways to represent how 
to walk along a straight line. Figure 6.17 shows a drawing by Lin and her 
partner, Tyra, that they gave to another pair of students for their interpretation 
and walk during the first session of the “Patterns of Change” unit.

219
FIG. 6.17. Drawing by Lin and Tyra.

220  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Lin and Tyra broke down the trip into five segments: (a) three baby steps, 
(b) stop for 5 sec, (c) 4 big steps, (d) stop for 3 sec, and (e) 15 baby steps. They 
showed step size by pictures of large and small shoes, stopping with a full 
hand, and time with a certain number of fingers up and numbers written near 
them. We can easily recognize that their representation is not immediately 
related to distance or step graphs. However, there are important elements in 
it that are central to distance and step graphs, including the size of the steps 
and how the step size changes over time and space. Asking students to invent 
representations has been an important part of our efforts to create contexts 
for their encounters with mathematical ideas—contexts that incorporate their 
own questions and proposals. In addition, through this inventing, students are 
likely to generate alternative approaches that we might not have conceived of, 
creating in us wonder and inspiration. 
We have described three aspects of curriculum design that can unify the 
discussion of theoretical perspectives and classroom actions: the design of 
resources, of boundaries, and of encounters. We see curriculum design as 
fully embedded in the conduct and documentation of teaching experiments (cf. 
Gravemeijer et al., chap. 7, this volume). It is from these teaching experiments 
that we can select illustrative stories and examples to serve as a basis for 
future assessment. To a large extent, we see curriculum design as a struggle 
with the need to make explicit the resources, boundaries, and encounters 
that the designers intend, so that they can relate to teachers’ agendas. By 
stressing that a teacher’s agenda is a key to his or her fruitful use of play 
and fortuitousness, we have attempted to clarify that having such an agenda 
is consistent with an image of symbol use in which some of its qualities are 
productively ambiguous, unintended, and unpredictable.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been partially supported by National Science Foundation 
grant MDR-9155746. All opinions and analysis expressed herein do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the funding agency. Part of the work reported 
herein was supported under the Educational Research and Development 
Centers Program, PR/award R305A60007, as administered by the Office 
of Educational Research and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education. 
However, the contents do not necessarily represent the position or the 
policies of the National Institute on Student Achievement, Curriculum, and 
Assessment, the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, or the 
U.S. Department of Education.

“If You Look at It the Other Way…”  221
REFERENCES
Ball, D.L., & Cohen, D.C. (1996). Reform by the book: What is—Or might be—The 
role of curriculum materials in teacher learning and instructional reform? Educational 
Researcher, 25, 6–8, 14.
Bednarz, N., Dufour-Janvier, B., Poirier, L., & Bacon, L. (1993). Socioconstructivist 
viewpoint on the use of symbolism in mathematics education. Alberta Journal of 
Educational Research, 39, 41–58.
diSessa, A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta-
representational expertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 117–160.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. New York: Harper & Row. (Original work published 
1927)
Lampert, M. (1990). When the question is not the problem and the answer is not the solution. 
American Educational Research Journal, 27, 29–63.
Magidson, S. (1992). What’s in a problem? Explore slope using computer graphing software. 
In W.Geeslin & K.Graham (Eds.), Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual Conference of the 
International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 64–71). 
Durham: University of New Hampshire.
Meira, L. (1995). The microevolution of mathematical representations in children’s activity. 
Cognition and Instruction, 13, 269–313.
Nemirovsky, R., Tierney, C., & Wright, T. (1998). Body motion and graphing. Cognition 
and Instruction, 16(2), 119–172.
Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams and imitation in childhood. New York: W.W.Norton.
Russell, S.J. (1997). The role of curriculum in teacher development In S.N.Friel & G.W. 
Bright (Eds.), Reflecting on our work: NSF teacher enhancement in K-6 mathematics (pp. 
247–254). Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Simon, M.A. (1995). Reconstructing mathematics pedagogy from a constructivist perspective. 
Journal For Research in Mathematics Education, 26, 114–145.
Slade, A., & Wolf, D.P. (Eds.). (1994) Children at play. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Suchman, L.A. (1987). Plans and situated actions: The problem of human-machine 
communication. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tierney, C., Nemirovsky, R., & Noble, T. (1995). Patterns of change: Tables and graphs. 
Palo Alto, CA: Dale Seymour.
Wenger, E. (1990). Toward a theory of cultural transparency: Elements of a social discourse 
of the visible and the invisible. Palo Alto, CA: Institute for Research on Learning.
Werner, H., & Kaplan, B. (1963). Symbol formation: An organismic developmental approach 
to language and the expression of thought. New York: Wiley.
Winnicott, D.W. (1992). Playing and reality. London: Tavistock/Routledge. (Original work 
published 1971)
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. New York: Macmillan.


II 
INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN  
ISSUES RELATED TO  
SYMBOLIZING, COMMUNICATING,  
AND MATHEMATIZING


225
7 
Symbolizing, Modeling,  
and Instructional Design
Koeno Gravemeijer  
Freudenthal Institute, The Netherlands  
Vanderbilt University  
 
Paul Cobb  
Vanderbilt University  
 
Janet Bowers  
San Diego State University  
 
Joy Whitenack  
University of Missouri
Recent trends in mathematics education indicate a shift toward a view of 
mathematics learning as an inherently social and cultural activity (Brown, 
Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Cobb & Yackel, 1996; Greeno, 1991; Schoenfeld, 
1987; Sfard, 1994). This shift has implications for theories of instructional 
design, the majority of which have a primarily individualistic focus. For 
example, constructivism offers an orienting framework within which to 
address pedagogical and design issues. However, as a psychological theory, 
it does not support designers’ efforts to envision the social setting within 
which students might be acting (cf. Bransford et al., chap. 8, this volume). 
The task for the instructional designer, in our view, is to create sequences of 
instructional activities that take account of both the evolving mathematical 
practices of the classroom community and the development of individual 
students as they participate in those practices.
The shift from focusing exclusively on individual development to seeing 
mathematical learning as occurring in social context is consistent with 
current instructional recommendations. In particular, many current reform 

226  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
recommendations suggest that the starting points for mathematics instruction 
should consist of settings in which students can immediately engage in 
informal, personally meaningful mathematical problem solving. From this 
reform perspective, the challenge is to support individual students’ transition 
to forms of mathematical activity in which the use of conventional symbols 
carries the significance of acting on experientially real mathematical entities. If 
this individual developmental process is placed in social context, the challenge 
for the designer becomes that of supporting the collective learning of the 
classroom community, during which taken-as-shared mathematical meanings 
emerge as the teacher and students negotiate interpretations and solutions.
Both this situated approach and its individualistic counterpart can be 
contrasted with the traditional transmission view of instruction in which 
mathematical symbols are treated as referring unambiguously to fixed, 
given referents. The teacher’s role in this traditional scheme is typically 
cast as that of explaining what symbols mean and how they are to be used 
by linking them to referents. Frequently, this involves the use of concrete 
materials or visual models designed to ensure that students learn mathematics 
meaningfully. Implicit in this approach is the assumption that such models 
embody the mathematical concepts and relationships to be learned. However, 
from our perspective, the explanatory power of such didactic models can be 
seen “only in the eye of the beholder.” That is, although adults can recognize 
mathematical relationships in the models as a consequence of their prior 
mathematical enculturation, the students might only see the concrete material. 
As a result, the taken-as-shared meanings that emerge as the teacher and 
students negotiate their interpretations of the materials might well differ 
markedly from those intended.
In this chapter, we consider several approaches to instructional design as 
we focus on the question of how to support the development of both collective 
mathematical meanings and the understandings of individual students who 
contribute to their emergence. In addressing this question, we attempt to move 
the discussion of instructional design beyond that of simply taking traditional 
(transmission) approaches as a strawperson against which to propose an 
alternative. Instead, we take several innovative approaches that are currently 
being proposed as our contrast set. In the first part of the chapter, we clarify 
the underlying assumptions of these approaches by extending Doerr’s (1995) 
distinction between expressive and exploratory models. In the second part of 
the chapter, we outline a third approach to instructional design that has been 
developed within the tradition of Realistic Mathematics Education (RME). 
This approach incorporates aspects of both the expressive and exploratory 
approaches by beginning with students’ expressive models while aiming 
to proactively support the emergence of increasingly sophisticated ways of 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  227
symbolizing and understanding. The critical aspect that distinguishes this 
approach from the other two is that the design process involves the explicit 
formulation of hypothetical learning trajectories (Simon, 1995). To this end, 
the designer conducts an anticipatory thought experiment by envisioning both 
how proposed instructional activities might be realized in interaction in the 
classroom, and what students might learn as they participate in them. In the 
final part of the chapter, we acknowledge that the approach based on RME 
involves an inherent tension between individual students’ expressive creativity 
and their enculturation into established mathematical ways of knowing.
ALTERNATIVES TO THE TRANSMISSION APPROACH
Doerr’s (1995) distinction between expressive and exploratory computer-based 
designs provides a useful starting point from which to consider innovative 
approaches to instructional design. According to Doerr, exploratory computer-
based models are designed with a specific, scientific endpoint in mind. The 
goal when designing these models is to create, in essence, microworlds (cf. 
Papert, 1980) in which objects follow specific sets of rules. One example is a 
microworld in which balls fall in accordance with Newtonian laws of motion 
(cf. White, 1993). Students explore this model by developing hypotheses and 
then varying input parameters to investigate how well their conjectures align 
with the model. Similarly, in the realm of mathematical modeling, Kaput’s 
(1994) MathCars program contains a microworld in which students explore 
the linkage between mathematical symbol systems and the authentic everyday 
experience of driving in a car. In contrast to exploratory models, Doerr stated 
that expressive models are developed by students themselves to explain 
phenomena using a variety of software tools. Here, students invent models 
that express their developing interpretations of the phenomena in question. 
Doerr (1995) clarified that this model-building approach begins with students’ 
informal understandings and progressively builds on them. In this approach, 
students’ development of mature scientific understanding occurs through 
incremental reformulations of commonsense knowledge.
We first consider the exploratory modeling approach and take Kaput’s 
(1994) and Nemirovsky’s (1994) work as paradigmatic cases. The 
instructional intent in each case was to help students bridge the gap between 
formal mathematical activity and authentic experience. The instructional 
design approach is one of helping students appropriate mature mathematical 
symbolizations through investigation. We are particularly interested in Kaput’s 
and Nemirovsky’s conjectures about how students might develop relatively 
sophisticated understandings that, for the adult, are inherent in the exploratory 
models. We suggest that although intended instructional endpoints are readily 

228  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
apparent, the possible learning routes by which students might develop these 
understandings are not fully elaborated.
To highlight the contrast with the exploratory approach, we next present 
two examples of the expressive approach by discussing studies reported by 
Bednarz (Bednarz, Dufour-Janvier, Poirier, & Bacon, 1993) and diSessa 
(diSessa, Hammer, Sherin, & Kolpakowski, 1991). These two studies both 
describe experiments in which students invented increasingly sophisticated 
symbolizations with limited guidance. In presenting their analyses, Bednarz 
et al. and diSessa et al. both describe the actual developmental route by which 
the students progressed. However, as both authors acknowledge, no distinct 
mathematical endpoints were elaborated prior to instruction.
The Exploratory Approach
Exploring Graphing. The defining characteristic of exploratory approaches 
is that students explore conventional mathematical symbolizations in 
experientially real settings. The instructional intent is usually well defined in 
approaches of this type and typically involves students’ development of the 
mathematical understandings inherent in the mature use of symbolizations. 
One example of such an approach is Kaput’s (1994) MathCars.
In discussing the rationale for MathCars, Kaput argued that one of the 
core instructional problems in algebra instruction is that closed algebraic 
forms do not correspond to real-life phenomena. To illustrate this point, he 
described current mathematical instruction as moving around on an “island 
of mathematical symbolizations” that are separated from students’ authentic 
experience. To further explicate this point, Kaput noted that most mathematical 
software is also confined to the island of mathematics. For example, in terms 
of this island metaphor, both algebraic functions and graphs of algebraic 
functions are located on the island. The implication is that mathematizing a 
situation, such as a car trip in which the car moves at a constant speed with 
a linear distance-time graph, does not support students’ attempts to bridge 
the gap between the mainland of authentic experience and the mathematical 
island of symbolizatons because both the graph and the story belong on the 
mathematical island. Kaput’s point is that the situation was developed to 
conform to the symbolization, whereas in authentic trips, cars do not move at 
a constant speed.
Kaput’s contention that students do not view driving at a constant speed as 
an authentic experience can be illustrated by an anecdote from a seventh-grade 
classroom (Gravemeijer, 1990). A teacher/researcher asked a group of seventh 
graders the following question: A car drives at a speed of 50 kilometers per 
hour. How long would it take to travel 500 meters? The students argued that 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  229
they could not answer the question because they did not know how fast the car 
was going. This response indicates that, for them, the formal concept of a car’s 
constant speed did not fit with their real-life experiences. So they interpreted 
the given speed as the average speed over a 1-hr trip, which made it impossible 
to say anything about the time spent on an arbitrary part of 500 meters.
Kaput’s (1994) proposal is to bridge the gap between the island of formal 
mathematics and the mainland of authentic experience through the use of 
computer-based linked representation systems. Thus, rather than confronting 
students with ready-made graphs of time and distance, Kaput looked for settings 
where the students can maximally exploit their own authentic experience to 
investigate and understand these means of symbolizing. One such setting is 
driving a car. MathCars provides a computer-simulated driving experience 
that involves a windshield view, a configurable dashboard display, clocks, and 
odometers. When a student clicks on a button, the computer creates distance-
time graphs, velocitytime graphs, and data tables of the simulated trip. The 
power of this system is that these various mathematical symbolizations are 
linked to the dashboard display. In this way, the everyday experience of 
motion in a vehicle can be linked to the formal graphical representations. 
Kaput suggested that an explicit connection can be made as students monitor a 
trip in, for example, a school bus. This activity would include having students 
keep a log of time and distance at constant intervals when riding on a real bus 
and then reenacting the bus ride with the MathCars software.
Kaput suggested that students’ learning may be facilitated by supporting 
their efforts to explore the physical linkages between the mathematical 
symbolizations and their own experiences, reflect on their own experiences, 
and generate new hypotheses. He argued that “as the model develops…the 
mental model based in the mathematical representations comes to relate more 
directly to conceptualizations of the setting” (Kaput, 1994, p. 390). Ideally, 
this mental model should integrate various mathematical symbolizations such 
as graphs, tables, and algebraic expressions on a more abstract level. Kaput 
took care to underscore that his approach is not yet fully elaborated:
Of course a major question is whether the strongly situated forms of these activities 
can yield widely applicable knowledge, whether the horizontal linkages of actions…
at the physical level can yield flexible structures at the mental level. The current 
work of the author assumes that this will not come easily, but will need to be 
built systematically through combinations of careful variations of the simulations 
themselves and physical activities distinct from simulations. (Kaput, 1994, p. 394)
We concur with Kaput that this approach to instructional design holds 
considerable promise that warrants further investigations. Kaput’s comments 

230  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
indicate the need to formulate hypothetical learning trajectories that involve 
specific conjectures about both the process of students’ mathematical 
development and the way in which acting with the MathCars system 
constitutes a means of supporting it. We would also note that the computer 
can be viewed as a social mediator (cf. Newman, Griffin, & Cole, 1989; Pea, 
1993; Teasley & Roschelle, 1993). This indicates the importance of locating 
students’ activity with the MathCars system in social context. Only then is it 
possible to describe the process by which students appropriate graphing and 
other ways of symbolizing. This issue of appropriation is addressed directly 
by Nemirovsky (1994) (see also van Oers, chap. 5, Sfard, chap. 3, and Dörfler, 
chap. 4, this volume).
Appropriating Ways of Symbolizing. A second example of the exploratory 
approach to instructional design is provided by Nemirovsky (1994). His 
account, like that of Kaput, focuses on the ways in which students might 
appropriate mathematical meanings as they explore linkages between physical 
activity and graphical symbolizations. As is the case with Kaput’s MathCars 
system, formal symbolizations such as distance-time graphs are introduced at 
the outset. However, in contrast to Kaput’s primarily psychological perspective 
on individual mathematical development, Nemirovsky based his rationale on 
a sociocultural view of learning as a process of appropriation. Building on the 
theoretical perspective of Bakhtin (1986), Nemirovsky distinguished between 
symbol systems and symbol use. He argued that a symbol system is an object 
that is typically analyzed apart from activity. In contrast, symbol use is a 
meaningful, situated activity. For example, a Cartesian graph can be viewed 
as an example of a symbol system in and of itself. Symbol use, on the other 
hand, involves the process of reasoning about functional relationships with 
Cartesian graphs (see also Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, this volume for a contrast 
between models and modeling).
Although Nemirovsky, together with Monk, recently elaborated his 
theoretical perspective by drawing on phenomenology, his use of Bakhtin’s 
ideas is helpful in clarifying aspects of the exploratory approach to instructional 
design. For example, the distinction between symbol systems and symbol 
use serves to counter the long and unfruitful tradition of striving to reduce 
symbolizing to a rule-governed activity. By illustrating that ready-made symbol 
systems are the result of abstractions from lived utterances, Nemirovsky 
demonstrated that the process of learning to reason with symbolizations such 
as graphs is not merely a matter of learning rules for producing and using 
those symbolizations. Instead, this learning involves developing meaning by 
reconceptualizing the situation symbolized by the graph. 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  231
In line with his emphasis on symbolizing as an activity, Nemirovsky 
described a computer-based device that links observable physical activity 
with coordinate graphs. In one analysis, Nemirovsky (1994) described the 
process by which a student, Laura, appropriated graphical symbolizations 
displayed on the computer screen. The experimental setup involved a motion 
detector connected to a computer that could generate real-time graphs of 
moving objects on a computer screen. Nemirovsky’s intent in developing this 
set up was to investigate what is involved in using graphical symbolizations 
to reason about physical change. When Laura placed the motion detector on a 
toy car and moved it along a straight path toward and away from the computer, 
the computer generated a distance-time, speed-time, or speed-distance graph. 
Nemirovsky’s consequent analysis, which focused on the way in which Laura 
attempted to make sense of, among other things, the meaning of a negative 
velocity graph, documented her actual learning trajectory. This documented 
learning trajectory is significant in that it chronicles the process involved in 
experimenting with and reflecting on the relation between the actual motion of 
the toy car and real-time symbolizations in the form of coordinate graphs. Of 
particular interest are the “Aha” experiences that supported Laura’s continued 
exploration and reinterpretation of both the symbolizations and physical 
motion as she appropriated the symbolization to her own use.
Discussion of the Exploratory Approach. The two cases we have considered 
indicate that an exploratory approach to design does not typically involve 
formulating a hypothetical learning trajectory in advance (Simon, 1995). These 
proposals do not contain a set of anticipatory learning conjectures regarding 
students’ learning process and the means for supporting its development. 
Instead, systems that might constitute productive learning environments are 
developed. In addition, the focus in this approach is typically on the activity 
of individual students. Nemirovsky, for example, drew on sociocultural 
theory when developing the rationale for his motion-detector system. 
However, although he interacted with Laura throughout her exploration, 
this interpersonal communication is not itself made the object of analysis. 
A further similarity between the two cases is that they both reflect the island 
metaphor in that ways of symbolizing such as graphing are seen as initially 
separated from students’ authentic experiences. In each case, computer-based 
linkages are used to mediate the dualism between the mathematical island and 
the mainland of authentic experience. This approach can be contrasted with 
the expressive approach, in which students’ ways of symbolizing are taken as 
the starting point. 

232  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
The Expressive Approach
Inventing Symbolizations. Bednarz et al. (1993) called their perspective 
an invention approach. They developed the rationale for this approach by 
challenging the widely accepted view that mathematical learning involves 
the construction of internal representations that reflect the mathematical 
characteristics of predefined external representations. Instead of presenting 
symbolizations as external representations of preexisting mathematical 
relationships, they argued that symbolizations should come to the fore as tools 
constructed by the students themselves. Additionally, they contended that 
this symbolizing activity has both an individual and collective aspect in that 
mathematics can be seen as a continually evolving human social construction. 
In their view, symbolizing is integral to the creation of new mathematical 
entities and thus to knowledge construction.
For Bednarz et al., the instructional starting point should be communicative 
situations in which students symbolize their mathematical understandings. 
This can be contrasted with exploratory approaches, in which formal 
mathematical symbolizations are introduced at the outset. The Bednarz et 
al. initial goal is to involve students in activities in which they are asked to 
produce a description of some real-world situation in order to communicate 
their understandings to someone else. They reported an experiment conducted 
in a first-grade classroom that followed this approach. The starting point is a 
story about a city bus (or a school bus) with passengers entering and getting 
off. The story is simulated with the help of a Fisher Price bus and toy figures. 
In the communicative setting that is established, one of the students has to find 
a way to keep track of a sequence of events in such a way that another student 
who has neither seen or heard what happened could deduce the story from the 
first student’s invented symbolizations. Thus, the symbolization must inform 
the outsider about both the number of passengers who get on or off at each 
stop and the final number of passengers on the bus at the end of the story.
With regard to issues of instructional design, the Bednarz et al. analysis 
indicates that students can invent a variety of symbolizations. For example, the 
students combined several conventional symbols with which they were already 
familiar (such as arrows and numerals) with stylistic images of buses. According 
to the authors, these ways of symbolizing emerged because the students were 
invited to be critical and reflective about the notations they produced. The focus 
was therefore not on predefined symbolizations, but instead on developing ways 
of symbolizing that were adequate for communicative purposes. The Bednarz 
et al. case study serves to illustrate the plausibility of both involving students in 
the process of developing symbolizations, and of taking communicative settings 
in which students perceive the need to express their understandings as starting 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  233
points. However, the question of how conventional ways of symbolizing might 
eventually emerge remains unanswered as the proactive support provided both 
the teacher and the instructional designer is not discussed. In this regard, it 
is significant that Bednarz et al. did not appear to develop a hypothesized 
learning trajectory in advance. We would note, however, that their analysis of 
the first-graders’ learning could inform the formulation of a learning trajectory 
that takes account of social context. The second example of the expressive 
approach that we consider does take account of the role of the teacher. This 
analysis was reported by diSessa et al. (1991) and focused on six instructional 
sessions in which students “invented graphing.”
Inventing Graphing. diSessa et al. clarified that the invention process they 
documented was more or less incidental to their investigations. That is, they 
did not set out, a priori, to support students’ efforts to “invent” graphing. 
The diSessa et al. original goal was to prepare a group of eight bright, sixth-
grade students for the introduction of distance-time and speed-time graphs 
by supporting their development of metarepresentational knowledge.1 
Consequently, although they did not define a hypothetical learning trajectory 
in advance, their analysis illustrates that the teacher’s and the students’ roles 
as members of a classroom community could, in principle, be incorporated 
into a hypothetical learning trajectory aimed at supporting the emergence of 
metarepresentational knowledge.
In the first of the lessons that diSessa et al. analyze, the students were asked 
to describe, with some type of symbolization, the motion in the following 
scenario: A person drives a car, then stops, then drives away slowly. This 
was initially an open situation in which the teacher guided the discussion by 
asking questions about the students’ symbolizations such as: Which is the 
simplest? Which shows the stop? Which shows the duration of the stop? The 
teacher’s role in supporting the students’ learning therefore appears to be 
pivotal (see also Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, and Bransford et al., chap. 8, this 
volume, for discussion of the role of the teacher). In this regard, the diSessa 
et al. analysis differs from the three previous cases we have discussed. In the 
course of a series of discussions, the students shifted from symbolizing motion 
with slanted lines to drawing a continuous line that symbolized position. The 
main point to note is that the norms for determining whether a new graphical 
representation was preferred over a former one was based on the students’ 
evolving metarepresentational knowledge. Further, as diSessa et al. pointed 
1	
On our reading, diSessa et al. define metarepresentational knowledge as knowledge arising from 
conversations about the benefits and drawbacks of various representations that can support the 
emergence of taken-as-shared views regarding the conventions of widely accepted representations 
and symbolizations such as graphs of motion.

234  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
out, the teacher played an essential role in supporting both this developmental 
process and the invention of ways symbolizing.
In summary, this case study documents how a teacher took a group of 
students’ self-developed symbolizations as the starting point and guided the 
development of culturally accepted ways of symbolizing through a process of 
social negotiation. From an instructional design perspective, the critical aspect 
of this case study is the focus on the teacher’s role as she continually guided 
the evolution of both classroom norms and taken-as-shared goals. diSessa et 
al. noted, for example, that the teacher set tasks, provided criteria, suppressed 
some of the students’ symbolizations, provided a conceptual focus, revisited 
problematic issues, and, perhaps most importantly, kept track of long-
term goals. Thus, although diSessa et al. did not outline a specific learning 
trajectory in advance or offer specific suggestions for the development of an 
instructional design theory, their description provides a paradigm case that 
can inform further design and pedagogical efforts. In particular, their analysis 
can guide the development of hypothesized learning trajectories by helping 
designers anticipate both criteria that should be established and the specific 
problems and issues that might arise as students discuss their invented ways 
of symbolizing motion. In addition, their analysis helps clarify the proactive 
role of the teacher in supporting this process.
Discussion of the Expressive Approach. Bednarz et al. and diSessa et al. 
both described the social settings within which students developed increasingly 
sophisticated ways of symbolizing. Thus, they both offer an alternative to the 
exploratory approach in which students develop meanings for conventional 
ways of symbolizing that are introduced at the beginning of an instructional 
sequence. In general, the expressive approach might be described as bottom-
up in that the starting point is students’ ways of symbolizing. This contrasts 
with the exploratory approach, which might be described as top-down in that 
mature ways of symbolizing are introduced at the outset. In many ways, the 
two approaches instantiate the perennial distinction between instruction that 
emphasizes invention and that instruction emphasizes discovery.
As we have noted, the diSessa et al. initial intent was not to develop a 
sequence of instructional activities that would lead to the invention of 
graphing. Their original intent was to focus was on metarepresentational 
competence, the emergence of which is demonstrated in their analysis. From 
our point of view, their report describes the process by which inventing 
graphing emerged in an instructional setting. In addition, the work of diSessa 
et al. is helpful in focusing on the role of the teacher. However, we note that 
the teacher had to intervene on an ad hoc basis because diSessa et al. did not 
develop a hypothetical learning trajectory in advance. The teacher could only 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  235
plan locally and had to capitalize on students’ contributions by relying on 
her intuitions about of conventional graphing. A similar comment about the 
absence of hypothesized learning trajectories also applies to the other three 
cases we have considered. Innovative approaches to instructional design that 
aim to support reform in mathematics education rarely involve the formulation 
of conjectures about either the course of students’ mathematical development 
or the means that might be used to support it. Instead, like the diSessa et al. 
teacher, design often proceeds on an ad hoc basis in which local decisions are 
not informed by a longer-range view of the instructional process. In the third 
approach, we consider that the formulation of tentative, potentially revisable 
learning trajectories is integral to instructional design.
ORIENTATION: AN ACTIVITY-ORIENTED  
VIEW OF SYMBOLIZING
Meira (1995) noted that analyses of mathematical activity often separate 
cognitive processes (labeled as internal) from the manipulation of 
symbolizations or inscriptions (labeled as external). He argued that this 
separation tends to downplay the role of symbolizing in mathematical 
development. To overcome this limitation, he proposed
an activity-oriented view that takes cultural conventions, such as notational systems, 
to shape in fundamental ways the very activities from which they emerge, at the 
same time that their meanings are continuously transformed as learners produce and 
reproduce them in activity, (p. 270)
Meira’s emphasis on the “dialectical relation between notations-in-use and 
mathematical sense making” (Meira, 1995, p. 270) can be seen in both the 
exploratory and expressive approaches. In the case of the exploratory approach, 
Nemirovsky (1994) noted that the appropriation of ways of symbolizing 
involves the creation of meanings that are continually transformed while 
investigating both symbolizations and what they symbolize. For their part, 
proponents of the expressive approach describe the ways in which students’ 
mathematical understandings evolve as they develop and revise their ways 
of symbolizing. This concern for the critical role that notations-in-use play 
in mathematical development is also prominent in theories of distributed 
intelligences (Dörfler, 1993; Pea, 1993).
Following Meira, we would argue that alternatives to the traditional 
transmission approach should take account of both the reflexive relation 
between symbolizing and sense making, and the dynamic character of this 
relation. It is while actually engaging in the activity of symbolizing that 

236  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
symbolizations emerge and develop meaning within the social setting of the 
classroom. The approach we discuss in the following pages incorporates this 
activity-oriented view while simultaneously capitalizing on the strengths 
of both the exploratory and expressive approaches. On the one hand, the 
dialectical relation between symbolizing and mathematical sense-making 
indicates the value of student initiative. On the other hand, the eventual goal 
of enabling students to reason powerfully with conventional symbolizations 
points to the need to introduce symbolizations developed in advance by the 
designer. These two aspects of design are central to the theory of Realistic 
Mathematics Education on which the third approach is based.
Realistic Mathematics Education
RME is rooted in Freudenthal’s (1971, 1973) interpretation of mathematics 
as an activity that involves solving problems, looking for problems, and 
organizing a subject matter resulting from prior mathematizations or from 
reality. The designer’s overall goal is to support the development of these 
mathematical activities by envisioning shifts or changes as they might occur 
within the social context of the classroom. According to Freudenthal, emphasis 
should be placed on the activity of organizing or mathematizing—as it is 
called in later publications (cf. Gravemeijer, 1994b; Treffers, 1987). Students 
engage in mathematizing for several reasons. These include goals for:
•	 Generality: generalizing (looking for analogies, classifying, structuring)
•	 Certainty: reflecting, justifying, proving (using a systematic approach, 
elaborating and testing conjectures, etc.).
•	 Exactness: modeling, symbolizing, defining (limiting interpretations 
and validity).
•	 Brevity: symbolizing and schematizing (developing standard procedures 
and notations).
These characteristics suggest that, for Freudenthal, the process of learning 
mathematics involved creativity and active construction of models to 
generalize conjectures. This envisioned process stands in sharp contrast with 
students’ efforts in traditional instructional settings to master mathematical 
procedures through memorization. Freudenthal views mathematizing as the 
key process in mathematics education for two reasons. First, mathematizing 
is not only the major activity of mathematicians; it also familiarizes students 
with a mathematical approach to everyday settings. Because mathematizing 
fosters applicability, in which personal experience is seen as critical, RME 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  237
is consistent with some aspects of the exploratory approach. Second, 
mathematizing relates to the idea of reinvention, a process by which students 
formalize their informal understandings and intuitions. This process may be 
seen as paralleling the intentions of an expressive approach. Freudenthal in 
fact argued that mature, conventional symbolizations should not be taken as 
the instructional starting point. He was particularly critical of this practice 
and called it an antididactic inversion in that the process by which the 
mathematicians developed mathematics is turned upside down (Freudenthal, 
1973). In his view, the goal for mathematics education should be to support a 
process of guided reinvention in which students can participate in negotiation 
processes that parallel (to some extent) the deliberations surrounding the 
historical development of mathematics itself.
The heart of this reinvention process involves mathematizing activity in 
problem situations that are experientially real to students.2 It is important 
to note that reinvention is a collective as well as an individual activity in 
which whole-class discussions centering on conjecture, explanation, and 
justification play a crucial role. These discussions bear some resemblance to 
the discourse of professional mathematicians in that students’ deliberations 
involve reflecting on mathematical interpretations and solutions. However, 
it should be stressed that idealized mathematical discourse represents the 
practice of a mathematical research community, whereas the mathematical 
activity in realistic mathematics education is closer to the practices of applied 
mathematicians. Additionally, we acknowledge that the social structure of the 
classroom, with its institutionalized power imbalance between the role of the 
teacher and that of the students, may preclude argumentation as it is realized 
in mathematics research communities. In our view, these power structures 
have a positive aspect in that the teacher can express his or her authority in 
action by initiating reflective shifts in discourse such that what is said and 
done in action subsequently becomes an explicit topic of discussion (cf. Cobb, 
Boufi, McClain, & Whitenack, 1997).
Reinvention Through Progressive Mathematization. We contend that an 
instructional approach in which the teacher builds proactively on students’ 
contributions is only possible if the sequence of instructional activities 
consists of problems that give rise to interpretations and solutions that can 
advance the instructional agenda. By proactive, we mean that the teacher 
attempts to planfully attempt to capitalize on students’ reasorting to achieve 
2	
Experientially real problems often involve everyday life settings or fictitious scenarios, but not 
necessarily so; for the more advanced students, a growing part of mathematics itself will become 
experientially real.

238  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
her pedagogical agenda. These continual negotiations between the teacher and 
students support the emergence of taken-as-shared meanings when certain 
social and sociomathematical norms are in place (Cobb & Yackel, 1996; 
Yackel & Cobb, 1996). In our work in reform classrooms, one of the major 
goals has been to promote the negotiation of classroom norms that support 
collective mathematizing. Ultimately, conversations in which students discuss 
the adequacy of their mathematical interpretations and solutions can serve as 
situations in which they might reflect on their own and others’ mathematical 
reasoning (cf. Lehrer et al., chap. 9, this volume). In this regard, Bednarz et 
al. and diSessa et al. both observed that the students in their studies initially 
developed sketchy, self-invented ways of symbolizing that did not resemble 
commonly accepted mathematical language. These initial ways of symbolizing 
evolved as the teachers and students in both studies negotiated their meaning 
and significance. Both studies therefore illustrate a process of progressive 
mathematization in which students’ ways of symbolizing and reasoning are 
subject to explicit negotiation.
Given the importance we attribute to mathematical discourse, we find it useful 
to focus on the mathematical development of the classroom community as well as 
that of individual students. Further, we have come to the view that hypothesized 
learning trajectories involve anticipations about possible developmental 
routes of the classroom community rather than of any particular student. In 
addition, our comments about the crucial role of classroom norms indicate 
that the design process should take account of the classroom microculture. In 
particular, an envisioned learning trajectory necessarily involves assumptions 
about the classroom social environment. Within a microculture that supports 
and encourages productive mathematical discourse, the reinvention process 
involves two aspects, horizontal mathematizing and vertical mathematizing 
(Treffers, 1987). In the case of horizontal mathematization, the classroom 
community develops informal, taken-as-shared ways of speaking, symbolizing, 
and reasoning as the students attempt to mathematize starting-point problems. 
By way of contrast, when these ways of describing become the subject of 
further mathematization, Treffers spoke of vertical mathematization. It is 
during the interplay of these two processes that symbolizations and symbol use 
are reinvented. In other words, symbol reinvention emerges as students engage 
in instructional activities in which they formalize their informal interpretations 
and solutions. The challenge for the designer (and the teacher) is to anticipate 
a developmental route for the classroom community that culminates with the 
powerful use of conventional symbolizations.
As an illustration, we may refer to the ways in which students may “invent” 
the long division algorithm (Gravemeijer, 1994b). On the one hand, students 
mathematize realistic scenarios involving “ratio division.” These initial activities 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  239
are described in terms of horizontal mathematization. As students reflect on 
their solution methods, they engage in vertical mathematization. During this 
process, they generalize their interpretations of successive subtractions. As a 
consquence of these reflections, they formalize the division algorithm.
Realistic Mathematics Education in Terms of Heuristics. The preceding 
discussion of horizontal and vertical mathematization gives some indication of 
how reinvention through progressive mathematization might take place in the 
social setting of the classroom, but it does not explicate specific heuristics that 
guide the design of instructional sequences. We first comment on the nature of 
RME as an instructional theory and then delineate three core heuristics.
It is important to appreciate that RME was not contrived as a formal, 
finished, instructional theory. Instead, the developers of RME view it as a 
theory in progress. In fact, Freudenthal’s philosophy of “mathematics as a 
human activity” has sparked several decades of developmental research 
(Gravemeijer, 1994a, 1994b) and continues to guide current work. The aim 
of this research is to develop and analyze instructional sequences that fit with 
Freudenthal’s orienting philosophy. In this process, RME theory has been 
developed by reconstructing the domain-specific instruction theory underlying 
the local theories implicit in these instructional sequences (Treffers, 1987). 
As a consequence, RME consists of an interrelated series of instructional 
activities, instructional sequences, local instruction theories, and more general 
tenets. The general tenets that stem from generalizations of local theories can 
be viewed as heuristics for instructional design (see also Gravemeijer, 1998).
The first of these heuristics, the reinvention principle, involves looking at the 
history of mathematics to see how certain mathematical practices developed 
over time. This heuristic guides the designer’s efforts to construct a learning 
trajectory and also highlights potential barriers, dead ends, and breakthroughs. 
Given these insights, the developer asks whether students might develop 
mathematical understanding by following similar developmental paths. A 
second aspect of the reinvention principle suggests ways in which students’ 
informal interpretations and solutions might “anticipate” more formal 
mathematical practices. For this reason, students’ initially informal reasoning 
can be used as a starting point for the reinvention process (Gravemeijer, 1994b; 
Streefland, 1990). Consequently, in this approach to design, the developer 
takes both the history of mathematics and students’ informal interpretations as 
sources of inspiration and tries to formulate a tentative, potentially revisable 
learning trajectory along which collective reinvention (as a process of 
progressive mathematization) might be supported. 
One of the most challenging aspects of this approach is finding problem 
situations that might support progressive mathematization. A second 

240  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
heuristic, that of didactical phenomenology, plays an important role in 
guiding the development of these problems. The word phenomenological as 
used by Freudenthal (1983) refers to a phenomenology of mathematics. In 
this phenomenology, the focus is on how mathematical interpretations make 
phenomena accessible for reasoning and calculation. In other words, the 
concern is with how the “thought-thing” (nomenon) describes and analyzes 
the “phenomenon.” In a didactical phenomenology, this relation is analyzed 
from a didactical point of view.
We view didactical phenomenology as a design heuristic because it 
suggests ways of identifying possible instructional activities that might 
support individual activity and whole-class discussions in which the students 
engage in progressive mathematization (Gravemeijer, 1994b). If we consider 
mathematics as a product of communal activity rooted in attempts to solve 
practical problems in increasingly effective ways, it is reasonable to expect to 
find present-day situations that could accommodate a variety of mathematical 
interpretations. In other words, we can imagine that formal mathematics 
came into being as a process of generalizing and formalizing situation-
specific problem-solving interpretations and solutions. Thus, the goal of the 
phenomenological investigation is to create settings in which students can 
collectively renegotiate increasingly sophisticated solutions to experientially 
real problems. These initial settings can then be taken as starting points 
for horizontal mathematization in a classroom culture that supports further 
vertical mathematization.
Emergent Models. RME’s third heuristic for instructional design focuses 
on the role that emergent models play in individual students’ learning and in 
the collective mathematical development of the classroom community. The 
term model as it is used here can refer to a task setting or to a verbal description 
as well as to ways of symbolizing and notating. Thus, although we speak of 
models and symbolizations interchangeably, there is a slight difference. In 
Realistic Mathematics Education, the term model is understood in a dynamic, 
holistic sense. As a consequence, the symbolizations that are embedded in the 
process of modeling and that constitute the model can change over time.
Modeling as it is conceptualized in RME shares some commonalities 
with both the expressive and exploratory approaches to design. For example, 
like the expressive approach, the overall intent is to capitalize on students’ 
creativity. However, we view students’ creations as being situated within 
the classroom microculture and as contributing to the development of taken-
as-shared ways of symbolizing. This focus on taken-as-shared models that 
emerge through negotiation is consistent with our approach of formulating 
hypothetical learning trajectories for the classroom community rather than 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  241
for any particular student. The notion of emergent models also encompasses 
some aspects of the exploratory approach in that both aim to make it possible 
for students to eventually use conventional symbolizations in powerful ways. 
However, in the exploratory approach, dynamic computer-based symbol 
systems are often presented at the outset. The goal is that individual students 
(or groups of students working at a computer) will recreate the accepted ways 
of reasoning with these symbolizations. In contrast, an approach consistent 
with RME attempts to build up from students’ initial informal activities to 
conventional ways of symbolizing. This approach of proactively supporting 
the emergence of taken-as-shared models involves both the judicious selection 
of instructional activities and the negotiation of the ways of symbolizing that 
students create as they participate in communal classroom practices. In this 
process, the teacher attempts to achieve his or her instructional agenda by 
capitalizing on students’ contributions and by introducing ways of symbolizing 
that fit with their reasoning. Students are still encouraged to develop their 
own models, but in situations that are chosen to support the realization of a 
proposed learning trajectory. In addition, attention is given to negotiation and 
to collective reflection as well as to individual creation. In this scheme, the 
proposed learning trajectory provides a vision of various ways of symbolizing 
that could be capitalized on in whole-class discussions to support the process 
of collective mathematization and reinvention.
Our description of the process of collective mathematization, in which 
informal, self-developed models evolve into more sophisticated models, is 
purposely left open ended for several reasons. First, it would be naive to 
expect or claim that any proposed learning trajectory could predict the exact 
route through which any classroom community would pass. In practice, 
the conjectured learning trajectory is continually adjusted and modified in 
response to observations of students’ activity (cf. Simon, 1995). Second, 
in contrast to the claims of developers who aim to bridge the gap between 
informal and conventional ways of symbolizing by assimilating the latter 
directly to the former, our goal is to support an emergence of meaningful 
symbolizations that arise during collective negotiations in which students 
attempt to revise their present ways of notating in order to describe a situation 
more effectively or efficiently. These caveats acknowledged, it is possible in 
our view for the designer to lay out a proposed developmental route for the 
classroom community in which students first model situations in an informal 
way (this is called a model of the situation) and then mathematize their informal 
modeling activity (this produces a model for mathematical reasoning). For 
example, referring again to the earlier example of the emergence of long 
division, students may create a model of a situation in which they find the 
number of buses needed to transport a certain number of supporters through 

242  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
repeated subtraction. Later, the class may discuss ways to use multiples 
of the number of seats in a bus to determine the number of buses needed. 
At this point, the discussions have shifted from explicitly talking about a 
situation, to talking about repeated subtraction as a model for reasoning about 
the mathematical relations involved. A hypothesized trajectory of this type 
involves the conjecture that the model, which emerges as students formalize 
their reasoning, will gradually take on a “life of its own” independent of 
situation-specific imagery. The benefit of such a trajectory is that it outlines 
both a learning agenda and a possible means for attaining it. In this way, it 
can serve as a resource for the teacher attempting to proactively support the 
collective development of taken-as-shared symbolizations and meanings.
The transition from a model of to a model for is generally consistent with 
Sfard’s (1991) historical analysis of the process of reification. Sfard argued 
that the history of mathematics is characterized by repeated processes of 
reification in which understandings that initially existed only in action were 
objectified, thus creating mathematical entities that were experienced as 
existing independently of activity.3 For example, she traced the origin of 
the notion of function to calculational actions that produce an output for a 
given input. Functions were subsequently defined as a set of ordered number 
pairs that could be produced by calculating. Later, functions emerged as full-
fledged entities with certain properties. It was then possible to compare linear 
and quadratic functions or continuous and discontinuous functions. Without 
making claims about the role of models in the history of mathematics, we 
would argue that emergent models can be employed in mathematics education, 
to foster similar transitions.
Note that the objective of fostering the reification of mathematical activity 
implies that what is reified in the model-of to model-for transition is the 
process of acting and reasoning with the model, not the symbolization itself. 
This emphasis on activity differentiates approaches based on RME from 
approaches that involve a modeling point of view (e.g., Lehrer et al., chap. 9, 
and Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, this volume). In these latter approaches, a model 
is considered to capture mathematical structures or relationships implicit 
in starting-point situations. In contrast, a model as we have characterized it 
originates from students’ ways of acting and reasoning in the starting-point 
situations. Although this distinction is subtle, it has implications for design in 
that our focus when formulating learning trajectories is on students’ anticipated 
interpretations and solutions rather than on the starting-point situation per se. 
3	
A similar discussion of the role of reification can be found in Ernst’s (1991) analysis of the 
theoretical reconstruction of informal knowledge.

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  243
The model-of/model-for distinction can be elaborated by identifying 
four general types of activity as shown in Fig. 7.1. Although the four types 
of activity clearly involve a developmental progression, we would reject 
the implication that they involve a strictly ordered hierarchy. In practice, 
discussions of general activity and of reasoning with conventional symbols 
frequently fold back to referential activity or even to activity in the setting 
(McClain & Cobb, 1998). The development both of collective mathematical 
practices and of the understandings of individual students who participate in 
them appears to be a recursive, multilevel process (Pirie & Kieren, 1994).
Our goal in describing the four levels of activity is to illustrate that 
models are initially tied to activity in specific settings and involve situation-
specific imagery. At the referential level, models are grounded in students’ 
understandings of paradigmatic, experientially real settings. In whole-class 
discussions, these models are integral to explanations in which students 
describe how they interpreted and solved tasks centering on the starting point 
settings. General activity begins to emerge as students’ reasoning loses its 
dependency on situation-specific imagery, and the role of models gradually 
changes as they take on a life of their own. This transition can be seen as a 
process of reification wherein the students begin to collectively reflect on their 
referential activity. In the process, the model becomes an entity in its own 
right and serves more as a means of mathematical reasoning than as a way of 
symbolizing mathematical activity grounded in particular settings. 
FIG. 7.1. Levels of activity.

244  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
THE STRUCTURING NUMBERS INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE
In order to further elaborate the notion of a learning trajectory in general and the 
transition from a model of to model for in particular, we describe the evolution 
of classroom mathematical practices during a recent teaching experiment 
conducted in a first-grade classroom in a southeastern suburban setting. 
The goal of this teaching experiment was to support students’ development 
of general number sense for numbers less than 20. That is, our instructional 
goal was to support the emergence of what Greeno (1991) described as a 
sense of knowing one’s way around a mathematical environment. We first 
discuss the design heuristics of mathematization and reinvention, didactical 
phenomenology, and emergent models by describing the Structuring 
Numbers instructional sequence and the conjectured learning trajectory. We 
then describe the classroom teaching experiment by first documenting the 
norms for participation that were established in the first-grade classroom. 
Next, we trace the mathematical practices that emerged as the teacher and 
students negotiated their interpretations and understandings, and compare this 
actualized learning trajectory to the conjectured learning trajectory. Finally, 
we step back to focus specifically on the role of symbolizing in the actual 
learning trajectory.
Design Heuristics in Relation to the Structuring Numbers Sequence
Mathematization and Reinvention in Relation to the Structuring Numbers 
Sequence. The arithmetic rack sequence was created to support flexible 
quantitative reasoning with numbers up to 20.4 In terms of Greeno’s (1991) 
environmental metaphor, the intent was that students would come to act in a 
quantitative environment structured by relationships between numbers up to 
20. Observationally, this would be indicated by their flexible use of thinking or 
derived fact strategies to solve a wide range of tasks. For example, the students 
might solve a task interpreted as 14−__=6 by reasoning that 14−4=10, and 
10−4=6, so the answer is 8. Alternatively, they might reason that 7+7=14, so 
14−7=7, and 14–6=8. Our global intent was that the numerical relationships 
4	
Working in the domain of numbers up to 20 may misleadingly be identified with the notion of basic 
skills. It is therefore essential that we explain our position on basic skills before we describe the 
instructional sequence. The label basic skills is heavily value laden and brings to mind a traditional 
stance that is reductionist with regard to both mathematics and student activity. However, rejection 
of the reductionist view on learning and instruction does not imply that we can dispense with the 
notion of skills. It does, however, imply that we need to reconceptualize them. Instead of talking 
about skills as consisting of automated subskills, we would prefer to speak of skilled activity. This 
reconceptualization also bears on the relation between skills and understanding. In the traditional 
view, skills stand in opposition to understanding—each is the antithesis of the other. In the view 
we endorse, understanding is an integral, inseparable aspect of skilled activity.

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  245
implicit in these and other observable strategies would be ready-to-hand for 
the students. In other words, they would not have to figure out appropriate 
strategies to use. Instead, our goal was that the students would come to have 
the experience of directly perceiving relationships as they interpreted and 
solved arithmetical problem situations. Needless to say, coming to act in such 
an environment is a major intellectual achievement that requires proactive 
developmental support and is profoundly influenced by the material and 
symbolic tools that students use. The challenge for design was therefore to 
conjecture a learning trajectory and the means of supporting it that culminated 
with this intellectual achievement.
FIG. 7.2. The arithmetic rack.
One source of guidance for design was provided by research that documents 
students’ informal solution strategies. Findings have consistently revealed 
that some students frequently develop strategies that use the doubles (and 
multiples) of five as points of reference. In explaining these findings, van 
den Berg and van Eerde (1985) noted that the spontaneous use of 5 and 10 as 
reference points is related to the creation of finger patterns that embody the 
results of counting.5 Treffers (1991) also suggested that strategies centering on 
the doubles and on 5 and 10 as reference points reflect numerical relationships 
implicit in common finger patterns. For example, a student might show 8 as 
5 fingers on one hand and 3 on the other, or as 4 fingers on each hand. These 
patterns can themselves be curtailments of counting on the fingers by one. In 
Steffe, Cobb, and von Glasersfeld’s (1988) terms, the finger patterns embody 
the results of counting.
Based on these finding, Treffers (1991) designed a device called the arithmetic 
rack whose use would support the development of numerical reasoning in which 
five, ten, and doubles can emerge as points of reference. This device consists 
of two parallel rods each containing 10 beads. As shown in Fig. 7.2, the first 5 
beads on the left of each rod are red, and the second 5 beads are white. Students 
use the rack by moving all the beads to the right and then creating various 
configurations by sliding beads to the left. For example, if a student wants to 
5	
The idea of supporting the development of five as a reference point is not new. We note Hatano’s 
(1982) use of 5-tiles, Fletcher’s (1988) 5-frames, Wirtz’s (1980) 10-frames, and the numerical 
images in older approaches to arithmetic (Radatz & Schipper, 1983). In RME, however, the focus 
is on students’ reasoning, whereas the preceding examples tend to rely on a rather scripted use of 
manipulatives.

246  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
show 8, she might move 5 beads on the top rod and 3 on the bottom, or she 
might move 4 beads on each rod. These ways of acting with the rack reflect 
relationships implicit in finger patterns and, from the observer’s perspective, 
appear to involve taking five and doubles respectively as points of reference. In 
the hypothetical learning trajectory that we outline, the instructional activities 
involved using the rack to solve a range of additive tasks.
Didactical Phenomenology in Relation to the Structuring Numbers 
Sequence. As a design heuristic, didactical phenomenology involves finding 
phenomenologically appropriate situations from which models might emerge 
in the course of classroom activities and discussions. In the case of the 
Structuring Numbers sequence, one type of situation identified involved a 
scenario about a double-decker bus. We planned to introduce the arithmetic 
rack once students had explored this situation. Our intent was that beads on 
the top and bottom rods would be used to show the number of passengers on 
the top and bottom decks of the bus, and that moving beads would signify the 
number of passengers getting on or off the bus. It is important to note that 
most of the students might never have seen a double-decker bus, let alone 
ridden on one. We therefore anticipated that the teacher and students would 
discuss the scenario at some length and perhaps act out riding a bus so that 
it would become an experientially real situation. The heuristic of didactical 
phenomenology does not therefore imply that initial, starting-point settings 
should be authentic in the sense that they fit with students’ actual, lived 
out-of-school experiences. Instead, the intent is to identify situations that 
can become experientially real for students relatively quickly and that these 
situations constitute settings from which mathematically significant models 
might emerge. Thus, this approach to design involves taking account of the 
potential endpoints of the instructional sequence even when choosing starting 
point situations. To paraphrase Ball (1993), it is an approach that involves 
keeping one eye on the mathematical horizon and the other on students’ 
current understandings, concerns, and interests.
Emergent Models in the Structuring Numbers Sequence. It is important 
to emphasize that the learning trajectory we envisioned when developing the 
instructional sequence necessarily involved assumptions about the nature of 
the classroom microculture. For example, we anticipated that the students 
would engage in conversations in which they not only described how they had 
acted with the arithmetic rack, but also explained how they had interpreted 
tasks and thus why they had used the rack in particular ways. Further, the 
teacher would proactively support the emergence of different and increasingly 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  247
efficient solutions. These comments again underscore the importance of 
giving explicit attention to the classroom social context.
The first instructional activities that we planned for the structuring numbers 
sequence were those involving the double-decker bus scenario. We intended 
to build on a prior instructional sequence called Patterning and Partitioning 
that emphasized partitioning collections of up to 10 items by first asking the 
students to generate different ways in which a given number of passengers 
could sit on the two decks of a double-decker bus. van den Brink (1989), the 
developer of the bus scenario, conjectured that the need to partition arises 
naturally once a distinction is made between the passengers on the upper and 
lower decks. Further, in this situation, solutions such as 6 and 2, and 2 and 6 
count as different in that they signify different arrangements of people on the 
bus. Once the practice of generating different partitionings had emerged, we 
planned to introduce the arithmetic rack as a means of showing the number 
of passengers on each deck. Thus, in the conjectured learning trajectory, the 
rack would initially function as a model of the number of passengers on the 
two decks.6
The first planned instructional activities in which the children used the rack 
involved generating configurations (e.g., “How could you show 15 people on 
the bus?”) and evaluating given configurations. We conjectured that ways of 
reasoning that involved grouping, particularly by taking 5, 10, and doubles as 
points of reference, might emerge as a mathematical practice. To the extent that 
this occurred, the arithmetic rack would gradually be constituted by the classroom 
community as a numerically structured device in line with its designer’s 
intentions. The interpretation of, for example, 5 red beads and 1 white bead on 
both rods as 10 and 2 would then be self-evident and beyond justification.
The next set of instructional activities that we outlined before the teaching 
experiment began dealt with situations in which passengers got on and off 
the bus. For example, after the students had shown nine passengers on the 
bus, the teacher might ask, “How many passengers would be on the bus 
when seven more get on?” We anticipated that, for the sample task, some 
students might first move nine beads on the top rod and then add seven more 
by moving the remaining bead on the top rod and six on the bottom rod (see 
Fig. 7.3a). From the observer’s perspective, a going-through-ten strategy is 
implicit in this solution (i.e., 9+1=10, 10+6= 16). We also anticipated that 
other students might first move nine on the top rod as before but then move 
6	
It should be noted that the anticipated relation between the beads and the passengers was fairly 
normal. We reasoned that, from the students’ perspective, the beads signified the number of 
passengers, not the passengers themselves. We therefore conjectured that it would not matter 
which bead was shifted when a passenger got off the bus, as long as the total decreased by one.

248  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
seven on the bottom rod and then recognize the resulting configuration as 7 
and 7 is 14, and 2 more is 16 (see Fig. 7.3b). In this case, a doubles strategy 
is implicit in the students’ solution. At this point in the conjectured trajectory, 
the arithmetic rack would function as a model of a wider range of events in 
the bus scenario.
FIG. 7.3. Two ways of acting with the arithmetic rack to solve 9+7=_: (a) going-through-
ten and (b) doubles.
The intent of the next set of planned tasks was to support the emergence 
of the numerical relationships implicit in students’ use of the rack as explicit 
topics of conversation. We conjectured that this would make it possible for 
the rack to gradually become a model for numerical reasoning. To this end, 
we envisioned a scenario in which the teacher and students might discuss 
the need to develop ways of notating their reasoning with the rack so that 
they could communicate it to others. Subsequent activities would then involve 
developing and negotiating symbolizations, the key criterion being that other 
children in the class could understand how the task had been solved. This 
anticipated development follows diSessa et al. (1991) in acknowledging the 
importance of metarepresentational knowledge. In addition, we imagined 
that the teacher would play a proactive role that might involve introducing 
ways of symbolizing that fit with students’ activity. For example, the ways 
of reasoning with rack shown in Figs. 7.3a and 7.3b might be symbolized as 
shown in Fig. 7.4.
Clearly, the teacher’s envisioned role of both supporting the development 
of students’ ways of symbolizing and introducing conventional ways of 
symbolizing that fit with their activity involves an inherent tension. In the 
planned activity as we imagined it, the teacher’s symbolizations would 
constitute offers but without the implication that students should merely imitate 
them. In the analysis reported by Bednarz et al. (1993), the symbolizations 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  249
that the students developed combined various conventional symbols (e.g., 
arrows, numerals) with other invented symbols to communicate their methods. 
Similarly, in the RME model, one hopes that the ways of symbolizing 
introduced by the teacher might serve as a resource that students could 
adapt to their purposes. In the case of the Structuring Numbers sequence, for 
example, the overall intent was that students would eventually come to reason 
with symbolizations that were independent of the arithmetic rack itself. In 
our view, such a goal could only be attained if the mathematical practices 
established in the classroom involved using thinking strategies flexibly to 
solve a range of additive tasks.
FIG. 7.4. Possible ways of Rotating the solutions to 9+7=_ shown in Figs. 7.3a and 7.3b.
This description of the hypothesized learning trajectory in terms of an 
anticipated sequence of classroom mathematical practices traces a route 
through the four types of activity summarized in Fig. 7.1. For example, the 
planned starting point for the hypothetical trajectory involved activity in the 
setting of the double-decker bus scenario. We anticipated that reasoning with 
the arithmetic rack would first serve as a model of activity in this setting 
(i.e., referential activity), but that it would subsequently take on a life of its 
own and become a model for numerical reasoning (i.e., general activity). We 
conjectured that the development of ways of notating would play a crucial 
role in this transition. In the conjectured trajectory, the final type of activity 
shown in Fig. 7.1 would emerge as reasoning with number relations took on 
a life of its own.
The design heuristic we have illustrated, that of emergent models, 
involves the transition from acting with the arithmetic rack as a model of 
a phenomenologically appropriate scenario to acting with the arithmetic 
rack as a model for more sophisticated mathematical reasoning. We would 
acknowledge that this general heuristic provides a relatively crude description 
of a complex process. However, we contend that it suffices to provide an 
orientation for the design of instructional sequences. It is also important to 
stress that a conjectured learning trajectory is just that, a conjecture. Although 
it provides a sense of direction for instruction, it is tentative and potentially 
revisable. Following Simon (1995), we have argued that the relation between 
the conjectured learning trajectory and the local judgments made in the 

250  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
classroom while enacting a sequence is reflexive (Cobb, 1996; Gravemeijer, 
1996). On the one hand, the trajectory constitutes the broad, encompassing 
backdrop against which local judgments are made. On the other hand, the 
conjectured trajectory itself evolves as a consequence of those local decisions 
and judgments. As a consequence, the actual learning trajectories realized 
in classrooms are “inextricably linked to histories that are lived, much like 
paths that exist only as they are laid down by walking” (Varela, Thompson, & 
Rosch, 1991, p. 205). In other words, although there is an overall instructional 
intent and a conjectured developmental route at any point, both are open 
to revision as the actual learning trajectory is realized in interaction in the 
classroom. In this regard, the process of enacting an instructional sequence 
illustrates the process of trail making discussed by Nemirovsky and Monk 
(chap. 6, this volume).
As a final observation, we again emphasize that the conjectured learning 
trajectory we have outlined is cast in the collectivist terms of classroom 
mathematical practices. In this regard, the focus is on the mathematical 
development of the classroom community rather than on that of any particular 
student. Of course, this does not imply that the students will all learn in 
lockstep. Instead, students make a range of qualitatively distinct mathematical 
interpretations even as they participate in the same classroom mathematical 
practices (cf. Cobb & Yackel, 1996). We should therefore stress that 
observations of individual students’ activity inform the process of revising 
the conjectured learning trajectory as an instructional sequence is enacted in 
the classroom (Simon, 1995). Further, individual students’ actual learning 
trajectories can be delineated by analyzing the development of their reasoning 
as they participate in the evolving classroom mathematical practices. In 
simultaneously viewing individual students’ mathematical activity as acts 
of participation, the analysis necessarily locates their learning in the social 
context of the classroom.
The Structuring Numbers Classroom Teaching Experiment
The Structuring Numbers sequence was one of two instructional sequences 
enacted during a 3-month teaching experiment conducted in a first-grade 
classroom. The class consisted of 7 boys and 11 girls, most of whom were 
from middle- or upper-middle-class families. The teacher with whom we 
collaborated, Ms. Smith, valued her students’ reasoning and wanted to further 
develop an instructional approach that capitalized on their contributions. The 
data corpus generated during the experiment comprised videotaped individual 
interviews conducted with all 18 children in September, December, and 
January; video recordings of additional interviews conducted with 10 children 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  251
in November; video recordings of 47 mathematics lessons; copies of all the 
students’ written work; and three sets of daily field notes. 
The first instructional sequence enacted in the teaching experiment was 
called Patterning and Partitioning. The rationale for this sequence is based on 
research indicating that using an arithmetic rack by grouping beads rather than 
by counting beads by one is itself a developmental achievement for young 
children. The instructional activities in the Patterning and Partitioning sequence 
focused on using finger patterns flexibly, on evaluating configurations of up 
to 10 items without counting (i.e., by patterning), and on generating different 
partitions of collections of up to 10 items (e.g., a picture collection of 8 items 
viewed as 7 and 1, 6 and 2, etc.). This latter type of instructional activity 
served as a precursor for the double-decker bus activity that was the starting 
point for the Structuring Numbers sequence.
A detailed analysis of the teaching experiment (Whitenack, 1995) indicated 
that the majority of the 18 students did come to act in an environment that 
was structured by relationships between numbers up to 20. We draw on this 
analysis first to document the classroom social and sociomathematical norms 
and then to describe the actual learning trajectory realized in the classroom.
Social and Sociomathematical Norms
Classroom social and Sociomathematical norms are central aspects of the 
classroom microculture within which instructional sequences are enacted. 
The microculture established in Ms. Smith’s classroom was one in which 
alternative interpretations were valued and respected. The general social 
norms she negotiated with her students included expectations that:
1.	The students would explain and justify their thinking when contributing 
to whole-class discussions.
2.	The students would listen to contributions made by their classmates.
3.	The students would indicate when they did not understand a classmate’s 
explanation or contribution and ask clarifying questions.
As these three norms indicate, the classroom microculture emphasized active 
participation and attempting to understand on the part of all students. In 
contrast to these general classroom social norms, Sociomathematical norms 
are specific to normative aspects of students’ mathematical activity (Yackel 
& Cobb, 1996). A Sociomathematical norm that was renegotiated throughout 
the teaching experiment was that of what counted as a different mathematical 
solution. Ms. Smith responded differentially to students’ contributions, 
indicating that she particularly valued non-counting solutions that she and the 
students came to call “grouping ways.” A detailed analysis of Ms. Smith’s 

252  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
role in proactively supporting her students’ mathematical learning indicates 
that this was an important aspect of her effectiveness as a reform teacher 
(McClain, 1995). In particular, the sociomathematical norms established by 
Ms. Smith and her students enabled the students to become aware of more 
sophisticated forms of mathematical reasoning, thereby making it possible 
for their problem solving efforts to have a sense of directionality (cf. Voigt, 
1995). In accomplishing this, however, Ms. Smith continued to accept and 
actively solicit counting solutions from students whom she judged were not 
yet able to develop grouping solutions. This ensured that all students had ways 
to actively participate in the evolving classroom mathematical practices.
As a consequence of Ms. Smith’s role in guiding the development of 
sociomathematical norms, various types of counting solutions that researchers 
would judge as different (e.g., counting all vs. counting on) were not judged 
as different in this classroom. In contrast, Ms. Smith and the students did 
differentiate between various types of grouping or thinking strategy solutions. 
These solutions were judged as different if they involved either (a) different 
quantitative interpretations (e.g., a task interpreted as 6+_=14 rather than 
14−6=_), or (b) different calculational processes such that numerical entities 
were decomposed and recomposed in different ways (e.g., solutions that used 
doubles and 10 as a point of reference were to be judged as different). As has 
been argued elsewhere, what counts as a different mathematical explanation can 
differ markedly from one classroom to another and can profoundly influence the 
mathematical understandings that students develop (Yackel & Cobb, 1996).
Documenting the Actual Learning Trajectory:  
The Evolution of Mathematical Practices
Our goal in describing the evolution of classroom mathematical practices is to 
document both the instructional sequence as it was realized in the classroom and 
the learning of the classroom community. In general, classroom mathematical 
practices evolve as the teacher and students discuss problems and solutions, and 
involve means of symbolizing, arguing, and validating in specific task situations 
(cf. Balacheff, 1990). The analysis of the Structuring Number sequence teaching 
experiment involved delineating the following five practices:
1.	Making configurations on the arithmetic rack.
2.	Describing configurations in terms of fives, tens, and doubles.
3.	Reasoning in terms of groups while solving addition and subtraction 
tasks.
4.	Reasoning in terms of number relations to make and evaluation 
configurations.
5.	Reasoning numerically to solve addition and subtraction tasks.

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  253
Mathematical Practice 1: Making Configurations on the Arithmetic Rack. 
Students participated in the initial mathematical practice by either counting 
beads by one or moving groups of beads to show a given number of people 
on the double-decker bus. During discussions of their solutions, an increasing 
number of students began to describe the resulting configurations in terms of 
groups. For example, students who had counted, say, seven individual beads 
on one rod sometimes explained that they had moved five and then two more 
beads, or that they had moved a group of seven beads. In these instances, the 
students appeared to reconceptualize their prior activity when they referred to 
beads to explain what they had done. As might be expected, some students 
continued to describe their solutions in terms of counting by ones. Although 
Ms. Smith accepted these explanations as well as those that involved grouping, 
she and the students implicitly negotiated that grouping solutions were more 
efficient and were therefore particularly valued.
An important aspect of these initial discussions was that, rather than asking 
the students to explain how they had actually made configurations, Ms. Smith 
asked them to describe the configurations that were shown on their racks. In 
doing so, she initiated exchanges that focused on ways of interpreting activity 
with the rack rather than on the specific sequences of actions that the students 
had carried out. This served to guard against the possibility that the use of the 
rack might become proceduralized.
One exchange that occurred during the second week of the sequence and 
on the second day that the students used the arithmetic rack illustrates the 
variety of their solutions. During this particular episode, Ms. Smith and the 
students discussed how one could show eight people sitting on the double-
decker bus. The discussion began as Ms. Smith called on one of the students, 
Amy, who explained that the configuration she had made was “four and 
four.” In redescribing Amy’s solution, Ms. Smith spoke as though Amy had 
intentionally made two groups of four.
Amy said that she showed a group of four on the top and a group of four on the 
bottom because a group of four and another group of four to make eight altogether 
on the bus. Raise your hand if you showed it the same way that Amy did. [Several 
students raise their hand]. Okay you can put your hands down.
Following this exchange, another student, Casey, offered a different solution 
in which he showed eight as five and three on the bottom rod. He explained, 
“Five plus three…okay you have five [makes finger-pattern for five] six, seven 
and eight [counts on as he raises three fingers on his other hand].” Ms. Smith 
then redescribed Casey’s explanation: 

254  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Casey thought of it as having all eight on the bottom but he looked at it as a group of 
five and a group of three [points to the five beads and then to the three beads on the 
bottom rod of a rack projected onto the white-board.]
In redescribing Casey’s explanation, Ms. Smith seemed to imply that he 
thought of eight as five and three before he made the configuration. Similar 
to the previous exchange with Amy, Ms. Smith appeared to interpret Casey’s 
solution as one that involved grouping. In contrast, when other students 
explained that they had counted by ones, she did not redescribe their solutions 
in terms of prior anticipations.
Through discussions such as these, Ms. Smith and the students negotiated 
that grouping solutions were particularly valued and that these solutions 
involved moving groups of beads rather than counting individual beads. 
Further, the way in which Ms. Smith attributed intentionality to the students’ 
explanations supported the development of these types of solutions and serves 
to illustrate her proactive role in this classroom. However, we should stress that 
students were not obliged to solve tasks in this manner. Ms. Smith encouraged 
students to participate in ways that made sense to them and continued to 
accept counting solutions. We saw no indications that students were merely 
attempting to mimic more sophisticated forms of reasoning.
Mathematical Practice 2: Describing Configurations in Terms of Fives, 
Tens, and Doubles. As Ms. Smith and the students continued to discuss 
solutions that involved making or evaluating configurations, explanations 
in which the students referred to groups of five and ten and, occasionally, 
to doubles emerged as a distinct mathematical practice. Although we had 
anticipated this transition when we formulated the hypothesized learning 
trajectory, we did not specify the diverse ways in which students might 
participate in this practice. For example, during an activity called Rack Bingo 
some students counted all the beads in a configuration shown to them by the 
teacher. They could recognize five beads of one color as “five” after they had 
counted, but this seemed to signify a specific figural pattern of beads rather than 
a numerical quantity. In contrast, other students first counted five beads of one 
color and then reasoned in terms of groups to evaluate the entire configuration. 
For these students, the result of counting appeared to be a numerical quantity 
rather than a figural pattern. Finally, the remaining students did not count 
at all but instead reasoned in terms of groups, sometimes describing their 
solutions in terms of imagining the activity of creating groups of five from 
beads of different colors (e.g., three red and two white on different rods). 
The following episode, which took place during the fourth week of the 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  255
instructional sequence, further illustrates the different ways in which students 
explained their reasoning. As the episode began, Ms. Smith briefly showed a 
configuration of five beads on the top rod and eight on the bottom rod. She 
then called on one of the students, Donald:
Donald: 	
I saw thirteen because I saw five plus five and I know that  
makes ten.
T: 	
Yeah.
Donald: 	
…and add three more. When I got ten I just put it all, and I 
added the other numbers to make like one, two, three [makes a 
horizontal motion with his hand] and I got up to thirteen.
T: 	
Okay, Donald said he saw thirteen but he grouped them, he did 
group them. He grouped five and five to make ten and then he 
saw three more so that made it up to thirteen.
Grouping explanations of this type appeared to be readily comprehensible 
to most students and did not need further justification. By this point in the 
teaching experiment, it was fairly common for students to explain that five 
and five made ten, or that ten and so many more made n-teen. This is not to 
say that all the students interpreted the configurations in the same way. As we 
have indicated, although these ways of describing configurations had become 
a form of classroom practice, the students made a range of qualitatively 
different interpretations as they participated in this practice. We therefore 
emphasize that the mathematical practices we have identified focus on the 
mathematical development of the classroom community by documenting the 
evolving taken-as-shared basis for communication. One of the challenges 
when analyzing the actual learning trajectory of a classroom community is 
to document the different ways in which individual students participated in 
the practices.
Thus far, we have indicated that the practice of making configurations on 
the rack evolved into the practice of describing configurations in terms of 
fives, tens, and doubles. In this transition, aspects of students’ activity that 
were implicit when they participated in the first practice subsequently became 
explicit in the second practice. That is, reasoning in terms of groups emerged 
from the students’ initial activity of making configurations on the rack. In 
accounting for this transition, we have indicated the crucial supportive role 
of both the teacher and of the instructional activities. The rack bingo game 
was particularly important in supporting the shift from counting to grouping 
solutions in that efficient ways of enumerating configurations emerged as 
useful for the task at hand—namely, filling up their bingo cards. 

256  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Mathematical Practice 3: Reasoning in Terms of Groups While Solving 
Addition and Subtraction Tasks. As we have seen, the second mathematical 
practice involved reasoning in terms of groups to evaluate a given configuration. 
The third mathematical practice emerged as a natural extension when the 
students solved addition and subtraction tasks presented in the setting of the 
double-decker bus scenario. In the case of addition tasks, the third practice 
involved first showing the initial number of passengers and then the additional 
passengers who got on the bus by moving beads on the top and bottom rods, 
respectively. Most students then reasoned in terms of fives, tens, and doubles 
to evaluate the resulting configuration. For example, when asked to find how 
many people were on the bus if there were initially eight passengers and seven 
more got on, many students moved eight beads on the top rod and seven on 
the bottom rod. Some then evaluated this configuration by reasoning that 8 
and 2 (from the 7) made 10, and 5 more was 15. Others explained that two 
fives (one on the top and one on the bottom) made 10, and 5 more made 15. 
Although this practice did not constitute a major advance over the second 
practice, its significance becomes apparent when we discuss the emergence of 
the subsequent practices.
Mathematical Practice 4: Reasoning in Terms of Number Relations 
to Make and Evaluate Configurations. The fourth mathematical practice 
emerged as the students continued to solve addition and subtraction tasks 
posed in the setting of the double-decker bus scenario. It involved a shift from 
moving beads on the top and bottom rods and then evaluating the resulting 
configuration to creating configurations flexibly by making groupings that 
facilitated the enumeration. In other words, although students had participated 
in the third mathematical practice by reasoning in terms of groups that they 
happened to have established, they participated in the fourth practice by 
proactively anticipating bead configurations in ways that would facilitate 
enumerating the collection. Further, although groups had previously been 
ready-to-hand when evaluating configurations, numerical relationships now 
emerged as ready-to-hand as when making configurations. For example, 
instead of solving the task corresponding to 8+7 by moving eight beads on 
the top rod and seven on the bottom, some students moved eight and two 
more on the top and then five on the bottom because they anticpated that 
this would be easier to evaluate. From our perspective as observers, these 
students’ activity with the rack appeared to involve an anticipatory going-
through-ten strategy. As we see later, the way in which Ms. Smith notated the 
students’ reasoning played an important role in supporting the emergence of 
this fourth mathematical practice. 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  257
To clarify this shift in mathematical practice, consider an episode that 
occurred during the fifth week of the Structuring Numbers sequence. In this 
episode, Ms. Smith wrote the number sentence 6+7=_ on the whiteboard 
and asked the students to determine the number of people on the bus. Most 
students used arithmetic racks to solve this task. In the subsequent discussion, 
one student, Kendra, explained her answer of 13 as follows:
Because I know that six plus six is twelve and I know that, I know that seven plus 
seven is fourteen and thirteen is in the middle between… between twelve and 
fourteen so I think it would be thirteen.
Kendra did not appear to refer to her actions with the arithmetic rack as 
she gave this explanation. However, when Ms. Smith redescribed Kendra’s 
explanation, she turned on the overhead projector and used an overhead 
version of the arithmetic rack to show a configuration of six beads on the top 
rod and seven on the bottom rod and then continued:
Kendra thought about something she knows, six plus six…a group of six and six is 
twelve [moves one bead off the bottom rod to show six and six] and she knows that a 
group of seven and seven is fourteen [moves one bead onto both the top and bottom 
rods to make seven beads on each] and fourteen, so she had six and seven and that 
would be thirteen [moves one bead off the top rod].
As she spoke, Ms. Smith notated her actions with the arithmetic rack, writing 
6+6=12, then 7+7=14 below, and finally 6+7=13 between the first two 
sentences (see Fig. 7.5a).
As the discussion continued, two other students explained that they had 
solved the task differently. The first student, Leigh, explained that she moved 
six on the top rod and seven on the bottom rod and then evaluated the resulting 
configurations to arrive at an answer of 13. 
FIG. 7.5. Ways of Rotating (a) Kendra’s, (b) Leigh’s, and (c) Donald’s solutions to 6+7.

258  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
And I saw that [it would] make ten [referring to the two fives on the top and bottom 
rods] and one would make eleven [referring to the white bead on the top rod] so 
these two [two white beads on the bottom rod] would make thirteen.
Although Ms. Smith redescribed this solution by using the overhead arithmetic 
rack, she did not notate it by writing number sentences. Significantly, as Leigh 
had first made a configuration and then evaluated it rather than anticipating a 
configuration, her solution would have been cumbersome to notate (a possible 
way of notating this solution is shown in Fig. 7.5b). Thus, in differentially 
notating some solutions but not others, Ms. Smith supported the development 
of anticipatory solutions and implicitly indicated that these solutions were 
particularly valued. In addition, her notating encouraged the students to 
interpret their activity with the rack in terms of numerical relations rather than 
groupings of beads.
The third student who gave an explanation, Donald, did not refer to the 
rack but instead said, “I think it’s 13 because um, because um, I [went] up 
to seven and I took [three] out of the six and it left me with three so I know 
that um ten plus three is um 13.” Ms. Smith notated his solution as shown in 
Fig. 7.5c. In contrast to Leigh, Donald described his activity with the rack in 
terms of numerical relationships that appeared to be ready-to-hand for him. 
In notating his solution, Ms. Smith made it possible for the going-through-ten 
strategy implicit in his reasoning to become an explicit topic of conversation.
In summary, as the fourth mathematical practice emerged, the focus of 
discussions shifted from evaluating already established configurations to 
describing anticipatory ways of acting with the rack in terms of numerical 
relationships. Thus, although most of the students had previously thought of 
six as five and one more, this and other relationships were now ready to hand 
as they solved tasks.
Mathematical Practice 5: Reasoning Numerically to Solve Addition and 
Subtraction Tasks. Although students spoke of numerical relationships as 
they participated in the fourth mathematical practice, imagery of acting with 
the rack appeared to be implicit in many of their explanations. In contrast, 
students no longer relied on this imagery to support their reasoning when they 
participated in the fifth mathematical practice. The numerical relationships 
that they had previously anticipated when making configurations on the rack 
had now taken on lives of their own when the students solved tasks posed in a 
variety of different scenarios by reasoning with written notations.
We illustrate this final shift in mathematical practices by examining an 
episode that occurred at the end of the instructional sequence. In this episode, 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  259
Ms. Smith posed a task corresponding to 8+9=_. First, Jordan explained that he 
had counted on two fours from nine. Several other students then explained their 
solutions, which Ms. Smith redescribed and notated as shown in Fig. 7.6.
FIG. 7.6. Ms. Smith’s notations for (a) Bob’s, (b) Karen’s, (c) Amy’s, (d) Leigh’s, and (e) 
Joseph’s solutions.
T: 	
Okay. Thank you. Jordan said he did it by counting… Did 
someone else figure it out a different way? Bob?
Bob: 	
I knew if you took one, if you had nine and then…plus eight and 
then you took one away from the eight and put it with the nine 
and you would have seven left and that would make seventeen 
[notates as shown in Fig. 7.6a].
T: 	
Did you understand what Bob said? Did that make sense? Did 
someone do it a different way? Karen?
Karen: 	
I knew that if eight plus eight was sixteen and you have one 
more it would be seventeen [notates as shown in Fig. 7.6b].
These explanations indicate that Karen had used a doubles as a reference whereas 
Bob had used ten as a reference point. The discussion continued as follows:
T: 	
Ah, Amy, another way?
Amy: 	
I thought about nine plus nine be eighteen and if I had eight 
plus nine then that would be seventeen [notates as shown in 
Fig. 7.6c].
T: 	
[Redescribes Amy’s solution method] Another way, Leigh?
Leigh: 	
I thought about eight plus eight equals sixteen and nine plus 
nine equals eighteen so um I thought about it, it should be in 
the middle so nine plus eight should be seventeen [notates as 
shown in Fig. 7.6d].
Jos: 	
Um I had like ah, I took the nine away. I mean I take, I took like 
two away from the nine and put it with the eight and that would 
make ten and I had about seven more [inaudible] [notates as 
shown in Fig. 7.6e].
T: 	
Okay. Joseph was still making it up to ten, he broke up the nine 
instead of the eight. He broke up the nine and used the two to 

260  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
go with the eight to make eight and two is ten, and ten plus the 
seven he had left over to make seventeen [points to the notation 
on the board recording Joseph’s solution method].
The fact that none of the students reiterated a solution that had already been 
explained indicates that the subtle differences between the various solution 
methods were taken-as-shared. Further, to avoid repetition, the students must 
have been monitoring the contributions of their classmates and differentiating 
them from their own solutions (cf. Yackel & Cobb, 1996). Ms. Smith’s notating 
supported this process by providing records of previously explained solutions.
To investigate the ways of notating that the students had developed as they 
participated in exchanges such as those illustrated in the sample episodes, Ms. 
Smith asked them to make records of their thinking when they solved tasks i	
ndividually so that other students could understand their reasoning. The 
challenge of symbolizing their thinking proved to be relatively unproblematic 
for most students. Four students’ symbolizations to a task corresponding to 
8+6 are shown in Fig. 7.7. As can be seen, only the first child’s way of notating 
is entirely consistent with that of the teacher. The other three students had 
adapted aspects of Ms. Smith’s notation in original ways. This suggests that 
although the students understood Ms. Smith’s redescriptions of their solutions, 
they were not obliged to mimic her way of notating but could instead devise 
notations that both supported and expressed their reasoning.
Our analysis of this fifth mathematical practice reflects the claim that 
reasoning with numerical quantities had become institutionalized in the 
teaching experiment classroom by the end of the instructional sequence. This, 
FIG. 7.7. Students’ symbolizations of their reasoning when solving a task corresponding 
to 8+6.

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  261
of course, is not to say that the students interpreted and solved tasks in identical 
ways. Although reasoning numerically was routine for the majority of the 
students, some participated in the fifth practice by using the arithmetic rack 
as necessary or by counting. The exchange with Jordan in the sample episode 
indicates that Ms. Smith continued to accept a wide range of explanations while 
indicating that thinking strategy solutions were particularly valued. Thus, the 
students participated in and contributed to the evolution of the mathematical 
practices that constituted the social situation of their development in diverse 
and personally meaningful ways.
Reflection: Symbolizing and the Emergence  
of a Mathematical Environment
The analysis of the classroom mathematical practices indicates that many 
of the conjectures we formulated when outlining the hypothesized learning 
trajectory proved to be viable when we conducted the teaching experiment 
in collaboration with Ms. Smith. However, the analysis clarifies both the 
diversity of individual students’ mathematical reasoning and the process 
of the classroom community’s collective mathematical development. With 
regard to this latter issue, the analysis also illustrates the four levels of activity 
shown in Fig. 7.1. Initially, the students acted in the task setting when they 
and the teacher acted out riding on a double-deck bus. In contrast, the first 
three mathematical practices involved referential activity in that using the 
arithmetic rack was institutionalized as a model of activity in the double-decker 
bus scenario. The fourth mathematical practice involved general activity in 
that use of the rack was institutionalized as a model for numerical reasoning. 
Finally, the fifth mathematical practice involved reasoning with numerical 
relations without the support of the rack.
This actual learning trajectory exemplifies Freudenthal’s (1991) contention 
that “mathematics should start and stay within common sense.” Freudenthal 
intended this adage to be interpreted dynamically and argued that common 
sense is not static. He noted, for example, that what is common sense for 
a mathematician differs significantly from what is common sense for a 
layperson. In addition, he emphasized that common sense evolves in the course 
of learning. Thus, in the first phase of the actual learning trajectory, riding a 
double-decker bus scenario was established as a commonsense activity. By 
the end of the teaching experiment, acting in an environment structured in 
terms of numerical relations had become common sense. Freudenthal further 
clarified his position by substituting the term reality for common sense: “I 
prefer to apply the term ‘reality’ to that which at a certain stage common 
sense experiences as real” (Freudenthal, 1991, p. 17). This use of the term 

262  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
reality in Realistic Mathematics Education (RME) is highly compatible with 
Greeno’s (1991) environmental metaphor and emphasizes that the overall 
goal of instructional design is to support the gradual emergence of a taken-as-
shared mathematical reality in the classroom.
FIG. 7.8. The chain of signification that emerged during the teaching experiment
Throughout the analysis, we have emphasized the crucial role that 
symbolizing played in the evolution of the classroom mathematical practices 
and thus in the emergence of a mathematical reality. The ways of symbolizing 
that Ms. Smith and the students established in fact constituted a chain of 
signification (Cobb, Gravemeijer, Yackel, McClain, & Whitenack, 1997; 
Walkerdine, 1988; Whitson, 1997). The basic component of a chain of 
signification is a sign, where a sign is thought of as a semantic relation between 
a signifier and a signified. A new link in the chain is established when a sign 
itself becomes the signified for a new signifier. The chain of signification 
established during the teaching experiment is shown in Fig. 7.8.7
In Fig. 7.8, sign 1 consists of the semantic relation between signified 1 (the 
distribution of passengers on the double-decker bus) and signifier 1 (the beads 
on the two rods of the rack). This sign subsequently became the signified 2 for 
the nonstandard notations that Ms. Smith initially introduced (signifier 2), and 
the semantic relation between them constituted sign 2. We can also envision 
that sign 2 might itself become the signified 3 for more conventional ways of 
notating (signifier 3). 
7	
This chain of signification is somewhat simplified in that it does not take account of the semantic 
relations established during the Patterning and Partitioning sequence that immediately preceded 
the Structuring Numbers sequence. In addition, the chain is drawn linearly and does not show 
variations in task settings.

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  263
It is important to stress that this chain of signification emerged as the 
classroom mathematical practices evolved. As Walkerdine (1988) noted, 
signifiers such as the arithmetic rack and informal notations were initially 
established as substitutes for preceding terms, with the assumption that the 
meaning of those terms would be preserved through the links of the chain. 
However, Walkerdine went on to argue that an original sign combination (i.e., 
distribution of passengers on the double-decker bus/beads on the two rods 
of the rack) is not merely concealed behind succeeding signifiers. Instead, 
the meaning of the sign evolves as the chain is constituted. Walkerdine’s 
fundamental contention was that a sign combination that originates in a 
particular practice slides under succeeding signifiers that originate in other 
practices motivated by different concerns and interests. In the case of the 
Structuring Numbers sequence, sign 1 was initially constituted within a 
narrative about people riding a double-decker bus. The concerns and interests in 
the first mathematical practice were those of using the arithmetic rack to show 
how passengers could be seated on the bus. Later, as the students participated 
in the fifth mathematical practice, the concerns and interests were primarily 
mathematical and involved reasoning in terms of numerical relationships.
This account of signs sliding under succeeding signifiers provides a semiotic 
analysis of the process of mathematization that occurred during the teaching 
experiment. The crucial aspect of this analysis for our purposes is that the 
process of a sign sliding under a signifier corresponds to the model-of/model-
for transition that is central to RME. This correspondence illustrates that RME 
is a design theory that proactively exploits the constitution of semiotic processes 
as a means of supporting students’ mathematical development. Further, 
Walkerdine’s (1988) perspective enriches the design theory. For example, we 
have seen that formulating a conjectured learning trajectory when planning an 
instructional sequence involves, in part, specifying possible model-of/model-
for transitions. Walkerdine’s work emphasizes the importance of locating 
these transitions in social context by considering the possible practices within 
which acts of signification or modeling might originate.
In summary, our intent in describing the evolution of mathematical practices 
in one classroom has been to document the mathematical development of a 
classroom community over an extended period of time. In reflecting on the 
analysis, we have brought semiotic processes of symbolizing and modeling 
to the fore. Viewed in this way, the negotiation of ways of modeling did not 
stand apart from classroom mathematical practices but was instead a central 
aspect of their evolution. We therefore follow Meira (1995) in emphasizing 
that the meaning of symbolizations cannot be separated from the activity of 
symbolizing (cf. Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, and Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 6, 

264  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
this volume). In the next section of this chapter, we address the question of 
how collective symbolic meanings evolve in more general terms by examining 
cases from the history of mathematics.
A BROADER PERSPECTIVE ON  
SYMBOLIZING AND MEANING
As the discussion of the Structuring Numbers sequence makes clear, 
symbolizing is not restricted to reasoning with conventional mathematical 
symbolizations, but also includes inventing (and, in some cases, reinventing) 
alternative symbol systems. In the history of mathematics, the development 
of these two types of symbolizations can be seen as two aspects of a single 
process. On the one hand, conventional symbolizations were established as 
culturally accepted ways to communicate mathematical ideas. On the other 
hand, newly invented symbolizations arose as mathematicians struggled 
to develop new ideas and understandings. These new ways, in turn, often 
called into question prevailing ways of reasoning and symbolizing. As a 
consequence, standard ways of symbolizing frequently became subject to a 
process of analysis, reflection, and mathematization. Two broad phases can 
be discerned in this process of mathematization. First, the meanings of the 
newly invented symbolizations were intimately connected with the settings 
from which they were derived. Later, this connection gradually moved into 
the background and the new symbolizations began to be interpreted apart 
from their original settings. As a consequence, the symbols began to develop 
meanings within the broader context of mathematical activity. As Bednarz et 
al. (1993) noted, Descartes and Leibniz each stressed one of these two general 
phases in the mathematization process.
For Descartes, the connection between symbolizations and the setting from 
which they derived was critical. In his view, the value of symbolizations was 
to “keep track of reasoning in a succinct fashion” (Bednarz et al., 1993). 
Leibnitz, on the other hand, stressed the use of symbolizations that were 
detached from their origin. For him, the function associated with symbolic 
writing “not only helps the reasoning, it replaces it. In fact, it dispenses the 
mind from ‘thinking’ the concepts it handles, by substituting calculation for 
reasoning, the sign for the thing signified” (Corturat, cited by Bednarz et al., 
1993). This view highlights the value of using standard, well-established 
symbolizations that make it possible to perform computations routinely 
and efficiently without having to attend consciously to their meaning. We 
may infer, however, that Leibnitz also valued the fact that the substitution 
of signifiers for signifieds could lead to the creation of new mathematical 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  265
environments.8 His emphasis on the role of signification in the development 
of mathematical ideas is consistent with Sfard’s (1991) discussion of the 
process of reification wherein actions with symbols that signify mathematical 
entities subsequently themselves become mathematical entities. We can 
further clarify this process by taking the historical development of the use of 
letters as symbols in algebra as an example. In doing so, we interpret the shift 
from one source of meaning to the other in terms of RME design theory.
According to Harper (1987), one can identify three broad phases of the 
historical development of algebra: pre-Diophantes, from Diophantes through 
Vièta, and post Vièta. Major steps in this development included Diophantes’ 
introduction of letters to denote unknown quantities, and Vièta’s use of letters 
for known quantities. Vièta’s extension of the use of letters from unknown to 
known quantities was critical in that it created opportunities for generalization. 
This sequence of developments can be interpreted in terms of the four levels 
of activity that characterize model-of/model-for transitions as shown in Fig. 
7.1. In Diophantes’ approach, although the unknown quantities were truly 
unknown, they were also fixed. This was because Diophantes’ algebraic 
description mathematized a specific setting. In other words, his use of letters 
was comparable with what we have called a model of the specific setting, in the 
sense that we can situate this use of letters at the level of referential activity. 
The letters derive their meaning from the specific setting they refer to. Vièta’s 
approach was more general in that the “known” quantities could be filled in 
afterward. As a consequence, the unknowns were not fixed, and thus not tied 
to a specific question. Vièta’s approach can therefore be situated at the level of 
general activity in that algebraic expressions were used by him to express and 
support reasoning about relations between variables. The development from 
Diophantes’ to Vièta’s approach can therefore be seen to involve a model-
of/model-for transition in the course of which letters or, better, variables 
took on a life of their own and became entities in their own right. Before this 
shift occurred, the meaning of letters was tied closely to the setting that was 
symbolized, as Descartes suggested. After the shift occurred, a variable could 
be treated as an independent symbol as Leibniz suggested.
This transition was not, of course, the final chapter in the development of 
algebra. Instead, the activity of using algebraic symbols came to be viewed as a 
system that could itself be investigated and analyzed. As an example, consider 
procedures for simplifying equations. At first, algebraic expressions were 
interpreted as descriptions of arithmetical calculations. Later, attention shifted 
8	
Bednarz et al. (1993) noted that, in Leibnitz’s view, “the organization of the words/signs contributes 
and precedes the organization of ideas.”

266  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
to the structure of expressions. As a consequence, experienced mathematicians 
were able to interpret an expression as composed of “chunks” more complex 
than a simple variable. In grasping the structure of an expression in this direct 
manner, they are acting in a mathematical environment in which algebraic 
relations are ready-to-hand for them in much the same manner that numerical 
relations were readyto-hand for the first graders in the teaching experiment 
classroom. For example, a mathematician might view an expression such as 
5(sin x−2)2+3 (sin x−2)=7 as a quadratic equation in (sin x−2). On the other 
hand, the expression 5(sin x−2)2+3(sin π/4−2)=7 might be seen as an addition 
that can be turned into a subtraction—5(sin x−2)2=7−3 (sin π/4−2)—in order 
to solve for x. In this regard, Wenger (1987) spoke of a “global substitution 
principle” wherein the expression 5(sin x−2)2+ 3(sin π/4−2)=7 is thought of as 
A+B=C, and can therefore be immediately transformed into A=C−B.
In reflecting on this process of algebraization, we may note that for the 
mathematician, the activity of reasoning with algebraic relations eventually 
takes the character of acting in an algebraic environment—when we may 
borrow Greeno’s (1991) metaphor of an environment. In terms of the RME 
design theory, we may situate this activity at the level of formal mathematical 
reasoning, while at the same time denoting “formal mathematical reasoning” 
as a form of reasoning that builds on arguments that are located in such a 
newly formed mathematical reality. Thus, in this account of the history of 
algebra, we see the gradual emergence of new mathematical reality. Further, 
we contend that the two sources of meaning for symbolizations emphasized 
by Descartes and by Leibniz are equally important in this process; they are, 
so to say, two sides of the same coin. Against this background, we question 
the common characterization of shifts in the level of activity as abstractions 
in the sense that the connections with the settings in which the symbolizations 
originated are severed. Instead, we see greater value in descriptions that are cast 
in terms of reification (Sfard, 1991). Described in this way, mathematization 
is not a destructive process of cutting ties to underlying phenomena, but is 
instead a constructive process of creating a new reality in which the meanings 
of underlying phenomena evolve as they are mathematized. Accounts of this 
type fit with the view of mathematics inherent in RME design theory as it is 
summarized by Freudenthal’s notion of mathematics as a human activity.
Note that a similar constructive process of creating a new reality can be 
discerned in the development of number. Here, the children start out with 
number words that first play a nominative role in the activity of counting. For 
instance, when a student is asked to find out how many candies are pictured, the 
student may solve the task by counting the candies with number words. Over 
time, the result of this process becomes reified such that the number becomes 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  267
a referent for a quantity. As students engage in further activities involving 
the structuring of quantities, they develop number relations and, at the same 
time, further develop the notion of a quantity as an object-like entity in and of 
itself. In this process, the explicit references to the objects that constitute the 
quantity gradually drop out of the student’s description. One reason for this is 
that, when reasoning with the rack, which objects are referred to becomes self-
evident for the student. Another reason is that a second shift is taking place in 
which the student’s view of numbers makes a transition from characterizations 
of sets of objects (e.g., eight beads, eight bus passengers, etc.) to numbers as 
mathematical entities. Crudely stated, this shift can be seen as a transition 
from viewing numbers as adjectives (“eight beads”) to viewing numbers as 
nouns (“eight”). For the student, a number viewed as a mathematical entity 
still has quantitative meaning, but this meaning is no longer dependent on its 
connection with an identifiable quantity. In the student’s experienced world, 
numbers viewed as mathematical entities derive their meaning from their 
place in a network of number relations. Such a network may include relations 
such as 8=5+3; 8=4+4; or 8=10−2. For our purposes, the critical aspect of this 
network is that the students’ understanding of these relations transcends the 
context of beads, bus passengers, or other countable objects. That is, when 
students form notions of mathematical entities, they view these relations as 
holding for any eight objects.
In our view, this shift from numbers as referents to numbers as 
mathematical entities—in the enactment of the sequence—is reflexively 
related to the model-of to model-for transition described earlier. On the one 
hand, the students’ activity of structuring quantities as they act with the rack 
fosters the constitution of a framework of number relations. On the other 
hand, through the students’ development of this framework of number 
relations, the students’ activity with the rack can take on its role as a model 
for mathematical reasoning.
In sum, we may remark that we see clear parallels between the history of 
algebra and the process of the first graders’ mathematical development both 
as it was conceptualized when formulating a hypothetical learning trajectory 
and as it was analyzed when delineating the actual learning trajectory. At 
the risk of using a much abused term, that of authenticity, we contend that 
RME design theory offers an authentic description of both the process of 
mathematization and the means of enabling students to participate in it. In 
using the term authentic in this manner, we are not focusing on observable 
features of instructional tasks such as whether they fit with students’ out-of-
school experiences. Nor are we focusing on specific characteristics of what 
is traditionally called mathematical content. For example, our focus on the 

268  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
historical development of algebra does not imply either that manipulating 
algebraic expressions is the only authentic form of algebraic activity or that 
it should be the primary instructional goal in school. Instead, we use the term 
authentic to refer to the process by which mathematical realities are created. 
Instructional sequences developed in line with RME are authentic in the sense 
that they involve a conjectured process of mathematization by which students 
might come to act in a mathematical environment.
CLOSING ARGUMENTS
In the first part of this chapter, we contrasted two alternative approaches to 
instructional design, the exploratory and the expressive approaches. Against 
this background, we then discussed a third approach in some detail, that 
of RME, by taking the Structuring Numbers sequence as a paradigmatic 
example. These three approaches share several points in common that serve 
to differentiate them from traditional approaches to instructional design. 
For example, each approach takes what is experientially real to students as 
the starting point for the learning process. Further, all three have similar 
endpoints in mind, namely, that students will come to act in a mathematical 
environment in powerful ways. In addition, proponents of all three approaches 
emphasize the critical role of symbolizing in mathematical development and 
challenge the traditional dichotomy between internal concepts and external 
symbolizations. Instead, in each approach, symbolizing is seen to be a central 
aspect of mathematical reasoning.
Differences between the approaches concern the way in which each 
attempts to support students’ mathematical development by capitalizing on 
their constructive activities. We saw that in the expressive approach, the intent 
is to encourage students to develop their own ways of symbolizing with limited 
guidance from the teacher. However, an issue that remains to be addressed 
by proponents of this approach is that of coping with the tension between 
accepting the symbolizations that students invent and attaining the instructional 
goal of enabling students to reason with culturally accepted symbolizations in 
powerful ways. Proponents of the exploratory approach address this tension by 
introducing conventional ways of symbolizing from the outset and attempting 
to link them to students’ everyday experiences or actions. As we saw, this 
linkage is typically effected by using computer systems that enable students to 
test their developing interpretations of conventional symbolizations.
A key issue that differentiates RME design theory from both the 
expressive and the exploratory approaches is the emphasis that it places on 
the formulation of conjectured learning trajectories as part of the design 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  269
process. For example, we noted that the analysis of instruction consistent with 
the expressive approach can inform the development of such trajectories. 
However, proponents of this approach do not typically outline a hypothetical 
trajectory from students’ initial, informal ways of symbolizing and reasoning 
to more sophisticated ways of reasoning that involve the use of conventional 
symbolizations. Similarly, proponents of the exploratory approach discuss 
the value of linkages between students’ personally meaningful activity and 
conventional ways of symbolizing, but do not typically propose a learning 
trajectory by which students might come to reason with those symbolizations 
in powerful ways. As a consequence, the teacher is offered little guidance 
in terms of either the types of instructional activities to use or the kinds of 
questions to pose.
In presenting the example of the Structuring Numbers sequence, we 
illustrated how RME’s heuristics of reinvention, didactical phenomenology, 
and emergent models serve to guide the development of hypothetical learning 
trajectories that can be investigated and revised while experimenting in the 
classroom. This example also illustrates that the RME approach to design is 
consistent with aspects of both the expressive and the exploratory approaches. 
In line with the expressive approach, the intent of the Structuring Numbers 
sequence was to support the gradual emergence of increasingly sophisticated 
ways of reasoning and symbolizing. However, we also saw that the teacher 
introduced particular ways of symbolizing at certain points in the instructional 
sequence. This is reminiscent of the exploratory approach in that the students 
were expected to develop personally meaningful ways of reasoning with these 
symbolizations. In this regard, designers who follow the RME approach have 
to cope with the inevitable tension between the expressive ideal of building 
on students’ contributions and deciding in advance which symbolizations 
students might come to use. The aspect of RME theory that makes this 
tension tractable is that the selected ways of symbolizing are designed to fit 
with the ways of reasoning that students have developed at particular points 
in the instructional sequence. For example, we described how, against the 
background of the prior Patterning and Partitioning sequence, students’ 
activity with the arithmetic rack was designed to fit with ways of reasoning 
documented in the research literature. Later, we described how the teacher 
used nonstandard symbolizations to record the students’ solutions. The 
analysis indicates that these ways of symbolizing did fit with students’ activity 
and that they played a crucial role in supporting the students’ development. 
Nonetheless, in reflecting back on the teaching experiment, we have come to 
question the relatively limited role of students’ contributions and therefore 
question the direct way in which the symbolizations were introduced. As a 

270  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
consequence, one of the revisions we are making to the Structuring Numbers 
sequence is to develop instructional activities in which the need to develop 
ways of symbolizing might itself become an explicit topic of discussion. This 
would then support students’ development of metarepresentational knowledge 
(diSessa et al., 1991). Further, students might then view conventional ways of 
symbolizing as a means of resolving a problem.
A second fundamental issue that differentiates RME from the expressive 
and exploratory approaches is the manner in which it takes account both of 
the collective mathematical development of the classroom community and 
of the mathematical learning of the individual students who participate in it. 
For example, we illustrated that hypothetical learning trajectories embody 
conjectures about the possible learning route of the classroom community 
and involve expectations about the social and sociomathematical norms. 
Further, we discussed how collective mathematical development can be 
analyzed in terms of the evolution of classroom mathematical practices. In 
doing so, we also indicated the diverse ways in which the individual students 
participated in the mathematical practices we identified. In our view, this dual 
focus on communal norms and practices and on individual students’ socially 
situated mathematical understandings is a major strength of RME design 
theory. In particular, RME is aligned with recent theoretical developments 
in mathematics education that emphasize the socially and culturally situated 
nature of mathematical activity.
In conclusion, it is important to stress that RME is not a prescriptive 
theory whose application will ensure that a particular vision of mathematics 
education will be achieved. RME is instead a theory that has emerged from 
and continues to be grounded in the practical activity of designing. Its 
contribution lies in the guidance it offers as we develop conjectures of possible 
ways of supporting students’ mathematical development and investigate 
those conjectures while experimenting in classrooms. The example of the 
Structuring Numbers sequence documents a case in which that guidance 
proved to be of great value.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The general theoretical analysis reported in this paper was supported by the 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement under grant R305A60007. 
The analysis of the sample instructional sequence was supported by the 
National Science Foundation under grant RED-9353587. The opinions 
expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of either the National Science 
Foundation or OERI.

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  271
REFERENCES
Bakhtin, M.M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. Austin: University of Texas 
Press.
Balacheff, N. (1990). Towards a problematique for research on mathematics teaching. 
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 21, 258–272.
Ball, D. (1993). With an eye on the mathematical horizon: Dilemmas of teaching elementary 
school mathematics. Elementary School Journal, 93, 373–397.
Bednarz, N., Dufour-Janvier, B., Poirier, L., & Bacon, L. (1993). Socioconstructivist 
viewpoint on the use of symbolism in mathematics education. Alberta Journal of 
Educational Research, 39, 41–58.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. 
Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32–42.
Cobb, P. (1996, December). Instructional design and reform: A plea for developmental 
research in context. Paper presented at the Meeting on the Role of Contexts and Models 
in Mathematical Learning, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Cobb, P., Boufi, A., McClain, K., & Whitenack, J. (1997). Reflective discourse and collective 
reflection. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 28, 258–277.
Cobb, P., Gravemeijer, K., Yackel, E., McClain, K., & Whitenack, J. (1997). Mathematizing 
and symbolizing: The emergence of chains of signification in one first-grade classroom. 
In D.Kirschner & J.A.Whitson (Eds.), Situated cognition theory: Social, semiotic, and 
neurological perspectives (pp. 151–233). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cobb, P., & Yackel, E. (1996). Constructivist, emergent, and sociocultural perspectives in the 
context of developmental research. Educational Psychologist, 31, 175–190.
diSessa, A.A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta-
representational expertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 117–160.
Doerr, H.M. (1995, April). An integrated approach to mathematical modeling: A classroom 
study. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, San Francisco.
Dörfler, W. (1993). Computer use and views of the mind. In C.Keitel & K.Ruthven (Eds.), 
Learning from computers: Mathematics education and technology (pp. 159–186). New 
York: Springer-Verlag.
Ernest, P. (1991). The philosophy of mathematics education. London: Falmer Press.
Fletcher, R.J. (1988). The power of five: The step before the power of ten. Arithmetic Teacher, 
34, 5–10.
Freudenthal, H. (1971). Geometry between the devil and the deep sea. Educational Studies 
in Mathematics, 3, 413–435.
Freudenthal, H. (1973). Mathematics as an educational task. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
Reidel.
Freudenthal, H. (1983). Didactical phenomenology of mathematical structures. Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands: Reidel.
Freudenthal, H. (1991). Revisiting mathematics education. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
Kluwer.
Gravemeijer, K. (1990). Context problems and realistic mathematics instruction. In K.P.E. 
Gravemeijer, M.van den Heuvel, & L.Streefland (Eds.), Contexts, free productions, 
tests and geometry in mathematics education (pp. 10–32). Utrecht, The Netherlands: 
OW&OC.

272  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Gravemeijer, K. (1994a). Educational development and educational research in mathematics 
education. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 25, 443–471.
Gravemeijer, K.P.E. (1994b). Developing realistic mathematics education. Utrecht, The 
Netherlands: CD-β Press.
Gravemeijer, K. (1996, December). Instructional design for reform in mathematics education. 
Paper presented at the Meeting on the Role of Contexts and Models in Mathematical 
Learning, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Gravemeijer, K. (1998). Developmental research as a research method. In J.Kilpatrick & A. 
Sierpinska (Eds.), Mathematics Education as a Research Domain: A Search for Identity 
(ICMI Study Publication) (Book 2, pp. 277–295). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Greeno, J.G. (1991). Number sense as situated knowing in a conceptual domain. Journal for 
Research in Mathematics Education, 22, 170–218.
Harper, E. (1987). Ghost of Diophantes. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 18, 75–90.
Hatano, G. (1982). Learning to add and subtract: a Japanese perspective. In J.P.Carpenter, 
J.M.Moser, & T.A.Romberg (Eds.), Addition and subtraction: A cognitive perspective 
(pp. 211–224). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kaput, J.J. (1994). The representational roles of technology in connecting mathematics 
with authentic experience. In R.Biehler, R.W.Scholz, R.Sträßer, & B.Winkelmann 
(Eds.), Didactics of mathematics as a scientific discipline (pp. 379–397). Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands: Kluwer.
McClain, K. (1995). An analysis of the teacher’s proactive role in supporting students’ 
mathematical development. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN.
McClain, K., & Cobb, P. (1998). The role of imagery and discourse in supporting students’ 
mathematical development. In M.Lampert & M.Blunk (Eds.), Mathematical talk and 
school learning: Where, what, and how (pp. 56–81). New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Meira, L. (1995). The microevolution of mathematical representations in children’s activity. 
Cognition and Instruction, 13, 269–313.
Nemirovsky, R. (1994). On ways of symbolizing: The case of Laura and velocity sign. 
Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 13, 389–422.
Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). The construction zone: Working for cognitive 
change in school. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic 
Books.
Pea, R.D. (1993). Practices of distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. 
Solomon (Ed.), Distributed cognitions (pp. 47–87). New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Pirie, S., & Kieren, T. (1994). Growth in mathematical understanding: How can we 
characterize it and how can we represent it? Educational Studies in Mathematics, 26, 
61–86.
Radatz, H., & Schipper, W. (1983). Handbuch für den Mathematikunterricht an Grundschulen. 
Hannover, Germany: Schroedel.
Schoenfeld, A.H. (1987). What’s all the fuss about metacognition? In A.H.Schoenfeld (Ed.), 
Cognitive science and mathematics education (pp. 189–216). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Sfard, A. (1991). On the dual nature of mathematical conceptions: Reflections on processes 

Symbolizing, Modeling, and Instructional Design  273
and objects as different sides of the same coin. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 22, 
1–36.
Sfard, A. (1994, September). The development of the concept of concept development: From 
God’s eye view to what can be seen with the mind’s eye. Paper presented at the Symposium 
on Trends and Perspectives in Mathematics Education, Klagenfurt, Austria.
Simon, M.A. (1995). Reconstructing mathematics pedagogy from a constructivist perspective. 
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 26, 114–145.
Steffe, L.P., Cobb, P., & von Glasersfeld, E. (1988). Construction of arithmetical meanings 
and strategies. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Streefland, L. (1990). Fractions in realistic mathematics education, a paradigm of 
developmental research. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Teasley, S., & Roschelle, J. (1993). Constructing a joint problem space: The computer as a 
tool for sharing knowledge. In S.Lajoie & S.Derry (Eds.), Computers as cognitive tools 
(pp. 229–260). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Treffers, A. (1987). Three dimensions. A model of goal and theory description in mathematics 
education: The Wiskobas Project. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel.
Treffers, A. (1991). Het rekenrek 1&2 [The arithmetic rack]. Willem Bartjens, 8(3), 151–
153; 8(4), 199–200.
van den Berg, W., & van Eerde, D. (1985). Kwantiwijzer [Number diagnostics]. Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands: SVO/Erasmus University,
van den Brink, F.J. (1989). Realistisch rekenonderwijs aan jonge kinderen [Realistic 
mathematics education for young children]. Utrecht, The Netherlands: OW&OC.
Varela, F.J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embedded mind: Cognitive science and 
human experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Voigt, J. (1995). Thematic patterns of interaction and sociomathematical norms. In P.Cobb 
& H.Bauersfeld (Eds.), Emergence of mathematical meaning: Interaction in classroom 
cultures (pp. 163–201). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Walkerdine, V. (1988). The mastery of reason. London: Routledge.
Wenger, R.H. (1987). Cognitive science and algebra learning. In A.H.Schoenfeld (Ed.), 
Cognitive science and mathematics education (pp. 218–251). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
White, B. (1993). Thinker tools: Causal models, conceptual change, and science education. 
Cognition and Instruction, 10(1), 1–100.
Whitenack, J.W. (1995). Modeling, mathematizing, and mathematical learning as it is 
situated in the classroom microculture. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN.
Whitson, J.A. (1997). Cognition as a semiosic process: From situated mediation to critical 
reflective transcendence. In D.Kirschner & J.A.Whitson (Eds.), Situated cognition theory: 
Social, semiotic, and neurological perspectives (pp. 97–149). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Wirtz, R. (1980). New beginnings, a guide to the think, talk, read math center for beginners. 
Monterey, CA: Curriculum Development Associates.
Yackel, E., & Cobb, P. (1996). Sociomath norms, argumentation, and autonomy in 
mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27, 458–477.


275
8 
Designs for Environments That Invite  
and Sustain Mathematical Thinking
John Bransford 
Linda Zech 
Daniel Schwartz 
Brigid Barren 
Nancy Vye 
and the Cognition and Technology Group (CTGV) 
Vanderbilt University
In this chapter we discuss a set of theoretical principles that guide our attempts 
to design environments that invite and sustain mathematical thinking (see 
Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 6, this volume). The particular environments 
that we describe are intended for students from fifth grade to adult, and are 
organized around the Jasper Woodbury Problem Solving Series—a series of 
12 videodisc- and CD ROM-based adventures that focus on areas such as 
rate (in the context of trip planning), statistics, geometry, and algebra (see 
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt [CTGV], 1997). However, 
the design principles that we discuss go beyond Jasper and apply to a wide 
variety of mathematical curricula.
In the first section of this chapter we discuss several theoretical analyses 
of understanding and social environments that provide the foundation for our 
thinking about instruction. In the second section we illustrate how different sets 
of principles can be combined to create different kinds of learning environments. 
We begin by describing environments that incor-porate only a few of the 
principles discussed in the first section and end by describing environments 
that incorporate all of them. This gradual incorporation of principles parallels 
changes in our group’s thinking about design, and we illustrate these changes. 
In many ways, these changes in thinking reflect our attempts to synthesize 
insights from two different literatures: the “regular” cognitive literature and 
the “situative” cognition literature (e.g., see Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 
1996; Cobb, 1994; Greeno, 1997; Lave, 1988; Moore et al., 1996; Rogoff, 

276  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
1990). Changes in our thinking also reflect the degree to which the cognitive 
psychologists in our group have paid increasing attention to the mathematics 
literature. We say more about these literatures as the discussion proceeds.
In the third section of this chapter we provide a detailed description of 
an instructional environment that embodies our most recent thinking about 
design, and we discuss some of our initial findings about how it has played 
out in classrooms. We end with a brief summary and a discussion of possible 
“next steps” in our work.
THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES THAT PROVIDE 
THE FOUNDATION FOR OUR THINKING ABOUT 
INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN
Our goal in this section is to discuss a set of theoretical principles that guide 
our approach to instruction. We assume that a major goal of education must 
be to help students understand the meaning or significance of new information 
rather than merely memorize it as a set of facts or procedures. We also assume 
that there are basic processes of learning and understanding that are common 
to all disciplines, but that attention must be paid to the unique characteristics of 
particular disciplines such as history, science, and mathematics. Our research 
group concerns itself with cross-disciplinary as well as within-disciplinary 
learning because we believe that each discipline can be approached in ways 
that strengthens learning in the other areas, and vice versa (e.g., CTGV, 
1993, in press). In fact, it is possible that the entire set of standards suggested 
by different organizations and disciplines (e.g., AAAS, 1989; NAS, 1996; 
NCTM, 1996; New Standards, 1995) cannot be achieved unless educators 
explicitly search for cross-disciplinary connections that create synergies with 
respect to learning. The focus in this chapter is primarily on mathematics 
learning, but our goal as a research group is ultimately to link mathematical 
inquiry and understanding with the exploration of other disciplines.
Understanding “Meaningfulness” or “Significance”
Our attempts to make information meaningful have been strongly influenced 
by theorists such as Dewey (1933), Buhler (cf. Blumenthal, 1970), Hanson 
(1970), and others. For example, in How We Think, Dewey provided an 
insightful discussion of differences between “brute things” and meaningful 
events and objects. He stated:
To grasp the meaning of a thing, an event or a situation is to see it in its relations to 
other things; to note how it operates or functions, what consequences follow from it; 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  277
what causes it, what uses it can be put to. In contrast, what we have called the brute 
thing, the thing without meaning to us, is something whose relations are not grasped. 
(Dewey, 1933, p. 135)
The objects represented in Fig. 8.1 can be used to clarify Dewey’s ideas about 
meaning (cf. Bransford & McCarrell, 1974). To many people, these objects are 
basically “brute things.” Everyone assumes that each is some sort of tool, but the 
exact function of each tool is often difficult to grasp without more information. 
The information provided in Fig. 8.2 should help transform each “brute thing” 
into something more meaningful. When tools such as these become meaningful, 
they become richly connected with other aspects of people’s lives.
In the area of mathematics, many concepts and their visual and symbolic 
representations are meaningful to experts but essentially “brute things” to 
FIG. 8.1. An example of “brute things.”

278  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
novices. The object illustrated in Fig. 8.3 provides an example. A person is 
using this object to estimate the height of a tall tree. College students we have 
interviewed knew that this was a triangle and even a “right triangle.” A few 
knew that it was an isosceles right triangle. However, none understood the 
special properties of isosceles right triangles for measurement, namely, that 
the height of an object sighted at an angle of 45 degrees will equal the distance 
one is standing from the base of the object. Mathematics experts understand 
the object in Fig. 8.3 at a very different level from novices. 
FIG. 8.2. Contexts that make “brute things” into meaningful objects.

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  279
Dewey’s analysis of meaningfulness versus brute things also applies to 
symbolic expressions such as Y=2n. To a mathematician, this expression 
represents a function with special properties. To a novice the significance of 
Y=2n is much more limited. For many college freshmen we have interviewed 
it is often viewed as “a formula we studied when I was taking math.”
An important design principle that has helped us create environments that 
support understanding rather than mere memorization involves the creation of 
teams that pair experts in particular disciplines with what we call “accomplished 
novices.” The latter are people who are knowledgeable about some area (e.g., 
psychology), but who do not have expertise in the particular area that is the 
focus of the research and development project (e.g., mathematics). The job of 
accomplished novices is to relentlessly pester the content area experts until 
they are able to understand concepts that the experts are discussing. This 
helps overcome a common problem of expertise, namely, that things become 
so intuitively obvious that one forgets the difficulties that novices have in 
grasping new ideas (e.g., Chi, Glaser, & Farr, 1991). Elsewhere, we describe 
how development of the Jasper series (see Fig. 8.4) has been influenced 
FIG. 8.3. Tool to measure heights.

280  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
through collaboration between mathematics experts and other “accomplished 
novices” on the design team (Bransford et al., 1996).
Advantages of Attempting to Understand  
What Makes Things Meaningful
One reason for helping students understand the meaningfulness or significance 
of information is that they invariably want to know, “What’s this for?” or 
“Where will I ever use this information?” Seeing the potential usefulness of 
information motivates students to learn. In the area of geometry, for example, 
we have asked people (including college freshmen and middle school math 
teachers) to explain what they understood about uses of geometry. Except 
for “to measure area and volume,” they had very few ideas (Zech et al., 
1994). Nearly all of these individuals were very excited when we helped them 
discover uses of geometry for “measuring the earth” (Zech et al., 1994). Some 
became angry that they had never been helped to realize this before. 
A second reason for helping students understand the significance of 
FIG. 8.4. The Jasper Series.

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  281
new information is that it helps overcome the “inert knowledge” problem. 
Whitehead discussed this problem in 1929; he argued that much of schooling 
produced knowledge that remained “inert” and was not useful for problem 
solving. In the last 15 years, research has provided insights into why and when 
knowledge remains inert (e.g., see Adams et al., 1988; Bransford et al., 1989; 
Gick & Holyoak, 1980, 1983; Lockhart, Lamon, & Gick, 1988).
In a classic paper on problem solving and education, Simon (1980) clarified 
why the knowledge underlying competent performance in any domain cannot 
be based on simple facts or verbal propositions but must instead be based on 
something more similar to production systems. Productions involve “condition-
action pairs that specify that if a certain state occurs…, then particular mental 
(and possibly physical) actions should take place” (Anderson, 1987, p. 193). 
Productions thus provide information about the critical features of problem 
situations that make particular actions relevant.
For our purposes, it is the notion of specifying the contexts in which actions 
are appropriate (the notion of “conditionalizing” one’s knowledge) that we 
find most valuable about Simon’s argument. (One can accept the importance 
of conditionalized knowledge without necessarily agreeing that production 
systems are the best or only way to represent useful knowledge.) Theorists 
such as Simon (1980) and Anderson (1982, 1987) provide important insights 
into the need to help people conditionalize their knowledge—to acquire 
knowledge in the form of condition-action pairs mediated by appropriate 
goal-oriented hierarchies rather than as isolated facts.
Simon echoed Whitehead (1929) and Gragg (1940) in noting that many 
forms of instruction do not help students conditionalize their knowledge. 
For example, he argued that “textbooks are much more explicit in 
enunciating the laws of mathematics or of nature than in saying anything 
about when these laws may be useful in solving problems” (p. 92). It is left 
largely to the student to generate the condition-action pairs required for 
solving novel problems.
Franks and colleagues (Franks, Bransford, Brailey, & Purdon, 1991) noted that 
one of their favorite examples of the lack of explicit emphasis on conditionalizing 
one’s knowledge comes from a textbook on experimental design. On page 195 
of the book was a section entitled “Which Test Do I Use?” It stated: “How to 
choose a statistical test was postponed until now so that various aspects of data 
analysis could be presented.” The text then included a discussion of the uses of 
various statistics. The entire discussion totaled 13 sentences in length. Anyone 
who has taught statistics knows that a major challenge for students is to learn 
when, why and how to use particular approaches to statistical analysis such as 
t-tests, F-tests, nonparametric tests, and so forth. A mere memorized list of tests 
and their formulas does students little good.

282  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
At a general level the idea of conditionalizing one’s knowledge is related 
to the ability to understand why, when, where, and how particular types of 
knowledge are useful. This understanding allows people to use knowledge as 
a tool to solve important problems. Our ability to use physical tools requires 
a similar type of understanding. Consider the knowledge necessary to know 
when, where, how, and why to use a particular type of scissors. Examples of 
different types of scissors, and some of their contexts of usage, are provided 
in Fig. 8.5 (cf. Bransford & McCarrell, 1974). If you could recognize different 
examples of scissors but had no idea about the contexts in which each was 
used most appropriately, your knowledge would not be “conditionalized.”
Challenges of Communication. The ease of helping people understand 
objects, symbols, and events depends strongly on the knowledge currently 
available to them. Buhler’s theory is very helpful in this context (cf. 
Blumenthal, 1970; Bransford & Johnson, 1973):
Buhler’s field concept was most important. Given two speakers of the same language, 
no matter how well one structures a sentence his utterance will fail if both parties do 
not share the same field to some degree…. There are inner aspects of the field, such 
as an area of knowledge, or outer aspects, such as objects in the environment. Indeed, 
the field can be analyzed into many aspects. The total field (Umfeld) consists not 
only of the practical situation (Ziegfeld) in which an utterance occurs, but also the 
symbol field (Symbolfeld) which is the context of language segments preceding the 
segment under consideration…. The structure of any particular language is largely 
field-independent, being determined by its own particular conventional rules, but the 
field determines how the rules are applied…. With a “rich” external field less needs 
to be specified in the sentence, (p. 56)
Mismatches between information in a message and the semantic field of learners 
can result in several different types of experiences. One is that messages may 
be incomprehensible to novices because they lack, or fail to activate, relevant 
background knowledge (e.g., Bransford & Johnson, 1972, 1973). A second 
and even more problematic situation is one in which learners think they 
understand but do so at only a surface level because they miss distinctions 
that seem obvious to experts yet often remain tacit (Schwartz & Bransford, in 
press). For example, consider a statement such as “The dressmaker used the 
scissors to cut the cloth for the dress.” This statement is understandable to most 
people; they can easily imagine a person using a pair of scissors to cut some 
cloth. However, what will detailed images of the dressmaker’s scissors look 
like? A scissors expert, or a dressmaker, will have a much more differentiated 
concept of scissors than most casual comprehenders. The experts understand 
that there are many different types of scissors, and that each is adapted for 

283
FIG. 8.5. Varieties of scissors and their functions.

284  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
different purposes (see Fig. 8.5). If asked to order a new pair of scissors for 
the dressmaker, experts would know to look for the relevant features whereas 
novices might not. Several studies show how people’s understanding and 
representation of concepts such as “scissors” is affected by the contexts of 
usage and listeners’ expertise (e.g., see Anderson & Ortony, 1975; Barclay, 
Bransford, Franks, McCarrell, & Nitsch, 1974).
As another example of the importance of well-differentiated concepts, 
consider students’ attempts to comprehend a statement such as “The 
developmental psychologist showed first graders, fifth graders and college 
students a set of 30 pictures and found that their memory for the pictures was 
equivalent” (Schwartz & Bransford, in press). Novices can understand this 
statement at some level, but chances are that their understanding of “memory” 
will be relatively undifferentiated. In contrast, an expert will assume that this 
experiment must have involved recognition memory rather than free or cued 
recall—unless the pictures were carefully chosen to map very explicitly into a 
domain of organized knowledge (e.g., dinosaurs) where the children had more 
expertise than the adults (e.g., Chi & Koeske, 1983; Lindberg, 1980). In short, 
the expert can construct a number of well-differentiated scenarios, whereas 
the novice understands only superficially.
Developing Well-Differentiated Knowledge
The challenge of helping students develop well-differentiated knowledge is 
informed by theories of perceptual learning (e.g., Bransford, Franks, Vye, & 
Sherwood, 1989; Gagné & Gibson, 1947; Garner, 1974; Gibson & Gibson, 
1955). These theories point toward the importance of contrasting cases as 
guides to noticing and differentiation. A focus on contrasting cases emphasizes 
that meaning cannot be captured and represented by looking at objects and 
ideas in isolation, or by assuming that the meaning of symbols is given solely 
by their referents. Instead, meaning depends on an object or symbol’s “place 
in a system of relationships” or broader “knowledge field.”
As an illustration of the importance of knowledge fields, consider a 
demonstration from Garner (1974). He asked readers to look at the stimulus in 
Fig. 8.6 and asked: “How would you describe the figure?” Garner noted that 
most people described it as a circle or a circle with two lines. Some described 
it as two concentric circles.
Garner continued his demonstration by considering the same figure (we 
call it the standard figure) in the context illustrated in Fig. 8.7. This time the 
standard is in the context of Stimulus B. Now features such as the size of 
the circle become relevant. When people see the standard in isolation, they 
generally fail to mention anything about size.

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  285
Garner continued his demonstration by considering the standard in a new 
context such as Stimuli C and B in Fig. 8.8. Now features such as the location 
of the circles within the border become salient.
Garner noted that one could continue indefinitely so that additional features 
become salient—features such as the thickness of the lines, the fact that the 
lines are solid rather than broken, the color of the ink. Garner’s conclusion 
from his demonstration was that the meaning of a single stimulus depends on 
FIG. 8.6. Standard stimulus.
FIG. 8.7. Stimulus B.

286  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
its position in a field of alternatives. These fields of contrasting cases affect 
the features that we notice about particular objects and events.
Noticing, Contrasting Cases, and Meaningfulness. Both J.Gibson and 
Gibson (1955) and Garner (1974) focused primarily on perceptual learning and 
differentiation. We noted earlier that theorists such as Dewey (1933) and Buhler 
(e.g., see Bransford & McCarrell, 1974) focused on issues of understanding 
by considering how an object’s place in a system of relationships determines 
FIG. 8.8. The Standard Stimulus and additional examples.

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  287
its meantngfulness. People’s understanding of the meaning of objects and 
events affects what they learn from contrasting cases. 
As an illustration, consider the set of grids shown in Fig. 8.9. Each differs 
from the others on a number of important dimensions. As a group, the grids 
illustrate a set of contrasting cases that are related through some sense of 
family resemblance involving “gridness.” Without knowledge about the 
functions of the grids, it is difficult to decide which dimensions of similarity 
and difference count and which do not.
To illustrate, Grid 1 occurs in two different sizes: 1 by 1 ft and 5 by 5 ft. 
Grids 4 and 5 are 1 by 1 ft and 2 by 2 in, respectively. These examples provide 
FIG. 8.9. Grids.

288  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
contrasting cases involving sizes. Are the size differences important? Without 
more information, it is difficult to know. 
Particular dimensions of contrast become relevant when one is told 
that the grids are for T-shirts designed for the “backscratchers’ society.” 
They are used for purposes of communication between “scratchees” and 
“scratchers.” Under these conditions, the relevance of the sizes become 
clearer. The 5 by 5 ft size is much too large for a T-shirt, and the “2 by 2” 
version is much too small.
The grid example illustrates the importance of viewing objects and events 
from the perspective of a “bigger picture” that includes knowledge of the 
social environments in which grids are useful. Without this knowledge, the 
grids are more like Dewey’s “brute things.”
Cycles of Action, Feedback, Revision, and Reflection. It is relatively easy 
to understand someone’s description of backscratchers and their usefulness 
because most people have experienced itching and know the difficulty of 
reaching their backs in order to scratch. In Buhler’s terms, speakers and listeners 
share a common “semantic field” (cf. Blumenthal, 1970). Even in the case of 
backscratchers, however, simply listening to someone’s description does not 
guarantee a well-differentiated understanding. Imagine, for example, that one 
wanted to design one’s own backscratcher T-shirts. What is the exact shape of a 
grid that best fits most backs? How far up or down on the T-shirt should the grid 
be placed? How does one adapt the grid for smaller and larger sizes of people 
and T-shirts? Are all areas of the back equally likely to have itches, or should 
backscratching targets be focused on particular areas and ignore others?
It would be difficult to develop in-depth understanding of these issues 
without frequent chances to design grids, test them, and revise them as needed 
(cf. Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, this volume). Over time, it is probable that 
opportunities to test and revise would result in the design of different grids for 
different purposes—for people of different sizes, for backs with different types 
of “itching zones,” for people with different kinds of aesthetic preferences, 
and so forth. (This is analogous to the invention and refinement of different 
kinds of scissors illustrated in Fig. 8.4.) In short, cycles of action, feedback, 
and revision would be necessary even for the domain of backscratching, where 
most people share a rich semantic field.
In most academic areas such as mathematics, science, and history, there 
is much less likelihood that experts and novices share a semantic field that 
is as rich as the backscratching situation. As noted earlier, this semantic 
field is necessary in order to assess the adequacy of one’s current level of 
understanding. For example, most adults feel that their understanding of the 
concept “gold” is adequate because they can differentiate things like gold 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  289
paint and gold watches from silver paint and silver watches. However, if 
placed in a situation where they need to differentiate fool’s gold from real 
gold, they soon discover that they need a much more technical understanding 
of gold (cf. Bransford, 1979). In addition, we noted earlier that experts in an 
area often do not realize how much of their own understanding is based on 
well-differentiated knowledge derived from years of experience. As a result, 
challenges of communicating about most academic areas are much greater 
than the challenges involved in exploring backscratching grids.
It is instructive in this context to note Norman’s (1993) discussion of Plato’s 
concerns about the need to actively test and revise one’s understanding in 
order to ensure adequate understanding.
Socrates, Plato tells us, argued that books would destroy thought. How could this 
be? After all, books, reading, and writing are considered to be the very essence of the 
educated, intellectual citizen. How could one of the foremost thinkers of civilization 
deny their importance? (Norman, 1993, p. 44)
Norman explained that Socrates was worried about the fact that dialogue is 
interactive whereas books simply present information.
When the idea is presented by a person, the audience can interrupt, ask questions, 
probe to get at the underlying assumptions. But the author doesn’t come along with 
a book, so how could the book be questioned if it couldn’t answer back? This is what 
bothered Socrates, (p. 45)
Discussions about texts are important because they can create interactive 
conditions that help people test their current levels of comprehension and 
revise their ideas.
Reflection and Representation
Acts of testing one’s understanding and revising are often accompanied by 
acts of reflection, which can affect how people represent their experiences. 
A number of studies suggest that people’s representations of situations have 
strong effects on the degree to which they will transfer their knowledge to 
new settings (e.g., Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996; Bransford & Stein, 
1993; Bransford, Vye, Adams, & Perfetto, 1989; Brown, Bransford, Ferrara, 
& Campione, 1983). If people simply learn a set of procedures without an 
understanding of what they are doing, why they are doing it, and how it relates 
to more general principles, chances are that there will be little initial transfer 
to new situations. However, if people are helped to represent their experiences 
at more general levels, the probability of transfer is improved.
As an illustration, consider once again the experience of first seeing 

290  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
the grids in Fig. 8.9 as “brute things,” and then being told that they are for 
backscratcher T-shirts. This experience could be represented at a number of 
different levels. One is simply the episodic representation of understanding 
at Time 1 (before being told the function of the grids) and Time 2. Another 
level of representation could involve the understanding that this experience 
represents an example of how the activation of relevant knowledge can affect 
one’s abilities to learn from contrasting cases. A third level of representation 
could involve the realization that back-scratcher grids represent one of many 
possible examples of how people have invented tools that allow them to 
accomplish various activities that would otherwise be difficult or impossible 
(e.g., Bacon, 1620; Bransford & Stein, 1993; Norman, 1993).
Clearly, there are many ways to represent a particular set of experiences. 
We assume that representations are affected by ways in which people reflect 
on their experiences, and that these representations affect the probability that 
any particular experience will support one’s adaptation to new problems and 
situations (e.g., see Anderson, Reder & Simon, 1996; Bransford, Vye, Adams, 
& Perfetto, 1989).
Analyses of Social Environments
During the past several years, our research group has become increasingly 
aware of the need to move beyond an exclusive focus on the individual and 
pay careful attention to the assumption that all human endeavors are socially 
situated (cf. van Oers, chap. 5, this volume). A number of theorists in the 
“situated cognition” literature have helped us see the importance of this kind 
of analysis (e.g., Brown & Campione, 1994; Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 
1989; Cobb, Wood, Yackel, & McNeal, 1992; Cobb, Yackel, & Wood, 1992; 
Greeno, 1997; Lave, 1988; McLaughlin & Talbert, 1993; Rogoff, 1990). One 
way to characterize the impact of this work is to conclude that “culture is not 
an option.” Classroom, school, and community cultures are always present, 
irrespective of whether they are explicitly analyzed.
The situated cognition literature has helped us see that teachers and their 
students are always embedded in sociocultural environments that have 
powerful effects on learning. This literature has also prompted us to analyze 
the culture and organization of our Learning Technology Center (LTC) 
because all of us felt that it was an excellent example of a learning community 
and we wanted to better understand such communities (Barron et al., 1995; 
CTGV, 1997). This analysis has been very helpful to us in thinking about the 
social organization of classrooms. For example, we discovered that the role 
of outsiders (visitors, journal audiences, grant review boards) is extremely 
important for our center. This helped us notice that some classrooms are 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  291
relatively “self-contained” whereas others are organized around opportunities 
to interact with “outsiders,” who often present challenges that unite the 
teachers and their students. Thinking about these issues has prompted us to 
include “social structures” as an important part of our design principles. For 
example, we have designed special SMART (Special Multimedia Arenas for 
Refining Thinking) Challenge Programs to provide some of the advantages of 
outside audiences to students and teachers in classrooms (e.g., Barron et al., 
1995, in press; CTGV, 1997; Vye et al., 1998).
Thanks to opportunities to collaborate with McLaughlin and Talbert (1993), 
we have also come to appreciate the importance of viewing organizations 
such as classrooms as embedded in other organizational structures such as 
teacher communities, school communities, and the broader community of 
administrators, parents, business leaders, and others. We say more about the 
importance of embedded contexts later on.
Distributed Support for Knowing
An additional principle that is highly relevant to the design of instructional 
environments involves what we call distributed support for knowing. Analyses 
of people’s functioning in everyday contexts shows clearly that “expertise” 
(in the sense of the ability to perform some task or set of tasks) is frequently 
distributed across people, and distributed across artifacts in the environment 
such as tools (e.g., Brown & Campione, 1994,1996; Lave, 1988; Pea, 1993; 
Salomon, 1993). Decisions about how knowing is going to be distributed 
are extremely important for theories of instructional design. Two aspects of 
distributed expertise are discussed next.
Expertise Distributed Across People. When people work collaboratively 
they can often form a system that is capable of accomplishing goals that no 
individual could accomplish alone. An example from research by Newman, 
Griffin, and Cole (1989) provides an excellent example. They developed an 
after-school cooking club that became very popular with students. Students 
who joined the club needed to be able to read recipes, and they needed to be 
organized and stay on task.
Two boys were eventually allowed to joined the cooking club who, initially, 
appeared to be very poor candidates. One boy could not read (it was later 
discovered that he was dyslexic). A second boy had severe attention problems 
and could not stay on task. As individuals, the two boys failed to meet the 
qualifications for the cooking club. As a team, the two boys did extremely 
well in the cooking club. The boy who could not read assumed leadership in 
organizing all the activities. When something needed to be read, he called the 
other boy for help.

292  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
We have seen numerous instances where students have become valuable 
contributors when allowed to work in teams. For example, some students 
seem to be excellent group organizers despite not being particularly strong 
individual learners. Others show evidence of creativity when working in 
groups that they do not show when working individually. As an illustration, 
consider Student A, who cannot draw but has great ideas for concepts that 
can be represented visually, and Student B, who is excellent at drawing what 
someone tells him to draw, but usually doesn’t know what to draw on his 
own. When students such as A and B are put together we have seen some 
outstanding products emerge—products that would have been impossible for 
either one to produce alone.
Distributing Expertise Across People and Artifacts. A second way to 
distribute knowing is to invent tools that provide support for human cognitive 
activities. In Things That Make Us Smart, Norman (1993) argued for the 
importance of distributing knowing across people and artifacts such as tools 
and written symbols. He stated: “The power of the unaided mind is highly 
overrated. Without external aids, memory, thought and reasoning are all 
constrained” (p. 42).
Written representations are one form of tools that are especially important 
for enhancing our mental powers. Norman (1993) made the following argument 
about oral cultures: “They haven’t developed mathematics or science, formal 
history, or extensive commercial records because they can’t without the aid of 
artificially constructed artifacts. It is things that make us smart” (p. 44).
Things that make us smart include tools that enhance problem solving. In her 
analyses of everyday environments, Lave (1988) noted that humans attempt to 
eliminate the need to continually solve repetitive sets of problems by inventing 
tools that allow them to “work smarter.” Examples include calendars, watches, 
speedometers, charts, graphs, and many types of computer software.
As a simple example, imagine setting up a T-shirt business that sold 
T-shirts with backscratching grids. It would not be particularly efficient 
to conduct an inventory every day by counting how many T-shirts of each 
size, design, and so forth are left over after the day’s sales. It would be more 
advantageous to invent tools that allow one to work smart. A very simple idea 
is to stack T-shirts in piles in a stockroom according to size and design. On 
the wall of the stockroom is a line. When the stack of T-shirts falls under the 
line, the clerk knows it is time to reorder (see Fig. 8.10). Placement of the 
line involves knowledge about baseline sales of particular types and sizes of 
T-shirts, plus knowledge about delivery times from the manufacturer. In short, 
a mathematical model underlies the construction of the inventory system.
Another way to work smart is to design spreadsheet templates that make 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  293
it easy to calculate costs for each customer. A template can provide a place 
for cost of each T-shirt, number of T-shirts purchased, any discounts based 
on volume of purchase, sales tax, and so on. Templates can also be created 
that allow clerks to instantly determine the postage required to mail packages, 
rather than to continually have to compute postage. Underlying the creation of 
appropriate templates are mathematical models of the situation.
Our readings of theorists such as Lave (1988) and Norman (1993) helped 
us realize that most classrooms are not designed with an eye toward helping 
students learn to invent tools for working smarter. We now include this goal 
in our thinking about instructional design.
Summary
Our goal in this section has been to provide an overview of some theoretical 
analyses principles of understanding and social contexts that are guiding 
our attempts to design environments that invite students to learn with 
understanding rather than simply memorize. Dewey’s analysis of “brute 
things” provided a good starting point for our discussion because he made it 
clear that understanding cannot simply be equated with connecting symbols 
with concrete referents. People’s abilities to understand the meaning of 
referents can be problematic, and this understanding needs to be explained. 
FIG. 8.10. Smart Tool for T-shirt inventory.

294  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Following Garner, the Gibsons, and others, we argued that meaning must 
be viewed as a place in a general field or relation structure, and that meanings 
change as semantic fields change. The work in perceptual learning by Garner 
and the Gibsons shows that what one notices about objects and events depends 
on the contrast sets within which they are embedded. The example of the 
backscratchers’ grid illustrates the importance of a general “semantic field” 
that makes the contrasts among individual grids meaningful. We also discussed 
Buhler’s field theory of comprehension, and the fact that comprehension is an 
active process where people need to test their ideas, receive feedback, and 
refine what they know.
Additional principles that have affected our thinking about design include 
explicit attempts to analyze the nature of the social environments in which 
people operate. This discussion included analyses of distributing knowledge 
across (a) different individuals and (b) artifacts in the environment. The idea 
of having students work collaboratively to invent artifacts that help them 
“work smart” is an idea that has become very important in our thinking 
about design.
A shortcoming of the preceding discussion is that it simply provides a 
list of theoretical principles that have guided our thinking about design. 
These must be combined in particular ways in order to design learning 
environments that are useful for students. Our goal in the next section is to 
show how different combinations of these principles lead to different kinds 
of instructional designs.
AN ORGANIZING FRAMEWORK FOR MAPPING 
THEORETICAL PRINCIPLES INTO CONCRETE DESIGNS
Discussion in this section is organized around the framework illustrated in 
Fig. 8.11. Use of this framework allows us to illustrate how our thinking 
has changed as we incorporated more and more of the theoretical principles 
discussed in the first section into our thinking. As noted earlier, these changes 
in thinking have stemmed both from our own research in classrooms (e.g., 
CTGV, 1996, 1997; cf. Gravemeijer et al., chap. 7, this volume; Nemirovsky & 
Monk, chap. 6, this volume) and from reading relevant literature—especially 
by theorists in the situated cognition tradition (e.g., Brown et al., 1989; Cobb, 
1994; Greeno, Smith, & Moore, 1993; Lave, 1988; Rogoff, 1990; etc.).
The framework in Fig. 8.10 is based on the intersection of two dimensions of 
thinking that have guided our work, namely, (a) the nature of the instructional 
content that forms the basis of instruction, and (b) the social contexts in which 
learning is situated. For the instructional content dimension, the categories 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  295
are cumulative. The first column represents the use of problem-based 
environments to situate learning. The second column involves an addition to 
these environments by emphasizing the importance of transforming students’ 
specific problem solving experiences into an understanding of more abstract 
“deep principles” in mathematics.
The third column involves a change from “single-shot problems” to 
simulations of “lived-in environments,” where the latter include multiple 
encounters with recurring classes of problems. One advantage of placing 
students in these environments is that it helps them appreciate the value of 
inventing ways to remove the need for frequent, cumbersome computations 
(Lave, 1988). The idea of “lived-in environments” should become clearer as 
our discussion proceeds.
The dimension labeled social context includes three different values: 
tacit, single contexts such as a classroom, and multiply embedded contexts. 
By tacit we do not mean an absence of social context. We include tacit as 
one of the values in Fig. 8.11 because in our early work, social context was 
FIG. 8.11. An organizing framework.

296  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
left unanalyzed. Gradually we began to understand how different sets of 
classroom norms affected everything that we developed, so the social context 
of classrooms became a major concern. As our work proceeded we began 
to see that there are multiple social contexts within classrooms, and that 
classroom contexts are affected by teacher communities in which they are 
embedded, as well as school, district, and larger out-of-school contexts (e.g., 
Cobb, 1994; Mc Laughlin & Talbert, 1993). We also began to appreciate the 
role of “outsiders” in helping form a sense of community (e.g., Barren et al., 
1995; CTGV, 1997).
Cell 1: Situating Instruction in Meaningful Problem-Solving 
Environments (With No Explicit Analysis of Social Context)
In retrospect, we now see that our early ideas about design were relevant to 
Cell 1 in Fig. 8.11. These early ideas were discussed in a 1990 article (CTGV, 
1990) that argued for the advantages of situating (anchoring) instruction in 
meaningful problem-solving environments that helped students understand 
the meaning or significance of the information they were learning rather than 
merely memorizing it as a set of facts or procedures. By significance, we 
included knowledge of why, when, and how the information was useful for 
solving important problems that people might encounter in life. We stated:
The major goal of anchored instruction is to overcome the inert knowledge problem. 
We attempt to do so by creating environments that permit sustained exploration 
by students and teachers and enable them to understand the kinds of problems and 
opportunities that experts in various areas encounter and the knowledge that these 
experts use as tools. We also attempt to help students experience the value of exploring 
the same setting from multiple perspectives (e.g., as a scientist, historian, etc.). (p. 3)
We discussed the Jasper series as one example of anchored instruction (the 
other was the Young Sherlock project that focused primarily on literacy). At 
that time two Jasper adventures had been completed: Journey to Cedar Creek 
and Rescue at Boone’s Meadow. Both adventures were organized around trip-
planning scenarios that involved concepts such as distance, rate, and time. 
The goal of the adventures was to help students form a “big picture” of a 
problem space within which particular concepts and tools became useful.
A brief description of Rescue at Boone’s Meadow (RBM) provides an 
example. In the adventure, Jasper is on a hiking trip in the wilderness when 
he discovers an eagle that is seriously wounded. He radios for help. Emily 
Davidson eventually receives the message and begins to plan the rescue. 
There are no roads at Jasper’s location, and only a small amount of open space 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  297
(the rest is all treed). Emily eventually decides that she needs to use Larry’s 
ultralight to rescue the eagle. The students’ challenge is to help her decide how 
to do this. What is the fastest route? Does she have enough fuel and can she 
stay under the payload limit? How much time will the rescue plan require?
Like all the Jasper adventures, RBM includes both irrelevant and relevant 
data that have been embedded in the story line. Students can use interactive 
technologies to rapidly return to important places on the video and find the 
relevant data (e.g., information about fuel consumption, speed of the ultralight, 
size of landing areas, payload limits). They usually work in groups to generate 
a solution and then present it to their fellow classmates and sometimes to 
outside audiences. Data available at the time we wrote the 1990 article 
indicated that the experience of solving a Jasper adventure had highly positive 
effects on students’ ability to solve transfer problems compared to students 
who received more traditional instruction in word problems that included 
concepts such as distance, rate, and time (Van Haneghan et al., 1992).
Cell 2: Adding an Emphasis on “Deep Principles”
As our work on Jasper progressed, we began to realize the importance of 
going beyond the goal of simply helping students learn to solve complex, 
authentic problems. We began to focus on “deep principles” or “big ideas” 
in mathematics that were relevant to their solution strategies. An example for 
Journey to Cedar Creek and Rescue at Boone’s Meadow is the mathematical 
concept of rate and its applicability in a wide variety of settings. Additional 
Jasper adventures focus on other deep principles such as functions, geometric 
models for “measuring the earth,” models of statistical sampling, and 
inferencing (see Bransford et al., 1996).
We noted earlier that our increased emphasis on deep principles came from 
several different sources. One was the cognitive literature, which shows that 
people’s representations of problems have powerful effects on transfer (e.g., 
Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996, 1997; Bransford, Vye, Adams, & Perfetto, 
1989; Brown & Campione, 1994). When students are helped to represent 
their experiences at a more general level (e.g., helped to see that a particular 
solution strategy represents an example of a more general concept such as 
rate, model building, etc.), their ability to transfer improves.
A second reason for focusing on deep principles emerged from our increased 
interaction with people in mathematics education (e.g., Cobb, 1994; Schoenfeld, 
1985, 1987; Silver, 1986, 1990). As noted elsewhere (Bransford et al., 1996), 
our initial foray into mathematical problem solving was motivated by a concern 
with “dynamic assessment.” The focus on mathematics was more accidental 

298  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
than planned. Our primary concern was having students solve everyday 
problems that required mathematical computation; we paid little attention to 
“big ideas” in mathematics. As we began to collaborate with members of the 
mathematics community, we realized that our ideas about mathematics had 
been shaped by our own experiences in school rather than by a serious study 
of the mathematics literature. In retrospect, we now understand statements 
such as this one made by Kilpatrick (1992): “Mathematics educators have 
often been wary of psychological researchers because of what they have been 
seen as an indifference to or ignorance of the academic discipline” (p. 5). The 
cognitive psychologists in our group were indeed ignorant of the mathematical 
literature when we first began our work on Jasper. Our attitude was, “After all, 
each of us had passed our middle school mathematics courses—what more 
was there to know?” (Bransford et al., 1996, p. 204).
A third reason for emphasizing the importance of deep principles stemmed 
from our own research, which indicated that students’ abilities to solve new 
problems after working with a Jasper adventure were not as flexible as we 
wished (CTGV, 1992, 1997). Therefore, we developed analog and extension 
problems to each Jasper that invited students to revisit adventures from new 
perspectives. The goal was to help them refine their strategies and deepen 
their understanding of the activities involved in solving the adventures. For 
example, after solving The Big Splash, we found that middle school students 
understood one procedure for obtaining a random sample and extrapolating 
to a population, but that this knowledge was relatively rigid. Students 
benefited greatly from opportunities to develop a more general understanding 
of sampling and statistical inferencing (Schwartz, Goldman, Vye, Barren, 
Bransford, with CTGV, 1998). Data from studies with other Jasper adventures 
indicate that opportunities for students to revisit adventures and deepen their 
understanding of the mathematical principles also increased their flexibility of 
transfer (e.g., CTGV, 1997, especially chap. 4; Williams, 1994).
We also became aware of the need to help teachers monitor and shape how 
students represented their experiences as they solved Jasper adventures and 
their respective analog and extension problems. Ideally, students working in a 
context such as Jasper are able to relate their specific actions (e.g., calculating 
fuel consumption for the ultralight) to the overall goal of the Jasper challenge. 
Often, however, they became lost in the specifics of a particular task and 
needed help relating it to a “bigger picture.” For example, students may state, 
“we are drawing graphs” rather than “we are comparing different rates.” Data 
indicate that students’ representations of their experiences have important 
effects on transfer (Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996). Attention to this aspect 
of learning has become an important aspect of our approach to design (e.g., 
Barren et al., in press). 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  299
Cell 3: Authentic Context and Deep Principles  
Transformed Into “Lived-In” Environments
Additional work with Jasper prompted us to move from Cell 2 to Cell 3 in Fig. 
8.11. Work in Cell 3 preserves the goal of situating instruction in authentic 
contexts (Cell 1) coupled with a focus on deep principles in mathematics 
(Cell 2). However, Cell 3 represents an important change in the nature of the 
environments in which the students interact. In particular, we have moved 
from attempts to present students with environments that involve “one-shot” 
problems to environments where problems tend to reoccur and it becomes useful 
to invent ways to deal with these reoccurrences (cf. Lehrer et al., chap. 9, this 
volume; Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, this volume). As noted earlier, theorists such 
as Lave (1988), Norman (1993), Rogoff (1990), and others argue that people 
become smart, in part, by learning to deal with important problems that tend 
to recur in their environments. One way to do this is through the invention of 
tools that allow them to “work smarter.” Examples of tools that can eliminate 
cumbersome computations include charts, graphs, computer programs, and 
gadgets such as watches, speedometers, and proportion wheels (cf. Lehrer et 
al., chap. 9, this volume; Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 6, this volume).
We illustrate the idea of smart tools in Jasper by returning to the adventure 
Rescue at Boone’s Meadow that was discussed earlier. The challenge in this 
adventure was to find the fastest way for Emily to rescue the eagle and explain 
how long that will take. Analog and extension problems that accompany the 
adventure provide additional experiences by posing additional “what if” 
questions (What if Emily’s plane flew at 45 rather than 30 miles per hour? 
What if she confronted a 10 mph headwind, etc?). Other extension problems 
let students apply the same kind of thinking to other adventures such as 
Charles Lindbergh’s trip from New York to Paris, and help them develop 
more abstract concepts of rate. All of these experiences fall into Cells 1 or 2 
of the framework illustrated in Fig. 8.11.
Rescue at Boone’s Meadow is transformed when it is situated within Cell 3 
of our framework. Instead of confronting an adventure where they are asked to 
solve a single problem (rescuing the eagle as quickly as possible), students are 
invited to imagine that Emily becomes an entrepreneur who sets up a pickup 
and delivery service for people who go camping in her area. She has several 
different planes to choose from depending on the needs (e.g., some can carry 
more payload, fly faster, etc.). When customers call in to ask for assistance, 
Emily asks where they are (or where they want to go) and needs to tell them 
the trip time and fuel costs as quickly as possible. Different requests embody 
problems that vary in terms of the location of the destination, windspeed 
conditions, payload limits that determine which plane must be used, costs due 
to fuel consumption, and so forth. 

300  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
To calculate the answer to each individual problem is cumbersome, and 
Emily wants to be as efficient as possible. The challenge for students in the 
classrooms is to invent smart tools that will help Emily solve such problems 
with efficiency. Some simple smart tools for determining travel time are 
illustrated in Fig. 8.12.
Each of the adventures in the Jasper series has been repurposed so that it 
can be approached from the perspective of creating smart tools. Several of the 
most recently developed Jasper adventures were designed from a smart tool 
perspective from their very onset. We explore the issue of smart tools in more 
detail in the next section of this chapter.
Cells 4, 5, 6: Analyses of Single Social Contexts Such as Classrooms
Many readers will have noted that our discussion of Cells 1, 2, and 3 made 
no mention of the social structure and norms of the classrooms in which our 
instruction was situated. As noted in the first section, many theorists (e.g., 
Cobb, Wood, Yackel, & McNeal, 1992; Cobb, Yackel, & Wood, 1992; 
Greeno, 1993, 1997) argue that all human activities are socially situated, 
FIG. 8.12. Smart Tools for Emily’s Rescue and Delivery Service.

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  301
and we agree. Nevertheless, when we first began our work we left the social 
context unanalyzed.
As our work has progressed we have discovered that an explicit analysis 
of the social contexts in which instruction is situated is crucial for a complete 
understanding of student and teacher learning (cf. Gravemeijer et al., chap. 7, 
this volume). A number of theorists have helped us move ideas about social 
context from the realm of the tacit and invisible to the realm of the visible (e.g., 
Brown & Campione, 1994, 1996; Brown et al., 1990; Cobb, 1994; Cohen, 
McLaughlin & Talbert, 1993; Lave, 1988; Rogoff, 1990). Several important 
characteristics of the social context of classrooms that have become part of 
our thinking about design are discussed next.
General and Subject-Specific Norms. One principle of social analysis is 
that classrooms can have a variety of different social norms. Some are subject-
general; some are subject-specific and apply to particular content areas such 
as how a group explores history or mathematics (Cobb, Wood, Yackel, & 
McNeal, 1992; Cobb, Yackel, & Wood, 1992b). Usually these norms reflect 
teachers’ understandings of both pedagogy and content knowledge of a 
domain (e.g., Bruer, 1993; Shulman, 1987).
We have visited classrooms where the general norms are not conducive 
to the kinds of instructional environments that we envision. For example, 
consider the previously described goal of building smart tools that help one 
solve a variety of problems. The probability that people will have the courage 
to generate and share their designs is strongly influenced by the norms of the 
classrooms in which they operate. If the social norms are “always follow the 
rules and never make mistakes,” it is difficult to get students invested in the 
goal of designing and testing smart tools. In contrast, when everyone’s ideas 
are encouraged and each person is given a chance to make mistakes and learn 
from them, the probability of successful participation increases noticeably.
Classrooms where students are encouraged to take risks and generate new 
ideas still do not necessarily encompass the kinds of subject-specific norms 
that facilitate deep understanding of particular disciplines (e.g., Cobb, Wood, 
Yackel, & McNeal, 1992; Cobb, Yackel, & Wood, 1992). For example, 
we have used the Working Smart Jasper in classrooms that were excellent 
at inviting students to generate many kinds of ideas—but not the kinds of 
ideas that focused on deep content in mathematics. One teacher with whom 
we worked noted that she first thought of Working Smart as a way to teach 
students to plot points and make graphs. As a result, most of her instruction, 
and most of the student discussion, focused only on procedures for graph-
making. Only later did the teacher realize the importance of emphasizing and 
discussing mathematical modeling and its role in constructing model-based 

302  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
tools (cf. Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 6, this volume). Eventually she and her 
students developed a classroom culture where discussions of the mathematical 
principles underlying tools such as graphs became the norm.
Social Organization and Participation. The social organization of 
classrooms can also affect the degree to which everyone participates. Brown 
and Campione (1994) discussed the advantages of first having students work 
in “expert” groups where each group develops some degree of expertise in a 
specific area (e.g, in Working Smart each group might develop its own set of 
smart tools for problem category number 1). After this, students form jigsaw 
groups that include one member from each of the separate expert groups. 
Within the jigsaw groups, each person must teach the others about what was 
discussed and developed in his or her expert group; hence each student must 
function as a teacher as well as a learner.1
Classrooms where students work in groups can be designed to promote 
individual as well as group accountability. For example, every individual 
might first be asked to design a smart tool and then meet with his or her expert 
group and be given chances to revise. Each student can be given chances to 
revise again after meeting with the jigsaw groups. The important point is that, 
eventually, each individual must be able to provide mathematical reasons for 
the tool of his or her choice, plus successfully use that tool to solve problems. 
Each student might also be asked to evaluate other potential tools.
Alignments of Curriculum, Instruction, Assessment, and Social 
Organization. Brown and Campione (1996) emphasized that the curriculum, 
instruction, and assessment materials one uses must fit the desired social 
organizations of the classroom and vice versa. Materials differ in the degree to 
which they are jigsawable, and the degree to which they make it easy to assess 
each student’s thinking. For example, asking students to design smart tools 
provides a visual representation of their thinking that makes their thinking 
visible and hence relatively easy to assess (see also CTGV, 1997; Schwartz, 
1995; cf. Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, this volume).
Cells 7, 8, 9: Analyses of Multiply Embedded Contexts
Discussion in the previous section tended to treat social contexts such as 
classrooms as closed systems. Except for the acknowledgment that norms for 
1	
An alternate way to use expert and jigsaw groups is have different expert groups specialize in 
particular problem types (i.e., problem categories 1–4) and each jigsaw group create smart tools 
for the entire range of problems to be solved.

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  303
dealing with specific disciplines such as mathematics are embedded within 
more general classroom norms, little explicit attention was paid to the idea of 
multiply embedded contexts. It is this idea that separates work in Cells 7, 8, 
and 9 from Cells 4, 5, and 6. We use the term multiply embedded contexts to 
refer to two important aspects of social structures that need to be explicitly 
considered when attempting to design effective educational environments. 
The first is that “outsiders” to a social group can play an extremely important 
role in facilitating learning. The second is that classroom cultures both affect 
and are affected by other cultures such as teacher communities within schools, 
school cultures, and broader community cultures (Earth, 1988; Elmore, 
Peterson, & McCarthey, 1996; McLaughlin & Talbert, 1993). These two 
examples of multiply embedded contexts are discussed next.
Roles for Outside Audiences. Our experiences in schools convince us 
that acts of preparing to interact with outside audiences have an extremely 
powerful effect on students’ and teachers’ motivation and a sense of “being 
in this together.” Arranging for “outsiders” to visit classrooms is now an 
important part of our thinking about design.
One reason for our emphasis on outsiders stems from opportunities to 
observe their effects on students and teachers. For example, we recently 
accompanied a group of visitors to an inner-city middle school that had begun 
the year by solving Rescue at Boone’s Meadow (RBM). The halls were lined 
with visual representations that had been constructed to support each group’s 
oral presentation of its solution to RBM. The students actively sought out 
adults who would listen to their presentations and provide feedback. In each 
of these interactions, the importance of getting to present to “outsiders” was 
abundantly clear. We later learned that the teachers were also excited and 
energized by the fact that outsiders cared enough to want to listen to their 
students and see what they had learned. We have also had opportunities to visit 
Brown and Campione’s Community of Learners classrooms in California and 
have seen the powerful effect that “interested outsiders” have on both students 
and teachers (Brown & Campione, 1994, 1996).
A second reason for our emphasis on outsiders stems from the opportunity 
to analyze the functioning of our own Learning Technology Center in an effort 
to see what made it a strong learning community (Barren et al., 1995; CTGV, 
1997). An extremely important feature of community building turned out to 
involve preparation for outside audiences. Preparation for these audiences 
took a variety of forms, such as presentations to visitors, the collaborative 
preparation of grant applications, articles written for different kinds of audiences 
(different people in the center excel in writing for different audiences), and so 
forth. The fact that most of these challenges included deadlines was especially 

304  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
important. Through our analysis of the LTC it became clear to us that if 
we were our group’s sole audience, much of our sense of community and 
willingness to exert extra effort would be diminished. We realized that, like 
us, students and teachers in classrooms need outside audiences as well.
The idea of outside audiences as presenting challenges (complete with 
deadlines) has been incorporated in our center’s SMART Assessment 
programs, which have been designed to supplement work on problem-based 
activities such as Jasper. SMART stands for Special Multimedia Arenas for 
Refining Thinking (e.g., Barron et al., 1995, in press; CTGV, 1994, 1997; Vye 
et al., 1998). It provides teachers and students with frequent opportunities to 
“test their mettle” and compare their efforts to others from around the country. 
Data show a clear value added for Jasper plus SMART compared to Jasper 
alone (e.g., Barron et al., 1995; CTGV, 1997).
Multiply Embedded Contexts. A second feature characteristic of designs 
that fit Cells 7, 8, and 9 involves an explicit analysis of the multiply embedded 
contexts in which one’s educational program is situated. Included in this cell 
is an examination of the classroom and subject-matter norms discussed in 
Cells 4, 5, and 6. As our work has progressed, it has become clear to us that 
efforts to sustain and continually improve educational practice also require 
attention to additional contexts that influence classrooms. Much of what we 
have learned about this process stems from opportunities to collaborate with 
McLaughlin and Talbert (1993). Work by Barth (1989) and Elmore et al. 
(1996) is highly relevant as well.
Teacher Communities. An extremely important aspect of the social 
environment that affects teachers is the quality of their professional 
communities. These generally include other teachers and sometimes 
administrators, researchers and additional members of the broader community. 
We have learned to appreciate the wisdom of Barth’s (1989) statement: 
“The relationship among adults who live in a school has more to do with 
the character and quality of the school and with the accomplishments of the 
students than any other factor” (p. 31).
Studies by McLaughlin and Talbert (1993) demonstrate the importance of 
this point. They show how different discipline-specific teacher communities 
within the same high school can differently affect the achievement of the same 
students (e.g., the mathematics teachers may find the students wonderfully 
motivated and bright whereas the English teachers may find the same students 
lazy and underprepared).
Work by Melinda Hall Bray (1996) in our center is documenting the 
importance of learning communities by studying teachers and researchers 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  305
involved in Nashville’s Schools for Thought project (e.g., Lamon et al., 1996; 
Secules, Cottom, Bray, & Miller, 1997). Bray is able to show a transformation 
of teachers’ interactions from one of “isolated soloists” to that of a community 
of learners who readily discuss strengths and weaknesses and strive to 
improve. This transition from a soloist culture to a learning community is 
especially important for areas such as middle school mathematics because 
many of the teachers have never had the benefit of exploring mathematics 
from the perspective of a quest for deep understanding. No single-shot 
workshop is sufficient to help them achieve this kind of understanding. As 
a result, the development of teacher learning communities is a prerequisite 
for effective education reform, and one of the key elements in our current 
thinking about design.
Broader Community Support. Teacher learning communities are also 
supported (or undermined) by other aspects of the social environment such as 
the degree of support from school administrators and community members. If 
left unattended, it is very easy for reform efforts to flourish for a short while but 
never sustain themselves. Issues that can make or break such efforts include 
the degree to which principals allow flexible time blocks so that students can 
engage in sustained thinking about important issues, and the degree to which 
members of the community as a whole support new approaches to assessment 
that reveal deep understanding.
The idea of anchoring instruction in authentic problem-solving 
environments such as the Jasper series has turned out to be extremely beneficial 
for community building (CTGV, 1997). College students, parents, business 
partners, and others can watch a Jasper adventure and get a solid idea of what 
the students are exploring. They can then (a) help students solve the problems 
and prepare their presentations; (b) serve as outside audiences during students’ 
presentation; or (c) create additional materials and experiences that link to 
themes in the anchor (e.g., after seeing RBM, community members have let 
students visit their personal ultralight fields; students have also visited wildlife 
centers that house injured eagles and other species).
An event that has proved to be especially powerful for community building 
has been to let a group of adults see a Jasper adventure and attempt to solve 
it, and receive help from students. The students get to see that adults also 
struggle with these problems, yet don’t give up. The adults get to see that 
young students are able to think and communicate much better than they 
typically imagined. Procedures for building community have become a very 
important part of our thinking about design (CTGV, 1997). 

306  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Cultural Flexibility. The idea of multiply embedded contexts also includes 
another component that we feel is important for teachers as well as students. 
It involves the ability to analyze key characteristics of one’s immediate 
social environment and see how it differs from other possible environments. 
For example, in some environments (e.g., during well-planned professional 
development sessions) it can be comfortable for adults to emphasize what they 
don’t know. In other environments (e.g., appearing before the school board) 
it can be important to look competent and keep many questions and doubts 
to oneself. Similarly, in some environments (hopefully most classrooms), 
students feel free to explore particular concepts deeply (e.g., the concept of 
nonlinear and linear functions that may underlie the design of different smart 
tools). In other environments (e.g., a business environment), the emphasis 
may be on efficiency. In this context it is probably not wise to spend a great 
deal of business time exploring something as deeply as one would explore 
it in a mathematics classroom. Alternatively, getting 80% of the problems 
on a quiz correct may be acceptable performance in a classroom but totally 
unacceptable in a business context where the customer expects problem 
solving that is error free.
We believe that cultural flexibility is an important aspect of transfer. The 
cognitive literature (e.g., Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996) tends to focus 
on learning that leads to abstract representations of important subject-matter 
concepts (e.g., functions, rate) as a primary source of positive transfer. The 
situated cognitive literature (e.g., Lave, 1988) tends to focus on learning as 
assimilation to existing sets of cultural norms, often with little attention to 
how adaptation to one set of norms affects adaptation to other norms. We 
believe that the strongest transfer will occur when people acquire “big ideas” 
of content, plus “big ideas” of how to analyze social settings and see how to 
best adapt to these settings. It is in this sense that the idea of cultural flexibility 
is part of the design principles that we currently use.
AN ILLUSTRATION OF A DESIGN FOR CELLS 6 AND 9
Our goal in this section is to provide more detail about a design involving 
Jasper that fits into Cell 9 in our framework (see Fig. 8.11). We do so by 
discussing one of our Jasper Adventures that was specially designed for 
Cell 9: Working Smart. The major mathematical goal of Working Smart is 
to introduce middle school students to important pre-algebra concepts such 
as functions—including their visual and symbolic representations. Our goal 
for the adventure is to help students understand and appreciate the power of 
mathematics (and especially functions) for “modeling the world.”

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  307
Overview of Working Smart
Working Smart consists of a 17-minute story on videodisc or CD ROM that 
ends with a challenge. Students are challenged to create mathematical “smart 
tools” (e.g., graphs, tables, templates for spreadsheets) that will help them 
quickly and easily solve classes of problems that have been highlighted in the 
video. An overview of Working Smart is provided in Fig. 8.13.
FIG. 8.13. Story summary of the Jasper Adventure, Working Smart.

308  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
FIG. 8.14. Map for the category, “Are We There Yet?”
In order to solve Working Smart, students need to revisit the adventure and 
gather information about the types of problems they can expect to encounter. 
Students usually proceed by dividing into groups. Four different problem 
types are featured in the video—two involve rate, time, and distance, and two 
involve other types of relationships. Functions generated for several of the 
categories involve linear relationships; others are nonlinear.
Preparing for a Particular Class of Problems. Consider preparing smart 
tools to answer questions about the category “Are We There Yet?” Problems 
in this category relate to a map (see Fig. 8.14) that is given to students and 
shows relevant distances and speed limits. Given the map and their smart 
tools, students are asked to solve problems such as the following (which are 
all based on leaving from Cumberland City):
1.	How long should it take me to get to Sue City by car?
2.	I’ve been driving for 2 hours at 60 mph and I’m in the country. Can you 
tell me the nearest town?
3.	If I drive 45 mph rather than 60 mph, how much longer will it take me 
to get to Hanford (which is 260 miles away)?

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  309
A graph like the one illustrated in Fig. 8.15 provides an excellent smart tool 
for helping students answer a variety of questions about the Category “Are 
We There Yet?”
Like all Jasper adventures, Working Smart includes “embedded teaching” 
scenes that students can return to in order to begin to understand the idea of 
smart tools. One scene features Grandpa’s smart tools that he uses to determine 
the delivery time for birdhouses, depending on the distance he must travel and 
whether he will walk, ride his bicycle, or drive his old truck (see Fig. 8.16). 
Students cannot simply copy Grandpa’s smart tool and use it to solve the 
challenge because it does not contain the relevant information. However, it 
provides a model of the value of smart tools.
The Need for Active Inquiry, Feedback, and Opportunities to Revise
We noted earlier that even for an easy-to-communicate idea such as 
backscratcher T-shirts, a thorough understanding of the value of different 
FIG. 8.15. Smart Tool for the category, “Are We There Yet?”

310  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
types of grids requires opportunities to make conjectures about design and to 
receive feedback. The need for opportunities for inquiry and feedback is even 
greater for Working Smart. The adventure is motivating and provides a good 
foundation for understanding the idea of creating smart tools. The embedded 
teaching scenes are helpful to most students and teachers. Nevertheless, most 
middle school students are used to thinking about mathematics as “what 
you do to solve a particular problem that someone gives you.” This is very 
different from attempting to select or invent tools and procedures that will help 
one solve an entire class of problems. Our experience is that students must 
attempt to use and then revise smart tools several times before they begin to 
grasp the idea that they are solving entire classes of potential problems rather 
than only a single problem.
Figure 8.17 shows data from a group of seventh graders who used their 
FIG. 8.16. Grandpa’s Smart Tool for delivering birdhouses.

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  311
smart tools to help them solve the “Are We There Yet?” category of problems 
from Working Smart. Their initial performance was not very good. After 
testing the mettle of their tools, students received a chance to revise their tools 
and try again. Their performance improved substantially (see Fig. 8.17).
An interesting aspect of students’ thinking in the context of Working Smart 
involves their initial assumptions about what counts as “acceptable performance.” 
On their first chance to test their mettle, many of the students argued that getting 
75% correct should be acceptable because it counts as a “pass.”
Working Smart helped set the stage for discussions of how errors on roughly 
25% of the problems one confronts would be quite unacceptable in a real 
setting such as a travel agency. If people are counting on you for advice that 
affects their vacation planning, they expect performance that is essentially 
error free. This example illustrates why we include cultural flexibility as one 
of the design principles that are important for Cells 7, 8, and 9.
Additional Cycles of Inquiry, Feedback, and Revision. Following several 
passes at the “Are We There Yet?” problems, students then develop smart tools 
for other categories of problems such as “Burning Bucks” and “Catch Em If 
You Can.” Our experiences in classrooms indicate that students’ abilities to 
FIG. 8.17. Questions answered correctly with Smart Tool on initial attempt and  
after revision.

312  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
prepare for new categories of problems, and to explain the mathematical basis 
of their smart tools, improve over time.
The cycles of inquiry, feedback, and revision built into Working Smart 
are also designed to help students learn to differentiate linear from nonlinear 
functions. For example, mathematical models for questions in the category 
“Beat This Deal!” are piecewise defined functions. Working with nonlinear 
functions provides opportunities for students to compare properties of linear 
functions with nonlinear ones and helps them understand how the functions 
are alike or different.
As an illustration, consider a student presenting ideas about her group’s 
discussions. She noted that the graph of a piecewise defined function did 
not allow her to extrapolate in the same way that she did with a linear 
function to find values for points outside the range of the graph. The student 
recognized the constant rate of change for the linear function and used 
this insight to help her determine values outside the range of the graph. 
She recognized that piecewise defined functions did not possess the same 
constant rate of change that was captured by her comment. Her teacher 
described the situation as follows:
There’s one group that has this [pointing to a graph-based smart tool where the 
vertical axis had the wrong range for the class of problems that students were asked 
to solve]…and it was really good—she was testing her smart tool today and she kept 
having problems. She said, “Well, I can’t do it with this because this is 300 miles 
and this only goes up to 140 and before I could just take half [referring to the smart 
tool she used for the category “Are We There Yet?”; for this category if the range 
of the smart tool was not big enough she could find the distance traveled in half the 
time and multiply by 2 to get the correct distance]… But I don’t know…” You have 
U-Steer beginning to really increase there and she said, “And I don’t know what 
U-Steer is going to do now.”
And I said to the student: “are you going to persuade the class to buy your smart 
tool.” And she said, “No!” And I said, “What are you going to do?” And she said, 
“I’m going to persuade them not to use my smart tool.” And I said, “Good job!” And 
I said, “What are you going to do when other people are persuading?” And she said, 
“I’m going to listen.”
This is an excellent example of mathematical reasoning, plus it illustrates a 
very positive attitude toward wanting to learn and improve.
Contrasting Cases as Scaffolds
In many classrooms where we have tested Working Smart, we find that it 
can be extremely difficult to have students attempt to invent smart tools from 
scratch. It’s too big a leap. As a scaffold for inventing smart tools, we have 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  313
used the theory of contrasting cases discussed in section 1 of this paper. In 
particular, we have presented students with a catalog of contrasting smart 
tools that they can use to solve particular classes of problems such as the “Are 
We There Yet?” problems (Fig. 8.18). Their job is to work in groups to choose 
a smart tool and then explain why they chose it and how it will be used. Some 
FIG. 8.18. A catalog of contrasting Smart Tools for the category, “Are We There Yet?”

314  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
of the smart tools in the catalog won’t work at all. Others vary in terms of 
elegance and ease of use.
As noted in the first section, an emphasis on particular sets of contrasts 
affects the kinds of dimensions and features that students notice. For example, 
using different rates of speed in a chart focuses students’ attention on speed. 
When students look at a graphical smart tool, they usually have conversations 
about how and what speed is represented on each graph. Similarly, the contrast 
of reading exact data for selected values in a chart verses a graph provides 
opportunities for students to identify what a reasonable degree of precision 
might be for their estimates of time and distance.
We are finding that the use of catalogs of contrasting cases helps teachers 
develop classroom communities that result in more effective learning. First, 
students are highly motivated to look through the catalog. Second, students’ 
conversations are focused because they organize their discussions around 
the design features that differentiate the contrasting tools. Third, students 
receive more chances for feedback because the catalogs help structure their 
presentations and make their current thinking clear and more visible so it is 
easier to give feedback.
A teacher who has collaborated with us for several years first taught Working 
Smart without a catalog and found that all her students tended to generate the 
same “smart tool” each time. When she later used a smart tool catalog, there 
was much more variability in the students’ initial choices and hence much 
better and more meaningful discussion. After thinking about her teaching the 
teacher realized that the first time she had taught Working Smart, she had led 
her students to create a particular type of smart tool without realizing that she 
had done so. The use of the catalog made it much easier to keep from being 
too directive, and it motivated exciting discussions among students, who then 
became eager to test the mettle of their particular tools.
From Selection to Adaptation to Invention. Instruction in Working Smart is 
designed to move students from processes of (a) selecting tools, to (b) adapting 
existing tools, and eventually (c) inventing new tools from scratch. For example, 
the tool shown in Fig. 8.19 requires that students add their own information—it 
is basically a shell for more generative activities. Eventually they work on parts 
of the problem where they generate their own tools from scratch.
As students gain insights that help them learn to generate their own tools, it 
can be useful to have them return to previous problem sets where they simply 
selected smart tools and attempt to create tools that are better than any shown 
in the catalog. Figure 8.20 illustrates a student-generated smart tool (the 
student was an eighth grader) for solving problems of distance, rate, and time 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  315
in Working Smart. No one in our research group had thought about designing 
this particular tool.
Additional extensions to Working Smart are designed to help students 
experience a number of situations where they can create smart tools by 
beginning with mathematical models. Many of these extensions revisit earlier 
Jasper adventures. For example, in Rescue at Boone’s Meadow, Larry’s 
ultralight is used to rescue a wounded eagle. How might one create a smart 
tool that lets Larry quickly see if his ultralight has enough range (hours of 
flying time on a tank of gasoline) depending on where he wants to go and 
whether there are headwinds and tailwinds? In The Big Splash, how might one 
FIG. 8.19. Template for Smart Tool for category, “Beat This Deal!”
FIG. 8.20. A student’s Smart Tool for the category, “Are We There Yet?”

316  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
create a smart tool that make it easy to determine the rate of filling different 
size pools depending on different flow rates of water in the school hose?
Eventually, we want to help students understand that a general model 
for concepts such as rate can apply to a wide variety of concrete situations. 
The model can be transformed into useful smart tools when it is calibrated 
for particular contextual conditions (e.g., when it takes into account the 
appropriate values for range and speed that fit Larry’s ultralight, or the flow 
rate for the school hose and volume for the pool in The Big Splash).
We also want to help students learn to move from visual representations 
of mathematics to symbolic representations. Helping students create special 
templates for spreadsheets is one way to help them begin to make this 
transition. It is especially useful to help them to see that symbolic, computer-
based representations are especially helpful when the range of values one 
has to deal with is large. Additional Jasper adventures in the algebra strand 
(see Fig. 8.4) are designed to move increasingly toward an appreciation of 
how visual representations of functions map into symbolic representations. 
For example, The General Is Missing is explicitly designed to help students 
see the symbolic power of algebra as a language—for communicating both 
with other humans and with machines such as computers. (Features of this 
adventure are described in Bransford et al., 1996, and CTGV, 1997.)
Engineering the Social Environment
Our experiences with Working Smart clearly illustrate the importance of 
classroom and subject-specific norms, which are emphasized in Cell 6 of the 
framework in Fig. 8.11. Working Smart can look very different depending on 
whether teachers emphasize “always find the right answer” or encourage a 
diversity of thinking and reasoning. Teachers’ understandings of the goals of 
Working Smart have a strong effect on the classroom culture. For example, 
we noted earlier that one teacher initially thought that the purpose of the 
adventure was to teach students how to draw graphs. Her classroom that year 
looked very different than it did in subsequent years when we did a better job 
of helping her understand the kinds of mathematical understanding that the 
adventure might help students achieve.
Working Smart takes on added dimensions when it is incorporated into 
Cell 9 of the framework in Fig. 8.11. As noted earlier, Cell 9 includes an 
emphasis on multiply embedded social contexts, which include roles for 
outside audiences in building classroom communities, plus the importance 
of thinking about classroom environments as being embedded in teacher 
communities, school-based communities, and the broader community (e.g., 
McLaughlin & Talbot, 1993). Examples are provided next. 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  317
The SMART Challenge Series. Working Smart is ideal for incorporating 
into our center’s SMART Challenge Series, which provides outside challenges 
that invite teachers and their students to “test their mettle,” see how other 
classes around the country perform, and make revisions as necessary. SMART 
stands for Special Multimedia Areas for Refining Thinking. Data indicate a 
clear value added in terms of achievement when we use Jasper and others 
adventures in a SMART context compared to using Jasper without SMART 
(Barron et al., 1995, in press; CTGV, 1997; Vye et al., 1998). The ability to 
design and test the mettle of particular classes of smart tools is an activity that 
is ideally suited for SMART Challenges.
Outside Audiences. Working Smart is also excellent for helping outside 
audiences interact with students and teachers in the classroom. Outsiders 
(which in the past have included college students, business partners, parents, 
and others) can watch the adventure so that they understand what the students 
are doing. They then have a more concrete basis for interacting with the students 
to help them test their mettle and improve their abilities to communicate. 
The idea of creating smart tools in Working Smart is particularly appealing 
because it represents a novel approach to mathematical thinking that most 
people find exciting. In addition, the fact that discussions can be organized 
around the mathematical properties of particular tools makes it easier for 
visitors to understand what the students are talking about.
The idea of “tools for working smart” is also a topic that allows outsiders to 
share tools that they use in their work. Our experiences indicate that students 
are intrigued with opportunities to learn about tools that people have invented 
to “work smart” in a wide variety of environments (fascinating examples 
include aviation, carpentry, artistic activities such as color matching and quilt 
making, and tools for business environments). An introduction of these tools 
raises a series of additional questions. For example, to what extent must tools 
be redesigned when they are moved from one setting to another? To what 
extent are cultural norms transformed as new tools are introduced? How much 
emphasis is placed on relating tools to formal bodies of knowledge such as 
mathematics or physics in different types of settings? These are fascinating 
issues that can be very useful for students to explore and articulate.
Questions like these help develop skills of cultural flexibility—a concept 
that we discussed earlier. For example, the adventure helps students compare 
classroom cultures with business cultures and other everyday activities. In 
the process, they can learn a great deal about how to move from one culture 
to the another. We noted earlier, for example, that classroom cultures often 
encourage a deep examination of ideas that in a business environment often 

318  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
does not happen because of the need to be cost-effective and time-efficient. We 
also noted that students who are used to a classroom culture initially assume 
that 75% correct is perfectly acceptable as a passing grade. In a business 
setting, however, it would usually be far from acceptable.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Our goal in this chapter was to discuss our current thinking about designs 
that invite and sustain mathematical thinking. We noted that, as a research 
group, we are interested in designing environments for all disciplines, 
including science, literature, and history, as well as mathematics. We believe 
that there are important principles of understanding and learning that are 
common across disciplines, but we also believe that there is also a great deal 
of domain specificity. Our focus in the present chapter has been in the area of 
mathematics for students in the middle school years.
We divided our discussion into three major sections. In the first section 
we focused on theories of understanding and socially situated learning that 
have had a major impact on our thinking. Our discussion of understanding 
included work by Dewey (1933) on differences between “meaningful objects” 
and “brute things”; work by Buhler (cf. Blumenthal, 1970) on the importance 
of shared knowledge for comprehension; and work by Garner (1974) and 
J.Gibson and Gibson (1955) on the development of differentiated knowledge. 
We emphasized that people’s perception and understanding of individual 
objects and events depend on their place in a field of alternatives. An 
important implication is that simply knowing the referent of various symbols 
is insufficient to understand their overall significance.
Our discussion of socially situated learning included an emphasis on both 
general and discipline-specific norms that characterize the social contexts of 
learning (Cobb, 1994), and on the fact that knowing is often distributed across 
other people and artifacts (e.g., Norman, 1993; Pea, 1993; Salomon, 1993). We 
also emphasized the importance of embedded contexts (McLaughlin & Talbert, 
1993) and the need to explicitly take these into account in approaches to design.
We ended our discussion in the first section by noting that its major 
shortcoming was that it simply involved a list of principles. The purpose of the 
second section was to explore how these principles could be combined to create 
different kinds of instructional environments. We used the 3×3 matrix in Fig. 
8.11 to illustrate nine different design environments, and we explained how and 
why our own work in design has moved from Cell 1 in that matrix to Cell 9. 
These changes were motivated by our experiences in classrooms (e.g., CTGV, 
1996, 1997), plus our increasing familiarity with other research literatures 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  319
such as the literature on situated cognition and the literature on mathematics 
education. Each of these has helped us deepen our understanding of design.
In the third section of this chapter we discussed a particular example of an 
instructional environment that was designed to fit Cell 9 of the matrix shown 
in Fig. 8.11. Based on the Jasper adventure Working Smart, this environment 
helps students focus on mathematical modeling as a way to create solutions that 
solve entire classes of problems rather than simply solve a single problem, and 
it invites students to think visually as well as symbolically as they attempt to 
invent mathematical tools that help them “work smart” in these environments. 
We also discussed how the theory of contrasting cases has guided our attempts 
to help scaffold students’ thinking in this domain.
We envision several “next steps” in our attempts to develop environments 
that invite and sustain mathematical thinking. A major goal is to increase the 
resources available with the Jasper adventures so that they can move from a 
supplement to the curriculum to a full curriculum in areas such as algebra and 
geometry (see CTGV, chap. 7, 1997). As support for achieving this goal, we 
have created a software shell that can help both students and teachers grasp the 
“big picture” of their inquiry; download from the World Wide Web a number 
of text, video, and interactive resources that are relevant to their inquiry; 
and continually “test their mettle” as they explore important mathematical 
concepts (Schwartz, Lin, Brophy & Bransford, in press).
A second “next step” is to continue our research in classrooms, plus our 
collaboration with colleagues in mathematics education. The goal of this step 
is to find ways to further improve our approach.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research reported in this chapter was supported, in part, by grants from 
the National Science Foundation (NSF) for development and research on 
the Jasper series (MDR-0050191 and ESI-9252990), and from the Office of 
Educational Research and Improvement (OERI; 305F60090) for research on 
contrasting cases. The ideas expressed in this chapter are those of the authors, 
not the granting agencies.
The Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt (CTGV) refers to an 
interdisciplinary group of individuals at the Learning Technology Center, 
Peabody College at Vanderbilt University. Members of the CTGV contributing 
to the work discussed in this chapter are the following (in alphabetical order): 
Melinda Bray, Kay Burgess, Susan R.Goldman, Ted Hasselbring, Xiaodong 
Lin, Allison Moore, Tom Noser, James W.Pellegrino, Teresa J.Secules, and 
Susan M.Williams. 

320  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
REFERENCES
Adams, L., Kasserman, J., Yearwood, A., Perfetto, G., Bransford, J., & Franks, J. (1988). The 
effects of facts versus problem-oriented acquisition. Memory & Cognition, 16, 167–175.
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (1989). Science for all Americans: 
A project 2061 report on literacy goals in science, mathematics, and technology. 
Washington, DC: Author.
Anderson, J.R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill. Psychological Review, 89, 369–406.
Anderson, J.R. (1987). Skill acquisition: Compilation of weak-method problem solutions. 
Psychological Review, 94, 192–210.
Anderson, R., & Ortony, A. (1975). On putting apples into bottles—A problem of polysemy. 
Cognitive Psychology, 7, 167–180.
Anderson, J.R., Reder, L.M., & Simon, H.A. (1996, May). Situated learning and education. 
Educational Researcher, 25(4), 5–11.
Anderson, J.R., Reder, L.M., & Simon, H.A. (1997). Rejoinder: Situative versus cognitive 
perspectives: Form versus substance. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 18–21.
Bacon, F. (1620). Novum organum. First book, Aphorism 2.
Barclay, J.R., Bransford, J.D., Franks, J.J., McCarrell, N.S., & Nitsch, K.E. (1974). 
Comprehension and semantic flexibility. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 
13, 471–481.
Barron, B., Schwartz, D.L., Vye, N.J., Moore, A., Petrosino, A., Zech, L., Bransford, J.D., 
& Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (in press). Doing with understanding: 
Lessons from research on problem and project-based learning. Journal of Learning 
Sciences.
Barron, B., Vye, N.J., Zech, L., Schwartz, D., Bransford, J.D., Goldman, S.R., Pellegrino, 
J., Morris, J., Garrison, S., & Kantor, R. (1995). Creating contexts for community-
based problem solving: The Jasper challenge series. In C.N.Hedley, P.Antonacci, & M. 
Rabinowitz (Eds.), Thinking and literacy: The mind at work (pp. 47–71). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Barth, R. (1988). School: A community of leaders. In A.Lieberman (Ed.), Building a 
professional culture in schools. New York: Teachers College Press.
Barth, R. (1989). The principal and the profession of teaching. In T.J.Sergiovanni & J.H. 
Moore (Eds.), Schooling for tomorrow: Directing reform to issues that count. New York: 
Teachers College Press.
Blumenthal, A.L. (1970). Language and psychology. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Bransford, J.D. (1979). Human cognition: Learning, understanding, and remembering. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Bransford, J.D., Franks, J.J., Vye, N.J., & Sherwood, R.D. (1989). New approaches to 
instruction: Because wisdom can’t be told. In S.Vosniadou & A.Ortony (Eds.), Similarity 
and analogical reasoning (pp. 470–497). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bransford, J.D., & Johnson, M.K. (1972). Contextual prerequisites for understanding: Some 
investigations of comprehension and recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal 
Behavior, 11, 717–726.
Bransford, J.D., & Johnson, M.K. (1973). Considerations of some problems of comprehension. 
In W.G.Chase (Ed.), Visual information processing (pp. 383–438). New York: Academic 
Press.
Bransford, J.D., & McCarrell, N.S. (1974). A sketch of cognitive approach to comprehension. 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  321
In W.Weimer & D.Palermo (Eds.), Cognition and the symbolic processes (pp. 189–229). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bransford, J.D., & Stein, B.S. (1993). The IDEAL problem solver (2nd ed.). New York: 
Freeman.
Bransford, J.D., Vye, N., Adams, L., & Perfetto, G. (1989). Learning skills and the acquisition 
of knowledge. In A.Lesgold & R.Glaser (Eds.), Foundations for a psychology of education 
(pp. 199–249). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bransford, J.D., Zech, L., Schwartz, D., Barron, B., Vye, N., & Cognition and Technology 
Group at Vanderbilt. (1996). Fostering mathematical thinking in middle school students: 
Lessons from research. In R.J.Sternberg & T.Ben-Zeev (Eds.), The nature of mathematical 
thinking (pp. 203–250). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bray, M.H. (1996). The changing role of teachers as they implementing a constructivist 
approach to learning. Unpublished manuscript, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
Brown, A.L., Bransford, J.D., Ferrara, R.A., & Campione, J.C. (1983). Learning, remembering, 
and understanding. In J.H.Flavell & E.M.Markman (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: 
Vol. 3. Cognitive development (4th ed., pp. 78–166). New York: Wiley.
Brown, A.L., & Campione, J.C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In 
K.McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice 
(pp. 229–272). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brown, A.L., & Campione, J.C. (1996). Psychological theory and the design of innovative 
learning environments: On procedures, principles, and systems. In L.Schauble & R. 
Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning: New environments for education (pp. 289–325). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. 
Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32–41.
Bruer, J.T. (1993). Schools for thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chi, M.T.H., Glaser, R., & Farr, M. (1991). The nature of expertise. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Chi, M.T.H., & Koeske, R.D. (1983). Network representation of a child’s dinosaur knowledge. 
Developmental Psychology, 29(1), 29–39.
Cobb, P. (1994). Where is the mind? Constructivist and sociocultural perspectives on 
mathematical development. Educational Researcher, 23(7), 13–20.
Cobb, P., Wood, T., Yackel, E., & McNeal, B. (1992). Characteristics of classroom 
mathematics traditions: An interactional analysis. American Educational Research 
Journal, 29, 573–604.
Cobb, P., Yackel, E., & Wood, T. (1992). A constructivist alternative to the representational 
view of mind in mathematics education. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 
19, 99–114.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1990). Anchored instruction and its 
relationship to situated cognition. Educational Researcher, 19(6), 2–10.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1992). The Jasper series as an example 
of anchored instruction: Theory, program description, and assessment data. Educational 
Psychologist, 27, 291–315.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1993). Toward integrated curricula: 
Possibilities from anchored instruction. In M.Rabinowitz (Ed.), Cognitive science 
foundations of instruction (pp. 33–55). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1996). Looking at technology in context: 

322  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
A framework for understanding technology and education research. In D.C.Berliner 
& R.C.Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 807–840). New York: 
Simon & Schuster MacMillan.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1997). The Jasper project: Lessons in 
curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional development. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (in press). Designing environments to 
reveal, support, and expand our children’s potentials. In S.A.Soraci & W.McIlvane (Eds.), 
Perspectives on fundamental processes in intellectual functioning. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Cohen, D.K., McLaughlin, M.W., & Talbert, J.E. (Eds.). (1993). Teaching for understanding: 
Challenges for policy and practice. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Dewey, S. (1933). How we think, “a restatement” of the relation of reflective thinking to the 
educative process. Boston: Heath.
Elmore, R.F., Peterson, P.L., & McCarthey, S.J. (1996). Restructuring in the classroom: 
Teaching, learning, and school organization. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Franks, J., Bransford, J., Brailey, K., & Purdon, S. (1991). Understanding memory access. 
In R.Hoffman & D.Palermo (Eds.), Cognition and the symbolic processes: Applied and 
ecological perspectives (pp. 281–299). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gagné, R., & Gibson, J.J. (1947). Research on the recognition of aircraft. In J.J.Gibson (Ed.), 
Motion picture training and research (pp. 113–168). Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Garner, W.R. (1974). The processing of information and structure. Potomac, MD: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Gibson, J., & Gibson, E. (1955). Perceptual learning: Differentiation or enrichment. 
Psychological Review, 62, 32–51.
Gick, M.L., & Holyoak, K.J. (1980). Analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 
306–365.
Gick, M.L., & Holyoak, K.J. (1983). Schema induction and analogical transfer. Cognitive 
Psychology, 15, 1–38.
Gragg, C.I. (1940, October 19). Because wisdom can’t be told. Harvard Alumni Bulletin, 
78–84.
Greeno, J.G. (1993). For research to reform education and cognitive science. In L.A.Penner, 
G.M.Batsche, H.M.Knoff, & D.L.Nelson (Eds.), The challenge in mathematics and 
science education: Psychology’s response (pp. 153–194). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Greeno, J.G. (1997). Response: On claims that answer the wrong questions. Educational 
Researcher, 26(1), 5–17.
Greeno, J.G., Smith, D.R., & Moore, J.L. (1993). Transfer of situated learning. In D.K. 
Detterman & R.J.Sternberg (Eds.), Transfer on trial: Intelligence, cognition, and 
instruction (pp. 99–167). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Hanson, N.R. (1970). A picture theory of theory meaning. In R.G.Colodny (Ed.), The nature 
and function of scientific theories (pp. 233–274). Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh 
Press.
Kilpatrick, J. (1992). Problem formulating: Where do good problems come from? In A.H. 
Schoenfeld (Ed.), Cognitive science and mathematics education (pp. 3–8). New York: 
Macmillan.
Lamon, M., Secules, T.J., Petrosino, T., Hackett, R., Bransford, J.D., & Goldman, S.R. 

Environments That Invite Mathematical Thinking  323
(1996). Schools for thought: Overview of the project and lessons learned from one of the 
sites. In L.Schauble & R.Glaser (Eds.), Innovations in learning: New environments for 
education (pp. 243–288). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics, and culture in everyday life. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lindberg, M. (1980). The role of knowledge structures in the ontogeny of learning. Journal 
of Experimental Child Psychology, 30, 401–410.
Lockhart, R.S., Lamon, M., & Gick, M.L. (1988). Conceptual transfer in simple insight 
problems. Memory & Cognition, 16, 36–44.
McLaughlin, M.W., & Talbert, J.E. (1993). Contexts that matter for teaching and learning: 
Strategic opportunities for meeting the nation’s education goals. Stanford, CA: Center for 
Research on the Context of Teaching.
Moore, J.L., Lin, X., Schwartz, D., Petrosino, A., Hickey, D.T., Campbell, 
O., & Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt. (1996). The relationship 
between situated cognition and anchored instruction: A response to Tripp. In 
H.McLellan (Ed.), Situated learning perspectives (pp. 213–221). Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
National Academy of Sciences. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1996). Professional standards for teaching 
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
Newman, D., Griffin, P., & Cole, M. (1989). Construction zone: Working for cognitive 
change in school. New York: Cambridge University Press.
New Standards. (1995). Performance standards draft 5.1. Washington, DC: Author.
Norman, D.A. (1993). Things that make us smart: Defending human attributes in the age of 
the machine. New York: Addison-Wesley.
Pea, R.D. (1993). Learning scientific concepts through material and social activities: 
Conversational analysis meets conceptual change. Educational Psychologist, 28(3), 
265–277.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking. New York: Oxford University Press.
Salomon, G. (Ed.). (1993). Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational 
considerations. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schoenfeld, A.H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Schoenfeld, A.H. (Ed.). (1987). Cognitive science and mathematics education. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schwartz, D.L. (1995). The emergence of abstract representations in dyad problem solving. 
Journal of the Learning Science, 4, 321–354.
Schwartz, D.L., & Bransford, J.D. (in press). A time for telling.
Schwartz, D.L., Goldman, S.R., Vye, N.J., Barron, B.J., & Bransford, J.D., with the 
CTGV. (1998). Aligning everyday and mathematical reasoning: The case of sampling 
assumptions. In Susanne P.Lajoie (Ed.), Reflections on statistics: Learning, teaching, and 
assessment in grades K-12 (pp. 233–273). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schwartz, D.L., Lin, X., Brophy, S., & Bransford, J.D. (in press). Toward the development 
of flexibly adaptive instructional designs. In C.M.Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design 
theories and models: Volume II. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

324  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Secules, T., Cottom, C., Bray, M., & Miller, L. (1997). Creating schools for thought. 
Educational Leadership, 54(6), 56–60.
Shulman, L.S. (1987). Knowledge and teaching: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard 
Educational Review, 57, 1–22.
Silver, E.A. (1986). Using conceptual and procedural knowledge: A focus on relationships. 
In J.Hiebert (Ed.), Conceptual and procedural knowledge: The case of mathematics (pp. 
181–189). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Silver, E.A. (1990). Contribution of research to practice: Applying findings, methods, and 
perspectives. In T.J.Cooney (Ed.), Teaching and learning mathematics in the 1990s: 1990 
Yearbook of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (pp. 1–11). Reston, VA: 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Simon, H.A. (1980). Problem solving and education. In D.T.Tuma & R.Reif (Eds.), Problem 
solving and education: Issues in teaching and research (pp. 81–96). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Van Haneghan, J.P., Barron, L., Young, M.F., Williams, S.M., Vye, N.J., & Bransford, 
J.D. (1992). The Jasper series: An experiment with new ways to enhance mathematical 
thinking. In D.F.Halpern (Ed.), Enhancing thinking skills in the sciences and mathematics 
(pp. 15–38). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Vye, N.J., Schwartz, D.L., Bransford, J.D., Barron, B.J., Zech, L., & Cognition and Technology 
Group at Vanderbilt. (1998). SMART environments that support monitoring, reflection, 
and revision. In D.Hacker, J.Dunlosk, & A.Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational 
theory and practice (pp. 305–346). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Whitehead, A.N. (1929). The aims of education. New York: Macmillan.
Williams, S.M. (1994). Anchored simulations: Merging the strengths of formal and informal 
reasoning in a computer-based learning environment. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
Zech, L., Vye, N.J., Bransford, J.D., Swink, J., Mayfield-Stewart, C., Goldman, S.R., & 
Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt (1994). Bringing geometry into the 
classroom with videodisc technology. Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School 1, 
228–233.

325
9 
The Interrelated Development  
of Inscriptions and  
Conceptual Understanding
Richard Lehrer 
Leona Schauble 
Susan Carpenter 
David Penner 
University of Wisconsin-Madison
In this chapter, we describe two episodes from elementary classrooms where 
children are learning through design. The focus and goal of the design vary 
across these cases, but the episodes share an emphasis on modeling and on 
the related issue of mathematizing the theoretically important elements of a 
problem as one route toward constructing a solution. In the first classroom case, 
second graders are working to design combinations of Lego cars and downhill 
“racetracks” (inclined planes) so that the cars will traverse a fixed distance 
either “really fast” or “really slow.” In the second case, third-grade children 
are designing experiments to explore the factors that affect the growth rate 
of Wisconsin “Fast Plants.” These design cases are presented as a backdrop 
against which we illustrate the importance of inscription and symbolization 
for teaching and learning mathematics and science.
Our interest in design has been inspired partly by recent highly enthu-
siastic accounts of teaching experiments that feature design contexts for 
mathematics and science learning (Greeno, Knudsen, Lachapelle, Lauman, 
& Merris, 1996; Harel, 1991; Kafai, 1995; Pea, Sipusic, Allen, & Reiner, 
1990). In our view, there is some basis for this optimism. Because design 
problems are generally ill-structured, they more effectively represent the 
kinds of problems that actually occupy scientists and mathematicians than 
do well-structured “textbook problems” with one right answer. Although 
much school time is spent merely computing solutions to problems, design 
focuses attention on other important phases of problem solving that are 

326  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
typically overlooked, such as analyzing the problem, exploring the space 
of possible solutions, and deciding when a good enough solution has been 
achieved. In professional communities that are organized around design, such 
as architectural firms, landscaping companies, and highway engineers, the 
activity of design has a cyclical nature, suggesting that design can provide 
students with valuable opportunities to generate multiple design possibilities, 
explore their implications, settle on a provisional plan, carry out the plan, 
evaluate the outcome, and then perhaps carry out one or more repetitions of 
these phases as cycles of revision (Lawson, 1990). These cycles of planning 
and revision are consistent with the idea that problem solution often looks 
more like successive approximation than like the application of known 
algorithms (cf. Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, this volume; Bransford et al., chap. 8, 
this volume). Good design problems invite multiple solutions, thus increasing 
the probability that students will construct, debate, and evaluate alternative 
solution strategies. Finally, design implies functionality, and so includes 
built-in feedback loops. Observing how well one’s design suits its purpose 
can provide a standard for evaluating learning and problem solving.
Yet, in spite of their promise, we do not believe that design problems— or, 
for that matter, any kind of classroom tasks—are sufficient alone to produce 
conceptual change. Rather than casting our bets too narrowly on the nature of 
design tasks themselves, we prefer to keep our focus on the way that such tasks 
are orchestrated in classrooms (cf. Gravemeijer et al., chap. 7, this volume; 
Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 6, this volume). Although it is useful to study 
what makes an effective design task, that question is arguably secondary to a 
more fundamental consideration: What needs to be considered in developing 
classrooms in which design fosters learning, not just doing? We believe that 
the most promising agents of educational change are teachers, not tasks. 
Hence, we are interested in the ways that teachers use and embroider design 
tasks—with tools, talk, notation, and modes and means of argumentation—to 
develop classrooms where thinking and reflection, shared critical standards, 
evaluation, and revision are elements considered integral to the process 
of design. For example, one feature that distinguishes design from mere 
tinkering is the development of effective means for fixing and composing 
the process of design in replicable plans and outcomes. Unless actions can 
be accurately captured in inscriptions, they are unlikely to be communicated 
to others, to be replicable, or to be improved by cycles of evaluation and 
revision (cf. Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, this volume). Good design depends on 
such practices, so to support them, designers rely on forms of symbolization 
that support the representation and composition of important aspects of the 
phenomenon being investigated, the actions taken in the design process, or 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  327
both. Inscriptions are especially important for a design community (like a 
classroom), in which members work together to negotiate plans, processes, 
and critical standards for design (Erickson & Lehrer, 1998). As inscriptions 
take a more central role in the classroom, it is increasingly the inscriptions, 
and not just the designed artifacts themselves, that become subject to the 
critical analysis of the design community. A central focus of the work that we 
present here is to document the process by which inscriptions develop, spread, 
and evolve in the classroom, including the means by which they become 
increasingly conventionalized, general, and powerful. In so doing, we explore 
the progressive mathematization of important ideas, track the evolution of 
inscriptions during both cases, and discuss how inscriptions, in turn, govern 
the evolution of children’s thinking.
INCLINED PLANES AND FREE FALL
In the first case, children worked over the course of a week to explore the 
features that affect the speed at which objects (a) roll down inclined planes 
and (b) fall when dropped from a fixed height. For purposes of this instruction, 
two second-grade classrooms were configured into three groups of a dozen to 
15 children each. These groups rotated through a series of design activities 
about force and motion, one of which was the set of explorations concerning 
inclined planes and free fall (the others involved designing and constructing 
wind-up toys, tops, mobiles, and balancing toys). Each group worked on 
the inclined planes unit for approximately 7 hr within the boundaries of one 
school week. In the following sections, we begin by describing problems 
that emerged in the context of these relatively brief design tasks that could 
best be solved by representing aspects of the problem mathematically. We 
then describe in more detail two groups’ diagrams for representing steepness 
and discuss the implications for interrelations between the development of 
symbolization and the development of students’ thinking.
Representing the Design Problem Mathematically
Students were posed the design task of working in teams of two to three 
children to invent and construct two Lego cars—one that would traverse a 
downhill racetrack “as quickly as possible,” and one that would travel “as 
slowly as possible.” During work on this problem, students encountered three 
conceptual problems: how to operationalize speed, how to conceptualize the 
nature of a trial, and how to represent steepness. 

328  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Operationalizing Speed. At the outset of the investigation, the second 
graders seemed to consider speed to be a self-evident property of a car, that 
is, something that would be obvious on inspection. Deciding which car was 
fastest was regarded as a simple matter of observing each car as it rolled down 
a “racetrack” (a plank inclined against a chair). A faster car would just “look” 
faster than a slower car. This heuristic probably works for most of the speed 
judgments that second graders need to make, but it had clear limitations in this 
situation, because to the unassisted eye, many of the Lego cars seemed to roll 
equally fast (although, of course, designers reliably observed their own cars 
as being “just a bit faster” than the others).
The children’s proposed way to resolve these disputes was to run cars down a 
racetrack in pairs. Had they found this strategy feasible, we might have encouraged 
them to construct an algorithm for generating all possible pairs. However, the 
racetracks were too narrow to permit an unobstructed race to the finish line, and 
even when children did (rarely) succeed at getting two cars to complete a run 
without crashing into each other, there were still discussions about how to be 
sure that each was released at exactly the same moment, or how to determine 
which one crossed the finish line first. Hence, we introduced a timing device, 
the optical sensors that are part of a standard Lego Logo kit. One set of sensors 
was taped to the “starting line” of the racetrack and was programmed to start a 
computer timer when a car broke the beam of light by rolling over the starting 
line. A second set of sensors was taped to the “finish line.” When the light beam 
at the finish line was broken, the computer timer turned off, and the total time for 
the trial was posted on the computer screen in hundredths of a second.
The optical sensors are more convenient than timing with stopwatches and 
forestall disputes about error of human timers, but they highlight some of the 
same fundamental issues about measurement. For example, when the second 
graders completed the design of their “fast” cars and brought them to the 
racetrack, some children were dissatisfied with the outcome of their “run,” 
claiming, for example, that a car was inadvertently positioned so that it failed 
to take the shortest route down the “racetrack.” Hence, it was decided that 
each group would have the chance to conduct five trials for their “slow” car 
and five trials for their “fast” car.
In sum, the very idea of measuring speed emerged only after “eyeball” 
judgments failed to discriminate among trials. Children readily accepted 
“time of travel” as an appropriate measure for speed. They originally expected 
measuring devices (e.g., optical sensors) to produce a perfect, reliable, and 
undistorted measure of the speed of a car. Only with experience and observation 
in comparing speeds of different cars did children begin to question the 
relation between any given measure and its “fairness” in determining which 
of two cars was faster. Having considered the possibility that there might be 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  329
variance in measure, children were now posed with the problem of deciding 
which measure was the best representative of the group or, as they described 
it, the “most typical.”
The Meaning of a Trial. The computer posted times in tenths of a second 
for each trial, and these trial times were recorded on the board. Table 9.1 shows 
the times for “slow” and “fast” cars for each of the subgroups (Group A, B, and 
C) in the initial group of 12 students. The variability in these measures raised 
the question, “What’s the best way of saying how fast or slow a car is?” The 
teacher (in this case, one of the researchers, RL) suggested that the children 
consider that question with respect to the times for Group B’s “slow” car. He 
rewrote Group B’s data on the board in a column arranged by ascending order 
of time: 10, 15, 22, 28, 44. One second grader suggested that the best way of 
handling the problem was to use the “middle number.”
	
Tracy:	
Use the middle number—22.
	
RL:	
What do you mean by the middle?
	
Tracy:	
Two above and two below. 10, 15 and 28, 44.
	
Susan:	
No, use the middle one here, 28 [pointing to the raw data as 	
	
	
originally arrayed on the board and duplicated in Table 9.1]. 
TABLE 9.1 Time (in Tenths of Seconds) for Each of Five Trials of the “Slow” and “Fast” 
Car Designed by Group A, Group B, and Group C

330  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
	
Matt:	
The different groups could talk and decide what they want.
	
Jeff:	
…or groups could just pick their slowest number.
In this brief exchange, students first brought up the ideas that reappeared 
over the course of the unit when questions of “typicality” were raised. A few 
students, like Tracy, were willing to subscribe to an idea like median, although 
we never saw a student endorse this value unless we rearranged the values 
in ascending or descending order. As Susan’s comment clearly shows, some 
students did not understand why the “middle number” was a good choice for 
representing all five trials. To her, the “middle number” of the unordered set 
of data was equally acceptable—probably more acceptable, because the value 
was higher, and thus was consistent with the goal of achieving the slowest 
possible car.
The remaining two comments in the discussion also reflect this concern for 
matching the top-level goal, a bias that we frequently observed in the second 
graders. Matt appeared to believe that the best way to resolve the dispute was 
to let each group decide which value they wanted to use to represent their 
car. This solution shows no regard for consistency in the rule applied. Jeff’s 
solution was very characteristic of those offered by these young children: If 
you are trying to make a slow car, then the best value to pick is the one that 
is consistent with achieving that objective. This same concern surfaced in 
discussion of the data for the “fast” cars, as the discussion here illustrates:
RL:	
Let’s look at Group C’s fast car data. [RL writes these data in 
ascending order on the board: 7, 8, 8, 8, 9.] Which one should 
we choose?
Linda:	
7, because it’s the fastest.
RL:	
Is that the fairest?
Linda:	
Yeah.
RL:	
Really? I see one 7 but three 8s. Is that fair?
Linda:	
Yeah, because it’s the one that’s the fastest.
Roy:	
I think if you have lots of one number you should use that.
RL:	
So we have three different ideas: Pick the one that’s the best, 
the one in the middle, and the one that is the most frequent? 
Well, what if we did this? [RL rewrites the data on the board in 
the form illustrated in Fig. 9.1.]
RL:	
So what should we do?
LS:	
What rule should we use? Should it be the same for all  
the cars?
Students:	 One rule. 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  331
FIG. 9.1. RL’s inscriptions capturing the “fastest,” “middle,” and “most frequent” values 
for children’s car speeds.
LS:	
So which rule should we use—the most? the middle?  
the fastest?
In the ensuing discussion, it became evident that in spite of their original 
agreement that “one rule” was fairest, the students in fact felt it was OK to use 
more than one rule, that is, to make decisions about each case on a different 
basis. Later in instruction, we raised this issue of typicality again, both with 
this group and with the other two instructional groups. Ideas of mode (most 
frequent measure) and optimal measure (the fastest or the slowest) continued 
to remain salient for the children.
In sum, the utility of multiple trials was not apparent to children. When 
multiple trials were run, it was not immediately clear how to decide what 
measure would be best for representing the set of measures. Children’s choices 
of “most typical value” were influenced by their overriding goal (e.g., making 
the fastest or slowest car). Comparisons were frequently made on the basis of 
only one measure among many trials taken. Children did not usually consider 
variability of measure, even though the data posed some interesting questions 
about variability—for example, the variability of the trials for “slow” cars was 
considerably greater than that for “fast” cars. Their relative lack of interest in these 
issues may have been a result of the fact that the design goal (optimization of 
speed) collided with the instructional goal of describing variability and typicality. 
In the second part of this chapter, we describe a case in which the instructional 
goals and the design goal are in better synchrony. In that case, students found 
more ways and more flexible ways to represent variability and typicality.
Representing Steepness. As children revised their designs, we gave each 
team a different-length plank of wood to serve as a trial racetrack. The need 

332  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
for several trial racetracks was motivated by the crowding around the “true” 
racetrack equipped with the optical sensors and the consequent waiting for a 
turn to run the five trials required for each car. However, and in our view more 
important, we provided multiple racetracks as a way of provoking questions 
about how properties of the racetracks might affect the speed of cars. Because 
the children expected cars to run faster on a steep racetrack than a shallow 
one, they quickly raised the question of how comparable these different 
racetracks really were. Specifically, how could the teams ensure that all the 
trial racetracks were equally steep?
In a whole-class discussion devoted to this question, the children in Group 
1 spent 
 hr discussing what makes inclined planes more or less steep. The 
children’s original reactions were similar to those concerning questions about 
car speed—that is, they acted as if there were nothing to explain, as if steepness 
were a self-evident property of ramps. For example, when pressed to describe 
how steep their racetrack was to someone in one of the other groups, students 
made hand gestures that communicated tilt or angle. However, over the 
course of the discussion, they eventually began to talk about the components 
of steepness—specifically, the height of the ramp and its “pushed-outness.” 
They finally concluded that one could describe the steepness of an inclined 
plane by specifying three values: “how long it is,” “how high it climbs,” and 
“how far pushed out it is at the bottom.” Children next used a tape measure to 
measure values of “length,” “height,” and “pushed-outness” at three different 
levels of steepness that they defined as “a little steep,” “middle steep,” and 
“very steep.” The values were entered on a whiteboard table, duplicated in 
Table 9.2. The teachers, RL and LS, spent considerable time discussing with 
the children what it meant to change the steepness of the ramp. For example, 
after measuring length, height, and “pushed-outness” for a ramp that the 
children judged “a little steep,” RL raised the height of the ramp to represent 
“middle steep,” and the following discussion occurred. 
TABLE 9.2 Facsimile of Whiteboard Table Recording Values (in Inches) for Variables of 
an Inclined Plane at Three Different Levels of Steepness

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  333
LS:	
So what do we have to measure?
Jill:	
How high.
LS:	
Want to come up and measure how high for me? OK, I’ll hold 
it [the tape measure] down and you pull it up.
Jill:	
About 20.
LS:	
About 20 inches, Mr. Lehrer. [RL writes that value in the table 
on the board.] Is it higher than it was before?
Students:	 Yeah.
RL:	
What do you think is going to happen to pushed-outness? Is it 
going to go up?
Peter:	
Down!
RL:	
…or down?
Students:	 Down, down, down.
Jenna:	
It’s higher up and, um…and when it was lower it had more 
longer under it and now it’s shorter.
RL:	
OK, Zach, want to add onto that?
Zach:	
It’s shorter because, um, the more high it gets, I mean the higher 
it gets…(moves pencil upward in a slantwise direction)…
RL:	
I see what you’re doing with your pencil. Could you hold your 
pencil where everyone could see what you’re doing?
Zach:	
If I can get it steeper, push-out gets pushed in more.
Later in the discussion, children were challenged to find the case in which the 
inclined plane was “as steep as possible” and the case in which it showed “the 
least possible amount of steepness.” One child demonstrated the former case 
by standing a plank at an angle perpendicular to the floor, while another child 
demonstrated the latter by placing the plank horizontally on the floor. Both of 
those values for “steepness” are included in Table 9.2.
Notable is the rather extended route the children took toward mathematizing 
an aspect of the physical world—a plank made of wood—and how much the 
plank itself got in the way, obscuring the forms of thinking that permitted 
children to regard each racetrack as a different instance of “steepness.” The 
variable that the children labeled “pushed-outness” was especially difficult 
for many children to perceive as part of the system, perhaps because it was 
not explicitly marked by the ends of the board (as was length) or the crate 
against which it was propped (as was height). “Pushed-outness” had to be 
mentally constructed before it could be measured and included in a “number 
rule” that summarized the relations among the variables that comprise 
steepness (see Fig. 9.2, later). Our decision to spend so much time helping 
children make the transition from physical gesture to mathematization to a 

334  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
general rule was motivated by our judgment that “steepness” is a concept 
that has wide application in mathematics and science. Of course, it is central 
to rolling objects, inclined planes, and free fall, but it plays a role as well 
in other contexts, including understanding graphs, which are critical to the 
second example that we discuss later in the chapter.
Because three different groups of students cycled through this investigation, 
the teaching varied somewhat from group to group. One of these variations 
highlighted an important issue regarding the development and use of 
representational drawings for solving problems. Specifically, the first group 
(Group 1) was invited to invent a sketch that could effectively capture the 
features of inclined planes that they had identified as definitive of steepness: 
height, length, and “pushed-outness.” In contrast, Group 2 was provided a 
representational device and invited to use it to reason about the same problem. 
This difference in the teaching might seem trivial. However, we next spend 
some time elaborating the contrast because we believe it sheds light on 
common instructional practice. A widely used instructional strategy among 
teachers and researchers trying to foster model-based reasoning is to provide 
a model that embodies conceptually important distinctions and relations, 
and then to ask students to solve a series of problems with the model (e.g., 
Smith, Snir, & Grosslight, 1992; White, 1993). Those who take this approach 
center much of their research around the problem of developing models that 
can serve as a bridge between students’ understanding and the conceptual 
distinctions represented in mathematical or scientific theory. However, as 
we describe next, our experience with these second graders suggests that, at 
least in some circumstances, giving children models may be less helpful than 
fostering their propensity to construct, evaluate, and revise models of their 
own to solve problems that they consider personally meaningful. In particular, 
we next describe some emerging contrasts between the thinking of Group 1, 
who were trying to develop an adequate way to represent, and Group 2, who 
were primarily struggling to find a way to apply a representational convention 
suggested by a teacher.
We invited Group 1 to make a sketch that could represent the steepness of 
their “racetrack,” which was a plank of wood propped against a crate.
RL:	
I wondered if someone could think of, if they were thinking 
about this thing as a shape, what shape does that you remind 
you of, when you look at the whole thing?
Brett:	
Triangle.
RL:	
A triangle?
Megan:	
Triangle. 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  335
Kyle:	
Rectangle.
RL:	
And a rectangle?
Kyle:	
It’s a rectangle.
Linnea:	
It’s a rectangle, but I think it’s a triangle.
RL:	
OK, you are thinking about the board as a rectangle? Alright, 
but I, but what I’m trying to get you to think about is, what’s the 
whole thing look like? The boxes and the board?
Kyle:	
Um, a triangle.
Scott:	
Yeah, it does look like a triangle.
Kaitlin:	
I think it looks like a triangle. Students (lots of kids talking at 
once): Hey, that’s what I said, a triangle.
RL:	
Could you draw that triangle? Let’s see the triangle for, like, 
a little bit steep. Can somebody come up and try that for us? 
Who hasn’t gone to the board yet? You haven’t, Maggie? OK, 
come on up. OK, the triangle for a little bit steep. Go ahead 
[pause while Maggie draws the sketch illustrated on the top left 
in Fig. 9.2]. OK, so this is Maggie’s way of showing a little bit 
steep. OK, can somebody show me a different way to show it? 
Kaitlin? You want to show a little bit steep? [Kaitlin draws.] 
OK, how is yours different?
Kaitlin:	
It’s more pushed out.
RL:	
So Maggie’s is a little more pushed in; Kaitlin’s is a little more 
pushed out? Linnea? Can you come up and show us a way 
of showing not very steep? [Linnea draws.] Zach? You got a 
different way? [Zach draws.]
RL:	
OK, How is Zach’s way different than anything else that’s been 
done here? Maggie?
Maggie:	
Um, it’s pushed out a lot.
In each case, RL asked children to describe the sketch drawn and then invited 
someone to revise the convention for representing “a little steep.” Next he 
challenged children to develop and critique conventions for showing a ramp 
that is “a lot steep.” These drawings are in the right-hand column of Fig. 9.2.
The sketches are intriguing both for what they do and do not represent. 
Basically, the progression from top to bottom of the column in Fig. 9.2 
preserves the sequence of the children’s drawings (so that the triangle at the 
bottom of each column was the last one drawn in the sequence). Note that the 
drawings toward the top of the column, including Maggie’s on the left, fail 
even to explicitly represent “pushed-outness” with a line marking the base of 
the triangle. These sketches seem in accord with the general rule, “If you can’t 

336  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
see it, don’t draw it.” Moreover, the outstanding feature of these earlier drawn 
triangles is that they are small, reflecting the children’s description of the 
ramp as “a little steep.” In contrast, as the discussion and critiquing continued, 
the figures toward the bottom not only explicitly depicted “pushed-outness”; 
they also exaggerated its value. The final triangle in the column, drawn by 
Zach, clearly exaggerates the “amount of push-out.” We also find it intriguing 
that although the children agreed that the situation could be represented as a 
triangle, their diagrams were not schematic triangles. Instead, they found it 
important to continue to represent the crate as a box, rather than abstracting it 
into a line that forms one leg of the triangle. So important was the crate (which 
the children perhaps regarded as the “source” of “height”), that in the triangles 
representing “a lot steep” on the right-hand side of the figure, all of the children 
included two stacked crates in their sketch. Possibly the children were not 
thinking of “height” as a continuous variable, but instead were considering 
these as examples of a “one-crate” ramp and a “two-crate” ramp.
In Group 2, the features and growth of diagrams looked quite different. As we 
FIG. 9.2. Facsimile of Group 1 diagrams for showing “a little steep” and “a lot steep.”

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  337
explain later, we believe that the sketches of Group 2 are less representational, 
because we inadvertently began the discussion by providing the children with 
a solution to a problem that they had not yet accepted as problematic. As 
before, we invited the children to draw a sketch representing steepness (at the 
same point in the instruction as Group 1 tackled this problem). But note the 
difference in the invitation:
LS:	
I want someone to come up here and I want them to take this 
red pen that I’m going to give you, and I want them to show me 
a triangle of what our ramp looks like when it’s not very steep. 
Suppose I was going to look from the side and think of that as 
a triangle. What kind of triangle would I draw to show a ramp 
that isn’t very steep?
As Fig. 9.3 shows, there is some evidence that these instructions did not really 
elicit representations of the situation at all, but instead elicited drawings of 
triangles. The children in Group 2 did not attempt at any point to represent 
important features in the situation, like the crates. Moreover, there was little 
progressive abstraction over the course of the discussion, or indeed little 
change of any kind in their diagrams. Instead, having heard the suggestion to 
draw a “triangle,” these children tried to oblige by drawing their best version 
of the prototypical isosceles or equilateral triangle sitting on its base. Instead 
of “show me what’s important about this situation,” the task became “draw 
me a triangle.” In fact, some of these triangles were elicited by requests to 
represent ramps that are “a little steep,” and others by requests to show “a 
lot steep,” but it is difficult to tell which are which. Except for the one on the 
bottom right of the figure, none of the triangles even is a right triangle.
In our view, this episode illustrates the danger of being too quick to provide 
students with notations, conventions, or models. Our experience suggests 
that although drawings, diagrams, and notations can be important tools for 
thought, they are also cognitively demanding for novices of any age, but 
especially for young children. Envision what is required to represent aspects 
of a situation in a notation, diagram, graph, map, or model: One must be able 
to conceptualize a complex physical situation, which often entails mentally 
constructing aspects (like “amount of push-out”) that are not explicitly marked 
in the situation itself. Simultaneously, one must negotiate the conventions 
of the representational system, sometimes inventing them as one goes (e.g., 
deciding whether “push-out” should be represented by a line or whether the 
crate that props the ramp needs to be drawn). Finally, one must coordinate 
the two by mapping objects and relations from the former onto those of 

338  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
the latter. Choosing the best timing for encouraging children to represent a 
situation is one among many important decisions that teachers must make. If 
representation is imposed too early, the resulting notation, model, or inscription 
may end up failing to represent at all, or failing to represent the critical parts 
of the situation for the majority of students. Children may become concerned 
with internal features of the representation, or if it is notational, may become 
lost in its syntax and lose sight of the meaning that it potentially carries, 
resulting in an overconcern with procedure at the expense of meaning. On 
the other hand, neglecting or postponing inscription for too long may result 
in a group of students who fail to lift principles out of the “stuff” of their 
ongoing activity. Models and representations denote theoretically important 
similarities between cases; hence, teachers must give careful consideration to 
the best ways of orchestrating students’ developing coordination between the 
cases and the abstractions (cf. Gravemeijer et al., chap. 7, this volume).
FIG. 9.3. Group 2 diagrams for showing “a little steep” and “a lot steep.”

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  339
DESIGNING EXPERIMENTS ABOUT GROWTH
In this second section, we explore the role played by inscriptions in a 
different kind of design: Third-grade students designed and conducted a 
series of experiments about growth. During the course of these experiments, 
inscriptions emerged and became central ingredients in the development 
of children’s models for describing and explaining the growth of plants. In 
contrast to the brief teaching experiment described in the previous section, 
here children’s inquiry evolved over several months. The prolonged duration 
allows us to describe the periodicity and mutual constitution of inscriptions 
and conceptions in the context of the classroom. The teacher, Carmen Curtis, 
is unusual in that she promotes geometry and spatial reasoning in her teaching 
of third-grade mathematics (Lehrer et al, 1998); moreover, she is considerably 
more skilled than we are in the craft of teaching.
Lynch (1990) suggested that scientists work in a world of inscription, 
manipulating and transforming inscriptions to describe the natural world. He 
noted that visual displays are particularly important forms of inscription, a 
generalization borne out by the children participating in this study. Over the 
course of several months, children developed a “cascade” (Latour, 1990) of 
visual inscriptions. Children’s inscriptions were guided by their questions 
about growth, and, in turn, their questions about growth were revised and 
refined in light of their increasingly inscribed view of the world. As the nature 
of the representational functions of the inscriptions changed, so, too, did the 
dimensionality of the inscriptions. First inscriptions were unidimensional, 
followed by a series of two-dimensional and finally three-dimensional 
inscriptions. These transitions in dimensionality afforded opportunities for 
children to describe growth in new ways, and inscriptional variation helped 
children revise and refine the questions and arguments they made,
From the several months of inquiry, we have selected episodes that 
exemplify children’s efforts to inscribe growth. We describe transitions in 
children’s reasoning in the context of two successive life cycles of Wisconsin 
“Fast Plants,” a species of fast-developing brassica (cabbages) that undergo 
a complete life cycle within 35–40 days. In the first cycle, children inquired 
about and observed the growth of plants. In the second, children conducted 
an experiment to test the effects of level of fertilizer on plant growth. Our 
efforts to describe children’s inscriptional activity necessarily foreshorten the 
roles played by teacher assistance, the development of classroom norms about 
the value of a good argument, and other elements of the classroom culture 
that sustained inquiry, although they were central to the events reported here 
(Lehrer, Jacobson, Kemeny, & Strom, 1999).

340  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
First Life Cycle
Posing Questions. Children first posed questions about the growth of Fast 
Plants and recorded them in their journals. These initial questions focused on 
aspects of growth related to endpoints, such as ultimate height (e.g., “How 
tall can Fast Plants be?”), number of leaves (e.g., “I wonder how many leaves 
they can get?”), and number of seeds produced (“I wonder how many seeds 
a single plant can get?”). Other, less frequently posed questions focused on 
conditions of growth, such as the presence of light (e.g., “I wonder if they 
could grow with no light?”). Only one or two questions were directed toward 
characterizing growth itself (“How fast do plants grow?”).
Predicting Growth. To orient children toward consideration of the entire 
life cycle, the teacher asked them to predict the pattern of growth over time. 
She provided a two-dimensional grid with axes labeled “days of growing” and 
“height.” This was not the students’ first experience with two-dimensional 
graphs. During previous classroom activity (the context was plotting the length 
and width of similar rectangles), they had investigated the qualities of two-
dimensional graphs. Their investigations encompassed the relationship between 
the measure of dimensions of objects in the world and the representation of 
these measures on the graph (e.g., should a 3-inch by 9-inch paper rectangle 
be represented on inch grid paper, or can the number denoting each interval 
be in a different measure, like cm?), the meaning of equal intervals for each 
axis, the idea that a point instead of a drawing can represent an object like a 
rectangle, and the construction of the origin. Construction of the origin proved 
especially problematic. Some children suggested using the highest value on 
the ordinate as the origin; this proposal was abandoned when they realized 
that the location of a point so determined would be ambiguous. For instance, 
one child noted that “if the long side (of a rectangle) is 9 and we start at the 
top and count down 9 (from 16) and get 7, how will people know that the long 
side is 9, and not 7?” Another child pointed out that even if they could find a 
way to communicate this feature of the “count from the top way,” values like 
7 would vary with the scale: “Suppose we marked it up to 20 instead of 16. 
What then?” 
These conversations and experiences underlay the graphs that children 
drew to illustrate their predictions about the growth of Fast Plants. Most of 
the predictions were linear. Two examples are displayed in Fig. 9.4. In one 
example, growth is represented as increasing at a constant rate throughout 
the life cycle, and in the other, the initial growth rate is constant but then 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  341
ceases. Most children interpreted the line of growth as representing a constant 
difference; that is, they expected plants to grow the same amount every day.
Collecting and Structuring Data. Each of the children grew a plant and 
in light of the questions he or she posed, made decisions about what data to 
collect. All students measured the height of their plants as they grew, resulting 
in discussions about how to measure height and what might be a good 
FIG. 9.4. Student predictions of growth for Fast Plants.

342  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
unit of measure. Eventually, it was agreed that height would be measured 
in millimeters from the soil base to the tip of the highest leaf. Throughout 
the plant’s life cycle, each child measured his or her plant’s height, made 
drawings, and noted other features of interest. For example, Fig. 9.5 shows the 
top view constructed by one child and the side view constructed by another. 
The primary form of inscription was a table denoting height, day, and text 
about observations, as displayed in Fig. 9.6. These observations led to new 
questions that reflected children’s emerging knowledge of the growth of 
this species. For example, children noticed that the plants’ first leaves were 
different from the “true” leaves that followed: “Why do Fast Plants have two 
kinds of leaves?” The classroom teacher uprooted and pressed a plant in a 
plant press at each of several points in the life cycle, and then photocopied 
the pressed plants for display (see Fig. 9.7). This new form of inscription 
characterized a prototypical pattern of growth and also preserved a visual 
record of change. 
FIG. 9.5. Top view and side view drawings of Fast Plants.

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  343
Inscribing Diversity. At the end of the life cycle, children began to consider 
the variation among plants. Initial consideration focused on single dimensions 
of difference, such as variation in height at day 32 of the life cycle:
Sara:	
They grew differently and I can prove that. My plant was 140 
millimeters when it stopped growing and Katie’s was 260, and 
FIG. 9.6. Table recording plant height and observations on successive occasions of 
measure.
FIG. 9.7. Xerox record of pressed plants.

344  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Kelly’s plant was 275. Those are 3 different measurements [on 
the same day], so that’s proof that our Fast Plants did not all 
grow the same.
However, partly because children worked in pairs, the conversation soon 
shifted toward comparing growth between pairs of plants, inscribed as two-
dimensional graphs of height and time, as displayed in Fig. 9.8. This notation 
afforded opportunities to describe rates of growth and to compare rates, as 
children discovered that differences between the heights of pairs of plants 
were not constant because the rates of growth were not constant. In addition, 
some children became interested in relationships among different kinds of 
growth, for example, noting that the width of plants did not covary continually 
with height:
Brynn:	
When my plant was 60 millimeters tall it was 90 millimeters 
wide, then it was 80 millimeters tall, then it was still 90 
millimeters. The height went 60, 80, 120 and the width did not 
change, it stayed at 90.
FIG. 9.8. Graph comparing growth rates for two students’ Fast Plants.

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  345
Inscribing Typicality. At the end of the first round of growth, the teacher 
displayed all of the children’s plots of height versus time and invited them to 
try to “make some general statements” about growth to inform the expectations 
of a second-grade class just beginning to work with Fast Plants. The need for 
a more general or “typical” description was fueled by the teacher’s proposal 
to “pick just one” of the displayed graphs as representative of those made by 
the class. Some children objected to this instruction because no single graph 
“matched exactly” an “S” pattern (see Fig. 9.8), yet most “came close.” In 
response, the teacher invited children to try to generate a typical growth curve 
without matching precisely any of the cases they had constructed: “Could we 
draw one line that does do a good job of giving a lot of information? It won’t 
fit exactly, but it will be a pretty good match.” Although the emphasis in this 
suggestion was on the generality of the inscription, the teacher also introduced 
a tacit criterion of model fitting—it was clear that the line was to be taken as 
a model of growth, not as a replication of any particular instance of growth. 
This inscriptional sense of the general, displayed in Fig. 9.9, was highlighted 
by the teacher, who asked children to verbally describe the patterns of growth 
depicted on the graphs, for example, “It goes up slow, then it goes up really 
fast, then it goes up slow again.” Although statements like this characterized 
only the appearance of the changing slopes of the growth curve, children also 
FIG. 9.9. Children’s representations of “most typical” growth curve.

346  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
interpreted the changes in slope as evidence of rates of growth: “Like, when 
you just plant your Fast Plant, it will start growing up slowly, but then it takes 
space to have the flowers. It needs to grow pretty big, so it takes a big jump 
and then it starts to slow down a little.”
As children sketched their models of typical growth, they reflected on their 
predictions and compared their initial graphs with those obtained empirically. 
Rather than simply noting the contrast in appearance, they used the initial 
graph to compare how they “used to think” about plant growth with “how they 
think now.” Many students noted that their first estimates assumed “that the 
plants will grow the same amount every day,” whereas the “S-curve” clearly 
indicated periods of nonuniform growth.
In sum, children’s first questions about plant growth focused primarily on 
unidimensional quantities, such as the ultimate height of a plant. Students 
employed a variety of inscriptions to characterize growth, and the variation 
helped to recast their views. The pressed-plant notation served as a visible 
record of growth, preserving a visual history that would otherwise be lost 
as the plants grew. This inscribed history served to anchor other systems of 
inscription, like tables and graphs, because the visual display served as a 
ready reference point for interpreting pairs of numbers in tables or growth 
curves in graphs. Inscriptions organized both typicality and diversity and 
suggested their mutual dependence. The use of a table transformed simple 
changes in length to a two-dimensional structure involving length and time 
of measure. By inscribing these variables in a graphical display, children 
could see something not immediately obvious in the table—that is, that 
growth was characterized by an “S” pattern. The detection of this pattern 
in specific cases and its reification as a “typical” growth curve triggered the 
beginnings of a search for an explanation that continued into the next round of 
experimentation. Moreover, the multiple forms of inscription made it evident 
that diversity was the rule, not the exception; children could compare their 
plants rapidly and see that no two were exactly the same. This experience 
with variation invoked the very idea of a model (the ideal “S” growth curve), 
an attempt to characterize commonalities in ways that fit, albeit imperfectly, 
the world observed. Interestingly, the model of growth described rate, a 
derived quantity.
Second Life Cycle: Designing an Experiment
Posing Questions. The first cycle of inquiry served as a springboard for new 
questions. Some of these questions concerned new aspects of growth, such 
as how the root system grows, and others were concerned with new factors 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  347
influencing growth, like temperature, light, and “food.” Among the factors 
suggested, the class decided to focus on what effect “food” might have on 
plants. They designed an experiment contrasting “regular amounts” (6 pellets) 
and “a lot” (18 pellets) of fertilizer. Children’s speculations about the effects 
of fertilizer included: “Maybe high-fertilizer plants will have more buds or 
pods,” “Maybe high fertilizer means more seeds in the pods,” and “Maybe 
high fertilizer means the plants get wider or get wider more quickly.” As 
these examples show, children’s speculations often included aspects of rate. 
Molly: “Maybe in the life cycle, maybe the high fertilizer will make them 
grow faster.” Michael responded, “Maybe the high-fertilizer plants will grow 
faster right from the beginning.” Some children were skeptical about fertilizer: 
“There will be no difference between pots with 6 pellets and pots with 18 
pellets. They’ll be about the same.” The experiment was viewed as a means 
of testing these and related conjectures; the class agreed that they could not 
otherwise reasonably decide among the alternatives.
Collecting and Structuring Data. The children decided to revise their 
data tables to include new aspects of growth, such as each plant’s “width” 
(distance between tips of leaves on opposite sides of the stem), number of 
leaves, number of buds, and number of pods. Each of these additions to the 
original table provoked discussion about their measure. For example, children 
debated whether or not to count all leaves or just “true” leaves (those other 
than the cotyledon) and considered what would constitute a valid measure of 
width (the furthest extension of the canopy of the plant).
Inscribing Rate. In the previous cycle of growth, children developed 
two-dimensional plots of plant height and day of measurement, qualitatively 
described the changing slope of the growth curve, and related qualitative 
changes in the graphs’ “diagonality” or “steepness” to growth. During the 
second growth cycle, children revisited this issue and developed a more 
precise notation for rate, inspired in part by their newfound questions about 
the effects of fertilizer on rates of plant growth. To focus attention on intervals 
of growth instead of endpoints, the teacher encouraged verbal descriptions 
of growth, like: “From day 23 to day 32 was 35 millimeters, so it grew 35 
millimeters in 9 days.” Children then reexpressed this statement numerically 
as millimeters/day. For example, to reexpress the 35 millimeters in 9 days, 
they said: “So then we tried four 9’s—that was our closest, and that got us 36. 
And it was just one off, so we knew one less 9 would make 27. So we knew 
we had to do 8/9, 8 of them (millimeters) divided over the 9 days, so it was 
 
millimeters per day.” Children annotated their growth curves accordingly, as 
displayed in Fig. 9.10. 

348  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Reinserting Growth. Observing more aspects of growth created additional 
opportunities for reasoning about relationships; for example, many children 
investigated the relationship between plant width and height. One child noted 
that “perhaps right before it takes the big jump up, maybe right before the 
growth spurt, the height equals the width.” Another child agreed, and many 
in the class observed that the growth was more “rectangular” after the growth 
spurt, meaning that the height far exceeded width at that point in the life cycle. 
The classroom teacher referred to the pressed plant inscription to validate 
this conjecture, and children drew squares and rectangles to inscribe the 
relationships they were considering. Next the teacher challenged children to 
go beyond two dimensions to “think about the space it takes up.”
Most children thought that a cylinder would be a good model for the volume 
of a Fast Plant. Some arrived at this decision on the basis of resemblance (“the 
stem is like a cylinder”), whereas others reasoned that the cylinder would 
provide a more accurate estimate of volume than other solids, like rectangular 
prisms, whose properties they understood well enough to calculate volume. 
Nevertheless, the majority of the class ultimately decided to represent change 
in volume with models of rectangular prisms, as displayed in Fig. 9.11. This 
FIG. 9.10. Growth curve annotated with rates of growth in millimeters per day.

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  349
decision was based partly on the realization that these models circumvented 
the problem of determining the relationship between their measure of plant 
width and the circumference of the cylinder (although this problem eventually 
was resolved by those who decided to use cylinders).
Children’s three-dimensional models of the “growth space” provided yet 
another inscription, one that invited new conjectures about the form of growth 
and new explanations for the transitions in growth that are so evident in models 
like those in Fig. 9.11. For example, one pair of students used the nesting 
property of the models (one model fits inside another) to develop and test the 
conjecture that growth fit the geometric property of similarity. These students 
noted that over the first time interval, the width and height each doubled, 
leading to an eightfold increase in volume: “Day 7 was like a cube. When we 
grew this cube [doubled the length for both height and width], 8 of these cubes 
fit into it at Day 11.” The children noted that the fit wasn’t “perfect,” but it 
was a good approximation. They also commented that this was like “growing 
cubes,” a reference to previous classroom work on similar figures. However, 
as they continued to pursue their conjecture, they realized that eventually the 
notion of geometric growth (“growing” similar forms) failed: “And from day 
11 to day 16, again volume increased 8 times, but day 16 to day 21, it didn’t 
change as much.” (This student demonstrated by nesting the day 16 model 
inside the day 21 model, showing that the rate of increase was less than eight). 
Other students in the class noted that at this last point, the plant had entered 
its growth spurt. This observation set the stage for a round of discussion about 
FIG. 9.11. Rectangular prism models of plant volume at different days of measure.

350  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
the functions for the growth patterns they were observing, with most of the 
children’s explanations centered on resources available to the plant:
Peter:	
To grow, the plant needs food, so the leaves grow (they 
make food), so at first, they really need to grow out wide to 
get the plant the food it needs. It just has to wait until it gets  
cultivated later.
Teacher:	
So it doesn’t take as much energy later in its life cycle?
Kyle:	
No, that can’t be right. It’s making seeds.
Another child speculated that the change in height associated with the growth 
spurt might serve the function of “pushing flowers up where the bees can get 
to them.” (The children were aware of the role of bees in pollination because 
they used “bee sticks” to pollinate the plants during flowering.) Children also 
plotted root growth over time (a small number of plants were grown in a root 
chamber) and found that the most rapid phase of root growth (“the steepest 
part of the line”) occurred as the plant was germinating. One child explained, 
“That’s because that is when the plant is coming out of the soil and it needs 
water (presumably, provided by roots) to do that.”
Reinscribing Typicality. During the first cycle, typical growth was 
inscribed as an S-shaped curve that was mentally composed as a prototype 
over the individual growth curves plotted by students. Typicality emerged in 
this inscription, but the criteria for typicality were not made explicit. During 
the second cycle of growth, children decided to create another plot of height 
versus time to compare growth in the second round to that in the first. They 
decided to use only those plants that had received six pellets of fertilizer for 
purposes of comparison to the first cycle, and they plotted every plant’s height 
during each interval as a point (see Fig. 9.12).
Once the points were plotted, the class cast about for ways to “sum up“how 
plants grew during the second cycle. The teacher asked children to come 
up with some strategies to accomplish this objective; her goal was to make 
criteria for typicality more visible. A number of candidates were generated 
by the children, including connecting all the top points, all the bottom points, 
the bottom points for the first six measurements and the top points for the 
remaining six measurements, the middle point (median) of each time of 
measurement, and the midpoint of the range for each time of measurement. 
Children’s justifications included selecting a strategy that would make the 
“best” (most easily seen) S-curve or selecting one where the line generated 
would come closest to all the points. Just as in the design context involving 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  351
cars, not all children adopted the instructional goal of “best fit”—some took 
as the goal depicting what they had found before, albeit in a new way. After 
further discussion about whether or not drawing a nice-looking S-curve was 
a “fair” goal, children voted to select the midpoint of each range. Several 
children objected on the grounds that sometimes this would not include any 
of the points plotted, but their objections were overruled on the grounds that 
the goal was only to “come close.” 
FIG. 9.12. Growth points for low-fertilizer plants at each day of measure.

352  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Reinserting Diversity. Children explored the effects of fertilizer on plant 
growth, raising the issue of whether differences among the two fertilizer 
conditions reflected mere plant-to-plant variation or systematic difference. 
This question was explored in a number of ways. After children measured 
growth on the fourth day in the second cycle, the teacher asked what they 
might be able to tell another class about fertilizer. She also asked what they 
were going to do about the “puddle of numbers,” which were not ordered, in 
their lists. One child said, “We’ll need to know the lowest and the highest.” The 
class went on to plot the frequency of values for each batch of data. Observing 
clear overlap in the distributions, children readily concluded that there were 
no differences in height at this point in the life cycle. They later revisited this 
issue when making three-dimensional models of the plants, concluding again 
that there was considerable overlap in the height of the models throughout 
the life cycle. It was particularly easy to see at a glance that the rectangular 
prisms representing the plants in both treatment groups were about the same 
height. It is interesting that they made these judgments on the basis of their 
models in spite of the ready availability of the plants. Perhaps this occurred 
because the models represented a form of structured observation. However, 
while investigating the models for different levels of fertilizer, some children 
became convinced that although the heights did not vary by condition, the 
width of the plants appeared to do so. This observation led to a reconsideration 
of the meaning of overlap of distributions. The classroom teacher helped 
children construct a histogram for width with color-coded marking (orange, 
FIG. 9.13. Width of low-fertilizer and high-fertilizer Fast Plants on the final day  
of measure.

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  353
green) indicating the values in each condition. On the histogram, shown in 
Fig. 9.13, the two distributions clearly overlapped, but nonetheless showed 
much more separation than did the two distributions for height. After viewing 
the histogram, Kyle began to talk about relative degree of overlap:
Kyle:	
They look like they’re like in two different groups ’cause most of 
the 6 pellets are right here and most of the 18 are more in the higher 
area, so I think 18 pellets maybe are wider than the 6 pellets.
Peter sought to quantify the uncertainty:
Peter:	
Because only 4 of the 12, only  of the 18-pellet plants are less 
(wide) than the widest 6-pellet plants,
Teacher:	
So you would feel pretty safe in saying to the second-grade 
class…?
Peter:	
But we’re not quite sure, because we only did it once, but I 
think it’s pretty safe to say…well, we can’t be exact like  and 
we only did one round, but we could say that  or more of the 
high-fertilizer plants will be wider than the 6 pellets.
Learning of Individuals
Of course, observing the work of an intact class does not address legitimate 
questions about the level of understanding of individual children. Therefore, 
follow-up interviews were conducted with pairs of children to further explore 
students’ understanding of these graphical depictions of rate. Moreover, at 
the close of the school year, interviews were conducted with each student in 
the class to develop a clearer portrait of individuals’ thinking about growth as 
represented in various inscriptional forms.
Dyads on Rate. During the interviews of student dyads concerning rate, 
one of us (SC) worked with students Nicholas and Nadine to identify the 
period of fastest growth recorded on the graph for Nicholas’ plant, which he 
had whimsically named “Tyler.”
SC:	
Where on your graph would you say he’s growing fastest?
Nicholas:	 [Traces an interval on his graph with his finger]…right here. 
It goes from 230 to 305 in only…[traces up from the X axis, 
where he has marked intervals]…in only three days. This other 
time that it went three days, it only grew from 40 to 70.
SC:	
So you’re comparing two three-day periods… 

354  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Nicholas:	 Yeah, it went from 40 to 70.
SC:	
So you’re comparing two three-day periods. How much did it 
grow in this one [the first period]? It started at 230 and eventually 
it was 305. How much did it grow? How many millimeters?
Nicholas:	 Um, 75.
SC:	
So it went 75 in three days. [Explains to Nadine:] That’s what 
Nicholas is saying is the really fast time of growth. The other 
period, it was also three days, but how much did it grow? It 
went from 40 to 70.
Nadine:	
30.
SC:	
So let’s look at those numbers.
Nicholas:	 Wait, I may have something coming in. It’s 305 to 340, that’s 
only 35 millimeters [identifying yet a third interval on the 
graph]. If it was close to, well, this is in a two-day period I 
think. 35 in two days. That would be actually faster than this 
[points to the figures in the notebook where he has recorded 30 
mm in three days], because this [the 35 mm segment] only grew 
in two days; this grew in three days.
SC:	
So you’re saying that 35 millimeters…
Nicholas:	 In two days…
SC:	
In two days is faster than…
Nicholas:	 …than 30 in 3 days.
SC:	
How do you know?
Nicholas:	 Well, this one’s lower than this one [e.g., the number 30 
is “lower than” 35], and this had a longer time to grow than  
this one [referring again to the figures in the notebook]…. So 
that means this had to grow faster; otherwise it wouldn’t have 
been higher.
SC:	
… OK, Nick, was it growing faster in this period than in this 
period [pointing to graph and indicating the 75 mm in three-
days segment vs. the 35 mm in two-days segment]? 75 in three 
days or 35 in two days?
Nicholas:	 I’ll have to think about that. ’Cause we’ll have to split 35 in 
half, that would give us down to… I don’t know. Well, it looks 
like 17 and a half.
SC:	
So 17 and a half millimeters, but like in how…
Nicholas:	 That’s in one day.
Susan:	
OK.
Nicholas:	 So, urn, what you do is just add 17 onto 35, ’cause that one 
day and two days equals three days. If 17 is higher than 75 [he 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  355
means if 17+35 is greater than 75], that means this one [the 75 
mm in three days] would have grown faster.
SC:	
This one would have grown faster?
Nicholas:	 Yes.
SC:	
How about if you take a look at how much this…you took a 
look at how much it would have to grow each day to grow this 
much in two days, right? Now, how much would it have to 
grow in one day to get to be 75 in three days?
Nicholas:	 … I’m trying to think…[rocks back and forth]. Oh, I know! 25 
millimeters per day.
SC:	
Okay…
Nicholas:	 Well, actually, guess what? I just pretty much figured out that 
this one is faster. Because this one is 25 millimeters per day, 
and this is 17 and a half millimeters per day. This is higher.
SC:	
So your original idea that this is the fastest…
Nicholas:	 …is true.
Although Nicholas’ way of comparing the rates of two growth periods was 
somewhat unusual (e.g., he apparently found it easier to think about identifying 
the amount each plant grew in three days rather than identifying rate of growth 
per day), the capability to compare linear sections of the graph in this way was 
reasonably well established among many of the children.
Individuals on Changes in Geometric Models. We presented each child 
with three rectangular prisms, arranged to depict three points of the growth 
cycle of the Fast Plants (each point separated by 5 days), and a metric ruler. 
The measurement occasions spanned the relatively linear increase in growth 
characteristic of the early phase of the life cycle of the Fast Plants (Times 1 
and 2 in the models presented to the children), as well as the more exponential 
phase of growth characteristic of the later phase of the life cycle (Time 3). 
We asked each child to examine the three models and to tell the interviewer 
what the models “tell you about the growth of Fast Plants.” We coded 
children’s responses to characterize the ways in which they used the models 
to describe growth. We were most interested in descriptions that explicitly 
focused on changing quantities (e.g., differences in height) and on changes in 
those changing quantities (e.g., on different differences between the first and 
second, and the second and third points in time). 
All but two of the children in the class explicitly noted that the changes 
in attributes of height, width (recall the previous discussion of children’s 
definition of this attribute), and volume, all of which were explicitly inscribed 

356  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
in the classroom work, were not identical: Volume changed the most and 
width the least over the course of the portion of the plant’s life cycle depicted. 
Moreover, all of these children noted that the rates of increase in each attribute 
were not identical over the three points in time. For example, after measuring 
the heights of the prisms at each point in time, one child noted that “from 
85 (time 2) to 210 is a big spurt,” to mark the relatively large difference she 
had noted between the second and third points compared to the more modest 
difference she observed between the first two points of height measure. Other 
children noted that if one thought of multiples, the multiple describing the 
change in height between the first two times of measure increased, but the 
multiple describing that of width decreased.
Forty percent of these children who noted variable change coordinated the 
changes in the measures of the attributes by characterizing the change over 
time as a geometric form, noting that change was initially “squarish” (the 
measurements of length and width were approximately equal during the first 
two occasions of measure) or “cubic,” but then became more “rectangular” 
(reflecting the acceleration in rate of growth for height, but not for width). 
Reflecting on the transition from linear to exponential growth, one child said: 
“Fast Plants have like a rule they follow [a reference to previous class work in 
geometry with linear relationships], like a pattern, and sometimes they, like, 
have a pattern for a long time and then it starts breaking.” Generally, then, 
we found that transitions in growth were inscribed not only collectively and 
publicly, but also individually.
In summary, then, over the course of children’s investigations with the Fast 
Plants, a cascade of inscriptions was accompanied by a cascade of conceptual 
change. As children inscribed growth, their ideas about growth became both 
more varied and more differentiated, and also became more tightly coupled 
to potential explanations, such as resource allocation in plants. In spite of 
occasional detours, the overall trajectory of inscription was toward increasing 
dimension. One-dimensional inscriptions of length (e.g., height) were 
transformed into two-dimensional inscriptions involving length and time, so 
that growth itself became an object for inspection. Three-dimensional models 
provided a means for coordinating multiple dimensions of growth (e.g., 
height, width, volume). Moreover, the arrangement of the three-dimensional 
models along an axis of elapsed time afforded some children the opportunity 
to test the feasibility of a mathematical model of similarity as a guideline 
to predicting patterns of growth. The ultimate failure of the model does 
not detract from the value of the attempt. Like working scientists, children 
increasingly worked in a world of inscription, so that, over time, the natural 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  357
and inscribed worlds became mutually articulated, albeit not indistinguishable 
(Lynch, 1990; Werner & Kaplan, 1963).
DISCUSSION
In both of these classroom cases, children were engaged in the process of 
design, and in both, diagrams and inscriptions played a central role in the 
reasoning. Yet, although the two cases are similar in some ways, their 
differences are informative as well. We have found both the comparisons 
and the contrasts to be instructive as we think about what makes an effective 
design task and as we consider the role that inscription can play in the context 
of design and ultimately in the conceptual development of students.
Both cases underline the importance of history, in two senses. The first 
has to do with the history of the inscription itself. Not only was the inclined 
planes unit very brief, but perhaps more important, the diagrams that evolved 
there had no standing in the history of the classroom. They did not build on 
children’s previous classroom experience, and as far as we know, they were 
not picked up, elaborated, or used further in the children’s ongoing work. In 
contrast, the third graders’ work with the Fast Plants built on a rich history of 
experience with these inscriptions: graphs; representations of length, area, and 
volume; and other varied ways of inscribing both large- and small-scale space. 
Recall also how the inscriptions in this classroom changed, evolved, and built 
on each other during the course of this study. No inscriptional invention was 
wasted because inscriptions were not evoked as one-shot solutions to solve a 
problem of the moment. Instead, they were continually edited, composed, and 
elaborated to do additional work (cf. Lesh & Doerr, chap. 10, this volume). The 
children’s representations for growth began as one-dimensional recordings of 
height, expanded to become two-dimensional graphs relating time and height, 
and finally evolved to three-dimensional models of plant volume. Inscriptions 
in this classroom not only have a past; they also clearly have a future.
The second sense in which inscriptions underline the importance of history 
is that they can be used to preserve history, a role that was exploited in both 
cases. In the inclined planes unit, inscription captured and quantified both trials 
(speed of cars) and the conditions under which trials were run (length, height, 
and “pushed-outness” of the racetracks), making it possible and meaningful 
to draw comparisons. In the Fast Plants work, the photocopy of pressed plants 
captured the appearance of plants that were changing in time, and the other 
displays—graphs and rectangular prisms—made it easy to notice features of 
change (like patterns of growth and amount of space that plants occupy) that 
would not otherwise be evident. As Latour (1990) explained, inscriptions, 

358  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
notations, and diagrams can serve to “fix” change, effectively freezing and 
preserving it so that it can serve as the object of reflection. Lynch (1990) added 
that inscriptions not only preserve change, they edit it as well: Inscriptions 
reduce and enhance information. In this sense, the classroom history that was 
preserved was not a simple succession of events, but rather an account that 
revised and edited events into a coherent conceptual framework. Moreover, 
somewhat unlike other descriptions of the evolution of children’s inscriptions 
(e.g., Meira, 1995), this history reflects evidence both of children’s invention 
with the inscriptions and of guidance by the teacher, who played an important 
role in negotiating discussions about inscriptional possibilities and ideas 
worthy of inscription.
A second issue concerns the alignment between the design task and 
the inscriptional form. In the inclined planes unit, children were primarily 
concentrating on the design task as posed to them—that is, optimizing speed, 
an activity that presumes one best solution. Under these circumstances, it was 
difficult to make much headway in getting them to consider, and hence to 
notate, typicality. A good design task encourages variability, and inscription is 
most useful when the variability is of a kind that can be captured by inscription. 
Inscription that focused around variability (e.g., steepness of racetracks) was 
more fruitful than inscription that focused around optimization (e.g., the 
outcome of trials). In contrast, during the Fast Plants unit, there was a much 
smoother match between the design goal (e.g., explore the variability in growth 
of plants) and the forms of inscription that were used. In retrospect, it is little 
wonder that the result was greater flexibility and power in the notation.
Third, it is important to remember that inscription and notation have an 
overhead cost. Children must either invent or learn the syntactical and semantic 
conventions of the inscription, and must do so thoroughly enough so that the 
inscription eventually becomes transparent (see Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 
6, this volume for a discussion of transparency). This achievement entails 
not only becoming able to navigate within the inscriptions smoothly, but also 
coordinating changes in the inscription with changes in the referent. Notational 
fluency does not come for free, and the cost (in learning and processing effort) 
raises the question, what is worth inscribing? In our view, students should 
work to inscribe fundamental or “big ideas,” those with generality and power. 
In these classroom cases, children were working to develop satisfactory ways 
of inscribing important physical and biological concepts. One cannot, for 
example, develop evolutionary models about diversity without a handle on 
ways of inscribing typicality and variation. Similarly, in both classroom cases, 
children worked to represent and mathematize a general idea of steepness, 
applicable to inclined planes, rates of growth portrayed on graphs, and many 

Interrelated and Conceptual Understanding  359
other situations as well. Interestingly, in both cases, the children had to 
overcome similar stumbling blocks to understanding steepness, for example, 
confusing the rate of change with the highest value of a variable, and mentally 
constructing ideas like “push out” and time interval, that are not immediately 
apparent in the situation.
Finally, both of these classroom cases highlight the importance of introducing 
a notation, diagram, or inscription only when a need for it has “ripened” in the 
work of the children and is widely acknowledged in the classroom community. 
Inscriptions serve functions—for example, to support activities such as 
communication, planning, recall, or problem solving. Yet their functions are 
easily obscured if they are introduced in a heavy-handed way (see Gravemeijer 
et al., chap. 7, and van Oers, chap. 5, this volume, for further discussion). In 
the inclined planes unit, we observed the rigidity in students’ reasoning that 
occurred when inscriptions were given to children as the solution to a problem 
that they did not yet recognize. The triangles that they drew at our invitation 
had no function; they did not really represent, and they did not evolve over 
their brief period of use. In contrast, when children identified triangles on their 
own as the solution to the problem of representing steepness, their diagrams 
showed considerable change over a brief period. Similarly, in the Fast Plants 
case, children developed inscriptions of increasing complexity and power to 
solve problems that emerged as they investigated questions of their own posing. 
Coming to understand the function of inscriptions is arguably more important 
than amassing a large library of representational devices that can be used only 
rigidly and within the narrow boundaries of their original acquisition. Rather 
than transmitting inscriptions—even powerful inscriptions—we may do better 
by taking a longer term perspective, concentrating instead on trying to help our 
students understand over the long term what inscriptions are good for: They 
allow you to plan and compose what would otherwise be incommunicable, 
to make evident what would otherwise not be seen, and to keep a trace of 
what otherwise would disappear. All of these functions are indispensable to 
good argument in mathematics and science, and, more generally, to coming 
to know the world.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Carmen Curtis, Susan Wainwright, 
Elizabeth LaHam, and their students in the Country View Elementary School. 
This research was supported by the National Science Foundation and the 
James S.McDonnell Foundation. 

360  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
REFERENCES
Erickson, J., & Lehrer, R. (1998). The evolution of critical standards as students design 
hypermedia documents. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7, 351–386.
Greeno, J.G., Knudsen, J., Lachapelle, C., Lauman, B., & Merris, K. (1996, April). 
HABITECH: A modeling environment for middle-school students learning to reason about 
functions. In F.C.Smith (Chair), Tools for learning: Computer-based representational 
tools for mathematics instruction. Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association, New York.
Harel, I. (1991). Children designers. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Kafai, Y.B. (1995). Minds in play: Computer game design as a context for children’s 
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M.Lynch & S.Woolgar (Eds.), Representation 
in scientific practice (pp. 19–68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lawson, B. (1990). How designers think. The design process demystified. Boston: Butterworth 
Architecture.
Lehrer, R., Jacobson, C., Thoyre, G., Kemeny, V., Strom, D., Horvath, J., Gance, S., & 
Koehler, M. (1998). Developing understanding of geometry and space in the primary 
grades. In R.Lehrer & D.Chazan (Eds.), Designing learning environments for developing 
understanding of geometry and space, (pp. 169–200). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Lehrer, R., Jacobson, C., Kemeny, V., & Strom, D. (1999). Building on children’s intutions 
to develop mathematical understanding of space. In E.Fennema & T.Romberg (Eds.), 
Mathematics classrooms that promote understanding, (pp. 63–87). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lynch, M. (1990). The externalized retina: Selection and mathematization in the visual 
documentation of objects in the life sciences. In M.Lynch & S.Woolgar (Eds.), 
Representation in scientific practice (pp. 153–186). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Meira, L. (1995). The microevolution of mathematical representations in children’s activity. 
Cognition and Instruction, 13, 269–313.
Pea, R.D., Sipusic, M., Allen, S., & Reiner, M. (1990, April). Dynagrams for reasoning about 
light. In L.B.Resnick (Chair), Dynamic diagrams for model-based science learning. 
Symposium presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, Boston.
Smith, C., Snir, J., & Grosslight, L. (1992). Using conceptual models to facilitate conceptual 
change: The case of weight-density differentiation. Cognition and Instruction, 9, 221–
283.
Werner, H., & Kaplan, B. (1963). Symbol formation. New York: Wiley.
White, B.Y. (1993). ThinkerTools: Causal models, conceptual change, and science education. 
Cognition and Instruction, 10, 1–100.

361
10 
Symbolizing, Communicating,  
and Mathematizing: Key Components  
of Models and Modeling
Richard Lesh 
Purdue University 
Helen M.Doerr 
Syracuse University
In this chapter, we describe some of the ways that models and modeling 
provide a unifying theme that is useful for integrating many of the most 
relevant research traditions in order to gain insight into the growth of student 
learning. We then share an example of students’ developing models while 
engaged in a model-eliciting task. We have found that the multiple cycles of 
increasing stability and sophistication that students go through in developing 
solutions to model-eliciting problems prove to be very valuable forms of 
information about the growth of student thinking. We conclude by describing 
how modeling highlights some new issues and suggests some significant 
changes in direction for traditional lines of research.
HOW DOES THE THEME OF MODELS  
AND MODELING INTEGRATE WITH OTHER  
RELEVANT RESEARCH PERSPECTIVES?
One way to begin a discussion of models is by considering the following  
kinds of questions: What is meant by model? How are models and 
representations related?
What Is a Model?
The terms models and representations have a variety of everyday meanings 
as well as a variety of technical meanings that have been given to them by 

362  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
diverse theoretical perspectives. There is no single “correct” meaning of these 
words. In the case of models and modeling, most of these meanings have 
enough in common so that even if one person’s meanings are not identical to 
another’s, productive discussions can continue to occur. Additional meanings, 
distinctions, and nuances tend to unfold as discussions take place. This 
latter characteristic is important because it is useful to avoid inventing new 
jargon in places where well-known terminology is already available, and it is 
useful to begin with terms that are simple, but whose meanings invite further 
refinement, rather than to begin with words that seem to have abstruse or 
technically “correct” meanings while carrying little intuitive meaning.
What is a model? The following first-iteration answer is familiar to 
people in fields such as mathematics, physics, chemistry, or other physical 
sciences. A model is a system consisting of (a) elements, (b) relationships 
among elements, (c) operations that describe how the elements interact, and 
(d) patterns or rules, such as symmetry, commutativity, or transitivity, that 
apply to the preceding relationships and operations. However, not just any old 
system functions as a model. To be a model, a system must be used to describe 
some other system, or to think about it, or to make sense of it, or to explain 
it, or to make predictions about it. Also, to be a mathematically significant 
model, it must focus on underlying structural characteristics of the system 
being described.
One issue that tends to confuse people about models is whether they 
are intended to refer to systems that reside inside or outside the mind. The 
confusion arises because there is a sense in which it is natural to speak of 
mathematical models and conceptual systems as though they were pure 
systems somehow disembodied from any tools, representations, or external 
artifacts. Yet, in practice, beyond the most trivial situations, it is clear that these 
conceptual systems seldom function without the support of powerful tools or 
representational systems, each of which emphasizes and deemphasizes (or 
ignores, or distorts) somewhat different aspects of the underlying conceptual 
system. The conceptual systems that humans develop often are partly 
embedded in conceptual tools that may involve electronic gadgets, but that 
also may involve specialized symbols, language, diagrams, organizational 
systems, or experience-based metaphors (cf. Dörfler, chap. 4, this volume). 
Thus, in speaking of students conceptualizing or reasoning with tools, the 
use of the tool is integral to the act of reasoning; the tool is not outside the 
reasoning process and the reasoning process is not entirely in the head (Lesh, 
1987; see Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 6, this volume, for a discussion of 
symbol use and symbolizing).
Humans are continually projecting their conceptual systems into their 

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  363
environments in the form of communication systems, economic exchange 
systems, and other types of systems that strongly influence our daily lives. 
For example, when a business manager uses a graphics-linked spreadsheet to 
make predictions about maximizing cost-benefit trends, this model enables the 
manager to create completely new types of business systems that did not exist 
before the tools were available. In turn, the manager’s conceptual and procedural 
capabilities are both changed and amplified when dealing with these newly 
introduced external systems. The cost-benefit system becomes an artifact that 
gets projected into the experienced world of others. Consequently, among the 
mathematical “objects” that impact everyday lives, many of the most important 
are human systems— complex, dynamic, interacting systems—which range 
in size from largescale communication and economic systems, to small-scale 
systems for scheduling, organizing, and accounting in everyday activities. 
These systems are artifacts that have been projected into the world and become 
part of the experienced world of others (Lesh, 1981; see Gravemeijer et al., 
chap. 7, this volume, for a contrasting discussion of models).
How Are Models Related to Representations?
The meaning of a model, or conceptual system, tends to be distributed across 
a variety of interacting representation systems that may involve written 
symbols, spoken languages, pictures or diagrams, concrete manipulatives, or 
experience-based metaphors. But although the term models tends to emphasize 
the dynamic and interacting characteristics of the systems being modeled, the 
term representations tends to draw attention to the objects within these systems. 
Models tend to refer to functioning whole systems, whereas representations 
tend to be treated as inert collections of objects to which manipulations and 
relationships must be added in order to function.
Modeling involves the interactions among three types of systems: (a) 
internal conceptual systems, (b) representational systems that function both 
as externalizations of internal conceptual systems and as internalizations of 
external systems, and (c) external systems that are experienced in nature, or that 
are artifacts that were constructed by humans. When taking this perspective, it 
is essential to emphasize that the boundaries between these systems are fluid, 
shifting and at times ambiguous (see Fig. 10.1). Conceptual systems, in a 
Piagetian sense, seem to exist mainly inside the head. Another kind of system 
seems to be embedded in the spoken language, written symbols, pictures, 
diagrams, and concrete models that people use to both express their internal 
systems and to describe external systems. These are often referred to as 
representation systems. A third kind of functioning system is that which humans 

364  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
create in the world, such as economic systems, communications systems, and 
mechanistic systems. As described earlier, these artifacts are projected into the 
world and become part of the experienced world of others. Although there are 
distinctions between these three systems, these systems are partly overlapping, 
interdependent, and interacting. It is these interactions that are brought to the 
foreground and are central to our analyses of student learning from a models 
and modeling perspective. Thus although cognitive systems seem to be largely 
internal, when students use powerful conceptual tools, it is clear, as we show 
later, that a large part of their abilities is embedded in their tools. Although 
the representation systems that students use seem to reside outside their minds 
and in a form that can be shared with others, it is also the case that a part of the 
meaning of these representation systems cannot simply be shared with others. 
In fact, the person who generates a representation tends to read out somewhat 
different information than the person put in (Lesh, 1983).
Representations function partly as externalizations of internal conceptual 
systems, and they also function partly as descriptions and simplifications of 
external systems in an experienced world. The constructs that humans develop 
to make sense of their experiences also are used to mold and shape the very world 
in which those experiences occur. Therefore, the constructs and conceptual 
systems that are in human minds today may be used to create systems that 
function as objects in the world tomorrow, and systems that are created for their 
own sake today may be used to make sense of other systems tomorrow.
How Is a Models and Modeling Perspective Related  
to Learning and Instruction?
The kinds of models that we are talking about in this chapter are those 
that students develop in attempts to produce mathematical descriptions or 
explanations of structurally interesting systems (e.g., Lehrer et al., chap. 9, this 
volume). If these descriptions and explanations are shareable and reuseable, 
FIG. 10.1. Modeling interactions among three types of systems.

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  365
then the ways of thinking that they involve represent important forms of 
learning. We believe that helping students develop powerful conceptual 
models should be among the most important goals of mathematics instruction 
(Confrey, 1994; Lehrer, Horvath, & Schauble, 1994; Lesh & Lamon, 1994).
In science, it has tended to be obvious that some of the most important goals 
of instruction are to help students develop powerful models for making sense of 
their experiences involving light, gravity, electricity, and magnetism; it has also 
been obvious that young students invent models of their own and that changing 
students’ ways of thinking must involve challenging and testing these models. 
But in mathematics, where the emphasis has been on representations, it is 
often assumed that students do not (and cannot) develop metaphors, language, 
and symbol systems for making sense of systems that involve mathematical 
entities such as directed quantities (negatives), multivalued quantities (vectors), 
ratios of quantities, changing or accumulating quantities, or locations in space 
(coordinates). This assumption comes about in part because the mathematical 
representations that are associated with the preceding kinds of systems often 
are so deep and profound that it seems very unlikely that youngsters would 
ever invent them by themselves. However, as we further describe later, when 
confronted with the need to create meaningful models of experientially real 
situations, learners can invent significant mathematics.
How Is a Models and Modeling Perspective Related  
to Cognitive Constructivism?
Models are interacting systems based in complex conceptual systems, and as 
such these models cannot simply be handed to students in a meaningful form. 
This is the basis for the claim that models (constructs) must be constructed. 
But it is also the case that: (a) construction can lead to a great many things 
(such as complex systems of low level facts and skills) that are not models 
for making sense of experiences, and (b) construction isn’t the only process 
that contributes to the development of models. For example, models evolve 
by being sorted out, refined, or reorganized at least as often as they evolve 
by being assembled (or constructed). Furthermore, sorting out and refining 
unstable conceptual systems is not at all the same thing as assembling stable 
conceptual systems.
We wish to avoid the error of turning model development into an end in 
itself; the misplaced emphasis of some enthusiasts for “discovery learning” 
often emphasizes the process of discovery without paying much attention to 
what it is that is being discovered. If instruction and learning focus on models 
and modeling, then it is absolutely critical to focus on models that correspond 

366  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
to the “big ideas” or main constructs and conceptual systems that underlie the 
curriculum in mathematics and science (cf. Gravemeijer et al., chap. 7, this 
volume). Models that describe patterns or systems of quantitative and spatial 
relationships in the experienced world should be emphasized throughout the 
mathematics and science curriculum (cf. Lehrer et al., chap. 9, and Nemirovsky 
& Monk, chap. 6, this volume).
How Is a Models and Modeling Perspective  
Related to Social Constructivism?
Models are often developed by groups and not just individuals. The 
development of models often involves social as well as cognitive functions. 
Of course, the sharing of models does not necessarily mean that each of the 
individuals who participated in the creation of the shared model or artifact has 
the same understanding of that system. Or, to put it differently, individuals’ 
personal models or artifacts may be somewhat different from the shared model. 
We make no claim that any one individual has direct access to the model of 
another individual. In fact, in the following sense, individuals do not even 
have direct access to their own models or conceptual systems. The internal, 
conceptual system that I had in my mind that enabled me to produce an external 
representation or artifact quite often changes as I experience the representation 
that I have created. In fact, during attempts to solve problems, one of the 
main reasons for drawing pictures or for developing other descriptions of the 
problem is that students’ early conceptualizations often fail to recognize the 
proverbial forest because of the trees, or vice versa—or, when they focus on 
one type of detail, other details may be conceptually neglected. Thus, when 
I draw a picture, the meaning that I had in mind that I put into the picture 
often changes as I see my picture, which in turn changes the picture that I 
see. When I look at my own picture, my ideas may have already changed and 
my view of my picture may not be so different than yours in the sense that 
the picture no longer represents some direct mapping of what is in my mind. 
In principle, there is often very little difference between viewing a picture 
that another person has created and viewing a picture that you yourself have 
created. Therefore, seeing my own picture is in fact more problematic than a 
constructivist perspective would have led us to believe, but seeing the picture 
of another may be less problematic.
How Is a Models and Modeling Perspective Related to Mathematizing?
Mathematizing (e.g., quantifying, visualizing, or coordinatizing) is a form of 
modeling; it usually involves using specialized languages, symbols, graphs, 

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  367
pictures, concrete materials, and other notation systems to develop mathematical 
descriptions and explanations that make obvious heavy demands on learners’ 
representational capabilities. Therefore, focusing on mathematizing meaningful 
situations brings to the foreground activities in which representational abilities 
are salient. Yet in the past, when researchers investigated the roles that 
representations play in mathematical reasoning, most focused on how students 
make sense of word problems or symbolic computations. Few investigated 
how students mathematize real-life situations.
MATHEMATIZING VERSUS DECODING
As Fig. 10.2 suggests, when mathematics is used in real-life situations, the 
processes that are needed often emphasize almost exactly the opposite kind of 
processes of those needed to make sense of most to the symbolic computations 
or word problems (exercises) that occur in traditional textbooks, tests, and 
teaching (see Lehrer et al., chap. 9, this volume for a discussion of design 
tasks). For example, for traditional textbook word problems, the problematic 
aspects tend to involve trying to make meaning out of symbolically stated 
questions; however, when students use mathematics in real-life situations, 
the processes that are needed tend to emphasize the need to make symbolic 
descriptions of situations that are already meaningful.
An Example of Average Ability Students Developing a Powerful Model
To focus on representational systems and mathematizing, we carefully examine 
a modeling activity whose goal is to stimulate and elicit the development of 
some construct. In the analysis that follows, we show how the solutions to 
FIG. 10.2. Processes that are needed for mathematics in real-life situations versus the 
exercises that occur in traditional teaching.

368  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
such problems involve a series of modeling cycles in which progressively 
more sophisticated ways of thinking are introduced, tested, and refined. 
The purpose of representations in this development is not only for students 
to communicate with one another; it is also for students to communicate 
with themselves and to externalize their own ways of thinking so they can 
be examined and improved. Thus, the meanings and functions of students’ 
representations are not static; they are continually evolving. The same is true 
for the underlying mathematical constructs that the representations embody, 
as well as for the external systems that they describe.
An important characteristic of the Summer Jobs Problem (Katims & Lesh, 
1994) that follows is that it is intended to be addressed by threeperson groups 
of students. The Summer Jobs Problem assumes that relevant tools, such as 
calculators and graph paper, are readily available to the student. The task 
makes heavy demands on communication capabilities and representational 
fluency for purposes such as: (a) analyzing problems, and planning solutions 
involving multiple steps and multiple resources and constraints, (b) justifying 
and explaining suggested actions, and predicting their consequences, (c) 
monitoring and assessing progress, and (d) integrating and communicating 
results in forms that are useful to others. As a model-eliciting activity, the goal 
of the task is to produce an operational definition that stimulates and expresses 
the learners’ notion of how to measure some construct, such as “productivity” 
at summer jobs. Descriptions, explanations, and justifications are not simply 
accompaniments to useful responses; they are the heart of useful responses. 
Model development is what solutions to such problems is all about.
The members of the three-person team whose work is described in this 
section were all considered to be “average ability” mathematics students in an 
“average ability” inner-city, seventh-grade classroom. Because of the teacher’s 
emphasis on portfolio-based assessment, the students had considerable prior 
experience working on projects similar in scope to the Summer Jobs Problem. 
This problem was based on a context that was described in a “math rich 
newspaper article” that was discussed by the class as a whole on the day 
before the Summer Jobs Problem was presented (Fig. 10.3). The students 
worked at small tables where a “tool kit” was available that included three 
TI-92 calculators; a Macintosh computer with software for word processing, 
spreadsheets, drawing, and making geometry constructions; and other standard 
classroom tools. Although this particular group made somewhat greater use 
of the technology, the actual result that they produced is not significantly 
different from that of other groups. What is prototypical of this group is the 
process of progressing through multiple modeling cycles. The analysis of 
the student activities over two class periods yielded evidence for 14 distinct 

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  369
cycles. We describe the significant characteristics of the evolution of the 
students’ interpretations and representations through those cycles.
Some Characteristics of Students’ Early Interpretations. Early 
interpretations often consist of a hodgepodge of several disorganized and 
FIG. 10.3. The Summer Jobs Problem. Figures are given for times when park attendance 
was high (busy), medium (steady), and low (slow).

370  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
sometimes inconsistent ways of thinking about givens, goals, and possible 
solution steps, as can be seen as the first modeling cycle begins:
Alan:	
Oh god. We’ve gotta add up all this stuff… You got  
a calculator?
Barb:	
They’re in here [the toolkit]… Here [she finds two TI-92 
calculators in the toolkit].
[Students calculated independently for about 5 minutes.]
Carla:	
[looking at Barb] What’d you get?… I got 159.
Barb:	
Yep…um… That’s what I got.
Alan:	
I got, let’s see,…116.
Barb:	
You punched them in wrong Here, you read them [the numbers] 
and I’ll punch ’em in.
Alan:	
[pointing to the numbers in the table] 12.5, 5.5, 12, 19.9, 19.5
Carla:	
Huh!… Not those, you dummy.
Alan:	
Why?
Barb:	
Here,…read these [pointing to the first row of the table].
This first cycle is characterized by the inconsistent use of several unstated 
and uncoordinated ways of thinking. In this team’s first interpretation of the 
problem, they tended to worry most about “What should I do?” rather than 
“What does this information mean?” Their first interpretations focused on 
computation, and the information that was given was treated as though no data 
interpretation or mathematization was necessary. They tended to focus on only 
a small subset of the information, and they tended to focus on isolated pieces of 
information rather than focusing on underlying patterns and regularities. For 
example, Alan, Barb, and Carla focused on only the first information that they 
noticed. This emphasis was not based on a thoughtful selection about which 
information was most important. It was simply the first information that came 
to their attention. They tended to focus only on numbers, and ignored quantity 
types. For example, the quantity “12.5 hours” usually was read as “twelve 
point five,” emphasizing “how much” but ignoring “of what.”
At the beginning of Modeling Cycle 2, the students created a table 
that accumulated more meaningful data, the total number of hours for  
each worker:
Barb:	
Here, read these [again pointing to the first row of the table].
Alan:	
OK…12.5, 15, 9, 10, 14, 17.5 12.5, 33.5, and 35…[pause] … 
What is it? [pause]
Barb:	
It’s 159. 

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  371
Carla:	
[As Alan was reading numbers, Carla was checking off the numbers 
in her table. So, when Barb gives the result, Carla recorded it in a 
new column on the right side of her table of data.]
Alan:	
OK, so who should we hire? [Alan was looking at Carla’s table 
of sums.]
Barb:	
Robin looks good…[pause] So does Tony.
Alan:	
Maybe Kim…[pause]
In the very next cycle, the students computed a table that showed the total 
number of dollars that each worker earned. Because this problem involves both 
“too much” and “not enough” information, the students’ first representations 
and ways of thinking often focused on only a subset of the information, and 
students often tended to be preoccupied with finding ways to simplify or 
aggregate (sums, averages) all of the available information. These students 
focused on hours worked and earnings while ignoring work schedules.
At the same time that students were preoccupied with finding ways to 
simplify or reduce information, they also expressed concerns about not knowing 
additional information that they believed was relevant. For example, the 
Summer Jobs Problem does not include information about the needs, flexibility, 
or friendliness of potential employees, or their willingness to work. Yet, even 
though this information is not available, it tends to be clear that the client in the 
problem would not find it useful if students refused to respond to her request for 
help simply because some relevant information was not available. Therefore, 
even at early stages of thinking about the problem, students generally recognize 
that, to solve the problem, a simplified description (or model) needs to be 
developed that focuses on significant relationships, patterns, and trends, and 
that simplifies the information and puts it into a useful form, while avoiding 
distractions related to surface-level details or gaps in the data. Consequently, 
these purposes tend to be reflected in the representations that they produce.
Some Characteristics of Students’ Intermediate Interpretations. Later, 
more sophisticated ways of thinking tended to go beyond organizing and 
processing isolated pieces of data to focusing on relationships, or patterns, 
or trends in the data. The students saw that different workers earned different 
amounts of money each month and they shifted their attention to trends across 
time. This shift marked the beginning of Modeling Cycle 5:
Barb:	
OK, let’s, like, line ’em up for each month.
Alan:	
You started doing that.
Barb:	
OK, you [Alan] read ’em off and I’ll write ’em down. 

372  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Alan:	
OK, here’s August…. We got Kim, Tony, Robin… Cheri … 
Willy, Chad, and Jose. Then, Maria and Terry.
The students focused on trends in rank across time. For about five minutes, 
Alan, Barb, and Carla worked together to get a list of “top money makers” 
each month. Then they noticed that the rankings were somewhat different 
each month, so the table shown in Fig. 10.4 was used as an attempt to reduce 
this information.
Approximately five minutes passed while each of the three students 
nominated workers that they believed should be hired, based on rankings and 
trends in the preceding table. In most cases, when students spoke in favor of 
a given worker, they made up some sort of “cover story” to account for the 
“ups” and “downs” in the performance of the worker. These stories involved 
the following kinds of possibilities: Some workers learned and improved, 
whereas others got bored; some weren’t able to work as much as others; 
some were good during busy periods, but not during slow periods. In these 
discussions, the students started to pay attention to the fact that the months 
might not be equally important (e.g., July is the busiest month, but August 
might be the best indicator of current abilities) and that busy, steady, and slow 
periods might not be equally important (e.g., the part-time workers wouldn’t 
be hired during slow periods). Finally, as Carla was looking at the three-
column chart that showed trends, she got the idea to make a similar graph 
using the computer. This idea led to Modeling Cycle 6:
Carla:	
I can make a graph like that [pointing to the table that was used 
in cycle 5] with the computer. Want’a see.
Alan:	
Sure, um, what’s it look like. 
FIG. 10.4. List of “top money makers” each month.

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  373
Barb:	
… Let me see.
Carla:	
Wait a minute…[long pause]… Wait a minute…[long pause]… 
Here’s one. No…[long pause]… Ah, here. No. …[long pause]… 
OK, look at this.
Alan:	
Wow! Neat! How’d you do that? [Carla explains again how she 
made the graphs using the computer.]
Alan:	
Now who do we pick Who’s this?
Carla:	
Um, let’s see, it’s Kim…. And, this is…um… Tony.
Alan:	
Who’s this?
Barb:	
Let me see.
Carla:	
Oh, it’s Robin.
Barb:	
So, we’ve got Kim… Tony, and Robin. Who’s next? [pause]
Carla:	
What about this guy?… Who is he?… Um, it’s Cheri…. Look, 
she was really good here. But, then she screwed up.
Barb:	
How we gonna decide which of these guys to hire? They were 
all good some and bad some [long pause]… How many were 
we supposed to hire anyway?…[pause]… Look at the problem 
[speaking to Alan]. What does it say? …[long pause].
Alan:	
We’re supposed to hire three full time and three part time. …
[pause]…
Alan:	
I think we should hire Willy. He was good here [pointing to July 
and August]…and he didn’t get to work much here [pointing to 
June].
Neither their chart nor their graph was sufficient for them to produce a list 
that successfully ranked the workers from “best” to “worst.” This mismatch 
between their current results and the desired products led them to consider 
relationships involving both time and money. It is important to note here that 
this shift in their model development was driven by the mismatch that the 
students themselves perceived between their current results and the desired 
outcomes. Modeling Cycles 8 through 10 reflect their shift to constructing 
relevant rates for each worker.
Barb:	
Look you guys. Some of these people got to work a lot more 
than others…. That’s not fair. Look, Willy didn’t get to work at 
all back here [in June].
Carla:	
So, what’re we gonna do? [Mumbling. More than 1 minute 
passes.]
Alan:	
Here. I’m trying something…. I’m subtracting how much each 
guy worked. That’ll kind of even things out…. I worked for 

374  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
a guy who did that once. We were cleaning up trash and he 
wanted us to work fast.
Barb:	
Hey, that’s a good idea! We could figure out dollars-per-hour…. 
I did that for my jobs last summer.
In addition to their own sense-making about the desired outcomes, the students 
drew on their own experiences in out-of-school situations. These experiences 
seem to serve as prototypes for actions in the summer jobs situation.
Some Characteristics of Students’ Final Interpretations. The final 
results that students produced went beyond simple, static solutions to include 
conditional statements about a variety of options or mechanisms for taking into 
account additional information. Their results were built on an understanding 
and use of rate and aggregated quantities that emerged in the final modeling 
cycles. The students produced a letter to the client with an accompanying 
graph (Fig. 10.5) that showed dollar-per-hour monthly trends for busy and 
steady periods for each worker.
In essence, then, we claim that the students have created a model that 
they themselves can think with and that can be shared with their client. The 
solution that is given enables the client to assign different “weights” to reflect 
the client’s own views about the relative importance of information about 
different months and different periods of work. Rather than using only a 
FIG. 10.5. Students’ letter to the client, with accompanying graph showing trends in money 
earned for June, July, and August.

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  375
single rule that is applied uniformly across all of the possible employees, the 
procedure that students used involved a series of dependent procedures. One 
approach was used to select employees that are in a “must hire” category; then a 
different procedure was suggested to select employees among the possibilities 
that remained. Thus, the students considered the realistic constraints of the 
model and the conditions under which their model applies.
The richness that we saw in the development of the students’ model, 
through multiple cycles, contrasted sharply with the somewhat more barren 
final product created by the students. This has important implications for 
both practice and research. On the one hand, we see the need for teachers 
to be able to examine students’ developing models in order to assess student 
knowledge and understanding and to foster continued model development in 
ways that evolve as the student models evolve. For example, the final product 
created by the students reveals little about the rejected or modified ideas that 
influenced the final interpretation or about the roles played by the various 
students. We see the need for research that will create and examine new and 
effective ways to capture the richness of the students’ model development. 
An important characteristic of the model development is that students’ later 
models are characterized by greater stability than their earlier models. There 
is evidence of increasing stability as the students are able to explain how they 
accounted for the data as well as missing information. In the later cycles, 
they were able to modify their model without losing their earlier work. It 
would appear that they are poised to modify and/or extend their own thinking, 
perhaps incorporating good ideas that they may hear from other students, but 
without abandoning their own work. Further research is needed to understand 
how teachers can themselves develop conjectures about how those ways of 
thinking might evolve and about the means of supporting those processes.
Our research with model-eliciting problem situations has led us to four 
insights that drive our continued work. First, because model-eliciting 
tasks emphasize the process of mathematizing meaningful situations, they 
emphasize representational abilities that tend to be overlooked in stereotypical 
textbook word problems. For example, learners need to explain and predict 
structurally complex systems, to monitor and assess their progress, to 
construct tools, symbols, and resources, and to integrate and communicate 
meaningful results. Consequently, if the posed tasks involve a much broader 
range of mathematical and representational competencies, it should be no 
surprise that a broader range of capable students emerge. Second, in cases 
where it is possible for students to recognize the need for a targeted construct, 
they often invent it (Lesh, Hoover, & Kelly, 1993). Such problems enable 
researchers to go beyond descriptions of static states of development to focus 
on mechanisms that contribute to development from one state to another. 

376  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
Third, when students develop a model, they often do so using a rich array 
of interacting representations, many of which tend to involve idiosyncratic 
diagrams and notational systems that are introduced by students themselves. 
Furthermore, students who are able to invent powerful constructs often 
include many who have been labeled “below average in ability” based on their 
performance in situations involving traditional tests, textbooks, and teaching, 
where only a narrow and shallow range of mathematical abilities tend to be 
emphasized (Lesh et al., 1993). Fourth, experiences like the Summer Jobs 
Problem provide stories or experiences that often function in symbolic and 
metaphoric ways. Students use these experiences as prototypes for thinking 
about other similar problem-solving situations (Schank, 1990; Doerr, 1994).
Implications of a Modeling Perspective
A modeling perspective, and the kind of observations that were made in the 
preceding sections, imply significant shifts for our views of learning, problem 
solving, and teaching, as well as new opportunities for gaining insight into 
the mechanisms that drive learning. This section discusses some of these 
challenges and opportunities, and focuses on implications that these changes 
have for future research on representational systems.
Model Development Is Learning. To develop models is to learn. For 
example, when students produce responses to model-eliciting activities, of 
the type described in the preceding section, what they produce is not just a 
solution—it is a powerful conceptual tool. The products that they produce 
are not simply answers to questions. They involve descriptions, explanations, 
and justifications that explicitly reveal important aspects of students’ ways 
of thinking. Furthermore, if these ways of thinking are embedded in “smart 
tools” (see Bransford et al., chap. 8, this volume) that can be shared and reused 
in other situations, then they are conceptual systems that represent significant 
forms of learning; if care is taken to focus on models that are mathematically 
significant, then the models that are constructed often provide the conceptual 
foundations for the most important cognitive objectives of mathematics 
instruction. Consequently, when students develop solutions to such problems, 
they tend to both learn and document what they are learning. The documentation 
provides a trail of development that helps teachers become familiar with 
students’ ways of thinking, and that helps students go beyond thinking with 
these conceptual systems to also thinking about them (Skovsmose, 1990). In 
this way, students are better able to modify, refine, and extend their ways of 
thinking. An assumption underlying the modeling perspective described in this 
chapter is that the most important goals of mathematics instruction are to help 

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  377
students develop powerful models for making sense of the kind of complex 
systems that are ubiquitous in our modern technology-based society.
How Is a Models and Modeling Perspective Related to Developmental 
Psychology? Piaget inspired a great deal of the best research on the nature of 
students’ developing mathematical knowledge. For example, just as Piaget 
described the sequences of stages that children go through to develop general 
cognitive structures for making sense of everyday experiences, mathematics 
educators described the sequences of stages that students go through in topic 
areas ranging from whole number arithmetic (Carpenter, Fennema, & Romberg, 
1993; Fuson, 1988; Steffe, 1994), rational number and proportional reasoning 
(Lesh, Post, & Behr, 1989), to early algebra (Kaput, 1990). However, recent 
research has shown that learning is a great deal more unstable, piecemeal, 
and situated than the preceding unfolding linear sequences of development 
suggested. For example, descriptions of children’s whole number arithmetic 
concepts appeared complete and sensible until researchers in different topic 
areas began to compare their results and conclusions. At the same time that 
early number concepts are developing, children are also developing ideas 
about continuous measures, fractions, ratios, rates, accumulating quantities, 
coordinates, and a host of other constructs; it is only at relatively late stages 
of development that these topic areas are sorted out into separate but linked 
conceptual domains.
During model-eliciting activities, it is often possible to describe how 
the relevant ways of thinking develop from intuitions to formalizations, 
or from concrete to abstract relationships or actions, or from situated to 
decontextualized understandings. So, researchers can describe: (a) what it 
means for given models to develop, (b) dimensions along which development 
occurs, and (c) mechanisms that drive development (from the perspective of 
the child) or that stimulate or facilitate development (from the perspective 
of the teacher). But in general, for any given conceptual model, there tends 
to be no such thing as a “stage n child,” at least not if such statements are 
intended to imply that the child should be expected to give a “stage n” level 
response on all tasks that a mathematician or a psychologist might consider to 
characterize the same structure. Even when seemingly superficial changes are 
made in the context or content of such tasks, students’ levels of development 
often vary significantly depending on factors such as experience and the other 
developing conceptual systems at play. 
New Ways of Thinking About Generalizing and Sharing. A modeling 
perspective on student learning brings a new perspective on generalizing and 
sharing. The kinds of model-eliciting tasks described in this chapter require as 

378  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
part of their solution meaningful descriptions, explanations, and procedures 
for predictions that can be used by others. The solution to such a task is not 
just a simple answer to someone else’s well-formulated question; it a tool that 
can be used to make sense of a collection of situations, and it is a tool that can 
be shared and reused by others.
In our own research, when we have asked students to develop such 
reusable and sharable tools, then we have found that their constructs have 
generalizability, transportability, and/or modifiability (Lesh, 1998; Doerr, 
1995, 1997; see also Bransford et al., chap. 8, this volume). By contrast, in 
most textbook problems, students are rarely asked to produce any models at 
all. Most often these problems simply provide the relevant, usually invariant, 
model to the student and then the student is directed to produce single-number 
answers. Even many applied problems, which are intended to involve “real-
life” situations, usually require no more than specific answers to particular, 
often complex, questions. It is a rare situation where textbook problems call for 
mathematical descriptions, explanations, or justifications, and it is even rarer 
to find solutions that are intended to be useful for a whole class of situations.
To build a general model does not guarantee that the builder will be 
able to generalize. We wish to distinguish carefully between claiming that 
the students have built a general model or a transferable tool and claiming 
that the students who created it can transfer the knowledge or use the tool 
in a variety of contexts. On the other hand, it is well known that when a 
person has a hammer in the hand, lots of things tend to look like nails. So, 
with models, the key learning problem is not necessarily acquiring the 
ability to generalize, but rather the key problem is for students to become 
more discerning about identifying situations where the model is appropriate. 
Effective model construction tasks can serve as powerful prototypes by 
providing rich, memorable contexts for learning and discussing important 
mathematical ideas. During the school year, these model-eliciting episodes 
can become an important part of the culture and history of the classroom. It is 
common to hear mathematical discourse in which students and teachers refer 
back to these prototypes—“Remember when we used rates in the Summer 
Jobs Problem?” A model thus becomes a powerful tool for students when they 
encounter structurally similar situations while simultaneously becoming part 
of the shared language of the classroom.
New Ways of Thinking About the Mechanisms That Drive Construct 
Development. For model-eliciting activities like the Summer Jobs Problem 
described in the preceding section of this chapter, students develop 
progressively more robust and powerful ways of thinking by going through a 
series of modeling cycles. In a modeling cycle, when a description is produced, 

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  379
it may involve a combination of spoken words, written symbols, pictures or 
diagrams, or references to other models or real-life experiences. But, in any 
case, the representation tends to organize and simplify the situation so that 
additional information can be noticed, or so that attention can be directed 
toward underlying patterns and regularities, which may, in turn, drive changes 
in conceptions. This new information often creates the need for a more 
refined or more elaborate description, and this new description again tends 
to make it possible for another round of additional information to be noticed. 
Internal conceptual systems and external representational systems both tend 
to be unstable, interacting, and continually evolving. The general cycle of 
development repeats until the match between the model and the modeled is 
experienced as being sufficiently close and sufficiently useful to produce the 
desired results without any further adaptations. We saw that in the students’ 
intermediate interpretations of the Summer Jobs Problem, they found that 
neither their chart nor their graph was sufficient for them to produce a list that 
ranked the workers. This led to a refinement of their model that included both 
time and money. In this way, the meanings of both models and representational 
systems tend to be unstable. This lack of stability, together with adaptations that 
are made that are aimed at increasing stability, are some of the most important 
driving forces behind model development. Cognitive conflict, or the need to 
develop increased conceptual stability, is a primary factor that creates the need 
for conceptual adaptation; representation systems facilitate the progressive 
differentiation and integration of relevant conceptual systems.
New Ways of Thinking About Problem Solving. The application of a 
modeling perspective to problem solving is a relatively new phenomenon 
within mathematics education research. Much of the problem-solving 
research of the past three decades has largely been based on variants of Polya-
like processes that proceed from givens to goals, with more recent research 
attending to the metacognitive processes in which expert problem solvers 
engage (Schoenfeld, 1985, 1994; Charles & Silver, 1989). As a result, problem 
solving has been defined as getting from givens to goals when the path is not 
immediately obvious or it is blocked. Students are often asked to learn some 
general heuristics that essentially answer the question: What can you do when 
you are stuck? These generalized heuristics and problem solving processes 
are then applied to “real-life” problem situations that may involve “messy” 
data and additional “real-life” information in order to solve a particularized 
problem. Applied problem solving is thus conceived of as a special case of 
generalized, content-independent, problem-solving processes. 
When attention focuses on model-eliciting activities, the essence of problem 
solving becomes finding ways to mathematically interpret meaningful problem 

380  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
situations. Nonroutine problems involve more than a single modeling cycle 
of getting from givens to goals; traditional problem solving is a special case 
where only one modeling cycle is needed. In model-eliciting tasks, there are of 
necessity multiple modeling cycles, with multiple ways of thinking about givens, 
goals, and solution paths (Bell, 1993; Doerr, 1996; Lesh & Zawojewski, 1987). 
It is crucial to recognize that these ways of thinking evolve over the course of 
the activity in ways that are increasingly stable. Modeling activities are much 
more than the mapping of problem information (givens) onto an invariant 
model in order to reach a solution (goals). In modeling, it is the interpretation 
and the model itself that are constructed, modified, refined, or extended.
When attention focuses on model construction, it becomes much more 
important for students to find ways to adapt, modify, and refine ideas that they 
do have, rather than to try to find ways to be more effective when they are 
stuck, that is, when they have no relevant ideas, as often happens in one-cycle 
problems and mathematical puzzles. To develop useful responses to modeling 
tasks, the kinds of heuristics and strategies that are most useful tend to be quite 
different from those that have been emphasized in traditional problems where the 
solution involves only a single interpretation cycle. For example, model-eliciting 
activities place greater demands on students’ abilities to introduce, modify, and 
adapt useful representations. In model-eliciting tasks, the mathematical abilities 
that are highlighted often emphasize communication, planning, monitoring, and 
other types of higher order thinking that emphasize representational abilities 
(diSessa, Hammer, Sherin, & Kolpakowski, 1991). Students must go beyond 
thinking with a given mathematical representation or model to also think about 
the relative strengths and weaknesses of alternative representations.
New Ways of Thinking About Teaching. A modeling perspective on 
learning and problem solving is a shift that views the student learner not as a 
traditional problem solver but rather as a model builder, and this necessitates a 
corresponding shift in views about effective teaching. The model building that 
we have examined is characterized by the development of models (or tools) 
that are both generalizable and shareable; modeling is seen not as a linear 
progression from givens to goals but rather as multiple cycles of modification, 
refinement, and extension, with increasing stability through the modeling 
cycles. The shift that views learners as model builders brings new issues for 
teaching and teachers into the foreground.
The metaphor of a teacher as a facilitator, guide, or coach has been widely 
used in recent years. However, transforming traditional teacher roles into the 
role of facilitator has proven to be an often vague and unclear charge. In the 
model-eliciting tasks we have discussed, the critical role for the teacher is to 
create the need for students to create significant models in the first place. The 

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  381
symbolizing, communicating, and mathematizing that need to occur among 
learners must be centered in tasks that are meaningful to the students and that 
evoke the need for the students to create a significant construct. Hence the 
role of the teacher is to effectively set the stage for this activity to occur. Lest 
this seem like an overly simplistic view of teaching, we are quick to add that 
this activity implies that teachers develop great skill in attending to what it 
is that students already know. This shifts the focus from what students need 
to be taught (as prerequisite skills and knowledge) to understanding more 
deeply the student knowledge that can be built on, extended, and refined by 
the student (cf. Nemirovsky & Monk, chap. 6, this volume).
As we have seen in our work, students can bring a great deal of diversity to 
modeling tasks (Confrey & Doerr, 1994; Doerr & Confrey, 1994). Moreover, 
because such tasks require different abilities than traditional, symbolic tasks, 
new students emerge as capable (Lesh et al., 1993). The challenge then, for the 
teacher, is not in terms of assisting students in finding a predetermined single 
solution, but rather is in terms of maintaining and nurturing the diversity in 
student approaches. Facilitating the development of student models requires 
that teachers carefully and closely attend to students’ ways of thinking 
about problem situations, but it is not necessary to classify such thinking in 
predetermined, linear next steps. Rather, the task confronting the teacher is 
to ensure that the mechanisms that drive model development can occur. This 
means that the teacher is in the role of hearing students’ own voices but not 
giving students the next step that would appear to be useful from the teacher’s 
perspective. The teacher needs to create the situations that provide students with 
conflicts that they need to resolve or with alternatives that they might test.
Finally, from a models and modeling perspective, we see the role of the 
teacher as creating the need for students to share their tools and representations. 
These representations become ways for a learner to communicate with himself 
or herself, within the group, and within the larger class setting. It is within 
this larger classroom setting that the teacher plays an especially critical role. 
Sharing alternative models, fostering discussion, creating and nurturing diverse 
approaches, creating meaningful and powerful prototypes through classroom 
discourse, and building on the connections that students make to their out-
of-school mathematics experience are all activities that will support students 
as they extend, apply, and explore the models they themselves have built. 
Teachers will need to develop the collaborative classroom settings in which 
such activities are most likely to occur. At the same time, more research needs 
to be done on the design of effective instructional sequences for learners.

382  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
CONCLUSIONS
The purpose of this chapter has been to describe a theoretical perspective 
that emphasizes models and modeling. It also pointed out how a modeling 
perspective leads to significant ways to rethink issues about learning, problem 
solving, and teaching. This perspective suggests several significant new 
directions for future research efforts.
Preparation for success in a technology-based society demands that 
students must learn to think about a multiplicity of systems, often of significant 
complexity. Students will need to mathematize systems that involve far 
more than simple counts and simple measures. They will need to develop 
representational fluency for dealing with mathematical entities such as signed 
quantities, ratios and rates, accumulating quantities, continuously changing 
quantities, measures associated with frequencies of events (probabilities), 
patterns and trends, logical statements, and control statements. As human 
conceptualizing and processing capabilities are increasingly embedded within 
powerful technology-based tools (such as computers and calculators), some 
of the most useful representational systems are those that are dynamic and 
functionally linked. From a modeling perspective, representational fluency 
will be an essential component of what it means to understand the kind of 
constructs that underlie elementary mathematical reasoning.
REFERENCES
Bell, M. (1993). Modelling and applications of mathematics in the primary curriculum. In 
T.Breiteig, I.Huntley, & G.Kaiser-Messmer (Eds.), Teaching and learning mathematics 
in context (pp. 71–80). London: Ellis Horwood.
Carpenter, T.P., Fennema, E., & Romberg, T.A. (1993). Rational numbers: An integration of 
research. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Charles, R.I., & Silver, E.A. (Eds.). (1989). The teaching and assessing of mathematical 
problem solving. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Confrey, J. (1994). Splitting, similarity, and rate of change: A new approach to multiplication 
and exponential functions. In G.Harel & J.Confrey (Eds.), The development of 
multiplicative reasoning (pp. 293–332). Albany, NY: State University of New York.
Confrey, J., & Doerr, H.M. (1994). Student modelers. Interactive Learning Environments, 
4, 199–217.
diSessa, A.A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta-
representational expertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 117–160.
Doerr, H.M. (1994). A model building approach to constructing student understandings of 
force, motion and vectors. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Cornell University.
Doerr, H.M. (1995). Negotiating conjectures within a modeling approach to understanding 
vector quantities. In L.Meira & D.Carraher (Eds.), Proceedings of the Nineteenth 
International Conference for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 3, pp. 168–
175). Recife, Brazil: Universidade Federal de Pernambuco.
Doerr, H.M. (1996). Integrating the study of trigonometry, vectors and force through 
modeling. School Science and Mathematics, 96, 407–418.

Symbolizing, Communicating, and Mathematizing  383
Doerr, H.M. (1997). Experiment, simulation and analysis: An integrated instructional approach 
to the concept of force. International Journal of Science Education, 19, 265–282.
Doerr, H.M., & Confrey, J. (1994). A modeling approach to understanding the trigonometry 
of forces: A classroom study. In J.D.da Ponte & J.F.Matos (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
Eighteenth International Conference for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 
2, pp. 264–271). Lisbon, Portugal: University of Lisbon.
Fuson, K.C. (1988). Children’s counting and concepts of number. New York: Springer-
Verlag.
Kaput, J. (1990). Applying the computer’s representational plasticity to create bridging 
notations from the concrete to the abstract. In B.Bowen (Ed.), Designing for learning (pp. 
114–148). Cupertino, CA: Apple Computer.
Katims, N., & Lesh, R. (1994). PACKETS: Performance Assessments for Grades 6–8. 
Lexington, MA: D.C.Heath.
Lehrer, R., Horvath, J., & Schauble, L. (1994). Developing model-based reasoning. Interactive 
Learning Environments, 4, 218–232.
Lesh, R. (1981). Applied mathematical problem solving. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 
12, 235–264.
Lesh, R. (1983). Conceptual analyses of problem solving performance. In E.Silver (Ed.), 
Teaching and learning mathematical problem solving (pp. 309–329). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lesh, R. (1987). The evolution of problem representations in the presence of powerful 
conceptual amplifiers. In C.Janvier (Ed.), Problems of representation in teaching and 
learning mathematics (pp. 197–206). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lesh, R. (1998). The development of representational abilities in middle school mathematics: 
The development of student’s representations during model eliciting activities. In I.Sigel 
(Ed.), Development of mental representation (pp. 323–349). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Lesh, R., Hoover, M., & Kelly, A. (1993). Equity, technology, and teacher development. 
In I.Wirszup & R.Streit (Eds.), Developments in school mathematics education around 
the world: Volume 3 (pp. 117–134). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics.
Lesh, R., & Lamon, S. (Eds.). (1994). Assessment of authentic performance in school 
mathematics. Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Sciences.
Lesh, R., Post, T., & Behr, M. (1989). Proportional reasoning. In M.Behr & J.Hiebert (Eds.), 
Number concepts and operations in the middle grades (Vol. 2, pp. 93–118). Reston, VA: 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Lesh, R., & Zawojewski, J. (1987). Problem solving. In T.Post (Ed.), Teaching mathematics 
in grades k-8: Research-based methods (pp. 49–88). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Schank, R.C. (1990). Tell me a story: A new look at real and artificial memory. New York: 
Charles Scribner’s Sons, Macmillan.
Schoenfeld, A.H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Schoenfeld, A.H. (Ed.). (1994). Mathematical thinking and problem solving. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Skovsmose, O. (1990). Reflective knowledge: Its relation to the mathematical modelling 
process. International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 
21, 765–779.
Steffe, L. (1994). Children’s multiplying schemes. In G.Harel & J.Confrey (Eds.), The 
development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics (pp. 3–40). 
Albany: State University of New York Press.


385
11 
Postscript: Integrating Themes  
on Discourse and Design
Janet Bowers 
San Diego State University
The rich and varied perspectives included in this book provide a broad 
view of contemporary philosophies concerning mathematics education. 
The goal of this postscript is to draw together the preceding chapters by 
outlining three common themes that cut across the two divisions of the 
book. These include:
1.	The interrelations between the role of community and communication in 
establishing common interpretations.
2.	The characterization of learning as a process of progressive refinement 
and reorganization.
3.	 Assumptions regarding the coemergence of meaning and symbolizations.
THREE COMMON THEMES IN THE CHAPTERS
Theme 1: Interrelations Between Mathematizing, Symbolizing and 
Communicating Within a Community
In Democracy and Education, Dewey (1916/1944) described the interrelations 
between the notions of commonalties, community, and communi-cation. He 
wrote, “Men live in a community in virtue of the things which they have in 
common; and communication is the way in which they come to possess things 

386  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
in common” (Dewey, 1916/1944, p. 4). Although stated differently in different 
chapters, the perspectives in this book all appear to be consistent with Dewey’s 
premise in that what students come to have in common evolves through 
successive iterations of symbolizing, mathematizing, and communicating. The 
implication of this assertion leads many of the contributors to call for analyses 
that incorporate both cultural and psychological processes when attempting 
to account for individual activity within a given classroom microculture. For 
example, Bransford et al. (chap. 8) conclude:
During the past several years, our research group has become increasingly aware 
of the need to move beyond an exclusive focus on the individual and pay careful 
attention to the assumption that all human endeavors are socially situated…. One 
way to characterize the impact of this work is to conclude that “culture is not an 
option.” Classroom, school, and community cultures are always present, irrespective 
of whether they are explicitly analyzed.
Sfard (chap. 3) contends that a coordination of social and cultural factors 
may lead to a reconceptualization of earlier views of symbolizing. She 
argues that although symbolizing was once viewed as a one-way process 
in which one “baptized an object” or attached a linguistic placeholder to 
an already extant object, she, and many of the authors in this book have 
come to characterize the relationship between symbolizing and learning 
as reflexive. In this reconceptualization, symbolizations and meanings are 
continually revised as students reorganize their current ways of knowing 
while communicating with others in their classroom community. This is 
aptly captured in Sfard’s metaphor describing the relationship between 
discourse and meaning as “two legs that make the movement forward 
possible thanks to the fact they are never in the same place, and at any 
given stage, one of them is ahead of the other.” This is also echoed in van 
Oers’ view (chap. 5) that “meanings and signs inextricably go together and 
develop concurrently.”
One implication that arises from this reconceptualization is that the 
ontological question regarding the existence of mathematical objects can be 
recast. That is, although students cannot talk about the existence of a function 
in the same way they can talk about the existence of a chair, their shared 
communication creates a space in which mathematical objects do, at least 
from the conversants’ point of view, exist. Sfard calls this shared negotiation 
space the virtual reality (VR) of mathematical discourse. Moreover, she 
suggests that although the virtual reality of mathematical discourse does not 
support discussions that parallel discourse in the physical world (i.e., you 
can hand me a pencil, but you cannot hand me a function), students can talk 

Postscript  387
about mathematical objects (such as functions) in meaningful ways. In sum, 
Sfard’s notion of VR discourse can be used to demonstrate the role of the 
community in establishing common understandings through communication. 
She states (chap. 3):
It is the discursive activity, including its continuous production of symbols, that 
creates the need for mathematical objects; and these are mathematical objects (or 
rather the object-mediated use of symbols) that, in their turn, influence the discourse 
and push it into new directions.
In contrast to Sfard’s focus on the community’s role in the construction of 
symbols and meaning, Dörfler (chap. 4) emphasizes the role of individual 
construction in communal discourse. He states, “I consider communication 
to be the social medium for the individual construction of prototypes and 
protocols and also for the development of what I call an as-if attitude.” Here, 
Dörfler indicates that individuals create prototypes (idiosyncratic images 
that serve as templates for classes of objects) and protocols (idiosyncratic 
schemas of action) based on their efforts to participate in the practices of the 
wider mathematical discourse. As Dörfler notes, one of the main functions of 
these tools is to support students’ discussions and reflections on mathematical 
objects “as if” they exist. It is, of course, assumed that individual student’s 
prototypes and protocols are not necessarily closely aligned. That is, Dörfler 
does not assume that everyone forms identical prototypes for, say, a function. 
Instead, these prototypes serve as discursive tools to establish taken-as-shared 
ways of talking about and reflecting on mathematical objects.
In short, for Sfard and Dörfler, participation in mathematical discourse 
involves negotiating common meanings. Dörfler suggests that such discussions 
enable students to discuss mathematical objects “as if” they exist. For Sfard, 
the issue is epistemological rather than ontological. She notes that, to the 
discussants, the objects do exist because they are experientially real.
From the perspective of instructional design, the triadic relationship 
between community, communication, and common referents is essential to the 
discussions of Gravemeijer et al. (chap. 7), Bransford et al. (chap. 8), Lehrer 
et al. (chap. 9), and Lesh and Doerr (chap. 10). For example, Gravemeijer et 
al. describe a vision of the communal mathematical practices that serves as 
the basis for developing instructional sequences. The authors note (chap. 7):
The task for the instructional designer, in our view, is to create sequences of 
instructional activities that take account of both the evolving mathematical practices 
of the classroom community and the development of individual students as they 
participate in those practices.

388  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
This view suggests that the classroom community (including the teacher and 
students) supports its own development by discussing and revising models 
through collective negotiations. In this way, the authors suggest that learning 
can be viewed as a process by which individuals construct meaning as they 
participate in and contribute to communal practices.
Lehrer et al. (chap. 9) describe how one such negotiation process occurred 
in a classroom in which students were asked to describe the growth of “Fast 
Plants.” Over the course of several weeks, the students discussed and revised 
their symbolic inscriptions several times. The authors conclude:
We found that transitions in growth were inscribed not only collectively and 
publicly, but also individually. In summary, then, over the course of the children’s 
investigations with Fast Plants, a cascade of inscriptions was accompanied by a 
cascade of conceptual change.
These arguments suggest the critical role of the community in supporting the 
evolution of individual learning. By communicating with each other, students 
can develop a cascade of inscriptions which emerges through successive 
iterations of discussion and refinement. This parallels the descriptions 
presented by Bransford et al. and Lesh and Doerr, both of whom claim that 
when students discuss and revise models communally, they gain deeper 
insight into the processes they are modeling. In particular, Lesh and Doerr 
(chap. 10) state:
Models are often developed by groups and not just individuals. The development 
of models often involves social as well as cognitive functions. Of course, 
the sharing of models does not necessarily mean that each of the individuals 
who participated in the creation of the shared models or artifact has the same 
understanding of that system.
In sum, the chapters illustrate Dewey’s view of the critical relationship 
between community, communication, and the establishment of common 
meanings. From a theoretical point of view, this supports an epistemology in 
which learning is viewed as each individual’s contribution to and participation 
in the negotiation of common practices. This theory informs pedagogical 
and design perspectives by suggesting that it is essential to anticipate the 
ongoing processes of collective reflection and generalization. In regard to 
this goal, several authors (e.g., van Oers, Gravemeijer et al.) take as their 
starting point Freudenthal’s assertion that doing mathematics can be viewed 
as a human activity. If the role of community is integrated into this view, 
then learning mathematics can be seen as a communal human activity. The 

Postscript  389
implication from this reconceptualization is that although designers cannot 
know how any one particular student will interpret any given instructional 
activity, they can make curricular decisions based on predictions of how the 
collective discourse will support the negotiation of taken-as-shared meanings. 
For example, Nemirovsky and Monk (chap. 6) suggest that the designer’s 
goal is not to determine any individual path, but to delimit a “territory” for 
trail making and to develop tools for supporting this exploration.
Theme 2: Multiple Perspectives on Learning as a Process
A second theme implicit in the book focuses on defining learning as an 
ongoing process of progressive refinement. This focus was first proposed by 
the symposium organizers who chose to emphasize the actions of symbolizing, 
modeling, and communicating, rather than focusing on the meanings that might 
be inherent in symbols, models, or words. For my part, I use the word process 
here to indicate the authors’ views regarding the importance of shifting from 
documenting the accumulation of knowledge to documenting the ways in 
which students can be seen as developing knowing-in-action. In general, this 
knowing-in-action can be viewed as a process of progressive reflection and 
reorganization. This analytic shift is elaborated, for example, in Lehrer et al.’s 
(chap. 9) description of how one class revised their models of plant height 
as they revised their own ideas about what they were measuring. Similarly, 
Gravemeijer et al. (chap. 7) describe a shift in the ways that students discussed 
relationships between numbers up to 20. The value of case studies such as 
these is that they provide insight into the process by which groups of students 
develop taken-as-shared understandings of “big mathematical ideas.” These 
insights can inform designers’ efforts to anticipate possible ways in which 
other communities will negotiate norms, expectations, and taken-as-shared 
mathematical meanings.
Although the contributors to this book appear to share the analytic view 
of learning as a process of progressive refinement, they offer a variety of 
theoretical positions regarding the nature of this process. These positions 
range from sociocultural to more psychological in nature. For example, based 
on a Vygotskian perspective that supports sociocultural views, van Oers 
(chap. 5) argues that “the structural endpoint of any mature activity needs to 
be present in the interaction between child and adult as a precondition for this 
new structure to appear as an individual psychological function in the child.” 
Here, van Oers describes the process of learning in terms of a transition from 
the inter- to the intramental planes that occurs as students interact with more 
knowledgeable others in the zone of proximal development. For van Oers, 

390  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
learning may be seen as an iterative process of engaging in, reflecting on, 
and eventually personalizing cultural practices (including the use of cultural 
tools). One implication of this view is that it emphasizes the importance of 
semiotic exploratory activity as a basis for supporting students’ engagement 
in formal practices such as culturally recognized ways of notating.
Assuming a more cognitively based approach, authors such as Bransford 
et al. and Lesh and Doerr focus on the ways in which students can develop 
general models that can be applied in a variety of different situations. For 
example, Bransford et al. (chap. 8) describe several studies to support the 
claim that “people’s representations of problems and experiences have strong 
effects on the degree to which they will transfer their knowledge to new 
settings.” Similarly, Lesh and Doerr (chap. 10) argue that the models students 
produce when engaging in model-eliciting problems are not just solutions to 
the problem at hand, but instead stand as more generalized conceptual tools 
that can be “shared and reused in other situations.” To this end, authors in 
both chapters discuss ways to design instructional tasks that activate relevant 
knowledge and affect students’ abilities to discriminate between cases.
Nemirovsky and Monk offer a third approach to characterizing the process 
of learning. Their phenomenological perspective attempts to document the 
ways in which students actually experience their symbol use. To this end, they 
describe one interview with Lin, a fifth grader, who draws a graph to represent 
the motion of a toy bear. The importance of a phenomenological position rests 
on the ways in which the authors describe the student’s experiences. They 
claim that Lin did not experience her symbol use as a representation of the toy 
bear’s movement. Instead, she experienced her symbol use as fused with the toy 
bear’s movement. That is, “the symbol user points out events and qualities of 
her lived-in space taking up a distinct perspective, a perspective ambiguously 
ascribed to herself and the tools at hand.” Later in the interview, Nemirovsky 
and Monk offer a second construct to describe Lin’s experiences with the 
graph. Here, Lin was seen as “trail-blazing,” which involved interacting with 
her environment such that various aspects of the problem setting became 
tools that were ready-at-hand. By way of contrast, the authors describe the 
experience of “path-following” and note that although this perspective more 
aptly describes most school-based activities, the experiences of trail-blazing 
often open new opportunities for learning. In sum, the phenomenological 
approach attempts to account for students’ activity in terms of the lived-in 
world, which, by definition, includes the social and cultural aspects as part 
and parcel of the unit of analysis. This perspective thus rejects assumptions of 
Cartesian dualism and by-steps the entire debate over whether the individual 
or culture should gain prominence in analyses.

Postscript  391
Although approaching the process of learning from slightly different 
epistemological positions, all of the chapters appear to view learning as a 
process of activity reorganization in which students continually revise 
their ways of knowing as they interact with others in their community and 
surrounding culture. Given this generalized definition, the question of how 
to support this process can be viewed as a search for activities and tools that 
will promote the development of collective meaning through progressive 
refinement. For example, Lehrer et al., Sfard, Gravemeijer et al., and van Oers 
all describe the progression of symbolizations in semiotic terms as moving 
from icons to symbols, or from signifiers to signs. As Sfard (chap. 3) notes, “It 
is through interaction that public signifiers are turned into private signs.” The 
question of how and when these public signifiers should enter the discussion 
serves as the basis for the third theme, which addresses the issue of whether 
symbols should precede or follow the introduction of mathematical concepts.
Theme 3: The Invent Versus Explore Dichotomy
A third theme that figured prominently in many of the chapters can be 
characterized as the “invent” versus “explore” dichotomy. This question 
may be seen as the perceptual chicken and egg paradox for mathematics 
education in that it concerns asking whether mathematical symbols should 
be introduced before, during, or after students have engaged in activities in 
which the mathematical ideas that the symbols portend to signify may arise. 
This question formed one of the major foci in the design chapters written by 
Gravemeijer et al., Lehrer et al., and Nemirovsky and Monk, and also the 
theoretical chapters written by Sfard and Dörfler.
Sfard’s theoretical description of the tension that arises if one accepts the 
view that discourse and mathematical objects are mutually constitutive and 
coemerge in discussion may set the stage for this debate. She asks (chap. 3), 
“How does the ongoing process of coemergence begin? According to what 
has been said, structural symbols cannot become meaningful before they are 
used; however, how can one use a symbol before it becomes meaningful?” 
In her conclusion, Sfard addresses this issue by noting that “starting with 
mathematical signifiers may sometimes be the right thing to do. Not only 
abstract mathematical objects, but also real-world structures, do not come into 
existence by themselves, but rather have to be ‘symbolized into being.’”
In arguing this position, Sfard claims that the introduction of new symbols 
opens an opportunity for students to discursively construct (or negotiate 
meanings for) new mathematical objects. To illustrate this process, she offers 
the metaphor of a pump that operates in two phases. In the first phase, the 

392  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
introduction of a new symbol equates to the lifting of the piston, thereby 
creating an opportunity for discussing meanings, what Sfard calls the semantic 
space. At this point, students can frame conversations around an object about 
which they know very little. For example, although students may not know 
what the symbol “π” means, they can frame discussions around it because they 
know that it refers to a quantity, rather than, say, a polygon. Sfard describes 
this use of the new term as template-driven or operational in nature in that 
students are able to frame discussions by following a template for discourse 
that fits quantities instead of polygons. In the second phase of the pump, these 
discursive negotiations lead to an ontological transition wherein the operational 
use becomes more structural in nature. By structural, Sfard indicates that a type 
of reification has occurred in which the process-based discussions have led to 
the creation of an object on which other operations can now be performed. 
At this point, mathematical objects can be discussed in ways that, in many 
respects, remind one of AR discourse; in spite of the relative weakness of 
perceptual clues, the participants feel that their conversation is being mediated 
by objects, a process that Sfard refers to as object mediation (Sfard, personal 
communication). Thus, the second stage involves filling the semantic space 
created in the pump. This pump metaphor enables the discussion of symbols to 
transcend the traditional dualism wherein meaning is assumed to be carried by 
symbols in that it locates meaning-making in social discourse rather than in any 
individual’s mind. On the other hand, although collective conversations can 
frame a taken-as-shared view of the newly introduced symbol, each individual 
forms his or her own ways of thinking, knowing, and acting with it.
Sfard’s theoretical argument sets the stage for discussing the tension that 
arises when one attempts to design an instructional sequence. The issue 
of whether instructional activities should begin with the exploration of 
symbolizations or whether activities should be designed around the invention 
of symbolizations was addressed by several of the design chapters. One 
example of an argument calling for the exploration of symbolizations rather 
than their invention was made by Bransford et al. These authors base their 
view on their extensive research with the Jasper series, a collection of video-
based instructional scenarios that engage students in situated problem solving. 
Based on their recent research, these authors report that although they initially 
attempted to embed enough information to support students’ invention of 
“smart tools” to solve problems (e.g., inventing a linear graph to figure out 
distance-time problems), they found it more productive to present students 
with catalogs describing various smart tools (e.g., graphs) that were available 
for use and then ask students to discuss which were most useful for their 
purposes at hand. They support this decision by noting,

Postscript  393
An emphasis on particular sets of contrasts affects the kinds of dimensions and features 
that students notice. For example, using different rates of speed in a chart focuses 
students’ attention on speed. When students look at a graphical smart tool, they usually 
have conversations about how and what speed is represented on each graph.
This argument is consistent with the general claim that it is unrealistic to expect 
that students will create representations that echo the underlying conventions 
and concepts that have evolved in the course of mathematical history.
In sum, Bransford et al. argue that the introduction of symbols may be 
a fruitful and productive approach for initiating the process of negotiation 
through which meaning and symbolizations emerge. On the other hand, 
Nemirovsky and Monk emphasize the importance of engaging students in 
activities that involve opportunities to invent symbolizations. For example, 
when reflecting on their efforts to design the “Patterns of Change” curricular 
unit (Tierney, Nemirovsky, & Noble, 1995), Nemirovsky and Monk argue that 
introducing students to the fundamental ideas of calculus through engagement 
in physical activities and then making representations of them was an essential 
aspect of the planning and implementation of the unit.
A crucial activity to “set the stage” for the students’ encounter with mathematical 
ideas is, we believe, the students’ invention of mathematical representations 
(Bednarz, Dufour-Janvier, Poirier, & Bacon, 1993; diSessa, Hammer, Sherin, & 
Kolpakowski, 1991). We have found these activities important not because we 
would expect that students would necessarily develop the mathematical ideas in 
question spontaneously and autonomously, but because these inventing activities 
can generate a context for a meaningful encounter with them.
Although these two positions appear to be in conflict, one must analyze 
the assumed relations between the development of symbolizations and the 
development of meaning. In both cases, the authors argue that a critical 
aspect of their work is to involve students in activities in which the need for 
symbolizations arise from the mathematical experiences in which the students 
are engaged. As such, both perspectives appear to suggest that meanings 
cannot be experienced outside of situations that call for mathematizing, 
and, conversely, situations that involve mathematizing can become learning 
opportunities with the use or development of symbolizations. In the Bransford 
et al. case, the students were asked to determine which smart tool might 
help them express a mathematical relationship between two variables they 
were attempting to coordinate. For these researchers, the objective appears 
to have been to support students’ efforts to interpret conventional graphs. 
In Nemirovsky and Monk’s case, the authors emphasize the importance of 

394  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
generating meaningful encounters with mathematical ideas. The objective here 
was to set the stage for later encounters with more conventional symbolizations 
by first involving students in situations that could be mathematized.
Chapter 9 by Lehrer et al. also emphasizes the value of having students invent 
their own symbolizations in an effort to set the stage for later development 
of more formal and conventional symbolizations. Like Nemirovsky and 
Monk, Lehrer et al. do not appear to aim toward supporting the emergence 
of conventional symbolizations. Instead, their goal appears to be to engage 
students in situations that offer possibilities for supporting the emergence of 
rich mathematical discussions. The main characteristic of these discussions 
is that they focus on describing and revising informal models of various 
phenomena. Their overall claim is that these informal symbolizations and their 
revisions are vital for supporting the emergence of mathematical meanings. To 
support this claim, they offer reflections based on observations taken from one 
teaching experiment. During this project, two groups of students were each 
asked to describe the steepness of different ramps used to race small toy cars. 
In the first group, the teacher asked the students to invent ways to describe the 
various inclined planes. These inscriptions evolved from literal drawings of 
the crates used to hold the planks to more generalized drawings of triangles. 
In the second group, the teacher inadvertently told the students to represent 
steepness by drawing triangles. The authors note that the sketches from the 
second group were less representational because the children in this latter 
group had been provided a solution to a problem that was not yet problematic 
to them. Based on these differences in richness, Lehrer et al. conclude:
A widely used instructional strategy among teachers and researchers trying to 
foster model-based reasoning is to provide a model that embodies conceptually 
important distinctions and relations, and then ask the students to solve a series of 
problems with the model (e.g., Smith, Snir, & Grosslight, 1992; White, 1993)…. 
However,…our experiences with these second graders suggest that, at least in some 
circumstances, giving children models may be less helpful than fostering their 
propensity to construct, evaluate, and revise models of their own to solve problems 
that they consider personally meaningful.
This approach is consistent with the modeling perspective advanced by Lesh 
and Doerr (chap. 10), who go even further to claim that “model development is 
learning.” For these authors, the activity of modeling implies a broad process 
in which students create and revise a series of systems that represent the 
objects, relationships and patterns that exist between the quantities involved 
in a given mathematical situation.
This view of modeling shares several similarities with that of Gravemeijer 

Postscript  395
et al. In both cases, the underlying epistemological view is based on a non-
dualist perspective in which mathematical meanings are not seen as inherent in 
models. Instead, meanings are seen to arise as students act with them (cf. Cobb, 
Yackel, & Wood, 1992). One of the main tenets of the view of Gravemeijer 
et al. is that the process of modeling is seen as reflexively related to students’ 
evolving ways of knowing. Thus, when the authors talk about the transition 
from model of to model for, they do not necessarily envision a change in the 
physical inscription system. Instead, what changes is the students’ views of 
what they are modeling. One critical aspect of this transition is that the role 
of the model shifts from being a model of a given situation to serving as a 
model for more generalized mathematical activity. To illustrate this transition, 
Gravemeijer et al. (chap. 7) describe one teaching experiment involving the 
arithmetic rack, an abacus-like device containing 20 beads. When using 
this device, students initially moved beads to show ways in which various 
configurations of passengers could be seated on a double decker bus. The 
authors state that the students’ activity with this model shifted from initially 
serving as a model of their situated activity (i.e., modeling people on a bus) 
to serving as a model for their more generalized mathematical reasoning (i.e., 
creating different configurations of addends that would constitute the same 
sum). In this case, the physical form of the rack did not change. Instead, it was 
the students’ activity (by which I mean their observable actions based on their 
evolving interpretations) that shifted from model of to model for. Moreover, 
the students reorganized their activity and, in so doing, their views of the 
rack. The basis for this shift was the students’ construction of a framework of 
number relations, which itself emerged in the modeling activity. Thus, these 
authors, along with the other design contributors, can be said to fall somewhere 
along the continuum between favoring pure invention of symbolizations and 
complete exploration of meanings. From the Gravemeijer et al. perspective, 
the critical aspect of design involves beginning with students’ current ways of 
knowing, but keeping an eye on target endpoints: the construction of personally 
meaningful ways of symbolizing that are consistent with conventional 
symbolizations.
In sum, one of the criteria all authors use to evaluate aspects of the in vent/
discover continuum is that students will develop insights into the conventions 
of representations that others who are already familiar with the concept may 
take for granted or overlook altogether. In other words, the authors appear 
to agree that the traditional practice of handing students ready-made tools or 
symbolizations and assuming that they can decode the math that experts see 
embodied in them is not as effective as encouraging students to engage in 
activity, reflection, and discussion regarding the tool’s use in-action.

396  Symbolizing and Communicating in Mathematics Classrooms
A second similarity between the contributors’ views is the assumption that 
learning does not occur in a vacuum. Instead, as themes 1 and 2 are intended 
to illustrate, all contributors to this book maintain that learning can be viewed 
as an inherently social process of reorganizing one’s ways of knowing through 
participation in communal activities. Thus, they describe other aspects of 
the learning experience that must be considered when discussing issues of 
instructional design that reach beyond the present in vent/discover dichotomy. 
Two of these aspects include the role of the teacher and the role of the norms 
established in the microculture of the classroom. For example, Lesh and Doerr 
(chap. 10) note:
It is within [the] larger classroom setting that the teacher plays an especially critical 
role. Sharing alternative models, fostering discussion, creating and nurturing diverse 
approaches, creating meaningful and powerful prototypes through classroom discourse, 
and building on the connections that students make to their out-of-school mathematics 
experiences are all activities that will support students as they extend, apply, and 
explore the models they themselves have built. Teachers will need to develop the 
collaborative classroom settings in which such activities are most likely to occur.
These critical elements are not merely add-ons but, in fact, form the very basis 
on which theory and design revolve.
A LOOK FORWARD: THEORIES INFORMING 
DEVELOPMENT AND RESEARCH
This postscript has highlighted three themes arising from current development 
and research projects in mathematics education. It is hoped that these ideas 
will inform future efforts to create tools and activities to support students’ 
collective negotiation of meaning and that these development efforts will, 
in turn, initiate calls for research documenting the meaning that students 
construct as they act with the tools in the social setting of the classroom. As 
we approach the 21st century, advances in technology and shifts away from 
conventional classroom settings will naturally generate new tools and novel 
social environments. The generative ideas contained in this volume form a 
sound basis to blaze trails along which, to borrow Sfard’s imagery quoted 
earlier, the two legs of discourse and meaning may head.
REFERENCES
Bednarz, N., Dufour-Janvier, B., Poirier, L., & Bacon, L. (1993). Socioconstructivist 
viewpoint on the use of symbolism in mathematics education. Alberta Journal of 
Educational Research, 39, 41–58.

Postscript  397
Cobb, P., Yackel, E., & Wood, T. (1992). A constructivist alternative to the representational 
view of mind in mathematics education. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 
23, 2–33.
Dewey, J. (1944). Democracy and education. New York: Free Press. (Original work 
published 1916)
diSessa, A.A., Hammer, D., Sherin, B., & Kolpakowski, T. (1991). Inventing graphing: Meta-
representational expertise in children. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 10, 117–160.
Tierney, C., Nemirovsky, R., & Noble, T. (1995). Patterns of change: Tables and graphs. 
Palo Alto, CA: Dale Seymour.


399
A
AAAS, 276, 320
Adams, L., 281, 289, 290, 297, 320, 321
Allen, S., 325, 360
Anderson, J.R., 275, 281, 289, 290, 297, 
298, 306, 320
Anderson, R., 284, 320
Andronov, V.P., 155, 172
B
Bacon, F., 290, 320
Bacon, L., 218, 221, 228, 232, 234, 238, 
248, 264, 265, 271, 393, 396
Bakhtin, M.M., 76, 95, 230, 270
Balacheff, N., 252, 270
Ball, D.L., 215, 220, 246, 271
Barclay, J.R., 284, 320
Barron, B.J., 114, 141, 214, 225, 233, 280, 
290, 291, 296, 297, 298, 303, 304, 316, 
317, 320, 321, 323, 326, 376, 378, 386, 
387, 390
Barron, L., 297, 323
Barth, R., 303, 304, 320
Bauersfeld, H., 2, 13, 145, 156, 172
Bauman, Z., 60, 95
Bednarz, N., 218, 221, 228, 232, 234, 238, 
248, 264, 265, 271, 393, 396
Behr, M., 377, 383
Bell, M., 380, 382
Bereiter, C., 60, 95
Berko, J., 56, 95
Bideau, J., 156, 172
Bishop, A.J., 134, 172
Bloor, D., 28, 36
Blumenthal, A.L., 276, 282, 288, 318, 320
Author Index
Blumer, H., 44, 95
Boufi, A., 237, 271
Boulez, P., 3, 13
Bowers, J., 2, 12, 35, 46, 55, 111, 135, 
152, 159, 160, 170, 220, 294, 301, 326, 
339, 359, 363, 365, 387, 388, 389, 395
Brailey, K., 281, 322
Bransford, J.D., 114, 141, 214, 225, 233, 
277, 280, 281, 282, 284, 286, 289, 290, 
291, 296, 297, 298, 303, 304, 305, 316, 
317, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 326, 
376, 378, 386, 387, 390
Bray, M.H., 304, 305, 321, 323
Brissiaud, R., 156, 172
Bristow, S., 158, 172
Brophy, S., 319, 323
Brown, A.L., 289, 290, 291, 297, 301, 302, 
303, 321
Brown, J.S., 87, 95, 225, 271, 290,  
294, 321
Brown, R.W., 56, 95
Bruer, J.T., 301, 321
Bruner, J.S., 27, 36, 43, 76, 95
C
Campbell, O., 275, 322
Campione, J.C., 289, 290, 291, 297, 301, 
302, 303, 321
Carpenter, S., 22, 48, 119, 214, 238, 242, 
299, 364, 366, 367, 387, 388, 389, 394
Carpenter, T.P., 377, 382
Carraher, D., 86, 96
Cassirer, E., 79, 95, 134, 172
Changeux, J.-P., 79, 95
Charles, R.I., 379, 382

400  Author Index
Chi, M.T.H., 279, 284, 321
Cobb, P., 2, 12, 35, 44, 46, 55, 95, 111, 
135, 136, 141, 146, 152, 159, 160, 170, 
171, 172, 176, 187, 220, 225, 237, 238, 
243, 245, 249, 250, 251, 252, 260, 262, 
271, 272, 273, 275, 290, 294, 296, 297, 
300, 301, 318, 321, 326, 339, 359, 363, 
365, 387, 388, 389, 395, 397
Cognition and Technology Group at 
Vanderbilt (CTGV), 114, 141, 214, 
225, 233, 275, 276, 280, 290, 291, 294, 
296, 297, 298, 302, 303, 304, 305, 316, 
317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 
326, 376, 378, 386, 387, 390
Cohen, D.K., 215, 220, 301, 322
Cole, M., 138, 141, 142, 172, 230, 272, 
291, 323
Collins, A., 87, 95, 225, 271, 290, 294, 321
Confrey, J., 365, 381, 382, 383
Connes, A., 79, 95
Cottom, C., 305, 323
Cundick, J., 154, 173
D
Davis, P.J., 94, 96, 136, 172
Davydov, V.V., 154, 155, 160, 172
Demby, A., 62, 96
Derrida, J., 46, 61, 96
Desforges, C., 158, 172
Dewey, J., 276, 277, 286, 318, 322, 385, 
386, 397
diSessa, A.A., 218, 221, 228, 233, 234, 
238, 248, 270, 271, 380, 382, 393, 397
Doerr, H.M., 9, 13, 19, 47, 87, 226, 227, 
230, 233, 242, 263, 271, 288, 299, 302, 
326, 357, 376, 378, 380, 381, 382, 383, 
387, 388, 390, 394, 396
Döfler, W., 2, 17, 41, 58, 75, 101, 113, 
123, 130, 149, 158, 200, 230, 235, 271, 
362, 387
Dufour-Janvier, B., 218, 221, 228, 232, 
234, 238, 248, 264, 265, 271, 393, 396
Duguid, P., 87, 95, 225, 271, 290, 294, 321
E
Eco, U., 42, 47, 96
Elkonin, D.B., 161, 172
Elmore, R.F., 303, 304, 322
Engeström, Y., 142, 172
Erickson, J., 327, 360
Ernest, P., 136, 153, 172, 242, 271
Ervin, S., M. 56, 96
F
Farr, M., 279, 321
Fennema, E., 377, 382
Ferrara, R.A., 289, 321
Fischer, J.-P, 156, 172
Fletcher, R.J., 245, 271
Foppa, K., 152, 174
Forman, E., 138, 169, 173
Foucault, M., 46, 96
Franks, J.J., 281, 284, 320, 322
Freudenthal, H.F., 134, 135, 152, 165, 173, 
236, 237, 240, 261, 271
Fuson, K.C., 377, 383
G
Gagné, R., 284, 322
Gal’perin, P J., 144, 146, 173
Gallistel, C.R., 144, 173
Garner, W.R., 284, 286, 318, 322
Garrison, S., 290, 291, 296, 303, 304,  
317, 320
Gearhart, M., 170, 174
Gelman, R., 144, 173
Gibson, E., 284, 286, 318, 322
Gibson, J., 284, 286, 318, 322
Gick, M.L., 281, 322
Glaser, R., 279, 321
Glotova, G.A., 160, 173
Goldman, S.R., 280, 290, 291, 296, 298, 
303, 304, 305, 317, 320, 322, 323, 324
Gottdiener, M., 46, 96
Gragg, C.I., 281, 322
Gravemeijer, K.P.E., 2, 12, 35, 46, 55, 95, 
111, 135, 137, 152, 155, 156, 157, 159, 
160, 170, 171, 173, 220, 225, 236, 238, 
239, 240, 249, 262, 271, 294, 301, 326, 
339, 359, 363, 365, 387, 388, 389, 395
Gray, E., 49, 96
Greeno, J.G., 225, 244, 262, 266, 271, 275, 
290, 294, 301, 322, 325, 360
Griffin, P., 230, 272, 291, 323
Grosslight, L., 334, 360, 394
Guberman, S., 170, 174

Author Index  401
H
Hackett, R., 305, 322
Hadamard, J.S., 58, 81, 96
Haenen, J., 143, 173
Hammer, D., 218, 221, 228, 233, 234, 238, 
248, 270, 271, 380, 382, 393, 397
Hanson, N.R., 276, 322
Harel, I., 325, 360
Harper, E., 265, 271
Hatano, G., 245, 272
Haughey, M., 154, 173
Heidegger, M., 178, 204, 221
Hersh, R., 1, 13, 94, 96, 136, 172
Hickey, D.T., 275, 322
Hitch, G., 154, 173
Hoffer, A., 135, 173
Holyoak, K.J., 281, 322
Hoover, M., 376, 381, 383
Hörmann, H., 149, 150, 173
Horvath, J., 365, 383
Howson, G., 137, 173
Hughes, M., 137, 173
Hundeide, K., 171, 173
Hutchins, E., 19, 36
J
Janvier, C., 2, 13
Jaworski, B., 44, 95
Jenkins, J.J., 56, 97
Johnson, M., 59, 65, 81, 82, 96, 129, 130
Johnson, M.K., 282, 320
K
Kafai, Y.B., 325, 360
Kantor, R., 290, 291, 296, 303, 304, 317, 
320
Kaplan, B., 23, 36, 136, 148, 151, 159, 
176, 178, 194, 195, 196, 221, 357, 360
Kaput, J.J., 2, 13, 19, 36, 134, 173, 227, 
228, 229, 230, 272, 377, 383
Karmiloff-Smith, A., 147, 173
Kasserman, J., 281, 320
Katims, N., 368, 383
Keitel, C., 137, 173
Kelly, A., 376, 381, 383
Kieren, T., 243, 272
Kilpatrick, J., 137, 173, 298, 322
Kleiner, L, 51, 52, 64, 96
Kline, M., 51, 96
Knorr, K.D., 76, 96
Knudsen, J., 325, 360
Koeske, R.D., 284, 321
Kolpakowski, T., 218, 221, 228, 233, 234, 
238, 248, 270, 271, 380, 382, 393, 397
Krummheuer, G., 2, 13
Kucinskij, G.M., 158, 173
L
Lacan, J., 45, 96
Lachapelle, C., 325, 360
Lakatos, L, 67, 96
Lakoff, G., 59, 65, 81, 82, 96, 102,  
129, 130
Lamon, M., 281, 305, 322
Lamon, S., 365, 383
Lampert, M., 67, 96, 210, 221
Latour, B., 11, 13, 339, 358, 360
Lauman, B., 325, 360
Lave, J., 24, 25, 36, 51, 86, 87, 96, 141, 
173, 275, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 
299, 301, 306, 322
Lawson, B., 326, 360
Leech, G., 149, 150, 174
Lehrer, R., 22, 48, 119, 214, 238, 242, 299, 
327, 360, 364, 365, 366, 367, 383, 387, 
388, 389, 394
Leont’ev, A.N., 139, 140, 142, 174
Lesh, R., 19, 47, 87, 230, 233, 242, 263, 
288, 299, 302, 326, 357, 362, 363, 364, 
365, 368, 376, 377, 378, 380, 381, 383, 
387, 388, 390, 394, 396
Leusina, A., 154, 174
Lin, X., 275, 319, 322, 323
Linchevski, L., 49, 62, 97, 145, 175
Lindberg, M., 284, 322
Lockhart, R.S., 281, 322
Lowell, F., 56, 98
Lynch, M., 339, 357, 358, 360
M
MacKay, D.M., 20, 36
Magidson, S., 210, 221
Malone, J.A., 137, 174
Markovà, I., 152, 174
Mashler, M., 56, 96
Maturana, H.R., 59, 96

402  Author Index
Mayfield-Stewart, C., 280, 324
McCarrell, N.S., 277, 282, 284, 286, 320
McCarthey, S.J., 303, 304, 322
McClain, K., 46, 95, 237, 243, 252, 262, 
271, 272
McLaughlin, M.W., 290, 291, 296, 301, 
303, 304, 316, 318, 322
McNeal, B., 290, 300, 301, 321
Meira, L., 210, 221, 235, 263, 272,  
358, 360
Meljac, C., 156, 172
Merris, K., 325, 360
Miles, E., 137, 174
Miles, T.R., 137, 174
Miller, J. -A., 93, 96
Miller, L., 305, 323
Minick, N., 138, 173
Moll, L., 138, 174
Monk, S., 39, 51, 66, 108, 126, 136, 250, 
264, 275, 294, 299, 302, 326, 358, 362, 
366, 381, 389, 393
Moore, A., 291, 298, 304, 317, 320
Moore, J.L., 275, 294, 322
Morris, J., 290, 291, 296, 303, 304,  
317, 320
N
NAS, 276, 323
NCTM, 276, 323
Nemirovsky, R., 18, 36, 39, 51, 66, 108, 
126, 136, 178, 179, 195, 221, 227, 230, 
231, 235, 250, 264, 272, 275, 294, 299, 
302, 326, 358, 362, 366, 381, 389,  
393, 397
New Standards, 276, 323
Newman, D., 230, 272, 291, 323
Nitsch, K.E., 284, 320
Noble, T., 179, 221, 393, 397
Norman, D.A., 289, 290, 292, 293, 299, 
318, 323
Nunes, T., 86, 96
O
Ortony, A., 284, 320
Otte, M., 134, 174
P
Palermo, D.S., 56, 96, 97
Papert, S., 227, 272
Parmentier, R.J., 152, 174
Pea, R.D., 5, 13, 230, 235, 272, 291, 318, 
323, 325, 360
Peirce, C., 44, 45, 97
Pellegrino, J., 290, 291, 296, 303, 304, 
317, 320
Penner, D., 22, 48, 119, 214, 238, 242, 
299, 364, 366, 367, 387, 388, 389, 394
Perfetto, G., 281, 289, 290, 297, 320, 321
Peterson, P L., 303, 304, 322
Petrosino, A., 275, 291, 298, 304, 305, 
317, 320, 322
Piaget, J., 178, 221
Pimm, D., 136, 151, 174
Pirie, S., 243, 272
Poincaré, H., 66, 97
Poirier, L., 218, 221, 228, 232, 234, 238, 
248, 264, 265, 271, 393, 396
Post, T., 377, 383
Presmeg, N., 44, 95
Pugh, R., 154, 173
Purdon, S., 281, 322
R
Rabinow, P., 46, 96
Radatz, H., 245, 272
Reddy, M., 43, 97
Reder, L.M., 275, 289, 290, 297, 298,  
306, 320
Reiner, M., 325, 360
Richards, J., 3, 4, 13
Rogoff, B., 275, 290, 294, 299, 301, 323
Romberg, T.A., 377, 382
Rommetveit, R., 26, 36, 171, 174
Rorty, R., 27, 36
Rosch, E., 25, 30, 36, 250, 273
Roschelle, J., 230, 272
Rotman, B., 78, 97, 101, 130
Rubtsov, V.V., 158, 174
Russell, B., 37, 42, 97
Russell, S.J., 215, 216, 221
Ruthing, D., 52, 97
S
Sabel’nikov, V.K., 145, 155, 174
Salmina, N.G., 155, 160, 174
Salomon, G., 142, 174, 291, 318, 323

Author Index  403
Sapagova, E.E., 160, 161, 174
Saussure, F.de, 44, 45, 97
Saxe, G.B., 86, 97, 170, 174
Schank, R.C., 376, 383
Schauble, L., 22, 48, 119, 214, 238, 242, 
299, 364, 365, 366, 367, 383, 387, 388, 
389, 394
Schipper, W., 245, 272
Schliemann, A., 86, 96
Schoenfeld, A.H., 2, 13, 225, 272, 297, 
323, 379, 383
Schutz, A., 26, 36
Schwartz, D.L., 114, 141, 214, 225, 233, 
275, 280, 282, 284, 290, 291, 296, 297, 
298, 302, 303, 304, 316, 317, 319, 320, 
321, 322, 323, 326, 376, 378, 386, 387, 
390
Secules, T.J., 305, 322, 323
Sfard, A., 2, 5, 6, 13, 41, 44, 49, 58, 59, 
60, 62, 64, 65, 81, 82, 87, 97, 101, 102, 
103, 105, 122, 127, 145, 146, 151, 158, 
174, 175, 187, 200, 211, 225, 230, 242, 
265, 266, 272, 386, 387, 391, 392
Sherin, B., 218, 221, 228, 233, 234, 238, 
248, 270, 271, 380, 382, 393, 397
Sherwood, R.D., 284, 320
Shotter, J., 137, 175
Shulman, L.S., 301, 323
Silver, E.A., 297, 323, 379, 382
Simon, H.A., 275, 281, 289, 290, 297, 298, 
306, 320, 323
Simon, M.A., 9, 13, 210, 221, 227, 231, 
241, 249, 250, 272
Sinha, C., 150, 175
Sipusic, M., 325, 360
Skovsmose, O., 376, 383
Slade, A., 178, 221
Smith, C., 334, 360, 394
Smith, D.R., 294, 322
Snir, J., 334, 360
Steffe, L.P., 144, 175, 245, 272, 377, 383
Stein, B.S., 289, 290, 320
Stone, C.A., 138, 173
Streefland, L., 239, 272
Struik, D.J., 136, 175
Suchman, L.A., 24, 36, 206, 221
Swink, J., 280, 324
T
Talbert, J.E., 290, 291, 296, 301, 303, 304, 
316, 318, 322
Tall, D.O., 49, 96
Talyzina, N.F., 155, 175
Tannen, D., 67, 97
Taylor, P.C.S., 137, 174
Teasley, S., 230, 272
Thompson, A., 17, 36
Thompson, E., 25, 36, 250, 273
Thompson, P., 44, 97
Tierney, C., 178, 179, 195, 221, 393, 397
Toma, C., 138, 142, 176
Treffers, A., 236, 238, 239, 245, 272
V
Vaihinger, H., 122, 131
Valsiner, J., 137, 175
van den Berg, W., 245, 272
van den Brink, F.J., 247, 272
van den Brink, J., 169, 175
van der Veer, R., 137, 175
van Eerde, D., 245, 272
Van Haneghan, J.P., 297, 323
van Hiele, P.M., 135, 175
van Oers, B., 2, 13, 26, 36, 134, 136, 138, 
142, 146, 151, 161, 165, 168, 175, 195, 
230, 359, 386, 388, 389
van Parreren, C.F., 135, 142, 175
Varela, F.J., 25, 36, 59, 96, 250, 273
Venger, L.A., 160, 175
Voigt, J., 2, 13, 252, 273
von Glasersfeld, E., 44, 97, 245, 272
Vye, N., 114, 141, 214, 225, 233, 280, 
281, 284, 289, 290, 291, 296, 297, 298, 
303, 304, 316, 317, 320, 321, 323, 324, 
326, 376, 378, 386, 387, 390
Vygotsky, L.S., 44, 45, 57, 77, 97, 138, 
139, 140, 149, 150, 152, 159, 176
W
Walkerdine, V., 46, 86, 87, 97, 137, 169, 
176, 262, 263, 273
Wenger, E., 51, 87, 96, 141, 173, 187, 221
Wenger, R.H., 266, 273

404  Author Index
Werner, H., 23, 36, 136, 148, 151, 159, 
176, 178, 194, 195, 196, 221, 357, 360
Wertsch, J.V., 138, 139, 142, 146,  
149, 176
White, B., 227, 273, 334, 360, 394
Whitehead, A.N., 281, 323
Whitenack, J., 2, 12, 35, 46, 55, 95, 111, 
135, 152, 159, 160, 170, 220, 237, 251, 
262, 271, 273, 294, 301, 326, 339, 359, 
363, 365, 387, 388, 389, 395
Whitson, J.A., 262, 273
Williams, S.M., 297, 298, 323, 324
Winnicott, D.W., 178, 221
Wirtz, R., 245, 273
Wittgenstein, L., 38, 46, 48, 78, 98, 99, 
131, 204, 221
Wolf, D.P., 178, 221
Wood, T., 136, 141, 146, 171, 172, 176, 
290, 300, 301, 321, 395, 397
Woodrow, H., 56, 98
Wright, H., 154, 173
Wright, T., 178, 195, 221
Y
Yackel, E., 46, 95, 136, 141, 146, 171, 
172, 176, 225, 238, 250, 251, 252, 260, 
262, 271, 273, 290, 300, 301, 321, 
395, 397
Yearwood, A., 281, 320
Young, M.F., 297, 323
Z
Zawojewski, J., 380, 383
Zech, L., 114, 141, 214, 225, 233, 280, 
290, 291, 296, 297, 298, 303, 304, 316, 
317, 320, 321, 323, 324, 326, 376, 378, 
386, 387, 390

405
A
Abbreviation, 144, 145, 149, 150, 154–156
Abstract object, 32, 57, 78–86, 93, 105, 
106, 123–130, 168, 339
Abstractness, 32, 57, 67, 76, 105, 160, 
196, 229, 306, 377
Actions, 32, 137, 182, 197, 207, 220, 281
Children’s play and, 162–165, 168–171
Culturally mediated, 139–144
Cycles of, 288
Structure of, 143–146
Symbols and, 151–156, 265
Action psychology, 133, 138, 142,  
144, 153
Activity, 178, 204–207, 210, 266
Agent of, 141, 142
Approach, 133–138
Culturally organized, 20–22, 25, 26, 35, 
134, 139–141, 149, 389
Discursive, 6, 7, 19, 47, 49, 101, 387
Mathematical, 2, 17–35, 136, 152–154, 
159, 161, 169–171, 209, 226, 
235–237, 242, 243, 250, 251,  
264, 270
Predicating, 7, 
see also Predication
Semiotic, 7, 22, 23, 26, 146–153, 155, 
158–163, 167–171, 389
Sociocultural, 2, 20, 26, 139, 141, 159, 
169, 225
Symbolizing, 8, 11, 12, 18, 94, 136, 
151, 181, 230–232, 263
Actor’s viewpoint, 20, 21, 26, 28, 33, 34
Appropriation, 7, 20, 21, 26, 27, 133–137, 
154, 156, 169, 170, 230, 235
Arithmetic rack, 244–269, 395
Artifacts, 25, 26, 48, 212–214, 291–294, 
318, 363, 364
As-if attitude, 6, 102, 122–130, 149, 387
Assessment, 305
Associationism, 21–24, 180–182, 186, 
190, 191
Authentic experience, 9, 228–231, 305
Autopoietic system, 59–61, 91
B
Boundaries, 215–218, 220
C
Cartesian dualism, 45, 134, 390, 392
Certainty, 165–168, 236
Chains of signification, see Signification
Classroom microculture, 10, 238, 240, 
246, 251, 316, 340, 386, 396
Cognitive conflict, 379, 391
Cognitive psychology, 25, 276, 298, 306
Cognitive science, 1, 10
Communicating, 2–4, 7, 11, 12, 385–387
Capabilities, 368
Meaning making and, 101–112, 135, 
146, 150, 171, 191, 282
Object mediation and, 40
Participation and, 141
Role of symbols in, 17, 48, 171
Sociocultural theory and, 134
Constructing objects, 69, 85, 137
Constructivism, 1, 21, 43, 69, 110, 169, 
225, 365
Cognitive, 11
Subject Index

406  Subject Index
Radical, 44
Social, 11, 137, 366
Constructs, 365
Generalizability of, 378
Modifiability of, 378
Transportability of, 378
D
Design, see Instructional design
Developmental approach, 7, 133, 159,  
195, 196
Developmental pedagogy, 26, 158, 159, 
169, 171
Didactical phenomenology, 240–249
Discourse
Abstract objects in, 122–130
Actual reality (AR), 29, 38–42, 48, 53, 
54, 59, 65, 79–82, 85–90, 92–94, 
392
Constructing meaning through, 19, 46, 
101, 104, 123, 391
Everyday, 28, 32, 33, 66, 86, 87, 105
Mathematical, 6, 27–37, 39–74, 79–94, 
102–129, 237, 238, 387
Nonmathematical, 62
Prototypes in, 110–114, 121
Structural, 55
Virtual reality (VR), 29, 38–42, 48, 53, 
54, 59, 65, 85–87, 92–94, 386, 387
Discovery, 234, 365
Discursive objects, 123, 126
Distributed cognition, 142
Distributed theories of intelligence, 5, 235
E
Empty number line, 155–157
Encounters, 215, 218, 220
Ethnomathematics, 86
Everyday mathematics, 86
Explanations, 243, 252, 258–261, 367, 
368, 376
Reusable, 364, 378
Shareable, 364, 378
Exploratory approach, 227–237, 240, 241, 
268–270
Expressive approach, 227, 228, 231–237, 
240, 268–270
F
Feedback, 101, 110, 143, 288, 294, 303, 
309–314, 326
Fetishism, 181, 182
Fortuitousness, 210, 220
Framing, 63, 66–68, 70, 75, 76, 87
Fusion, 8, 20–26, 66, 126, 178–182, 
187–196, 214, 390
G
Graphing, 340–342, 
see also Representations
H
Hermeneutic circle, 60
Heuristics, 239, 240, 244, 246, 249, 269, 
379, 380
Higher order thinking, 380
I
Image schema, 129
Imitation, 139, 142, 170
Inscriptions, 48, 119, 325–327, 340, 
342–353, 358
Cascades of, 11, 339, 356, 388
Construction of vs. provision of, 
331–339, 359, 394
Shared history of, 10, 357
Instructional content, 294
Analog problems, 298, 299
Deep principles, 295, 297–299
Goals of, 114, 227, 232–249, 262, 268, 
276, 331, 350, 365
Jasper adventures, 296–301, 304–312, 
315–317, 392
Lived-in environments, 295, 299
One-shot problems, 295, 299, 357
Problem-solving environments,  
295, 296
Instructional design, 1–4, 8–12, 25, 
210–213, 220, 227, 230, 263, 266–270, 
279, 293–305, 311, 319, 325, 357, 358, 
387, 388
Goals of, 26, 27, 214–216, 235, 262, 

Subject Index  407
275, 296, 318, 326, 327, 390,  
393, 395
Heuristics for, 239, 240, 244–246, 249
Invent vs. explore dichotomy, 391, 392
Role of teacher, 216, 234, 396
Symbolizing and, 18, 19, 33, 180,  
226, 232
Theoretical perspectives and, 20, 35, 
225, 226, 276, 291, 306
Interactionism, 44, 55
Interpretant, 45
Interpretations (children’s), 23, 24, 71, 
170, 182, 226, 227, 236–243, 250, 251, 
255, 268
Interpretivist approach, 3, 4
Intuitions, 67, 71, 377
Invention, 220, 232–234, 264
Isomorphism of discourses, 70, 82, 92
L
Language
Activity theory and, 145
Constitutiveness of, 27, 45, 47
Mathematical, 95, 128, 365
Prototypes in, 102
Semantic fields, 282
Symbol use in, 43, 46, 83, 136, 151
Transparency and, 51
Language games, 32, 52, 58, 61, 64, 67, 
73, 92
Learning
Action psychological view on, 
137–144, 154, 171
Classroom vs. individual, 250, 252, 388
Instructional design and, 226, 229, 298, 
314, 326
Mathematical, 1, 2, 5, 9, 17, 27, 34, 
133, 215, 225, 232, 251, 261, 270
Mathematizing and, 236–240
Modeling as, 376, 388
Prototypes and, 106
Situated, 10, 65, 87, 275, 295, 301, 
306, 318, 377
Symbol/referent dichotomy and, 43
Learning paradox, 60
Learning trajectories, 9, 26, 227–255, 
261–270
Linguistic use, 46–49, 61, 67, 75, 86, 103, 
105, 150
Lived-in space, 8, 25, 178, 181, 188, 195, 
211–214, 390
M
Marketplace mathematics, 86
Mathematical objects, 5, 28–32, 40–72, 
83–94, 121–130, 153, 267, 363,  
387, 392
Creation of, 386, 391
Intradiscursive, 58, 59, 65, 81–85, 
93, 123
Interdiscursive, 65, 84, 92
Mathematical practices, 2, 20–26, 34, 225, 
239–263, 270, 387
Mathematical processes, 40
Mathematics-inducing-practices, 153
Mathematics-producing-practices,  
168, 169
Mathematizing
Abbreviation and, 144, 145
Appropriation of, 26, 171
Chains of signification and, 263
Connected to authentic experience, 228
Definition of, 7, 135, 152
Goals of, 236, 241, 325
Horizontal, 153, 158, 238–240
Modeling and, 325, 366, 367, 375
Predication and, 23
Progressive, 237–240
Semiotic activity and, 161–170, 
263–268, 393
Vertical, 153, 238–240
Meaning, 5, 67, 267
Carrier of, 102–121, 129
Definitions of, 99–102
Emergence of, 21, 395
Intradiscursive creation of, 32, 33,  
123, 126
Mathematical, 6, 7, 17, 19, 27–33, 42, 
44, 59, 84–93, 133, 135, 153, 169, 
226, 230, 394
Endogenic, 58, 59, 65, 81–93
Exogenic, 65, 84, 92
Negotiation of, 9, 18, 20, 23, 33, 34, 
135, 150–152, 171, 226, 238, 241, 
263, 387–389, 393, 396
Relation with symbols, 1, 8, 22, 43–66, 
72–78, 91, 146–161, 179–182, 187, 
195, 214, 235, 236, 264

408  Subject Index
Situated learning in, 10, 12, 276–294
Sociocultural theory on, 137–139
Teacher’s role in developing, 169–171
Meaning making, 4–11, 18–22, 159,  
171, 392
Meaningful(ness), 280, 393
Big picture, 288, 296, 298, 319
Brute things, 276–279, 289, 293
Conditionalized knowledge, 281, 282
Contrasting cases, 284–288, 290, 294, 
313, 314, 319, 390, 392
Gestalt effect and, 47
In discourse, 125, 186
Inert knowledge, 281, 296
Of meaning, 99
Situated learning and, 10
Sociocultural theory and, 138–142
Solutions, personally, 119, 122, 261, 
269, 334
Symbols and, 29–32, 60–63, 72–95, 
134–137, 158, 161, 169, 180,  
196, 391
Well-differentiated knowledge, 284, 
289, 318
Measure, variability of, 329–331
Metaphors, 31, 39, 45, 48, 55, 66, 68, 76, 
82, 87, 91, 129, 151, 365
Metaphorical projection, 59, 65, 67, 85
Model-eliciting tasks, 361, 375–381, 390
Modeling, 12, 145, 227, 236, 240, 242, 
263, 301, 307, 319, 325, 345, 361,  
362, 366
Cycles of, 368, 370, 374, 379, 380
Perspective, 11, 376–382, 394
Models, 12, 47, 104, 127, 145, 155–161, 
170, 227–229, 312–316, 340–364, 390, 
see also Systems
Constructed, 365, 366, 375, 376, 380
Construction of vs. provision of, 
334–339, 359, 394
Development of, 377, 388
Elements of, 362
Emergent, 240–244, 246, 249, 269
General activity, 243, 249, 261, 265
Levels of activity, 243, 249, 261, 
265
Model of, 241–244, 247–249, 261, 
263, 265, 267, 395
Model for, 241–244, 248, 249, 261, 
263, 265, 267, 395
Referential activity, 243, 249,  
261, 265
Exploratory, 9, 226
Expressive, 9, 226
Mathematically significant, 362, 376
Refined, 375, 379, 380, 388, 389
Stability of, 11, 361, 375
Teacher’s role with, 380, 381, 396
N
Non-dualist perspective, 2, 394
Norms, 6, 27, 136, 165, 233, 306, 317, 
318, 389
Classroom, 234, 238, 244, 296, 
300–304, 316, 340, 396
Social, 238, 251, 270, 301, 318
Sociomathematical, 238, 251, 252, 270
Notations, 44, 259, 260, 358
Conventional, 9, 10, 114, 262, 390
Construction of vs. provision of, 
331–339, 359, 391
Notations-in-use, 235
Systems, 169, 170, 235, 249, 364,  
366, 376
O
Object mediation, 28, 31, 40–47, 55–59, 
77–95, 387, 392
Objectivist approach, 3, 4, 43–48
Observer’s viewpoint, 21, 28, 33
Ostensive definitions, 38
P
Paradigmatic relationship, 57
Participation, 141, 211, 251
Path-following, 24, 197, 198, 209,  
210, 390
Patterns, looking for, 370, 371
Perceptual mediation, 39, 94
Play, 21–23, 26, 159–163, 167–171, 
177–182, 193, 210, 220
Polysemy, 66
Predication, 7, 21, 23, 30, 35, 149, 
150–171
Prediction of growth, 340–342
Problem solving, 198, 199, 225, 236, 252, 
281, 292–297, 305–308, 314, 319,  
325, 366

Subject Index  409
Children’s ways of thinking, 376, 
379–381
Jasper series with, 392
Justifying in, 368
Modeling and, 379, 380
Planning, 326, 368
Protocol
Aspects of, 118–122, 129
Definition of, 29, 30, 111, 387
Examples of, 112–118
Significance of, 28, 30
Supporting reflection, 33, 113, 387
Prototype
Aspects of, 104–106, 129
Classes of (figurative, operative, 
relational, and symbolic), 106–110
Definition of, 30, 31, 102, 103, 387
Discourse and, 32–34, 111, 113, 122, 
381, 387
Examples of, 103, 104, 127
Significance of, 28, 29, 376, 378
Psychosemiotic approach, 133, 161
Pump mechanism, 55, 59, 391, 392
R
Ready-at-hand, 177, 178, 181, 197, 
200–203, 208, 213, 214, 245, 256,  
258, 266
Realism, 44
Realistic Mathematics Education (RME), 
9, 171, 226, 227, 236–249, 262–270
Reality
Actual, see Discourse
Mathematical, 6, 29, 94, 261, 262,  
266, 268
Mathematical entities, 29, 32,  
226, 267
Physical, 28, 29, 32, 80
Virtual, see Discourse
Reenactment, 119, 139, 141
Referent
Definition of, 37, 38
Fusion and, 182, 194–196, 213
Inscriptions and, 358
Prototypes and, 102, 103
Relationship with symbol, 18–21, 
42–47, 79, 151, 152, 160, 161, 178, 
179, 226, 284, 293, 318
Reflection
Instructional design and, 326, 388, 395
Mathematizing and, 153, 158, 236–243, 
389
Protocols and, 30, 33, 113, 119, 387
Semiotic activity and, 7, 22–24, 53, 
147–149, 159–169, 232, 264, 358
Well-differentiated knowledge through, 
288–290
Reflexive relationship (of symbol and 
meaning), 6, 7, 18, 19, 47, 148, 151, 
160, 161, 171, 386
Reification, 5, 50, 59, 67, 68, 83, 84, 105, 
145, 153, 242, 243, 265–267, 392
Circle of, 60
Reinvention, 237–239, 241, 244, 264, 269
Represent amen, 45
Representations, 
see also Inscriptions
Appropriateness of, 156–158, 277, 290
Children’s development of, 159–161, 
218, 339, 340, 365, 368, 375,  
376, 393
External, 2, 5, 19, 232, 364, 379
Fluency with, 367, 368, 382
Function in discourse, 123–126, 129, 
130, 134, 136, 233
Internal, 2, 5, 19, 364, 379
Models and, 11, 361–364
Object mediation and, 78–85
Protocols and, 113–120
Prototypes and, 31, 32, 103, 104, 110
Relationship with signified, 38, 41–48, 
160, 196
Use of in the classroom, 229, 316, 
334–339, 359, 381
Resource, 216, 220, 249
Revision, 288, 289, 326, 339
Rules, 53–62, 73, 94, 104, 106, 120, 122, 
136, 141, 144, 171, 230
S
Schematizing, 106, 113, 118–120, 126, 
160, 236
Semantic mediation, see Symbolizing
Semantic space, 58, 59, 77, 81, 391, 392
Semiotic activity, see Activity
Semiotic mediation, 2, 8
Semiotics, 2, 5, 17–19, 35, 42, 44, 45,  
150, 391

410  Subject Index
Sign
Definition of, 7, 45–48
In AR and VR discourses, 86, 87
In chains of signification, 84, 262–265
Object mediation and, 81
Protocols and, 118–121
Relationship with meaning, 44–46, 58, 
115, 116
In semiotic activity, 146–152, 159, 
160, 168
Relationship with new signifier, 70–76, 
391
Structural, 57, 78
Templates-driven use and, 61–66, 77
Signs-for-others, 77
Signification, 25, 29, 43, 265
Chains of, 45, 46, 59, 70, 84, 92, 152, 
262, 263
Signified, 22–24, 30, 31, 37, 42–61, 66, 
68, 76–90, 190, 262, 264
Signifier, 6, 22–24, 30, 44–48, 53–93, 
190, 262–264, 391
Operational, 49, 50, 72, 89, 91
Structural, 49, 50, 56, 59, 68, 72, 
89, 91
Situated cognition, 290–295, 306, 318, 319
Social contexts, 294, 295
Classrooms, 290, 291, 296, 300–303, 
316, 396
Multiply embedded contexts, 302–304, 
306, 316, 318
Norms, 296, 301–304, 306, 316,  
317, 340
Teacher communities, 291, 296, 
303–305, 316
Social environments, 10, 143, 158, 238, 
275, 288, 396
Distributed support for knowing, 291
Engineering, 316
Multiply embedded contexts, 295, 296, 
302–306, 316, 318
Role of outsiders, 290, 291, 296, 
303–305, 316, 317
Single context, 295
Tacit, 295
Working smarter, 292–294, 299, 319
Social interaction, 44
Sociocultural theory, 1, 2, 20, 21, 25,  
138, 389
Strategies, 326, 380, 
see also Heuristics
Street mathematics, 86
Symbolic means, 146
Symbol systems, 18, 53, 92, 111, 120, 230, 
241, 264, 365
Symbol use, see Symbolizing
Symbolizing
Chains of signification and, 261–263
Conventional ways of, 9, 241, 248, 
249, 268–270
Fusion and, 180–182, 187, 213
Historical development of, 4, 5, 49–53, 
65, 68, 264, 265
Inscriptions and, 10–12, 
see also Inscriptions
Instructional design and, 169, 229–234
Mathematical discourse and, 19, 94
Object-mediated, 28, 29, 31, 40, 41, 
47, 55–58, 76, 81, 87, 91, 92, 95, 
387, 392
Predication and, 150–154, 170, 171
Relationship with meaning, 4, 6, 7, 18, 
19, 179, 235–238, 386
Role of, 2, 33–35, 151, 158, 177, 188, 
226, 240, 260
Semantically mediated, 6, 80, 82, 85
Sociocultural approach and, 20–23, 35
Symbol/referent dichotomy and, 43, 
178, 179, 213
Templates-driven, 6, 28, 29, 31, 57–66, 
76, 77, 81, 91, 102, 122, 392
Trail-making and, 204, 208, 209, 214
Symbols
Appropriateness of, 156, 158, 171
Appropriation of, 20, 21, 102, 135, 137, 
153, 154, 156, 169, 170
Associationist view of, 23, 24
Conventional, 9, 18, 19, 21, 27, 128, 
135, 226, 228, 232, 241, 243, 248, 
249, 264, 268–270, 394, 395
Definition of, 17, 180, 181, 230
Discourse and, 31–33, 56–59, 82–84, 
94
Formal, 232, 394
Formation of, 9, 29, 69, 133, 136, 145, 
146, 151, 152, 195, 238
Historical development of, 4–6, 49–53, 
65, 68, 84, 264, 265
Mathematical, 8, 9, 19, 21, 27, 42–50, 
58, 68, 72, 76, 82–92, 106, 109, 

Subject Index  411
133–137, 145, 153–156, 169, 170, 
182, 226, 228, 232
Object-mediated, 40, 41, 57–59, 77–81, 
95
Operational, 89, 91, 392
Predication and, 165–168
Protocols and, 111–119
Referents and, 37, 38, 45, 104, 160, 
161, 178, 179, 194–196, 213, 293
Relationship with meaning, 17, 22, 44, 
45, 60–64, 146–150, 187, 284, 318
Role of, 1, 2, 28
Sociocultural theory on, 7
Structural, 49, 53, 55, 58, 60, 89, 91, 
391, 392
Trail-making and, 200–210, 214
Syntagmatic relationship, 57
Systems, 377, 394
Conceptual, 362–365, 379
External, 368, 379
Interactions, 363, 364, 379
Interdependent, 364
T
Templates-driven use, see Symbolizing
Theoretical perspectives, 1, 5, 27, 33, 35, 
143, 220, 230, 284, 389
The-thing-in-itself (role of symbol), 79
Thought experiment, 125, 127, 135, 161, 
227
Tools, 1, 5, 9, 114, 120, 291, 292, 299, 
302, 318, 319, 368, 378, 391, 395, 396
Cultural, 389
Conceptual, 362, 364, 376, 382, 390
Smart tools, 10, 114, 300–302, 
307–317, 376, 392, 393
Trail of development, 376
Trail-making, 8, 20, 24–26, 178, 179, 
197–210, 214, 216, 250, 389, 390
Transmission, 21, 226, 227, 235
Transparency, 22, 51, 182, 187, 194, 358
U
Understanding
Contrasting cases and, 286–288, 318
Decontextualized, 377
Expertise level and, 279, 284, 288
Of symbols
Flexibility, 78, 121, 226, 289,  
293, 318
Discursive use, 87, 90, 126
Relation with basic skills, 244, 289
Relation with meaning, 99, 100, 111, 
114, 123
Virtual reality and, 94
V
Vygotskian perspective, 7, 20, 21, 44, 45, 
57, 69, 77, 133–150, 159, 160, 389
W
Working Smart, 301, 316, 319
Classes of problems, 310
Cycles of, 311
Opportunities to revise, 309
Preparing for, 308
Smart tools, 302, 307–315, 317
Symbolic representations, 306
Z
Zone of proximal development, 20, 138, 
139, 142, 160, 389

