T. H. WHITE
 
The Troll
 
 
Born in 1906, the late T. H. White was perhaps the most
talented  and  widely  acclaimed  creator  of  whimsical
fantasy  since  Lewis  Carroll,  and  probably  did  more  to
mold  the  popular  image  of  King  Arthur  and  Merlin  than
any  other  writer  since  Twain.  Al-though  he  published
other  well-received  fantasy  novels  such  as  Mistress
Masham’s
 Repose
 and
 The
 Elephant
 and
 the
Kangaroo,  White’s  major  work—and  the  work  on  which
almost  all  of  his  present-day  reputation  rests—was  the
massive Arthurian tetralogy, The Once and Future  King.
Begun  in  1939  with  the  publication  of  the  first  volume,
The  Sword  in  the  Stone  (itself  well  known  as  an
indi-vidual
 novel,
 and
 later
 made
 into
 a
not-terribly-successful
 Dis-ney
 animated
 film),
 the
tetralogy  was published  in  an  omnibus  volume  in  1958,
became  a  nationwide  best-seller,  inspired  the  musical
Camelot, one of the most popular shows in the history of
Broadway,  and  later  was  made  into  a  big-budget  (and
quite  dreadful)  movie  of  the  same  name.  Gloriously
eccentric  and  impressively  erudite,  full  of  whimsy  and
delightful anachronism, hilarious and melancholy by turns,
poetically  written  and  peo-pled  with  psychologically
complex  and  compassionately  drawn  characters,  The
Once  and  Future  King  is  probably  one  of  the  two  or
three  best  fantasies  of  the  last  half  of  the  twentieth
century, and is surpassed for widespread impact only by
J. R. R. Tolkien’s  Lord  of the  Rings.  (As  an example  of
its influence, most subsequent fantasy books and stories
that  handle  Arthurian  themes  take  for  granted  the  idea
that Merlin (or Merlyn, as White spelled it) is living his life
backward through  time—although  that trope  is not found
in Mallory, Tennyson, or Twain, but only in White’s work. It
has become part of the ongoing Merlin legend, with most
subsequent  writers  not  even  realizing  where  they’ve
picked  it  up  from,  and  you  can’t  ask  for  a  much  better
demonstration of in-fluence than that!)
 

T. H. White  died  in  1964.  The  Book  of  Merlyn,  a
postscript to The Once and Future King,  was published
posthumously  in  1980.  White  was  not  prolific  at  short
lengths,  and  most  of  his  sto-ries  are  garnered  in  the
collection  The  Maharajah,  and  Other  Sto-ries.  White’s
strengths as a writer did not desert him at shorter lengths,
though, as you will see in the wry story that follows, which
shows  that,  even  in  the  carpeted,  comfortable,  and
luxu-rious  halls  of  a  modern  hotel,  a  leopard  does  not
change its spots, nor a troll its nature . . .
 
* * * *
 
“My father,” said Mr. Marx, “used to say that an experience like the one I am
about to relate was apt to shake one’s interest in mundane matters.
Naturally he did not expect to be believed, and he did not mind whether he
was or not. He did not himself believe in the supernatural, but the thing
happened, and he proposed to tell it as simply as possible. It was stupid of
him to say that it shook his faith in mundane matters, for it was just as
mundane as anything else. Indeed, the really frightening part about it was
the horribly tangible atmosphere in which it took place. None of the outlines
wavered in the least. The creature would have been less re-markable if it
had been less natural. It seemed to overcome the usual laws without being
immune to them.
 
“My father was a keen fisherman, and used to go to all sorts of places
for his fish. On one occasion he made Abisko his Lapland base, a
com-fortable railway hotel, one hundred and fifty miles within the Arctic
Cir-cle. He traveled the prodigious length of Sweden (I believe it is as far
from the south of Sweden to the north, as it is from the south of Sweden to
the south of Italy) in the electric railway, and arrived tired out. He went to
bed early, sleeping almost immediately, although it was bright daylight
outside, as it is in those parts throughout the night at that time of the year.
Not the least shaking part of his experience was that it should all have
happened under the sun.
 
“He went to bed early, and slept, and dreamed. I may as well make it
clear at once, as clear as the outlines of that creature in the northern sun,
that his story did not turn out to be a dream in the last paragraph. The
division between sleeping and waking was abrupt, although the feeling of
both was the same. They were both in the same sphere of horrible
ab-surdity, though in the former he was asleep and in the latter almost
ter-ribly awake. He tried to be asleep several times.
 

“My father always used to tell one of his dreams, because it somehow
seemed of a piece with what was to follow. He believed that it was a
consequence of the thing’s presence in the next room. My father dreamed
of blood.
 
“It was the vividness of the dreams that was impressive, their minute
detail and horrible reality. The blood came through the keyhole of a locked
door which communicated with the next room. I suppose the two rooms
had originally been designed en suite. It ran down the door panel with a
viscous ripple, like the artificial one created in the conduit of Trumpington
Street. But it was heavy, and smelled. The slow welling of it sopped the
carpet and reached the bed. It was warm and sticky. My fa-ther woke up
with the impression that it was all over his hands. He was rubbing his first
two fingers together, trying to rid them of the greasy ad-hesion where the
fingers joined.
 
“My father knew what he had got to do. Let me make it clear that he
was now perfectly wide awake, but he knew what he had got to do. He got
out of bed, under this irresistible knowledge, and looked through the
keyhole into the next room.
 
“I suppose the best way to tell the story is simply to narrate it, without
an effort to carry belief. The thing did not require belief. It was not a feel-ing
of horror in one’s bones, or a misty outline, or anything that needed to be
given actuality by an act of faith. It was as solid as a wardrobe. You don’t
have to believe in wardrobes. They are there, with corners.
 
“What my father saw through the keyhole in the next room was a Troll.
It was eminently solid, about eight feet high, and dressed in brightly
ornamented skins. It had a blue face, with yellow eyes, and on its head
there was a woolly sort of nightcap with a red bobble on top. The features
were Mongolian. Its body was long and sturdy, like the trunk of a tree. Its
legs were short and thick, like the elephant’s feet that used to be cut off for
umbrella stands, and its arms were wasted: little rudimentary members like
the forelegs of a kangaroo. Its head and neck were very thick and massive.
On the whole, it looked like a grotesque doll.
 
“That was the horror of it. Imagine a perfectly normal golliwog (but
without the association of a Christie minstrel) standing in the corner of a
room, eight feet high. The creature was as ordinary as that, as tangible, as
stuffed, and as ungainly at the joints: but it could move itself about.
 
“The Troll was eating a lady. Poor girl, she was tightly clutched to its
breast by those rudimentary arms, with her head on a level with its mouth.

She was dressed in a nightdress which had crumpled up under her armpits,
so that she was a pitiful naked offering, like a classical pic-ture of
Andromeda. Mercifully, she appeared to have fainted.
 
“Just as my father applied his eye to the keyhole, the Troll opened its
mouth and bit off her head. Then, holding the neck between the bright blue
lips, he sucked the bare meat dry. She shriveled, like a squeezed or-ange,
and her heels kicked. The creature had a look of thoughtful ecstasy. When
the girl seemed to have lost succulence as an orange she was lifted into
the air. She vanished in two bites. The Troll remained leaning against the
wall, munching patiently and casting its eyes about it with a vague
benevolence. Then it leaned forward from the low hips, like a jackknife
folding in half, and opened its mouth to lick the blood up from the car-pet.
The mouth was incandescent inside, like a gas fire, and the blood
evaporated before its tongue, like dust before a vacuum cleaner. It
straight-ened itself, the arms dangling before it in patient uselessness, and
fixed its eyes upon the keyhole.
 
“My father crawled back to bed, like a hunted fox after fifteen miles. At
first it was because he was afraid that the creature had seen him through
the hole, but afterward it was because of his reason. A man can attribute
many nighttime appearances to the imagination, and can ulti-mately
persuade himself that creatures of the dark did not exist. But this was an
appearance in a sunlit room, with all the solidity of a wardrobe and
unfortunately almost none of its possibility. He spent the first ten minutes
making sure that he was awake, and the rest of the night trying to hope that
he was asleep. It was either that, or else he was mad.
 
“It is not pleasant to doubt one’s sanity. There are no satisfactory
tests. One can pinch oneself to see if one is asleep, but there are no
means of determining the other problem. He spent some time opening and
shut-ting his eyes, but the room seemed normal and remained unaltered.
He also soused his head in a basin of cold water, without result. Then he lay
on his back, for hours, watching the mosquitoes on the ceiling.
 
“He was tired when he was called. A bright Scandinavian maid
ad-mitted the full sunlight for him and told him that it was a fine day. He
spoke to her several times, and watched her carefully, but she seemed to
have no doubts about his behavior. Evidently, then, he was not badly mad:
and by now he had been thinking about the matter for so many hours that it
had begun to get obscure. The outlines were blurring again, and he
determined that the whole thing must have been a dream or a tem-porary
delusion, something temporary, anyway, and finished with; so that there was
no good in thinking about it longer. He got up, dressed him-self fairly

cheerfully, and went down to breakfast.
 
“These hotels used to be run extraordinarily well. There was a
host-ess always handy in a little office off the hall, who was delighted to
an-swer any questions, spoke every conceivable language, and generally
made it her business to make the guests feel at home. The particular
host-ess at Abisko was a lovely creature into the bargain. My father used to
speak to her a good deal. He had an idea that when you had a bath in
Sweden one of the maids was sent to wash you. As a matter of fact this
sometimes used to be the case, but it was always an old maid and highly
trusted. You had to keep yourself underwater and this was supposed to
confer a cloak of invisibility. If you popped your knee out she was shocked.
My father had a dim sort of hope that the hostess would be sent to bathe
him one day: and I dare say he would have shocked her a good deal.
However, this is beside the point. As he passed through the hall something
prompted him to ask about the room next to his. Had any-body, he inquired,
taken number 23?
 
“‘But, yes,’ said the lady manager with a bright smile, twenty-three is
taken by a doctor professor from Uppsala and his wife, such a charming
couple!’
 
“My father wondered what the charming couple had been doing, whilst
the Troll was eating the lady in the nightdress. However, he decided to think
no more about it. He pulled himself together, and went in to break-fast. The
professor was sitting in an opposite corner (the manageress had kindly
pointed him out), looking mild and shortsighted, by himself. My father
thought he would go out for a long climb on the mountains, since exercise
was evidently what his constitution needed.
 
“He had a lovely day. Lake Torne blazed a deep blue below him, for
all its thirty miles, and the melting snow made a lacework of filigree around
the tops of the surrounding mountain basin. He got away from the stunted
birch trees, and the mossy bogs with the reindeer in them, and the
mosquitoes, too. He forded something that might have been a temporary
tributary of the Abiskojokk, having to take off his trousers to do so and
tucking his shirt up around his neck. He wanted to shout, brac-ing himself
against the glorious tug of the snow water, with his legs cross-ing each
other involuntarily as they passed, and the boulders turning under his feet.
His body made a bow wave in the water, which climbed and feathered on
his stomach, on the upstream side. When he was under the opposite bank
a stone turned in earnest, and he went in. He came up, shouting with
laughter, and made out loud a remark which has since be-come a classic in
my family. ‘Thank God,’ he said, ‘I rolled up my sleeves.’ He wrung out

everything as best he could, and dressed again in the wet clothes, and set
off up the shoulder of Niakatjavelk. He was dry and warm again in half a
mile. Less than a thousand feet took him over the snow line, and there,
crawling on hands and knees, he came face-to-face with what seemed to
be the summit of ambition. He met an ermine. They were both on all fours,
so that there was a sort of equality about the encounter, especially as the
ermine was higher up than he was. They looked at each other for a fifth of a
second, without saying anything, and then the er-mine vanished. He
searched for it everywhere in vain, for the snow was only patchy. My father
sat down on a dry rock, to eat his well-soaked lun-cheon of chocolate and
rye bread.
 
“Life is such unutterable hell, solely because it is sometimes
beautiful. If we could only be miserable all the time, if there could be no
such things as love or beauty or faith or hope, if I could be absolutely
certain that my love would never be returned: how much more simple life
would be. One could plod through the Siberian salt mines of existence
without being bothered about happiness. Unfortunately the happiness is
there. There is always the chance (about eight hundred and fifty to one) that
another heart will come to mine. I can’t help hoping, and keeping faith, and
loving beauty. Quite frequently I am not so miserable as it would be wise to
be. And there, for my poor father sitting on his boulder above the snow,
was stark happiness beating at the gates.
 
“The boulder on which he was sitting had probably never been sat
upon before. It was a hundred and fifty miles within the Arctic Circle, on a
mountain five thousand feet high, looking down on a blue lake. The lake
was so long that he could have sworn it sloped away at the ends, prov-ing
to the naked eye that the sweet earth was round. The railway line and the
half-dozen houses of Abisko were hidden in the trees. The sun was warm
on the boulder, blue on the snow, and his body tingled smooth from the
spate water. His mouth watered for the chocolate, just behind the tip of his
tongue.
 
“And yet, when he had eaten the chocolate—perhaps it was heavy on
his stomach—there was the memory of the Troll. My father fell suddenly
into a black mood, and began to think about the supernatural. Lapland was
beautiful in the summer, with the sun sweeping around the horizon day and
night, and the small tree leaves twinkling. It was not the sort of place for
wicked things. But what about the winter? A picture of the Arctic night came
before him, with the silence and the snow. Then the legendary wolves and
bears snuffled at the far encampments, and the name-less winter spirits
moved on their darkling courses. Lapland had always been associated with
sorcery, even by Shakespeare. It was at the outskirts of the world that the

Old Things accumulated, like driftwood around the edges of the sea. If one
wanted to find a wise woman, one went to the rims of the Hebrides; on the
coast of Brittany one sought the mass of St. Secaire. And what an outskirt
Lapland was! It was an outskirt not only of Europe, but of civilization. It had
no boundaries. The Lapps went with the reindeer, and where the reindeer
were, was Lapland. Curiously in-definite region, suitable to the indefinite
things. The Lapps were not Chris-tians. What a fund of power they must
have had behind them, to resist the march of mind. All through the
missionary centuries they had held to something: something had stood
behind them, a power against Christ. My father realized with a shock that he
was living in the age of the reindeer, a period contiguous to the mammoth
and the fossil.
 
“Well, this was not what he had come out to do. He dismissed the
nightmares with an effort, got up from his boulder, and began to scramble
back to his hotel. It was impossible that a professor from Abisko could
become a troll.
 
“As my father was going in to dinner that evening the manageress
stopped him in the hall.
 
“‘We have had a day so sad,’ she said. ‘The poor Dr. Professor has
disappeared his wife. She has been missing since last night. The Dr.
Profes-sor is inconsolable.’
 
“My father then knew for certain that he had lost his reason.
 
“He went blindly to dinner, without making any answer, and began to
eat a thick sour-cream soup that was taken cold with pepper and sugar. The
professor was still sitting in his corner, a sandy-headed man with thick
spectacles and a desolate expression. He was looking at my father, and my
father, with a soup spoon halfway to his mouth, looked at him. You know
that eye-to-eye recognition, when two people look deeply into each other’s
pupils, and burrow to the soul? It usually comes before love. I mean the
clear, deep, milk-eyed recognition expressed by the poet Donne. Their
eyebeams twisted and did thread their eyes upon a double string. My father
recognized that the professor was a troll, and the professor rec-ognized my
father’s recognition. Both of them knew that the professor had eaten his
wife.
 
“My father put down his soup spoon, and the professor began to
grow. The top of his head lifted and expanded, like a great loaf rising in an
oven; his face went red and purple, and finally blue, the whole ungainly
upperworks began to sway and topple toward the ceiling. My father looked

about him. The other diners were eating unconcernedly. Nobody else could
see it, and he was definitely mad at last. When he looked at the Troll again,
the creature bowed. The enormous superstructure inclined itself toward him
from the hips, and grinned seductively.
 
“My father got up from his table experimentally, and advanced toward
the Troll, arranging his feet on the carpet with excessive care. He did not
find it easy to walk, or to approach the monster, but it was a question of his
reason. If he was mad, he was mad; and it was essential that he should
come to grips with the thing, in order to make certain.
 
“He stood before it like a small boy, and held out his hand, saying,
‘Good evening.’
 
“‘Ho! Ho!’ said the Troll, ‘little mannikin. And what shall I have for my
supper tonight?’
 
“Then it held out its wizened furry paw and took my father by the hand.
 
“My father went straight out of the dining-room, walking on air. He
found the manageress in the passage and held out his hand to her.
 
“‘I am afraid I have burned my hand,’ he said. ‘Do you think you could
tie it up?’
 
“The manageress said, ‘But it is a very bad burn. There are blisters all
over the back. Of course, I will bind it up at once.’
 
“He explained that he had burned it on one of the spirit lamps at the
sideboard. He could scarcely conceal his delight. One cannot burn one-self
by being insane.
 
“‘I saw you talking to the Dr. Professor,’ said the manageress, as she
was putting on the bandage. ‘He is a sympathetic gentleman, is he not?’
 
* * * *
 
“The relief about his sanity soon gave place to other troubles. The Troll had
eaten its wife and given him a blister, but it had also made an unpleasant
remark about its supper that evening. It proposed to eat my father. Now
very few people can have been in a position to decide what to do when a
troll earmarks them for its next meal. To begin with, al-though it was a
tangible troll in two ways, it had been invisible to the other diners. This put
my father in a difficult position. He could not, for in-stance, ask for

protection. He could scarcely go to the manageress and say, ‘Professor
Skal is an odd kind of werewolf, ate his wife last night, and proposes to eat
me this evening.’ He would have found himself in a loony bin at once.
Besides, he was too proud to do this, and still too confused. Whatever the
proofs and blisters, he did not find it easy to believe in pro-fessors that
turned into trolls. He had lived in the normal world all his life, and, at his age,
it was difficult to start learning afresh. It would have been quite easy for a
baby, who was still coordinating the world, to cope with the troll situation: for
my father, not. He kept trying to fit it in some-where, without disturbing the
universe. He kept telling himself that it was nonsense: one did not get eaten
by professors. It was like having a fever, and telling oneself that it was all
right, really, only a delirium, only some-thing that would pass.
 
“There was that feeling on the one side, the desperate assertion of all
the truths that he had learned so far, the tussle to keep the world from
drifting, the brave but intimidated refusal to give in or to make a fool of
himself.
 
“On the other side there was stark terror. However much one
strug-gled to be merely deluded, or hitched up momentarily in an odd
packet of space-time, there was panic. There was the urge to go away as
quickly as possible, to flee the dreadful Troll. Unfortunately the last train had
left Abisko, and there was nowhere else to go.
 
“My father was not able to distinguish these trends of thought. For him
they were at the time intricately muddled together. He was in a whirl. A
proud man, and an agnostic, he stuck to his muddled guns alone. He was
terribly afraid of the Troll, but he could not afford to admit its existence. All
his mental processes remained hung up, whilst he talked on the ter-race, in
a state of suspended animation, with an American tourist who had come to
Abisko to photograph the Midnight Sun.
 
“The American told my father that the Abisko railway was the
northernmost electric railway in the world, that twelve trains passed through
it every day traveling between Uppsala and Narvik, that the population of
Abo was 12,000 in 1862, and that Gustavus Adolphus ascended the throne
of Sweden in 1611. He also gave some facts about Greta Garbo.
 
“My father told the American that a dead baby was required for the
mass of St. Secaire, that an elemental was a kind of mouth in space that
sucked at you and tried to gulp you down, that homeopathic magic was
practiced by the aborigines of Australia, and that a Lapland woman was
careful at her confinement to have no knots or loops about her person, lest
these should make the delivery difficult.

 
“The American, who had been looking at my father in a strange way
for some time, took offense at this and walked away; so that there was
nothing for it but to go to bed.
 
“My father walked upstairs on willpower alone. His faculties seemed
to have shrunk and confused themselves. He had to help himself with the
banister. He seemed to be navigating himself by wireless, from a spot
about a foot above his forehead. The issues that were involved had ceased
to have any meaning, but he went on doggedly up the stairs, moved
for-ward by pride and contrariety. It was physical fear that alienated him
from his body, the same fear that he had felt as a boy, walking down long
cor-ridors to be beaten. He walked firmly up the stairs.
 
“Oddly enough, he went to sleep at once. He had climbed all day and
been awake all night and suffered emotional extremes. Like a condemned
man, who was to be hanged in the morning, my father gave the whole
business up and went to sleep.
 
“He was woken at midnight exactly. He heard the American on the
terrace below his window, explaining excitedly that there had been a cloud
on the last two nights at 11:58, thus making it impossible to photograph the
Midnight Sun. He heard the camera click.
 
“There seemed to be a sudden storm of hail and wind. It roared at his
windowsill, and the window curtains lifted themselves taut, pointing
horizontally into the room. The shriek and rattle of the tempest framed the
window in a crescendo of growing sound, an increasing blizzard directed
toward himself. A blue paw came over the sill.
 
“My father turned over and hid his head in the pillow. He could feel the
doomed head dawning at the window and the eyes fixing themselves upon
the small of his back. He could feel the places physically, about four inches
apart. They itched. Or else the rest of his body itched, except those places.
He could feel the creature growing into the room, glowing like ice, and
giving off a storm. His mosquito curtains rose in its afflatus, uncov-ering
him, leaving him defenseless. He was in such an ecstasy of terror that he
almost enjoyed it. He was like a bather plunging for the first tine into
freezing water and unable to articulate. He was trying to yell, but all he could
do was to throw a series of hooting noises from his paralyzed lungs. He
became a part of the blizzard. The bedclothes were gone. He felt the Troll
put out its hands.
 
“My father was an agnostic, but, like most idle men, he was not above

having a bee in his bonnet. His favorite bee was the psychology of the
Catholic Church. He was ready to talk for hours about psychoanalysis and
the confession. His greatest discovery had been the rosary.
 
“The rosary, my father used to say, was intended solely as a factual
occupation which calmed the lower centers of the mind. The automatic
telling of the beads liberated the higher centers to meditate upon the
mys-teries. They were a sedative, like knitting or counting sheep. There
was no better cure for insomnia than a rosary. For several years he had
given up deep breathing or regular counting. When he was sleepless he lay
on his back and told his beads, and there was a small rosary in the pocket
of his pyjama coat.
 
“The Troll put out its hands, to take him around the waist. He became
completely paralyzed, as if he had been winded. The Troll put its hands
upon the beads.
 
“They met, the occult forces, in a clash above my fathers heart. There
was an explosion, he said, a quick creation of power. Positive and
nega-tive. A flash, a beam. Something like the splutter with which the
antenna of a tram meets its overhead wires again, when it is being changed
about.
 
“The Troll made a high squealing noise, like a crab being boiled, and
began rapidly to dwindle in size. It dropped my father and turned about, and
ran wailing, as if it had been terribly burned, for one window. Its color waned
as its size decreased. It was one of those air toys now, that expire with a
piercing whistle. It scrambled over the windowsill, scarcely larger than a
little child, and sagging visibly.
 
“My father leaped out of bed and followed it to the window. He saw it
drop on the terrace like a toad, gather itself together, stumble off,
stag-gering and whistling like a bat, down the valley of the Abiskojokk.
 
“My father fainted.
 
“In the morning the manageress said, ‘There has been such a terrible
tragedy. The poor Dr. Professor was found this morning in the lake. The
worry about his wife had certainly unhinged his mind.’
 
“A subscription for the wreath was started by the American, to which
my father subscribed five shillings; and the body was shipped off next
morning, on one of the twelve trains that travel between Uppsala and Narvik
every day.”

 
* * * *

