Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
$10
by JOE KISSELL
YOUR 
ONLINE 
PRIVACY
TAKE CONTROL OF
EBOOK EXTRAS: v1.1
Downloads, Updates, Feedback

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Read Me First ............................................................... 5 
Updates and More .......................................................... 5 
Basics ......................................................................... 6 
What’s New in Version 1.1 ............................................... 6 
Introduction ................................................................. 8 
Online Privacy Quick Start .......................................... 11 
Learn What You Have to Hide ..................................... 13 
Things You Might Want to Keep Private ............................. 13 
Personally Identifiable Information ................................... 16 
Learn Who Wants Your Private Data (and Why) ........ 18 
Advertisers ................................................................. 18 
Local Villains ............................................................... 22 
Hackers ..................................................................... 22 
Big Media ................................................................... 23 
Big Money .................................................................. 24 
Big Data ..................................................................... 24 
Big Brother ................................................................. 25 
What about Privacy Policies? ........................................... 26 
Develop a Privacy Strategy ........................................ 28 
Fix the Easy Things ...................................................... 28 
Create Privacy Rules for Yourself ..................................... 30 
Cope with Special Cases ................................................ 31 
Take the Pledge ........................................................... 32 
Keep Your Internet Connection Private ...................... 35 
Understand the Privacy Risks of Your Internet Connection ..... 35 
Prevent Snooping ......................................................... 38 
Turn Off Unnecessary Services ........................................ 49 
2  
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Use a Firewall .............................................................. 52 
Use an Outbound Firewall .............................................. 54 
Browse the Web Privately .......................................... 56 
Understand the Privacy Risks of Web Browsing ................... 56 
Go to the Right Site ...................................................... 61 
Browse Securely .......................................................... 62 
Manage Local Storage of Private Data ............................... 63 
Protect Passwords and Credit Card Info ............................ 73 
Search Privately ........................................................... 75 
Browse Anonymously .................................................... 75 
Shop Online Privately .................................................... 79 
Improve Email Privacy ............................................... 81 
Understand the Privacy Risks of Email .............................. 82 
Reduce Email Privacy Risks ............................................ 85 
Encrypt Your Email ....................................................... 91 
Send and Receive Email Anonymously .............................. 94 
Use Email Alternatives ................................................... 95 
Talk and Chat Privately .............................................. 97 
Understand the Privacy Risks of Real-Time Communication ... 98 
Improve Your Real-Time Communication Privacy ................. 99 
Keep Social Media Sort of Private-ish ....................... 101 
Understand the Privacy Risks of Social Media .................... 101 
Check Your Privacy Settings .......................................... 103 
Use Other Social Media Precautions ................................ 104 
Share Files Privately ................................................ 107 
Understand the Privacy Risks of File Sharing .................... 107 
Encrypt Transfers, Files, or Both .................................... 108 
Use Peer-to-Peer File Sharing ........................................ 111 
Create a Personal Cloud ............................................... 113 
Maintain Privacy for Your Kids ................................. 115 
3  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teach This Book ....................................................... 118 
About This Book ....................................................... 119 
Ebook Extras ............................................................. 119 
About the Author ........................................................ 120 
About the Publisher ..................................................... 121 
Copyright and Fine Print .......................................... 122 
Featured Titles ......................................................... 123 
4  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Read Me First 
Welcome to Take Control of Your Online Privacy, version 1.1, 
published in March 2014 by TidBITS Publishing Inc. This book 
was written by Joe Kissell and edited by Geoff Duncan. 
This book explains potential privacy risks in everyday online activities 
like Web browsing and sending email, and suggests strategies for 
avoiding common pitfalls and improving online privacy. 
If you want to share this ebook with a friend, we ask that you do so 
as you would with a physical book: “lend” it for a quick look, but ask 
your friend to buy a copy for careful reading or reference. Also, you 
can Teach This Book. 
Copyright © 2014, alt concepts inc. All rights reserved. 
Updates and More  
You can access extras related to this book on the Web (use the link in 
Ebook Extras, near the end; it’s available only to purchasers). On the 
ebook’s Take Control Extras page, you can: 
•  Download any available new version of the ebook for free, or buy 
any subsequent edition at a discount. 
•  Download various formats, including PDF, EPUB, and Mobipocket. 
(Learn about reading on mobile devices on our Device Advice page.) 
•  Read the ebook’s blog. You may find new tips or information, links 
to author interviews, and update plans for the ebook. 
If you bought this ebook from the Take Control Web site, it has been 
added to your account, where you can download it in other formats 
and access any future updates. However, if you bought this ebook 
elsewhere, you can add it to your account manually; see Ebook Extras. 
5  
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basics  
Here are a few “rules of the road” that will help you read this book: 
•  Links: All blue text in this ebook is hot, meaning you can click 
(or tap) it, just like a link on the Web. If you click a link that takes 
you to a different part of the ebook, you can return quickly to where 
you were if your ebook reader offers a “back” feature. For example, 
if you use iBooks to read the EPUB version of this ebook, you can 
click the “Back to” link at the lower left. Or, if you use Preview on 
the Mac to read the PDF version of this ebook, you can choose Go > 
Back or press Command-[. 
•  Menus: Where I describe choosing a command from a menu in 
the menu bar, I use an abbreviated description. For example, the 
abbreviated description for the menu command that creates a new 
folder in the Finder is “File > New Folder.” 
•  Mobile devices: In this book I distinguish between conventional 
(desktop or laptop) computers and mobile devices, by which I mean 
smartphones, tablets, e-readers, and other handheld computer-like 
devices. The iPhone, iPad, iPod touch, Kindle, and BlackBerry 
(among many others) would all be considered mobile devices. 
What’s New in Version 1.1  
Version 1.1 of this book, released about eight months after the original 
publication date, updates the book with the latest privacy-related 
information and adds numerous details. The most significant changes 
are as follows: 
•  Added a note in Hackers about how to search for information on 
recent privacy breaches. 
•  Included a tip in Big Brother with links to resources detailing 
government surveillance revelations. 
6  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Updated Fix the Easy Things to emphasize the importance of 
keeping one’s operating systems up to date with security fixes. 
•  Replaced numerous graphics (see, for example, Encrypt Your Wi-Fi 
Connection) with spiffier versions. 
•  Made several clarifications about speed and reliability in Use a VPN. 
•  Added a sidebar, SSL Implementation Bugs, covering the serious 
SSL vulnerability Apple disclosed and fixed in February 2014. 
•  Updated the sidebar Set-top Boxes and the Like to further discuss 
the Internet of Things (“smart” connected objects like light bulbs 
and thermostats). 
•  Mentioned how a password manager can ensure that you Go to the 
Right Site. 
•  Noted the improved Private Browsing option in Safari for iOS 7 in 
Private Browsing Modes. 
•  Included information on iCloud Keychain in Protect Passwords and 
Credit Card Info. 
•  In Browse Anonymously, added a note distinguishing between 
anonymity and untraceability, and mentioned a further Tor 
vulnerability. 
•  Mentioned cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin in Shop Online 
Privately. 
•  In Understand the Privacy Risks of Real-Time Communication, 
noted a potential vulnerability in audio and video chats, and added 
a sidebar, Security in iMessage and Other Apple Services. 
•  Added “secret-sharing” apps to the list of areas of concern in Use 
Other Social Media Precautions. 
•  Renamed “Create a Private Cloud” to Create a Personal Cloud and 
added information about several other products. 
7  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
“A book about online privacy? That’ll be pretty short!” my friend 
joked. It was his way of saying, “We both know there’s no such thing 
as privacy on the Internet.” 
He’s not far from the truth, but to be fair, the illusion of privacy 
extends far beyond the world of computers and networks. 
If you want complete privacy, go live in a remote cave without any 
electronics. Don’t build a fire, because the smoke could give away 
your location. Never step outside, because a satellite or a passing 
drone might snap your picture. And avoid all human contact, because 
you never know who might be a spy. I hope you packed plenty of food, 
water, and clothing, too—you won’t be getting any more! 
In other words, there’s essentially no such thing as total privacy, online 
or otherwise. People have to interact with each other to survive, and 
every interaction reveals something about each participant. 
I don’t know about you, but I wouldn’t want it any other way. I like 
having family and friends who know me well, and who can get in touch 
with me whenever they want (or need) to. I like sharing thoughts and 
opinions with a wider audience online. And I like the convenience of 
using my computer, phone, or tablet to communicate, find directions, 
and make purchases anywhere in the world. All these things involve 
revealing information about myself, so I wouldn’t want complete 
privacy. 
And yet, the Internet turns many of our everyday assumptions about 
privacy upside down. If I’m at home, I can close the curtains and feel 
reasonably confident that whatever I say or do inside my house won’t 
be seen or heard by anyone else unless I (or a family member) choose 
to reveal it. Not so with electronic communications. Whether I’m 
sending email, browsing the Web, or doing a video chat with a friend, 
the only safe assumption I can make is that strangers might be able to 
see that information—now or in the future. 
8  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once something has traveled over the Internet in any way, it’s 
potentially out there forever—and potentially public. You can delete a 
file from your computer, but once data has gone into the cloud, there’s 
never a guarantee that all copies of it have been eternally expunged. 
In fact, it’s far more likely that any given piece of data on the Internet 
will live on indefinitely. Not only that, but data tends to escape even 
strong restraints—hence the saying “information wants to be free.” 
To be brutally honest, someone who wants badly enough to learn 
what you’ve transmitted or received on the Internet can probably 
do so, given enough time, effort, and skill. Part of the reason for this 
book is to explain how your words, personal information, and activities 
could become known to individual strangers or even the public—and 
that knowledge may lead you to make different choices about how 
you use the Internet. But I’m not saying you must give up any hope 
of basic privacy. On the contrary, common-sense strategies—the 
Internet equivalent of drawing the curtains and locking your door— 
can significantly reduce the risk of having your personal information 
fall into unwelcome hands. And, when you have more sensitive or 
valuable data to protect, you can take appropriately stronger measures. 
Of course, there are often trade-offs—you may lose convenience, 
valuable social interaction, and even (paradoxically) personal safety 
if you choose to keep certain information private. For example, the 
same technology that can reveal your whereabouts to advertisers could 
also help someone trying to rescue you during a natural disaster or 
other emergency. Privacy cuts both ways. 
That’s why I don’t recommend attempting to lock down all electronic 
communication, all the time. You need the curtains open to see the 
sunlight, and you need the open Internet too. 
This book isn’t a guide for the paranoid—or for people with 
outrageously sensitive or scary secrets to protect. It’s a book for 
ordinary people with ordinary privacy needs. You want to go about 
your business, enjoying the many benefits of modern technology 
without worrying that someone is snooping on you all the time— 
whether to sell you something or for more sinister reasons. That’s 
9  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what I plan to help you do, regardless of whether you use a Mac or PC, 
iOS or Android device, set-top box, cell phone, or any of a thousand 
other network-enabled gadgets. 
I focus more on general principles than on nitpicky settings, particular 
apps, or elaborate technological rituals. I offer examples and pointers 
to more information as appropriate, but I don’t dwell on minutiae. The 
lack of detailed, step-by-step instructions may come as a surprise to 
some readers, so let me spell out my reasons: 
•  Privacy settings are a matter of choice. There’s no single right 
answer; each person’s decisions about what information to keep 
private and how to do so will be different from the next person’s. 
•  Each app, operating system, and device has its own way of doing 
things. Spelling out how to configure the privacy settings in every 
email client, Web browser, telephony app, and other Internet-
connected software—on every version of OS X, Windows, iOS, 
Android, and other operating systems—would take hundreds of 
dull pages. And all those instructions would go out of date as soon 
as the next software or hardware update appears! 
•  I don’t want to give you a false sense of security. Although you can 
certainly take steps to dramatically increase your privacy, I don’t 
want you to think that some magical combination of software and 
settings will keep your online activities completely and permanently 
private. Knowledge and vigilance go a long way, however. 
Think of this book as a primer on the things that affect your online 
privacy. It tells you what’s going on, how it pertains to you, and why 
you might care. More than that, it puts privacy issues in perspective. 
If you feel overwhelmed by privacy concerns, you can take control of 
your online privacy by replacing paranoia and guesses with knowledge 
and smart choices. 
Because I live in the United States, many of my examples involve 
things I know or suspect to be the case here. But even though laws 
and policies vary from country to country, nearly everything I say 
here is applicable in some fashion to anyone in the world. 
10  
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Online Privacy Quick Start 
You can think of this book as being divided into general topics (the 
first four chapters) and specific topics (the rest). I recommend that 
you read the first four chapters before you do anything else in order 
to understand your overall privacy risks and the simple, preliminary 
steps you can take to reduce them. Then feel free to skip to whichever 
other chapters are of particular interest. 
Identify your online privacy needs: 
•  Think you have nothing to hide? Think again. Read Learn What You 
Have to Hide. 
•  Find out who might be trying to invade your privacy. See Learn 
Who Wants Your Private Data (and Why). 
Take preliminary steps: 
•  Come up with a plan to deal with most common privacy issues in 
Develop a Privacy Strategy. 
•  Block the broadest and most likely privacy risks. See Keep Your 
Internet Connection Private. 
Use specific online services privately: 
•  Surf and shop without compromising your personal information. 
Read Browse the Web Privately. 
•  Reduce the chances that email will be read by anyone other than the 
intended sender and recipient. See Improve Email Privacy. 
•  Reduce the chances of eavesdropping when using instant messaging 
and other audio, video, and chat services. Read Talk and Chat 
Privately. 
•  Social may be another way to say “public,” but you need not give 
up all your privacy when using Facebook, Twitter, and other social 
networking services. See Keep Social Media Sort of Private-ish. 
11  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
•  Cloud backups and syncing could involve privacy risks if you’re not 
careful. See Keep File Syncing and Backups Private. 
•  There are many ways to share files online, but some of them may 
expose data you’d rather keep private. Read Share Files Privately. 
Help others with their online privacy: 
•  If you have children, you have the additional responsibility to take 
control of their online privacy. See Maintain Privacy for Your Kids. 
•  Share what you’ve learned about online privacy with your friends, 
family, or a large group. See Teach This Book. 
12  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Learn What You 
Have to Hide 
I’m sure you’re an honest, moral, law-abiding citizen. Good for you! 
But if you tell me you have nothing to hide, I’m going to laugh in your 
face. I’m sorry, but “I have nothing to hide” is an absurd statement, no 
matter who’s saying it. Of course you have things to hide! We all have 
secrets, and that’s as it should be. But you may not realize how much 
you want to keep private and how you might inadvertently give it away 
online. That’s what I want to help you understand in this brief chapter. 
Bear in mind that privacy nearly always depends on context. You may 
want to keep certain information from your employer but not your 
doctor; you may want to tell your spouse things that you wouldn’t tell 
your kids; you may share information freely with your lawyer that you 
would prefer not to have repeated in court. In the next chapter, Learn 
Who Wants Your Private Data (and Why), I further explore that part 
of the question—private from whom? You can’t keep all information 
private from everyone (and you wouldn’t want to), but you can take 
steps to keep some information private from some people. 
Things You Might Want to Keep Private 
If you’ll indulge me for a moment, I’d like to run down a list of some 
categories of information you probably want to keep private in the 
sense of controlling who it’s shared with online. This is in no way 
intended as a complete list, but only as a few highlights: 
•  Contact information: You may hand out business cards freely, 
but are you willing to let any stranger know your name, telephone 
number, and home address? (Some people don’t mind at all, but 
others find it problematic.) You enter this information nearly every 
time you make a purchase online, and in many other situations. 
13  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Vital statistics: Personal facts such as your date and place of 
birth, the names and ages of your parents and children, and your 
marital status are probably well-known among family and close 
friends. In the wrong hands, that data could help someone hack into 
your accounts, steal your identity, or even blackmail you. And yet, 
you’ve probably revealed much of this information on Facebook. 
• Location: Unless you take deliberate steps to prevent it, the mere 
act of turning on a mobile phone or visiting a Web site on your 
computer can reveal your physical location, sometimes down to 
your street address. This information may be stored, too, such that 
your movements and online activity over time can be mapped out— 
and that, in turn, can often suggest what you have been doing in all 
those locations, or even with whom you’ve been doing it. Do you 
mind that someone you don’t know can tell where you are now, and 
where you’ve been in the past? 
• Financial information: You may file your taxes online, and you 
may submit online applications for credit or other financial services. 
That’s all fine; tax authorities, banks, and lenders have a legitimate 
need to know how much money you earn, what your Social Security 
number is, and so forth. But I’ll bet you wouldn’t want everyone to 
know that information. Likewise, you can probably log in to your 
bank accounts online, but it may not be in your best interest for just 
anyone to see your bank statements. And yet, any information that’s 
transmitted online could conceivably be misused. 
• Medical information: Everything that your doctor knows about 
you—your height and weight, past and present illnesses, surgeries, 
medications, pregnancies, genetic data, and so on—is almost 
certainly stored in a computer somewhere. If a security breach or 
human error resulted in any of that information leaking out, or if 
you shared it injudiciously by email or social networking, might that 
have any negative consequences? 
• Purchases: When you buy anything online, the vendor keeps 
a record. Your bank may know about all your transactions, too, 
including those made in person with a credit card. And some of 
14  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
your purchases will also be known to online advertisers. All that 
data is online somewhere—and some pieces of it are more secure 
than others. Can you think of any purchase you might not want 
to be made public? 
•  Communication history: Some of us deliberately save every 
email message we receive or send, but even if you don’t, that 
information (possibly including messages you deleted long ago) 
is out there—it’s on a server somewhere, or on someone else’s 
computer. Ditto for chats, instant messages, Twitter, and most 
other forms of electronic communication. Most of it is probably 
innocuous, but if you ever sent a message that you wouldn’t 
want your mother, spouse, or employer to read, you may have 
a legitimate worry about your online privacy. 
•  Browsing behavior: You’re aware, I’m sure, that every Web site 
you visit, every Web search, every video you watch, and every file 
you download leaves a trail, which includes information about your 
location, your computer, and your browser, among other things. 
Parts of this trail are stored on your own computer or mobile 
devices as histories, caches, and cookies. Some parts are stored on 
the servers of search providers, advertisers, and other entities. It’s 
extremely difficult to avoid leaving a trail and virtually impossible 
to erase all traces of your browsing behavior after the fact. 
I can go on, but I hope I’ve made my point by now. You want your real-
life friends and family to know where you are and what your kids are 
doing; you don’t want strangers to know. You want to order things 
online, but you don’t want your spouse to know about the surprise 
birthday present you bought. You want your sister to know you’re 
pregnant, but you want to wait before letting your parents or your 
employer know. 
Unfortunately, you can’t always control what happens to information 
about yourself on the Internet. Far too often, for one reason or 
another, online information about you becomes available to people or 
organizations that you would prefer didn’t know it—and this usually 
happens without your knowledge. 
15  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Personally Identifiable Information  
In the foregoing list, I assumed that all the information about yourself 
that could conceivably “escape” online can be traced back to you 
personally. Sometimes that’s true, but not always. 
If you read the privacy policies of the Web sites you visit (an 
admittedly boring undertaking that I discuss further in What about 
Privacy Policies?), you’ll notice that they normally distinguish between 
personally identifiable information and anonymous or aggregate 
information. This difference is worth understanding. 
If a message, database entry, or other snippet of information online 
includes your full name, your email address, your photograph, your 
driver’s license number, or some other detail that uniquely belongs 
to you, it’s personally identifiable—even if the person or company who 
has that information hasn’t actually identified you with it. 
On the other hand, some information—your city, area code, operating 
system, and so on—is the same for many people. An advertiser may 
find it useful to know that 145 people in Fresno who also own iPhones 
visited a certain Web page today, but if you were one of them and 
that’s the only information the advertiser has, it won’t point to you 
personally. This sort of aggregate demographic information is valuable 
to businesses, political campaigns, and other entities even it doesn’t 
identify you personally. But sometimes a combination of seemingly 
innocuous facts can turn aggregate information into personal 
identification (see On a Web Server). 
IP addresses are an interesting case. Every device that connects to the 
Internet uses one, although often more than one device shares an IP 
address (using a process called NAT, or Network Address Translation), 
and a device’s address may change from time to time. When you visit a 
Web site, it records your IP address. If you happen to be using a device 
whose IP address isn’t shared, that number can potentially be traced 
back to you personally. But if you visit the same page at, say, a public 
library or using a device connected to a public Wi-Fi hotspot, the IP 
address recorded by the Web site would not be personally identifiable. 
16  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Privacy vs. Security vs. Anonymity 
The words privacy and security are often tossed around as though 
they’re synonymous, and some people also confuse privacy with 
anonymity. In fact, these three words all mean different things, but 
the concepts are related, especially when it comes to the Internet. 
The basics: 
✦ 
Privacy is freedom from observation or attention. 
✦ 
Security is freedom from danger or harm. 
✦ 
Anonymity is freedom from identification or recognition. 
To picture the difference between privacy and security, think of 
a bear. If you visit a bear in a zoo, you have no privacy (anyone 
can see you) but you have near-total security in regard to the bear: 
it’s very unlikely the bear will harm you or anyone else. On the other 
hand, if you’re in a tent in the woods, you might have privacy (no 
one can see you) but not security (a bear could still harm you in 
your tent). Either way, you’re anonymous from the bear’s point of 
view (he doesn’t know you), but once your remains are identified, 
we’ll all know who you were. 
Bears tend not to use the Internet, but you might have privacy 
online if no one can see what you type, the contents of your email, 
which sites you visit, and so on without your permission. If you 
are safe from malware, hackers, and other potential causes of harm 
(including data theft), that’s security. And if you send a message 
or visit a Web site without anyone being able to tell that it was you 
in particular who did so, that’s anonymity. 
Computer security can often increase your privacy, just as a lock on 
your door (security) can prevent someone from opening it and seeing 
you in your underwear (privacy). But there are situations in which 
you might have privacy without security, and vice-versa. 
Likewise, if I send you a message only the two of us can read, it’s 
private—but not anonymous if we know each other’s identity. If 
I post a comment anonymously on YouTube, it’s not private at all, 
even though no one may know who it’s from. 
17  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Learn Who Wants Your 
Private Data (and Why) 
We’ve seen that lots of information you may want to keep private 
travels over the Internet. That in itself isn’t a problem; after all, you 
want to share private information with your family, friends, doctor, 
and so on. Problems can occur when someone accesses personally 
identifiable information (see Personally Identifiable Information) 
without your consent or even, in some cases, your knowledge. 
Who exactly might be trying to learn private information about you 
online? I’m glad you asked; this chapter shows you who wants to know 
about you and, crucially, why. Knowing who you’re trying to keep your 
private data private from is a useful first step. 
Advertisers  
The Web is powered by advertising as much as it’s powered by servers 
and routers. Many Web sites devote far more space and resources to 
ads than to their actual content. As you know, it’s difficult to read the 
news, watch a video, check your email, or even search for pictures of 
cute cats without being bombarded by ads. 
Web sites sell advertising space because that’s the only way most of 
them can make any money. However irritating or even slimy you may 
consider online advertising, it is the mechanism that has kept most 
Web sites and other Internet services free. 
The companies that purchase advertising want to get their money’s 
worth, and that happens only if the ads result in sales. So advertisers 
expend a tremendous amount of effort to ensure the ads each person 
sees are likely to be interesting and thus lead to purchases. When 
advertisers make money, they’re able to keep buying ads and the sites 
that display the ads can stay in business. 
18  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Years of experimentation have shown that the most effective ads are 
those that target individual needs and preferences (including things 
you didn’t even think you needed!), not those that are merely relevant 
to a site’s content or the perceived needs of a broad demographic 
group. For example, if an advertiser knows I’m in the market for an 
air conditioner and shows me an ad for one—even on a completely 
unrelated site—the chances of making a sale go way up. 
How might an advertiser know I’m in the market for an air conditioner 
if I’m not on the site that sells air conditioners? There are a number 
of techniques, including tracking cookies (which I discuss in Manage 
Local Storage of Private Data), but most involve using instructions 
hidden on a Web page that store data on my device when I visit 
one site (say, a search at Amazon.com) and then check that same 
data when I go to another site (say, weather.com) containing an ad 
from the same provider or advertising network. Although the server 
may store the details of my visit, the local data enables me to be 
identified across sites. 
As you search the Web, browse various sites, follow links, and use ad-
supported apps, advertisers can build up elaborate profiles of your 
perceived interests and tastes. And, because your IP address (or profile 
information you’ve entered into a social networking site like Google+ 
or Facebook) tells them roughly where you are, they can even display 
ads for local businesses selling the products you’ve shown interest in. 
Unless you regularly search for things that someone else might regard 
as suspicious, none of this should be a concern. After all, if I truly do 
want to buy an air conditioner, I’d rather see an ad for an air 
conditioner than an ad for weight-loss products or hair color. Targeted 
ads should, in principle, be more helpful to me than random ads. 
But… 
Individually targeted advertising isn’t always to your benefit. The same 
bits of data advertisers can piece together to determine your interests 
and location can be used for things like showing higher prices on 
furniture to people who live in wealthy neighborhoods—or higher 
prices on electronics to people using Macs rather than PCs. They could 
19  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also be used to determine that you are a registered voter in the “wrong” 
party, resulting in a phone call sending you to the wrong polling place. 
In fact, the privacy concerns get even worse. Imagine this scenario, 
only slightly fictionalized from real life. A retailer tracks your online 
purchases and, noticing that you’re buying larger clothes, folic acid, 
and unscented lotions, guesses that you might be pregnant. Then, in 
an effort to be “helpful,” they display ads for baby clothes and cribs— 
or maybe they even send such ads by mail. Now family members, 
coworkers, or other people who might see those ads also suspect that 
you’re pregnant. Oops. 
The variations on this theme are endless, but the point is that 
advertising can never be targeted with perfect precision. An advertiser 
may think it’s showing ads only to you, but your spouse, parents, kids, 
or anyone else who might use the same accounts or electronic devices 
can also infer private information about you by seeing on your screens 
the ads that were targeted at you. 
When targeting becomes unfair or misleading, when it gives away 
personal information to others, or when it benefits only the advertiser 
and not the consumer, you may feel that your private data has been 
misused. Unfortunately, there’s no master switch you can throw that 
says, “Sure, you can know who I am and what I search for, but only if 
you use that information responsibly.” If advertising becomes intrusive 
or creepy rather than helpful, you may want to take steps to prevent 
any advertiser from collecting your private data, not just objectionable 
advertisers. As you’ll see throughout this book, the number of ways in 
which you voluntarily give away personal data extends far beyond the 
Web sites you visit, so this isn’t a problem with a perfect solution—but 
you can certainly reduce the risk. 
20  
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Google Problem 
Google isn’t just a search engine; it’s a provider of email, document 
storage, videos, phone service, and numerous other capabilities. 
What they all have in common is Google’s legendary contextual 
advertising—that’s how Google makes money. And the more of 
Google’s services you use, the more personal data the company 
has about you that can be used to target ads with ever greater 
precision. Make no mistake about it: every search, every YouTube 
video viewed, every email read contributes to Google’s personal 
profile on you, to be used for the express purpose of displaying 
targeted ads. 
You can use other search engines and other email providers, buy 
a non-Android cell phone, and watch videos on sites other than 
YouTube. But it’s nearly impossible to avoid Google altogether 
(although some people try). By all accounts, Google works hard to 
prevent your personal data from falling into other companies’ hands— 
after all, that would be giving away the store. But will Google be 
able to protect your data from everyone, forever? And can you trust 
Google itself not to be evil with your data? 
On the one hand, it’s not in Google’s best interest to alienate its 
users. On the other hand, it is a giant corporation whose primary 
mission is to increase shareholder value, not to protect your privacy. 
If push came to shove, I’d have to guess Google would choose profit 
over kindness. And, even the best-intentioned companies sometimes 
experience security breaches that leak personal data. 
I won’t say that you shouldn’t trust Google. But you should be aware 
of the massive amount of information most of us give Google for 
free—and remember that there’s always a cost somewhere. 
And, even though I’m picking on Google here as the largest provider 
in its class, you shouldn’t think other companies with comparable 
services (Microsoft, Yahoo, and so on) are fundamentally different. 
The more data any company has about you, the more power they 
have—and the greater the risks to your privacy at their hands. 
21  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local Villains  
Another category of people who might be out to get the digital goods 
on you is what I’ll call “local villains.” Let me give you some examples: 
•  Ex-spouses or former partners who want to make your life 
miserable or even find evidence to use against you in court 
•  Neighbors with whom you have a dispute or disagreement 
•  Your current employer, who may want to make sure you’re not 
violating company policies or misusing proprietary information 
•  A prospective employer who’s trying to judge your appropriateness 
for a position 
•  Stalkers, thieves, and other criminals looking for evidence of when 
you’re home or not, where your kids are, and other information 
•  Friends and relatives who like to snoop and gossip 
As a group, local villains tend to be less technologically sophisticated 
than advertisers, hackers, and others who seek your personal 
information. On the other hand, they may be more motivated, and 
they’re far more likely to be focused on you personally rather than on 
a sales demographic you represent. And, let’s face it, most of us have 
tons of personal information online that’s readily accessible by the 
general public—Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, personal blogs, and so on. 
Hackers  
Some of them do it for fun. Some do it for notoriety. Some do it to 
make money. But one way or another, thousands of intelligent but 
misguided people around the world spend every waking hour trying 
to break into computer systems to steal information and money, to 
trick you into buying something, or simply to cause mischief. 
I shouldn’t call them “hackers,” because hacking is a noble art and 
only a small subset of hackers use their powers for evil. But you know 
22  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
what I mean: black hats. People—mostly young men—who write 
and distribute viruses, keyloggers, Trojan horses, and other malware. 
People who send spam and use phishing messages to con you into 
handing over your passwords. People who take over computers by the 
millions to turn them into botnets. Bad guys. 
Hackers rarely target specific individuals—in most cases, it’s nothing 
personal. The two pieces of private information most of these bad guys 
would be happiest to have are your credit card number (for obvious 
reasons) and any password that protects financial information (for the 
same reasons) or provides access to large amounts of your data, such 
as your email account. Although it’s difficult to protect your privacy 
from a truly determined hacker, you can take steps (as discussed 
elsewhere in this book) to make their work harder and less rewarding. 
Note: If you want to see what the bad guys—hackers and others— 
have been up to lately, you can search the massive (although 
incomplete) database of the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse for privacy 
breaches. It’s fascinating and deeply sobering: the list is extremely 
long and growing fast. 
Big Media  
The RIAA (Recording Industry Association of America) and MPAA 
(Motion Picture Association of America)—along with record labels, 
movie studios, publishers, and other major copyright holders— 
are keen to know who has been pirating their media. Apart from 
monitoring BitTorrent traffic and file sharing sites, these firms 
work closely with ISPs to identify people who illegally share movies, 
software, and other copyrighted materials. Depending on your location 
and provider, this could lead to serious consequences including civil 
lawsuits and termination of your Internet service. 
I don’t blame copyright holders for protecting their property; I’ve 
had my own work pirated and lost money because of it, and it’s no 
fun. (You did pay for this book, right? Just checking. If not, I should 
mention in passing that I can see you right now.) 
23  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The problem is, sometimes big media companies make mistakes. 
They’ve sued little old grandmothers who don’t even own computers 
and made other egregious blunders. Even if you’d never consider 
stealing media (I did tell you I’m watching, right?), you might prefer 
that your file sharing activities be kept private. 
Big Money  
Banks, credit unions, credit card providers, and other financial 
institutions may want evidence of your thriftiness or trustworthiness 
in considering whether to offer you a mortgage or other loan. Insurers 
may want to see whether you engage in risky behavior or have medical 
conditions that might influence your rates or disqualify you. When lots 
of money is at stake, it’s only prudent to collect as much information as 
possible to make a good decision. That’s as true for large corporations 
as it is for you. 
You should not be at all surprised if a potential lender or insurer 
checks out your Facebook page or searches for your name on Google. 
Your health-food blog and tweets about your jogging regimen might 
score you a better life-insurance premium; Facebook posts about late-
night drinking binges could raise your car insurance rates. You may 
never learn why these things happened, either—companies generally 
aren’t required to reveal how they go about researching you. 
Big Data  
I’ve mentioned Google (and will do so again)—it may be the largest 
non-governmental data collection entity in the world. But it’s certainly 
not the only one. Facebook, Twitter, and other companies with users 
numbering in the hundreds of millions collect massive amounts of 
data on users’ tastes, preferences, opinions, geographical whereabouts, 
and other details. Although this data is mostly used for targeting 
advertising (see Advertisers), it can also be put to many other uses, 
24  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the virtuous (helping you find a parking space) to the creepy 
(profiling you as a potential criminal). 
Big Brother  
Unless you’ve been protecting your privacy by living in a remote 
cave without electronics or human contact, you’re probably aware 
of the string of revelations starting in mid-2013 about ways in which 
government agencies, including the NSA (National Security Agency) in 
the United States and Britain’s GCHQ (Government Communications 
Headquarters), have been secretly collecting phone records, email, 
recordings of Skype conversations, and other data most of us thought 
was private—on the authority of secret courts and accompanied by gag 
orders that prevented those who knew about the data collection from 
revealing it. In fact, this sort of thing has been going on for a long time, 
and there’s no end in sight. The public might never know the full 
nature or extent of government data monitoring. 
Tip: For detailed and continuously updated discussions of the ongoing 
revelations about government monitoring, see Timeline of NSA 
Domestic Spying at the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) or Global 
surveillance disclosures (2013–present) at Wikipedia. 
All this is being done, of course, in the name of preventing terrorism 
and other crimes. You may or may not believe that. You may trust 
the government and feel that a reduction of privacy is justified by an 
increase in security, or you may feel the whole thing is an appalling 
abuse of power. Whatever your opinions, I believe the following facts 
are uncontroversial: 
•  Massive data collection has happened and continues to happen. 
There are apparently no technological barriers preventing the 
government from monitoring most email, phone calls, and other 
online data. 
•  The laws governing data collection may eventually change, but if 
the U.S. government’s current monitoring was performed for years 
25  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
without the public’s knowledge that the law permitted it, the same 
thing can happen again. (And in any case, making something illegal 
doesn’t mean it won’t occur.) 
•  Although we now know something about data collection by 
the NSA, FBI, and other U.S. law enforcement agencies—and 
comparable efforts in certain other countries—the full extent of 
global monitoring is unknown. It’s plausible that other governments 
have the capability to capture at least some of your personal data, 
even if you access Internet services only in your own country. 
•  Other than lobbying for changes in laws you may disagree with 
and voting for people whose privacy positions you trust, there’s 
little that average citizens can do about this sort of data collection. 
Going back to the “I have nothing to hide” argument (see Learn What 
You Have to Hide), the difficulty with all this from a privacy point of 
view is that even if you are the most harmless and trustworthy person 
in the world, something you say or do online could be misconstrued 
or misrepresented. Just as spam filters incorrectly flag some legitimate 
messages as junk mail, government computers could incorrectly flag 
you as a potential threat, and that could have consequences ranging 
from inconvenient (such as being put on a no-fly list) to devastating 
(being charged with a crime you didn’t commit). Computers have been 
known to make mistakes—and so have the people using them. 
What about Privacy Policies?  
Almost every Web site and Internet service has a published privacy 
policy, and I’d think twice about using a site without one. Privacy 
policies spell out what data the company collects (particularly 
personally identifiable information), how it’s used, what protections 
are in place to safeguard it, and so on. 
Privacy policies, like software licenses, are typically full of boring, 
inscrutable legalese. They might be good for curing insomnia, but 
they’re not exactly page-turners. Even so, you might find it interesting 
26  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
and educational to read the privacy policies from a few sites you visit 
often. As you do, keep the following in mind: 
•  Although a company may be legally obligated to publish a privacy 
policy stating how it uses your data, it’s not required to have a 
policy that protects your privacy. A privacy policy could state, “We 
ruthlessly collect every scrap of personally identifiable information 
we can find about each user and sell it to the highest bidder, with 
malice aforethought.” So, don’t mistake the presence of a privacy 
policy for a pledge of privacy. 
•  Privacy policies sometimes contain cleverly worded loopholes—and 
policies could be updated without your knowledge to become less 
protective of your personal information. 
•  However strict and commendable a privacy policy may be, it is, at 
best, only a policy—not a barrier. A company may say it stores your 
data in a secret mountain fortress protected by a dragon, but does it 
have a contingency plan in case a hobbit shows up with a magic ring 
and a bunch of dwarves? These things happen. 
•  A privacy policy does not, by itself, have the force of law. If you can 
prove that a company violated its stated policy, you might be able 
to win damages in a civil lawsuit. But that can’t prevent, undo, or 
correct a breach of privacy. 
I wouldn’t want to do business with a company whose privacy policy 
admitted to practices I disagree with, and I’d rather know about such 
things up front. But even a fantastic privacy policy is no guarantee. 
27  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Develop a Privacy Strategy 
Online privacy is, as you now know, a complex problem with no 
definitive solutions. But it doesn’t have to be overwhelming. In this 
chapter, I help you think through a high-level strategy you can use to 
help inform your decisions about specific tasks such as Web browsing, 
email, and file sharing (all of which I cover later in the book). 
I suggest dividing your privacy concerns into three broad categories: 
•  First, Fix the Easy Things—that is, make simple changes to your 
software, settings, and habits that will address many of your privacy 
concerns but will require almost no planning or effort. 
•  Next, Create Privacy Rules for Yourself. These simple statements 
focus on a few types of information you always want to take extra 
care with and a few people you always want to communicate with 
privately. 
•  Finally, Cope with Special Cases. Troubling situations may come up 
occasionally that require extra privacy but for which you don’t have 
an existing system. Think through the possibilities in advance and 
prepare for them so you don’t make a foolish decision on the spur of 
the moment. 
For extra credit, Take the Pledge: promise me, yourself, and the rest of 
the world that you won’t do stupid things online. 
Fix the Easy Things  
You instinctively take measures to protect your real-world privacy— 
you draw the curtains at night, use a changing room to try on clothes, 
and lower your voice when discussing something sensitive in public. 
Adopting a comparable set of habits for online communication can 
eliminate some of your most serious privacy risks. Better yet, you can 
make a number of simple, one-time adjustments to your devices and 
software that will improve your ongoing privacy without further effort. 
28  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I cover many of these “easy things” elsewhere in the book, but I’ll list 
some prominent examples now. 
First, here are some one-time changes you might consider: 
•  For your Internet connection: Follow the advice in Keep Your 
Internet Connection Private, including using WPA encryption on 
your Wi-Fi network (see Encrypt Your Wi-Fi Connection), turning 
on your computer’s firewall (see Use a Firewall), and fortifying your 
DNS settings (see Avoid DNS Mischief). 
•  When browsing the Web: Use your browser’s built-in controls 
or third-party software to confirm that you’re not visiting fake or 
dangerous sites; see Go to the Right Site. Also, configure your Web 
browsers not to store third-party cookies and other unnecessary 
private data, or take even stronger measures such as blocking all 
ads and trackers; see Manage Local Storage of Private Data. 
•  For email: Make sure your email program transmits your 
password in an encrypted form (see Log In Securely), or better 
yet, use SSL for incoming and outgoing mail (see Transfer Email 
Securely). 
Next, consider adopting some new customs, such as: 
•  Always use a VPN to connect to the Internet when you’re on an 
open or unfamiliar network; see Use a VPN. 
•  Use a password manager not only to store passwords and credit 
card data securely, but also to reduce the risk of phishing; see 
Protect Passwords and Credit Card Info. 
•  Kick the Google (Bing, Yahoo, etc.) habit for searches; see Search 
Privately. 
•  If your computer or other device supports multiple user accounts, 
be sure to set up an account for each family member or coworker 
who uses the device—each account protected with a password 
known only to its user. Be scrupulous about logging out of your 
own account after each session. 
29  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Make sure the operating system on each of your devices is always 
up to date. Software updates regularly patch security holes that 
might otherwise compromise your privacy. (I mention one example 
later, in the sidebar SSL Implementation Bugs.) 
Those changes made, you can move on to specific privacy rules. 
Create Privacy Rules for Yourself  
Some pieces of information (refer back to Things You Might Want to 
Keep Private) are nearly always private in the sense that you likely 
want to control who knows them. And there may be some people with 
whom you almost always want to communicate privately, regardless 
of the topic—your doctor, lawyer, accountant, therapist, minister, AA 
sponsor, business colleagues, clients, and so on. 
Only you can say which facts and conversations count as private for 
you. You can’t foresee every situation, but you can identify information 
and people that deserve extra care when it comes to online privacy. For 
now, jot down a list of your privacy “triggers.” For example, someone 
might list: 
•  My credit card numbers 
•  My new pseudonymous novel 
•  My chocolate chip cookie recipe 
•  My mistress 
•  My attorney 
•  My FBI handler 
Or whatever. Then, as you read this book and learn about the specific 
privacy risks and options for various types of online communication, 
you can form these into simple rules, for example: 
•  I’ll never send a credit card number or Social Security number by 
email unless it’s encrypted (and I’m confident that the recipient will 
protect the information on the other end). 
30  
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  I’ll insist that my publisher use a secure Web portal for discussing 
“J.K.’s new novel.” (No one will guess my true identity!) 
•  I’ll talk about my ___ (invention, legal concern, addiction, etc.) 
only by phone or in person—never in writing of any kind. 
•  I’ll use an anonymous Web browsing tool such as Tor (see Browse 
Anonymously) when researching competing cookie recipes. 
Cope with Special Cases  
Online privacy gets tricky when you encounter a situation you weren’t 
expecting—one that isn’t covered by your up-front fixes, ongoing 
habits, and regular rules. For example: 
•  You win the lottery, and suddenly you have a thousand new 
“friends” who want a piece of the action. 
•  You find yourself embroiled in a messy divorce. 
•  You witness or are otherwise close to a newsworthy event that 
results in reporters, lawyers, and scammers crawling out of the 
woodwork and paying you special attention. 
•  You find yourself in a delicate position involving your health, your 
insurance, and your employer. 
•  You or a family member are suspected of a crime. 
•  You have a fleeting error in moral judgment that may turn out to 
have far-reaching consequences. 
In these and many other situations, your online actions could become 
subject to much greater scrutiny than normal—you now have to worry 
about being targeted personally. 
No one likes to think about these things, but they do happen, and 
you’re more likely to get through them unscathed if you’ve spent at 
least a little time thinking about the online privacy implications in 
advance. 
31  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My first piece of advice is: If humanly possible, avoid saying anything 
about the situation online in any way. The less digital information you 
generate that could come back to haunt you, the better. 
Second, however tempting it may be, don’t go crazy deleting things, 
shutting down accounts, ditching equipment, and the like. That 
looks suspicious, and could draw unwanted attention to your actions. 
(Besides, it won’t matter, because nothing ever truly disappears from 
the Internet.) 
Third, if the situation has any legal implications whatsoever, find 
yourself a good lawyer and follow her instructions to the letter. 
After doing all those things and allowing yourself some time and 
mental space to think about your situation clearly, if circumstances 
permit (and your lawyer, if any, agrees), consider cranking all your 
privacy settings up to 11. That is, go back to everything in this book 
that you decided wasn’t worth the effort or was too inconvenient, 
and do it anyway. Use a VPN all the time. Use only Tor (see Browse 
Anonymously) for Web browsing. Limit your email to completely 
commonplace, uncontroversial topics. Avoid Facebook, Twitter, and 
other social media until the situation stabilizes. 
I hope you never find yourself having to take such drastic measures. 
(Unless you win the lottery, because I can totally help you out there.) 
But if you remember that online privacy is inversely proportional to 
your need for it, you’ll be in much better shape. 
That sets the stage for the final topic of this chapter: avoiding stupidity 
online. 
Take the Pledge  
Regardless of what measures you take to protect your privacy, there 
are certain things that should never, ever, under any circumstances 
or for any reason, be sent over any network. I would have thought this 
is obvious, but judging by frequent news reports, politicians, actors, 
32 

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
professional athletes, and other celebrities still haven’t gotten the 
memo that online privacy is the exception rather than the rule. 
You don’t have to be rich or famous to have your life ruined by online 
stupidity. Anyone with fingers and a Web browser can find millions 
of photographs, videos, email messages, tweets, Facebook posts, and 
other digital artifacts showing humans at their worst. And more often 
than not, this stuff is put online deliberately by the very people who 
stand to lose the most… 
“Look how fast I can drive this train!” boasted a railway engineer 
online before recklessly causing a derailment that killed dozens 
of people. 
“I’m sure my wife won’t mind a bit of harmless online flirting with 
other women,” said a public official whose wife—and constituents— 
turned out to mind very much. 
“Stealing this car will be a piece of cake,” said the guys whose every 
movement was being recorded on dozens of traffic cams. 
“Why, yes, I think it would be a great idea for me to post a video of our 
drunken college orgy!” said a young lady who will find it difficult to get 
any respectable job in the future because her prospective employers 
know how to use a search engine. 
Folks, the very best decision—for you and for the rest of the world— 
is to stop doing stupid things. But if you are going to do stupid things 
anyway, don’t compound your stupidity by putting evidence of it on 
the Internet, which, as you’ll recall, never forgets. As you’ve seen 
already and will learn in more detail throughout this book, it’s nearly 
impossible to guarantee complete online privacy—and the worse you 
behave, the more likely it is that evidence of your behavior will emerge. 
So, I’m not merely going to tell you to refrain from putting potentially 
incriminating information about yourself online. I’m going to ask you 
to promise me not to be stupid online. I ask you to join me in taking 
The Pledge. 
33  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Turn on your webcam, raise your right hand, and repeat these words: 
I, (state your name), do hereby solemnly affirm before the all-seeing, 
all-remembering eye of the Internet that I will never, ever, under any 
circumstances, for any reason, or in any manner, knowingly cause or 
permit any of the following information to travel over any network: 
1. Statements that are hateful, abusive, racist, or otherwise cruel 
2. Nude or sexually suggestive pictures or videos of myself, my 
friends, my family, current or former romantic partners, or 
anyone else who might at some point deserve to have a life 
3. Information that could implicate me, rightly or wrongly, in any 
crime 
4. Any material that violates someone else’s copyright, patent, or 
other intellectual property 
5. Anything I’d be ashamed for my (current or future) children to see 
or hear 
I further acknowledge that any failure to keep this pledge disqualifies 
me from ever holding political office, practicing law or medicine, 
teaching in a public school or university, holding any government 
or public sector job, owning a puppy, living in a nice home, finding 
(or keeping) true love, receiving technical support, enjoying ice 
cream, or pretty much anything else that might bring me happiness. 
I therefore, voluntarily and without coercion, undertake to avoid 
extreme online stupidity for the rest of my days. 
By the way, there’s a fine of US$1,024 (or the Bitcoin equivalent) 
for each infraction of this pledge, payable directly to me. Yes, I take 
PayPal. 
34  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keep Your Internet 
Connection Private 
Whether you’re on a Wi-Fi, cellular, or wired connection, keeping 
your link to the Internet itself private is an important step that affects 
all the other traffic your devices send and receive—Web, email, video, 
and everything else. In this chapter I discuss some of the ways in which 
another person or company could eavesdrop on your Internet activities 
or even misdirect you into connecting to bogus sites in order to steal 
information from you. Then I describe steps you can take to reduce 
the most serious of these risks. 
Understand the Privacy Risks of Your 
Internet Connection 
The connection between your device (computer, smartphone, set-top 
box, etc.) and a server (Web server, email server, streaming video 
server, etc.) may involve numerous steps. For example, your laptop 
may connect to a wireless router via Wi-Fi, which then connects to 
a cable modem via Ethernet, and then to your ISP over coaxial or fiber-
optic cable. Your ISP, in turn, sends requests for data through a series 
of routers and network operators until they reach the desired 
destination. Sometimes the simple act of visiting a Web page can 
involve requests going back and forth between dozens of routers and 
servers all over the world. 
So, although you may have the impression that your computer is 
talking “directly” to a server somewhere, that’s almost never the case. 
Internet connections, by their nature, are indirect. And at any point 
between your device and the remote server, the data could potentially 
be monitored or intercepted. 
35  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To get the bad news out of the way first, let’s look at some of the likely 
trouble spots: 
•  Wi-Fi connections: If your device connects to the Internet 
wirelessly, as most do, someone nearby (even in another building) 
could “sniff” the Wi-Fi signal and watch or record all the data 
transmitted and received. This is easy to do when Wi-Fi connections 
are open, or unencrypted, and if a connection uses WEP, an older 
security method, it’s only a tiny bit more challenging. Newer Wi-Fi 
security protocols, such as WPA, offer protection that’s much 
better—although still not foolproof (especially if the network’s 
password is weak or can be guessed by brute force). 
A compromised Wi-Fi connection can lead to not only to passive 
snooping but also active attacks. For example, a man-in-the-middle 
attack is one in which two parties think they’re communicating 
directly but are instead manipulated into channeling their data 
through a third party, who can monitor and alter it in transit. (A 
man-in-the-middle attack can occur anywhere, but it’s especially 
easy to perpetrate on an open Wi-Fi network.) If I used a man-in­
the-middle attack on an instant messaging conversation, I would 
see what each party types, but they would see only what I relay— 
which may or may not be what the other person said. 
•  Cellular connections: The cellular data connection between 
your phone or tablet and your ISP can also be monitored and 
intercepted. Unless you work for the carrier (which can presumably 
monitor anything that’s not encrypted), doing so requires the use of 
specialized equipment and skills. It’s not something a kid in a coffee 
shop is likely to pull off, but it’s certainly within the capabilities of 
law enforcement and sophisticated criminals. 
•  DNS disruptions: DNS (Domain Name System) servers translate 
domain names (such as apple.com) into IP addresses (such as 
17.149.160.49). But if your device were tricked into using the wrong 
address for a server, you could end up at a fake but look-alike site 
designed to steal your password or other personal data—or perhaps 
just display ads. Several types of DNS attacks exist, including DNS 
36  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hijacking, which often takes the form of malware that modifies your 
computer’s DNS settings; and DNS spoofing (also known as cache 
poisoning), which inserts false information directly into a DNS 
server. 
•  ISP monitoring: Your ISP can (and likely does) monitor and log 
any data that flows through its routers—including your IP address, 
the addresses of any servers you connect to, and the quantity and 
type of data you transfer. Logs may be kept indefinitely and could 
be inspected by your ISP’s employees, law enforcement, or 
(potentially) hackers. Besides monitoring data, your ISP could 
censor data—for example, blocking access to certain domains or 
the use of certain protocols. 
But, your ISP can’t see the contents of encrypted data you send or 
receive, but it knows how much data was transferred, and who was 
on each end of the exchange. 
•  Router monitoring: What’s true of your ISP is also true of any 
other router between your ISP and the servers you want to reach— 
and there may be many of these. For example, numerous countries 
have national firewalls that prevent anyone within their borders 
from reaching sites or services deemed to be unsuitable. 
•  Malware: If you have the misfortune to download a virus, worm, 
Trojan horse, or other malware, any number of privacy risks could 
exist. Some malware logs every keystroke you type in order to 
capture passwords, credit card numbers, and other personal data. 
Other malware may alter your DNS settings (as described earlier in 
this list), turn your computer into a spam-sending robot, or display 
an endless series of pop-up ads. 
•  Location discovery: I’ve mentioned how your IP address can give 
away your location and sometimes even your identity—and your IP 
address is known to every site and service you connect to. Even if 
you use methods (discussed ahead in Prevent Snooping) to disguise 
your IP address, your computer or mobile device may determine 
and transmit your location using other methods, including the 
37  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
names of nearby Wi-Fi networks, triangulating on cellular radio 
signals, and using GPS coordinates (for suitably equipped devices). 
Pretty grim, right? Could be, but fortunately, many of these privacy 
threats are easily overcome, as I explain in the rest of this chapter. 
Prevent Snooping  
If you take steps to secure the connection between your computer 
(or other devices) and the Internet, you eliminate one of the easiest 
methods available to an attacker who might want access to your 
private data—or who might simply be searching randomly for low-
hanging fruit. Depending on your situation, you may use any or all 
of several techniques. 
Note: In later chapters, I’ll talk specifically about additional steps you 
can take to Browse the Web Privately and Improve Email Privacy, 
among other things. 
Here are some of the ways you can keep outsiders from snooping on 
your Internet connection. 
38  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Encrypt Your Wi-Fi Connection 
Even if your main computer uses a wired Ethernet connection, you’re 
bound to have some device—a laptop, smartphone, or tablet, for 
instance—that can connect only using Wi-Fi. Without any encryption 
at all, your Internet connection might look something like Figure 1. 
Figure 1: Without encryption, your Wi-Fi connection—the most local 
and most vulnerable portion of the path to other computers on the 
Internet—could easily be “sniffed” by someone nearby. 
Assuming that you own or control the Wi-Fi router or base station, 
you should take immediate action to make certain no one else can 
eavesdrop on your communications—see the documentation that came 
with your router or refer to the manufacturer’s Web site for specific 
instructions: 
•  Use WPA. Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) is the most secure 
standard for Wi-Fi encryption currently in widespread use. It 
comes in several flavors, so you may see options like “WPA/WPA2 
Personal” and “WPA2 Enterprise” (Figure 2). I can’t get into the 
details here, although I’ll mention that if you use an Apple AirPort 
39  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
base station or Time Capsule for wireless networking, you’ll find lots 
of good information in Glenn Fleishman’s ebook Take Control of 
Your 802.11n AirPort Network. 
Figure 2: Wireless security options for an Apple AirPort base station. 
Choose any of the options including “WPA” and you should be fine. 
Choose any variety of WPA, but do not use WEP (Wired 
Equivalency Protocol)—it’s trivially easy to crack. And do not skip 
wireless encryption. You could choose “None” as the wireless 
encryption type, but don’t; that’s ridiculously insecure and never 
the right choice if you can avoid it. 
Note: If WEP is the only option available on your base station, it’s 
probably an old one. Now is a good time to think about replacing it. 
40  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
With WPA-encrypted Wi-Fi, your connection looks like Figure 3  
Figure 3: With encrypted Wi-Fi, you protect the local portion of your 
Internet connection from sniffing. 
•  Use a good wireless network password. The password 
you create to connect to the Wi-Fi network should be long, random, 
and complex to avoid automated attacks in which a computer 
systematically tries likely passwords until it finds the right one. 
•  Use a good administrative password. In addition to the 
password for your wireless network, your base station or wireless 
router has an administrative password, which you must enter in 
order to modify its settings. Be sure to change the default 
password—it’s often “password” or something else similarly 
insecure. Ideally, the administrative password should be different 
from, but just as strong as, the password for your wireless network. 
Tip: In my book Take Control of Your Passwords I talk about the risks 
of bad passwords, how to choose and remember great passwords, 
when and how to use a password manager, and more. 
41  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What if you’re on someone else’s Wi-Fi network? If it happens to use 
WPA, that’s good, but since other people will know the password, your 
connection is somewhat more vulnerable to hacking than your own 
network would be. If the network uses no encryption or WEP—or if 
you want extra insurance on a public WPA network—you need to take 
matters into your own hands by using a VPN, as I describe next. 
Use a VPN 
A Virtual Private Network, or VPN, is a special type of network 
connection that encrypts all Internet traffic flowing between your 
device and a VPN server somewhere on the Internet. Think of a VPN 
as a tunnel running through your physical (Wi-Fi, cellular, or wired) 
Internet connection that’s impenetrable from the outside but open 
on both ends (Figure 4). Since VPNs encrypt everything, they even 
make it safe to use an unencrypted Wi-Fi connection. 
Figure 4: Using a VPN encrypts the entire Internet connection 
between your device and your VPN provider, protecting a greater 
portion of your data’s path than encrypted Wi-Fi alone. 
42  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With a VPN, your computer or other device appears to be on the 
same local network as the VPN server. So, for example, if that server 
is located in your company’s data center, connecting to it gives your 
computer the same access to your corporate network that it would 
have if it were in the same building—access that would otherwise be 
blocked from the outside by a firewall. And your IP address will be 
assigned by the VPN, so if the VPN server is in, say, France but you’re 
physically in Los Angeles, your IP address will most likely appear 
(from the perspective of any server you connect to) to be in France. 
Large corporations often run their own VPNs, and if you work for such 
a company, your IT people can explain how to get up and running. But 
ordinary citizens can also take advantage of VPNs by signing up for any 
of numerous commercial services. Some (such as Hotspot Shield) offer 
free, ad-supported VPN service, while others (such as Cloak and my 
personal favorite, WiTopia) require paid subscriptions. A quick Web 
search will turn up numerous other options. 
Macs, Windows PCs, and most mobile devices have built-in VPN 
software, so in many cases, all you have to do is sign up for a service, 
enter a few settings (including your username and password), and 
click or tap a button to activate the VPN (Figure 5). In cases where 
a VPN requires custom software, it’s nearly always a free (or free-with­
purchase) download. In any case, the VPN service you select will 
provide detailed online instructions for setting up each of your devices. 
43  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: iOS (shown here on an iPad) offers built-in support  
for three common VPN types—L2TP, PPTP, and IPsec.  
VPNs are great, and I use them all the time on public Wi-Fi networks, 
and sometimes even with my iPhone over a cellular connection. 
However, I should mention a few qualifications: 
•  In general, VPNs are active only when you explicitly turn them on. 
If your device goes to sleep, switches physical networks, or loses 
its connection, you may have to manually restart the VPN. In fact, 
even when you stay on the same physical network, VPN connections 
have a way of flaking out—sometimes without any obvious sign that 
you’ve lost your secure connection—just when you need them most. 
Pay attention to make sure you’re connected when you need to be. 
•  VPNs protect your local Internet connection but not the entire path 
to a remote site or server; I say more about this in the sidebar The 
Problem of End-to-End Privacy, just ahead. 
44  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Certain types of VPNs (typically used in enterprise and education 
settings) split the traffic such that only data traveling to and from 
the institution’s network is encrypted, whereas access to the outside 
Internet remains unprotected. 
•  Because of the overhead required to encrypt and decrypt data, 
VPNs are always slower than unencrypted connections. Whether 
that’s noticeable will depend on your hardware, software, VPN 
type, and the location of the server you connect to. But it could 
cause problems for activities that require lots of bandwidth or low 
latency, such as streaming video or fast-paced games. 
•  In general, a VPN connection must be made individually from each 
device—and you may have devices (such as set-top boxes) that can’t 
use VPNs. A brilliant, if somewhat pricey, solution to this problem 
is the CloakBox Pro VPN Router from WiTopia. It’s a router that 
makes a permanent VPN connection to any of numerous servers 
around the world, and then passes that encrypted connection to any 
devices you connect to it via Ethernet or Wi-Fi. I used one of these 
myself for a few years, and can vouch for its effectiveness. But bear 
in mind the impact on bandwidth and latency (above), which can be 
substantial and will affect your whole network. 
The Problem of End-to-End Privacy 
When you use a VPN, your Internet connection is encrypted only  
between your device and the VPN server. Whatever site or service  
you connect to may be several steps beyond the VPN server, and  
for that portion of the journey, your data is not protected unless  
you use SSL (discussed next).  
The same phenomenon exists with encrypted email (see Encrypt Your 
Email, a bit later in the book) and most other online communication. 
The steps you can take to protect your privacy may be both powerful 
and effective within a certain scope, but once your data is in someone 
else’s hands, your privacy depends on the recipient. 
None of this should put you off using VPNs, which are quite effective 
at securing the most vulnerable part of your Internet connection; 
I’m only saying that VPNs alone can’t guarantee end-to-end privacy. 
45  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I’ll mention another, related option here: proxy servers. A proxy 
server, like a VPN, can disguise your physical location by routing 
your Internet connection through a device somewhere else in the 
world. Some proxy servers do additional tricks, such as filtering or 
caching data. But proxy servers don’t offer the encryption of VPNs, 
so although they might keep your identity private from the server 
on the other end, they are less likely to improve privacy in your 
immediate vicinity. 
Use SSL If Possible 
I’ll come back to this in several later chapters, but I want to mention 
it here, too: whenever possible, use encrypted connections to the 
servers you visit. For Web sites, that means preferring sites that use 
HTTPS (discussed in Browse Securely); for email servers, that means 
using SSL/TLS (see Transfer Email Securely); for remote terminal 
sessions, it means using SSH instead of Telnet; for file transfer, it 
means using SFTP, FTPS, or WebDAV HTTPS instead of FTP (read 
Share Files Privately). All these types of communication offer end-to­
end encryption between your device and the remote server, whether 
or not your Internet connection is encrypted (Figure 6). That limits 
your potential privacy exposure considerably. 
46  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Using SSL encrypts an entire communications channel 
between your device and a particular remote computer. But other 
insecure connections may be active at the same time. 
SSL Implementation Bugs 
Although using SSL is much better than not using it, numerous bugs 
and vulnerabilities have been found in various SSL implementations 
over the years (and some may even have been planted deliberately 
to facilitate government surveillance). 
To take a recent example, a bug in iOS 6 and 7, OS X 10.9 
Mavericks, and Apple TV that affected SSL connections meant that 
under certain conditions, an interloper could eavesdrop on Internet 
data that should have been encrypted—including email passwords 
and message data, Web traffic, calendar syncing, and FaceTime calls. 
Apple fixed this bug in iOS 7.0.6, OS X 10.9.2, and Apple TV 6.0.2 in 
late February 2014. To learn more about this bug, read Dan Moren’s 
Macworld article What you need to know about Apple’s SSL bug. 
Although this particular problem has apparently been solved, it’s 
a cautionary tale: Don’t rely entirely on any one type of security, 
because things can (and often do) go wrong. 
47  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Avoid DNS Mischief 
I mentioned threats such as DNS hijacking and DNS spoofing that 
can lead you to a server that looks real but is only impersonating 
(inserverating?) the one you want to reach. How can you prevent this? 
The best place to start is to change your DNS provider. Your ISP 
provides DNS services automatically, but you’re free to connect to any 
DNS server you like. Some third-party DNS servers offer much better 
performance than your typical local ISP, and if you choose one with 
a good security reputation, you’ll reduce the risk of DNS mischief too. 
I’ve long been a fan of OpenDNS; Google Public DNS and Recursive 
DNS from UltraDNS are also good choices. All these services are free; 
you have merely to change the network settings on your computer or 
your router, and your DNS queries will be processed by the new server. 
(All three providers include detailed configuration instructions.) 
OpenDNS goes a step further by offering a free download for Mac or 
Windows called DNScrypt. This app not only configures your computer 
to use the OpenDNS servers, it encrypts all your DNS requests, which 
prevents DNS spoofing and man-in-the-middle attacks. 
Avoid Malware 
Recent versions of Mac OS X and Windows are highly resistant to 
malware, especially if you keep up to date with all security updates 
and turn on the built-in firewalls. If you practice common sense—don’t 
click links in email messages when you aren’t absolutely certain of the 
message’s authenticity, don’t download pirated movies and suspicious 
software, stay away from sketchy Web sites, and so on—you have a 
reasonably good chance of avoiding viruses, worms, and other nasty 
programs that could compromise your privacy. 
Installing third-party antivirus software, of which (as I’m sure you’re 
aware) there are a gazillion choices, will improve your odds even more. 
However, I urge you not to put your entire trust in any anti-malware 
program. Even the best ones aren’t perfect, and malware authors are 
always finding clever ways to defeat them. You still need to compute 
with both eyes open. 
48  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The vast majority of malware is designed to affect Windows, and 
thus you should use anti-malware software with Windows; however, 
a number of prominent security experts—including TidBITS Security 
Editor Rich Mogull—feel that anti-malware apps are currently 
unnecessary for most Mac users (see Rich’s article Do You Need Mac 
Antivirus Software in 2013? for details). Having tested many Mac anti­
malware apps myself, I tend to agree—Mac anti-malware software 
rarely identifies genuine threats while often imposing performance 
and usability penalties—but if you think it’s a good idea for you, I 
won’t try to talk you out of it. 
Anti-malware is less crucial on mobile devices—and is irrelevant on 
iOS, as Apple implements security measures that reduce the risk of 
malware to near zero. 
Turn Off Unnecessary Services  
Your computer has a number of built-in features that enable other 
devices to connect to it over the Internet—file sharing, screen sharing, 
printer sharing, location services, Find My Mac, and so on (Figure 7). 
In most cases, these services are good and valuable, and if you actively 
use them, by all means, keep them turned on. 
49  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Windows lets you share files, printers, and other resources 
(as does Mac OS X). Turn off sharing services you don’t actively use. 
However, any service that lets other devices connect to your computer 
also represents a potential privacy concern (as well as a security 
concern). What if someone unknown to you guesses your password 
and connects to your computer without your permission? All sorts of 
damage could occur. 
So, I’ll simply give two pieces of advice: 
•  Turn off any sharing or location services you don’t use. (And, if you 
use a service only rarely, consider leaving it off until it’s needed.) 
•  Be sure your computer has an excellent login password. For advice 
on creating, remembering, and storing highly secure passwords, 
pick up a copy of my book Take Control of Your Passwords. 
50  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
51
Set-top Boxes and the Like
Computers, smartphones, and tablets aren’t the only devices that 
connect to the Internet. My television, Apple TV, TiVo, Blu-ray player, 
telephone, and home alarm system all have Internet connections too. 
So it’s worth asking to what extent you need to worry about online 
privacy for those devices.
Such products can tell providers and advertisers a lot about your 
tastes and interests. For example, if you stream videos from Amazon 
or Netflix to your TV, the provider will know what you watch and at 
what time of day; from this, they can probably deduce facts like your 
age, gender, political persuasion, and whether there are any children 
in your home. Furthermore, your privacy controls are limited—you 
may not be able to configure settings or install extra software as you 
can on a computer or mobile device, and using a VPN is generally out 
of the question. 
(One exception is WiTopia’s CloakBox, described previously under 
Prevent Snooping—it can provide a VPN connection to all your 
devices, albeit with a speed penalty. But video providers still know 
who you are and what you watch because you must log in, so you’re 
not gaining much privacy that way.)
As privacy concerns go, I have trouble working up much anxiety 
about this one, and there’s not much I could do about it anyway 
(other than to stop using these devices). But you should at least 
be aware of the sorts of data you may be giving away.
What about devices like thermostats, light bulbs, light switches, 
and door locks, all of which could be Internet-accessible? Other 
appliances—such as refrigerators, washers, and dryers—and home 
automation systems are also increasingly connected. (Everyday 
objects like these with Internet connections are often referred to 
collectively as “the Internet of things.”) These are more concerning—
what if hackers (or even advertisers) could use these objects to 
determine whether you are or aren’t at home, for example, or even 
what room you’re in? Time will tell what privacy choices may be 
available to users of such devices.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use a Firewall  
A firewall is a program that monitors all inbound Internet activity 
and selectively allows or blocks connections based on a series of rules 
applied to particular ports, protocols, or IP addresses. Firewalls are 
usually designed to protect your computer from malicious access over 
the Internet, although they can also censor data and perform a variety 
of less-helpful activities. 
Mac OS X and Windows both include built-in firewalls; you can 
activate them with a couple of clicks, and then customize them later 
if you want to allow or block certain types of access. A firewall can 
only help you, so I suggest you check to see that yours is turned on 
right now (Figure 8). You can find instructions to do this in the Help 
menu or by using your favorite search engine. For the vast majority 
of users, sticking with the default settings is just fine. 
Note: If your computer uses NAT (as is the case for most computers 
that connect to the Internet via a home broadband router), you 
already have a certain amount of protection against outside access, 
but it’s not foolproof—and it doesn’t hurt to use your computer’s 
firewall too. 
52  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
  
Figure 8: Built-in firewalls in Windows (top) and Mac OS X (bottom). 
53 

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If for any reason you find your computer’s built-in firewall inadequate, 
you can install any of numerous third-party firewalls instead or in 
addition. I’ll leave that research to you. 
Use an Outbound Firewall  
I said a moment ago that a firewall monitors inbound Internet traffic, 
which is generally true. However, some firewalls monitor outbound 
traffic (instead of, or in addition to, incoming traffic). The main reason 
is to make you aware of—and enable you to block—software that might 
be sending out private information invisibly in the background. 
Lots of software connects to the Internet without a visible interface, 
and it’s nearly always perfectly legitimate. Your email program 
downloads your messages in the background, many apps check 
periodically for software updates, Dropbox syncs newly changed files, 
and so on. These activities are fine, but if you downloaded malware 
that secretly logs your keystrokes and tries to connect to a server 
somewhere to send them to an attacker, that’s a problem. And, while 
some software “phones home” to validate licenses or send registration 
data, a few unscrupulous developers have been known to collect and 
send personally identifiable information without users’ consent, and 
that’s totally uncool. 
I’ve tried a few outbound firewalls, and I’ll be the first to admit that 
they’re annoying—given default settings, they’re constantly popping 
up alerts about outgoing connections, most of which are innocuous but 
all of which (thanks to the firewall!) now require attention. (To be fair, 
you can approve any outgoing connection so you’re interrupted only 
the first time it appears—but I still find this happens often enough to 
be irritating.) But if you are worried about data being sent from your 
computer without your knowledge, you might want to give one a try. 
On the Mac, the best-known outbound firewall is Little Snitch. On 
Windows, you might try ZoneAlarm or Windows 7 Firewall Control. 
(There are many other options on both platforms, too.) I can’t say 
54  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that you’ll like using them, and for most people they’re overkill, but  
they can in some cases be useful in protecting your privacy.  
Beware Analog Snooping, Too 
I frequent coffee shops that are full of people with laptops, 
sometimes seated quite close to other customers. I’d have little 
difficulty positioning myself such that I could watch over someone’s 
shoulder as they type a password. An incautious person could 
also have private information stolen while entering a PIN at an 
ATM or retail counter, scanning a passport at the airport, using a 
smartphone on the bus, or even talking loudly on a mobile phone. 
When it comes to online privacy, this sort of low-tech analog 
snooping is just as much of a threat as hackers hunched over 
keyboards in dark rooms far away. Be prudent when using your 
electronics in public—always keep an eye out for people keeping 
an eye on you! 
55  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Browse the Web Privately 
In the previous chapter, I told you how to keep your connection to the 
Internet private. That can close quite a few holes that might put your 
privacy at risk—but even if you do all that, as soon as you open a Web 
browser, new risks emerge. 
Simply browsing the Web reveals a great deal about you personally, 
your computer, your location, and your habits. There are many steps 
that you can take to reveal less about yourself, although some entail 
some loss of convenience. Never is this more the case than when 
shopping on the Web. This chapter explores the risks, the measures 
you can take to avoid them, and certain negative consequences of those 
measures. 
Understand the Privacy Risks of 
Web Browsing 
Assuming you’ve taken all the steps in Keep Your Internet Connection 
Private, browsing the Web privately comes down to two main things: 
•  Preventing information about your browsing activities from being 
stored on your own device (see On Your Device) 
•  Preventing the sites you visit (including search engines) from 
collecting information that can identify you personally (see On a 
Web Server) 
(If you have not taken all the necessary steps to secure your Internet 
connection, there’s a third factor to worry about—having information 
intercepted in transit on its way to or from a Web site you visit. We’ll 
come back to that momentarily, in In Transit.) 
Both of these categories are often misunderstood, and your actual risk 
may be greater or less than you imagine. 
56  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If information is stored on your computer, it’s available to anyone 
who has physical or network access to your computer (assuming it’s 
not protected in some other way, such as by using full-disk encryption 
or keeping it in a locked cabinet). To use the obvious example, your 
spouse or roommate might sneak a peak at the list of Web sites you’ve 
visited when you’re not looking. But some of this stored information, 
including cookies, is also available to advertisers and other online 
entities as you browse the Web. One person may not care whether 
someone in his home or office sees what’s on his computer, but may 
have a principled objection to advertisers knowing about his browsing 
habits. For another person, the opposite may be the case—advertisers 
might be irrelevant, but it would be problematic if a family member, 
coworker, or (let’s just say) the FBI found out what sites she’s visited. 
Even if your computer is squeaky clean, every site you visit may record 
what pages you’ve read, what search terms you’ve entered, and much 
more (see On a Web Server, ahead). Unless you’ve logged in to a site 
with a username and password, it probably won’t know who you are by 
name, but the other information the site logs could very well be enough 
to identify you uniquely, given sufficient effort and ingenuity. 
Finally, information you send to, or receive from, a Web site could 
be intercepted in transit. If you use an encrypted Wi-Fi connection, 
you eliminate one avenue that could be used to eavesdrop on your 
Web surfing. If you activate a VPN, you eliminate another. And if you 
connect to a site that uses HTTPS (which I talk about ahead, in Browse 
Securely), you reduce the likelihood of in-transit eavesdropping to the 
point that most of us need not worry about it at all. In the absence of 
any of these protections, I’d be extremely hesitant to enter or view any 
sensitive personal information on the Web. 
That’s a long list of risks. But before freaking out about all the potential 
privacy risks of Web browsing, remember to ask yourself what data 
you’re trying to keep private, and from whom. Do you care what 
someone could find physically on your computer? Do you care what 
advertisers know about you? Both? Neither? 
57  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you’re downloading stuff or doing things online that could lead 
to jail time, a lawsuit, a divorce, losing your job, or a combination 
thereof, you could always, you know, not do that. Regardless of what 
you do to protect your privacy, someone will probably find out and it 
will end badly for you. So seriously, stop it. 
For what I’ll call “lesser offenses,” you’ll want to be aware of, and take 
steps to avoid, certain types of data collection. 
On Your Device 
On your computer or mobile device, you should be aware that 
browsing the Web typically results in at least the following information 
being stored, for each browser you use: 
•  Browsing history: A list of every Web page you’ve visited, in each 
browser. 
•  Download history: A list of every file you’ve downloaded—again, 
in each browser. 
•  Cookies: Textual information stored on your device by the sites 
you visit, or by the companies who place ads or other code on those 
sites. Cookies (see Live Data, ahead) are most often simple settings 
or random-looking strings of characters that identify your browser 
uniquely, but they can also include your username, password, 
location, or any number of other details. Cookies can then be read 
when you revisit the same site—or other sites using the same ad 
network, analytics service, or social networking software. 
•  Flash cookies: Records similar to cookies that are stored outside 
your browser when you visit sites with Flash content, including 
movies. The same thing goes for sites using Microsoft’s Silverlight 
plugin. 
•  Web caches: The contents of pages you’ve visited recently, 
especially images (so the page can load more quickly if you return 
to it) and favicons (the little icons that appear in your browser’s 
address bar next to the URL). Some browsers also store thumbnail 
images of the pages you’ve visited. 
58  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The above is only a partial list. Some sites use even sneakier techniques 
to squirrel away various information about you in a variety of places 
(see Live Data, ahead, for further detail). In addition to all these things, 
your device may store a global cache of recent DNS lookups—that is, 
somewhere outside your browser there may be a list of the domain 
names you (or your apps) most recently visited along with their IP 
addresses. If you’re sufficiently curious or motivated to want to remove 
this cache, you can search the Web for “delete DNS cache” to find the 
procedure for your operating system. 
In Transit 
The worry about Web transactions being observed in transit is that 
data such as passwords, credit card numbers, and other personally 
identifiable information could fall into the wrong hands. In fact, 
the sky’s the limit—literally anything you type on a Web page or any 
content displayed on a Web page you view—could get out. Fortunately, 
this is the least likely privacy threat when it comes to browsing the 
Web and the easiest one to guard against (see Browse Securely, ahead, 
and also refer back to Keep Your Internet Connection Private). 
On a Web Server 
Modern Web servers can store an astonishing number of facts about 
every single page request, including (but not limited to) the following: 
•  Time stamp: The date and time of the request. 
•  Time zone: The reported time zone of the device making the 
request. 
•  IP address: The numeric address of the device you’re using, which 
may or may not uniquely point to you, but which normally does 
reveal your approximate geographical location. 
•  Item requested: The URL and size of the page or other resource 
you loaded. If you visit a page that contains 20 graphics, they’ll 
register as 20 separate requests. 
59  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Referrer: The URL of the page on which you clicked a link to get 
to this page (if applicable). 
•  Search terms: If you reached this page from a search engine, the 
terms you searched for may be logged. 
•  User agent: The name and version of your browser. (Many 
browsers let you change this at will, so what the site records may 
only be what you tell it your browser is.) 
•  Browser plugins: The names and versions of all your browser 
plugins or extensions. 
•  Operating system: Your operating system’s name and version. 
•  System fonts: All the fonts installed on your device. 
•  Screen characteristics: The dimensions (in pixels) of your 
screen, along with color depth. 
Furthermore, the server may be able to tell how far down a page you 
scrolled, how long you spent looking at a page, which links to external 
sites you clicked on, and a good deal more. 
Although none of these items has your name on it as such (again, 
assuming you haven’t logged in with unique credentials), you can 
probably see how a combination of them might point to you uniquely. 
And if that isn’t already obvious, I invite you to visit a site run by the 
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) called Panopticlick. It examines 
much of the above data to create a “fingerprint” of the device you’re 
using, and it tells you how unique that fingerprint is. I tested one of my 
Macs and found that only one in more than three million browsers has 
the same fingerprint as mine. That means an advertiser (or anyone else 
monitoring my Web activities) could be reasonably certain that I was 
the person who requested any given Web page. 
60  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Go to the Right Site  
One of the most surprising privacy threats on the Web is impostor 
sites that look almost exactly like the real thing, but are merely clever 
copies designed to trick you into supplying your password, credit 
card number, or other private data. Sometimes these sites appear if 
you make a slight typing error when entering a URL or if your DNS 
settings have been compromised, but they’re most commonly reached 
by clicking a link in a phishing email message. (These messages often 
warn you that you must “update” or “confirm” your account settings 
or suffer dire consequences.) 
Here are some tips to avoid bogus sites: 
•  If you haven’t already done so, follow the advice in Avoid DNS 
Mischief in last chapter to avoid most DNS exploits. 
•  Don’t click links in email messages. If you get a message that 
appears to be from your bank, PayPal, Amazon.com, Apple, or 
whoever insisting that you log in to correct some problem and 
you’re worried that it might be a legitimate message, open your 
Web browser and manually type the site’s address. Then log 
in and see if there are any messages waiting for you. If not, the 
message is almost certainly fake. 
•  Check the site’s certificate. Real banking, commerce, and similar 
sites nearly always use HTTPS (see Browse Securely, next), and 
you can usually click a lock icon in your browser’s address bar to 
verify the site’s SSL certificate. If there’s no certificate, if you see 
a certificate warning, or if the site doesn’t even use HTTPS, you 
may be dealing with an impostor. 
•  Let technology help. Most browsers have built-in checks to warn 
you of sites that might be bogus (see Browser Privacy Settings), 
as do some third-party plugins (see Web Privacy Software). Be sure 
to enable these features. In addition, most password managers (see 
Protect Passwords and Credit Card Info) confirm each site’s identity 
before entering your credentials. 
61  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Browse Securely  
Security and privacy are two different things (see the sidebar Privacy 
vs. Security vs. Anonymity), but sometimes security provides privacy 
as a side-effect. That’s certainly the case with Web browsing: if you 
can ensure that the connection between your browser and the server 
is securely encrypted, you can also be confident that no one in between 
can violate your privacy by reading what you send or receive. 
The standard way for a Web site to do this is to use HTTPS, a secure 
version of the HTTP protocol. A site must install an SSL certificate, 
which confirms its identity and enables two-way encryption; your 
browser can independently verify that the certificate is valid and that 
it’s being used by the correct site. All this happens automatically, 
behind the scenes. 
You’ll know a site uses HTTPS if the URL starts with https: (although 
many browsers now hide this portion of the URL) or if you see a lock 
icon (usually in green, along with the company’s name, right next to 
the URL in your browser’s address bar). You can then click the lock 
icon to view details about the certificate and confirm its identity. 
Increasingly, sites that transmit or receive any personal data—even 
just a username and password—use HTTPS by default, which is an 
excellent idea. In fact, I’d go so far as to say you should assume any 
password or other personal data entered on a site that doesn’t use 
HTTPS could be intercepted and misused. Some sites use HTTPS 
only optionally; you might look for a preference you can enable, which 
will automatically redirect you to the secure site even if you enter a 
URL starting with http:. 
The EFF offers a free browser extension for Chrome and Firefox called 
HTTPSEverywhere (sorry, no Safari or Internet Explorer versions 
available). This extension maintains a regularly updated list of sites 
that offer HTTPS connections and instructs your browser to use 
HTTPS for those sites, even if you visit the site with a non-HTTPS 
link or URL. It can’t encrypt sites without HTTPS support, but it can 
prevent you from accidentally visiting an insecure version of a site. 
62  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You won’t be at all surprised, I’m sure, to learn that HTTPS, for all its 
virtues, is not foolproof. I’ve read of numerous hacks and exploits that 
could enable an attacker to intercept and decrypt a secure Web session. 
(Refer back to the sidebar SSL Implementation Bugs for an example.) 
However, these are rare, and are generally fixed in short order. So, 
your best defense is to make sure you keep your operating system and 
browsers (including any security updates) current. 
Manage Local Storage of Private Data 
In On Your Device, I mentioned several types of (potentially) private 
data that may be stored on your device as you browse or use Internet-
enabled applications. Here, I want to provide a bit more detail about 
this data and tell you what you can do about it. 
It may be helpful to conceptually divide the stored data into two 
categories: live data—that is, information that may be sent from your 
browser to the sites you visit in real time—and historical data, which is 
accumulated on your device but not transmitted. Both types of data are 
normally stored separately for each browser you use, on each device. 
Live Data 
When you visit a site and it sets a cookie, that by itself is generally 
harmless; it’s just a bit of text stored on your device. When you visit 
the same site later, it will read that cookie before displaying the page. 
Cookies are often helpful because they enable sites to save preferences 
for you, keep track of your login information so you need not enter 
your credentials each time you visit, and offer continuity (such as 
remembering which articles you have read) on successive visits. 
Cookies have become a privacy problem because they’re often used for 
tracking you across sites. An ad, social networking widget, or analytics 
code on one site creates an identifier on your device that it can use to 
look up what you did there. If the next site you visit happens to use an 
ad, widget, or code from the same network, it can read the cookie to 
see what you’ve done in the past, and add information about your 
63  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
current visit. This process continues indefinitely, such that you may 
randomly visit a site for the first time and instantly see ads that are 
mysteriously targeted to your interests and location, including items 
you’ve searched for recently on Amazon.com, Google, or other sites. 
In these cases, it’s not the site you’re visiting that’s setting and reading 
tracking cookies, but a third-party site or network that has placed code 
on the page to track you. That’s why you’ll see these types of cookies 
referred to as third-party cookies. A site may use its own cookies (first­
party cookies) for useful purposes such as saving your preferences but 
permit third parties to use cookies for tracking and other less-noble 
reasons. Some popular news sites have hundreds of tracking cookies, 
which pose a privacy risk and cause pages to load much more slowly 
(and help chew through your data cap). (Browsers don’t normally go 
out of their way to tell you what cookies a given page has set, but see 
Web Privacy Software, ahead, to learn one way to keep track of them.) 
Browser cookies aren’t the only sort of live data that your device may 
store and send to sites as you browse. When you use media plugins 
such as Flash and Silverlight, they may also collect, store, and transmit 
data in much the same way as conventional cookies—but they do so 
separately from your browser, which means disabling cookies in your 
browser may have no effect on this data. Numerous other plugins and 
extensions can also do this sort of thing, but, without a doubt, Flash 
cookies are the most common. 
Even if you block or delete cookies of all sorts, you may not be in the 
clear. Some especially aggressive trackers use a variety of techniques 
(sometimes known as evercookies or zombie cookies) to respawn 
cookies you’ve deleted or to track you using other methods involving 
your image cache, JavaScript, and/or HTML5 Web storage. 
What’s HTML5 Web storage, you ask? It’s another way a Web page 
or application can store data in your browser and access it later. It 
was designed to be not only faster and more secure than cookies, but 
also to hold larger quantities of data. And in principle there’s nothing 
wrong with it—HTML5 Web storage can do neat things like cache 
64  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
webmail or map images so you can read them offline. But it’s still 
an imperfect system that can be used for undesirable purposes. 
Historical Data 
Cookies normally stick around on your device for quite some time, so 
in addition to sending live data about you as you browse the Web, they 
serve as historical evidence of the sites you’ve visited and some of the 
activities you’ve performed there. 
Your browser may also store lists of pages you’ve visited (browsing 
history), files you’ve downloaded (download history), searches you’ve 
performed (search history), and information you’ve entered into 
form fields. Barring a bug or malicious exploit, your browser doesn’t 
transmit any of this data, but someone could examine your device after 
the fact and get a detailed record of where you’ve been. 
As I said earlier, live data and historical data have entirely different 
privacy implications. You may find live tracking to be creepy and 
offensive but have no qualms about someone examining the browsing 
history on your computer; or you may have no issues with advertisers 
knowing what you’re up to but prefer to keep that information from, 
say, your employer (who might take a look at your computer when 
you’re not at your desk—or even use monitoring software). 
Avoid or Remove Local Data 
Broadly speaking, you can manage local data storage in either of two 
ways: 
•  Prevent data from being stored on your device in the first place— 
using browser settings, a private browsing mode, or third-party 
plugins/extensions. 
•  Erase stored data after the fact—either manually or using an 
automated tool. 
You can use a number of methods for either approach, as I describe 
in a moment. But which way is best? 
65  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
I think most people would agree it’s preferable to avoid getting sick 
than to cure an illness. By preventing data from being stored locally 
in the first place, you eliminate both the threat of live tracking and 
the potential for historical examination. Furthermore, clearing cookies 
and other local data after the fact may prevent you from being tracked 
from one session to the next, but not during a single session. 
However, depending on your browser, operating system, and device, 
you may be unable to prevent data from being stored—or at least not 
with the granularity you prefer. For example, if a browser’s only option 
is to block all cookies, that may make your Web browsing experience 
worse because it prevents the use of helpful, first-party cookies. 
So, what are your options for managing local data? 
Private Browsing Modes 
Safari and Firefox have Private Browsing (in Safari, choose Safari > 
Private Browsing; in Firefox, choose File > New Private Window). 
Google Chrome has Incognito windows (choose File > New Incognito 
Window; see Figure 9). Internet Explorer has InPrivate (click the 
gear icon and then choose Safety > InPrivate Browsing). Most other 
browsers have something similar. While you’re in one of these modes, 
your browser typically avoids storing data such as cookies; browsing, 
download, and search histories; form/autofill data; and page or image 
caches. Because the data isn’t stored at all, it eliminates both tracking 
and after-the-fact analysis. 
66  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Chrome’s Incognito window spells out what information it 
protects, as well as what possible privacy risks remain. 
Note: Private browsing modes are somewhat less common (or at 
least harder to find) in mobile browsers, but options are improving. 
For example, in the iOS 7 version of Safari, open a new page and tap 
Private at the bottom. In the iOS version of Google Chrome, tap the 
Chrome menu 
button and tap New Incognito Tab. (See Browse 
Anonymously, ahead, for other mobile private browsing options.) 
Private browsing modes are great for people who only occasionally— 
for specific sites or tasks—want to remain private. Turn them on 
when you need them; turn them off when you don’t. That way, the 
bulk of your Web browsing still has the benefits of first-party cookies, 
histories, and so forth, but you keep the private things private. 
However, please keep the following in mind about private browsing: 
•  Plugins and extensions—including Flash—could still store data 
locally if they remain enabled, and there’s no guarantee that an 
unscrupulous tracker hasn’t invented some other sneaky trick to 
store data even when browsing privately. Browser beware. 
•  If you download a file, that file may not appear in your download 
history, but it’ll still be on your disk. 
67  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
•  Private browsing doesn’t stop you from manually bookmarking 
pages. 
•  Although your browser doesn’t store search terms while browsing 
privately, the search engine might (see Search Privately). 
•  DNS queries, which happen outside your browser, could still be 
cached on your device. 
•  Someone sniffing your Internet connection may still be able to see 
what sites you connect to, and server logs will still be kept. 
Browser Privacy Settings 
Whereas private browsing modes are temporary, you can usually fine-
tune a browser’s preferences to specify permanent settings for which 
sorts of data should be stored locally (Figure 10). You can usually also 
examine or delete data already stored. 
Figure 10: Firefox offers a variety of privacy settings; most other 
browsers have a similar range of options. 
68  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once again, the range of choices varies by browser and platform, and 
I can’t cover every detail here. I will say, however, that you can usually 
make at least the following choices: 
•  Cookies: Block all cookies; accept all cookies; or (my 
recommendation) block only third-party cookies. You can also 
usually view all the stored cookies and delete any of them 
individually, or all of them en masse. 
•  Do Not Track: Your browser can ask sites not to track you, and 
I suggest you enable this feature—but sites may ignore the request. 
(See the sidebar Do Not Track, ahead.) 
•  Phishing and malware protection: Alert you to sites that may 
be fraudulent (especially phishing sites) and those suspected of 
containing malware. By all means, turn this on. 
•  Location tracking: Your browser may report your location in 
order to provide you with more useful results (for example, local 
weather, movie times, and stores) without your having to manually 
specify where you are. I generally find location tracking helpful, and 
I figure I’m already giving away my location by my IP address when 
not using Tor (see Browse Anonymously, ahead) or a VPN, so this 
isn’t much worse—although, to be fair, location data derived from 
Wi-Fi triangulation and GPS can be much more precise than what 
your IP address alone indicates. You can usually enable or disable 
location tracking on a per-site basis or globally, as you prefer. 
•  Search suggestions and history: When you start typing a 
search term, your browser may try to fill in the rest for you as a 
convenience feature. To do so, it may use a locally-stored list of your 
previous searches, but it’s probably also telling the search engine 
what you’ve typed so far (each and every keystroke!) and ask for a 
list of matches. This is usually beneficial, but can sometimes reveal 
more about you than your search terms alone. If you don’t want 
your browser storing your search terms or search engines trying to 
pre-guess what you want, turn these features off. 
69  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Here’s how to access privacy settings in a few popular desktop 
browsers: 
•  Firefox: Choose Firefox > Preferences and click Privacy (choose 
Use Custom Settings for History from the pop-up menu in the 
History section for additional options). Some privacy-related 
settings are also found on the Security pane. 
•  Google Chrome: Enter chrome:settings into the address bar. 
Then click the “Show advanced settings” link and look under 
Privacy. (Note that you must click Content Settings and Clear 
Browsing Data to access some of the settings.) 
•  Internet Explorer: Open the Internet Options control panel and 
look on the Privacy tab. You’ll need to click Sites and Advanced to 
see certain important settings. 
•  Safari: Choose Safari > Preferences and click Privacy. Also click 
Security for some additional privacy-related settings. 
Do Not Track 
Most modern browsers can (at your option) transmit a special Do Not 
Track header when they load a Web page that asks the site to pretty 
please not track your visit. And, by all means, you should turn this 
feature on because some sites will heed your request, and even those 
that don’t should know that you prefer it that way. 
Unfortunately, Do Not Track is at this point merely a request.  
Advertisers, analytics companies, and social networks are free to  
ignore it, and often do. A movement is afoot to make Do Not Track  
more than a request—to enforce it technologically and also enact  
legislation that would punish sites that track users in violation of  
their requests. I’m not optimistic that either will happen, but I’ve  
been surprised before.  
70  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Web Privacy Software 
Besides using private browsing modes and fiddling with browser 
settings, you can also install software that purports to enhance your 
Web privacy. I say “purports” because programs of this sort vary 
widely in their capabilities. Some are excellent, while others promise 
more than they can deliver, and some offer little that you couldn’t 
achieve simply by clicking a few buttons in your browser. 
I couldn’t begin to review the full range of options. A Google search 
on “privacy software” turned up nearly three billion hits. So, I’ll just 
give a couple of examples. 
One tool I’m quite fond of is Adblock Plus, a free extension available 
for Google Chrome, Firefox, Opera, and Android. (Although Adblock 
Plus isn’t available for Safari, there is a shareware extension from 
a different developer called AdBlock for Safari that has many of the 
same capabilities.) Adblock Plus is highly customizable, letting you 
selectively or globally block ads, tracking cookies, and social media 
buttons (which let you tweet, like, or otherwise spread the word about 
a page—and track you in the process) without interfering with normal 
browsing and local storage the way private browsing modes do. It 
also offers protection against domains that could infect your computer 
with malware. 
Another fantastic free tool is called Ghostery—available as a cross-
platform browser extension for Firefox, Google Chrome, Internet 
Explorer, Opera, and Safari; and as a stand-alone iOS Web browser. 
It displays a list of all the trackers of various sorts—both honorable 
and ignoble—present on any given Web page (Figure 11) and lets 
you enable or disable them (individually or by category). It’s highly 
educational as well as effective in increasing your privacy. 
71  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Ghostery briefly displays a pop-up showing which  
trackers it’s blocking when you load a site; you can individually  
enable or disable them as you like.  
Then there are apps that strike me as a waste of money, such as 
SecureMac’s PrivacyScan for Mac and Symantec’s PC Tools Privacy 
Guardian for Windows (PC Tools Privacy Guardian was recently 
discontinued, but I’ve mentioned it because you may see it reviewed 
or already have a copy). 
Both of these apps merely delete locally stored browser data (including 
browsing histories, conventional and Flash cookies, and so on) after 
the fact. To be fair, they can do this for multiple browsers at once, 
identify local data that your browser may be unaware of, and securely 
overwrite the data to prevent it from being undeleted. But it’s certainly 
possible to do all this manually, without any extra software. And in 
my opinion, such software misleads users by portraying “privacy” 
as merely preventing someone from seeing what’s on your computer. 
It does nothing to protect private information in transit, avoid the 
collection of tracking data as you browse, or disguise your identity in 
servers’ logs. 
My overall recommendation about privacy software is to read the fine 
print. If a piece of software claims to solve all your privacy problems, 
take that claim with a grain of salt. Look into the details to see what it 
truly does, and whether that’s something you can’t achieve in a simpler 
way. And remember: prevention is nearly always preferable to cleanup. 
72  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protect Passwords and Credit Card Info  
Your passwords and credit card information are certainly among the 
items you’ll most want to keep private, but you can’t do very much on 
the Internet without entering a password, and most online shopping 
requires entering a credit card number. So you can’t realistically avoid 
ever sending these things over the Internet, but you can take steps to 
keep them private: 
•  Use a password manager. You may be familiar with password 
managers—apps such as 1Password, Dashlane, and LastPass that 
can generate, securely store, and enter passwords for you (see 
Figure 12). Users of Apple devices running OS X 10.9 Mavericks 
and/or iOS 7 can use a built-in password manager called iCloud 
Keychain (see the sidebar Security in iMessage and Other Apple 
Services). 
You can also use password managers for credit card numbers, 
secure notes, and other private data. In addition to their obvious 
benefits, these apps can verify that you’re on the right site before 
handing over your password—yet another way to avoid phishing 
and DNS spoofing attacks. 
Note: Most browsers have built-in password-filling tools, but they 
tend to be both less capable and less secure than full-blown password 
managers. 
73  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
74
Figure 12: 1Password (Mac version shown here) securely stores 
passwords, credit card numbers, and other personal data, and syncs 
them among your devices.
I discuss password managers and other password strategies further 
in my book Take Control of Your Passwords. (And, if you decide 
to use 1Password as your password manager, I have a book all about 
that too: Take Control of 1Password.)
•
Check for HTTPS. As you saw in Browse Securely, an encrypted 
Web session makes it much safer to send private data, and an 
unencrypted session is asking for trouble. So look for that lock icon 
before filling in any Web form containing private information.
Just ahead, in Shop Online Privately, I discuss further issues involving 
online commerce.

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Search Privately  
You know already how you can use a private browsing mode (or 
change your browser settings) to avoid having your search terms 
stored on your device. But the search engine could keep a record that 
someone at such-and-such an IP address performed a certain search 
at a certain time and date. Furthermore, if you’re logged in to the 
search site—for example, you’re logged in to your Gmail account while 
you do a Google search in the same browser—the site will store those 
search terms in your account and it knows exactly who you are, by 
name. Later, you may use the same search engine on an entirely 
different device and see those earlier terms pop up again! That could 
be either helpful or disconcerting. 
Google does let you temporarily or permanently Turn off your Google 
Web History, and most other search providers do too. But you might 
forget, or might not have done the right things in every browser or 
on every device. 
If you want to use a pretty good search engine that won’t log your 
results, period, try DuckDuckGo. All searches are completely 
anonymous. Nothing is logged, no tracking occurs…and there are 
no ads. And although the results aren’t always as thorough as with 
Google or Bing, DuckDuckGo is getting better all the time. 
Browse Anonymously  
So far I’ve talked only about private Web browsing, but sometimes you 
may need greater assurances that your Web activities are anonymous, 
meaning they aren’t associated with you individually. 
Note: You should never assume that anonymity on the Internet  
is absolute or permanent. Anonymity means making it extremely  
difficult to discover your identity—and although that’s often good  
enough, anonymous statements and activities can sometimes be  
traced back to the person who originated them.  
75  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I said in the Introduction that this is a book about ordinary privacy 
for ordinary people. And frankly, the picture I’m about to paint is far 
from ordinary. This is something a political dissident or a journalist 
in a highly secretive country might need to worry about, not a day-to­
day privacy concern for regular folk. Still, it’s worth knowing about. 
Imagine that your local Internet connection is encrypted using a VPN, 
which also hides your real IP address. Then you use your browser’s 
private browsing mode to eliminate all local data storage, and connect 
to a Web server using HTTPS, so the entire transaction is encrypted. 
That’s about as private as you can get—it’s extremely unlikely that any 
party between your device and the Web server will be able to see your 
information, and similarly unlikely that anyone who examines your 
device later on will be able to discover evidence of the session either. 
However, don’t forget that the server still logs your visit. Server 
logs may provide enough other information (see On a Web Server to 
learn about browser fingerprints) to uniquely identify your computer. 
Furthermore, even though the server doesn’t know your real IP 
address, your VPN provider does, and it may have kept a log of your 
session that could be traced back to you. Finally, even though an 
encrypted connection protects the contents of the transmitted data, 
it doesn’t protect low-level routing information, which indicates the 
data’s origin and destination. (They can’t: intervening routers and 
switches need that information to pass your data along.) So, by 
combining all that information, someone could still discover that 
you were the person who visited a certain page at a certain time. 
For certain types of Web activity, that could put you in deep trouble. 
If you need of near-complete anonymity when browsing the Web 
(including using webmail), you should be aware of something called 
Tor. Tor, which originally stood for “The Onion Router,” is a system 
that not only encrypts data but also does so multiple times, sending 
it through a series of randomly selected relays called nodes (see 
Figure 13)—each of which knows only about the previous and next 
node in the chain, but not the information’s origin (unless it happens 
to be the “entry” node) or destination (unless it’s the “exit” node). 
This process makes it extremely difficult to determine the source of 
76  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any Web transaction. In addition, a component called Torbutton offers  
a fair degree of protection against browser fingerprinting.  
Figure 13: When you use Tor, your connection to any server goes 
through a random series of nodes, each one adding a layer of 
encryption and further obscuring the sources of requests. 
To use Tor on a Mac or Windows PC, you download software called 
Tor Bundle, which includes a customized version of Firefox and several 
other components, all with extremely strong privacy settings enabled 
by default (Figure 14). Full instructions for installation and use are on 
the Tor site. For Android, you’ll want Tor’s Orbot package; for iOS, you 
can use the third-party Onion Browser. 
77  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Figure 14: The Tor browser (left) along with Vidalia, another app 
in the Tor Bundle whose job is to establish anonymous connections. 
Tor can dramatically increase the chances that your Web activities will 
be anonymous, but it’s not without its drawbacks. For example: 
•  Several weaknesses in the Tor system have been discovered that 
could be exploited under the right conditions to reveal private data. 
For example, someone who runs a Tor exit node could monitor 
unencrypted traffic flowing between it and the rest of the Internet— 
and indeed, it’s widely believed that the FBI runs a large number of 
Tor exit nodes to do just that. Using end-to-end encryption such as 
SSL/TLS reduces the risk of eavesdropping significantly, even if the 
exit node is compromised. 
•  Someone monitoring your Internet connection can tell that you’re 
using Tor, even though they can’t necessarily tell what you’re doing 
with it. Some ISPs and countries block all known Tor traffic. There 
are ways to work around this problem in some instances, but they 
make the process of Web browsing that much more cumbersome. 
•  Merely using Tor could result in unwanted attention from the NSA, 
including having your encrypted communications retained 
indefinitely. 
•  Using Tor makes Web browsing slow. No, I mean really slow. 
And forget watching videos, anyway—Flash, QuickTime, and other 
plugins are blocked because they pose too much of a security risk. 
Privacy is hard. Anonymity is extremely hard. 
78  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shop Online Privately  
I’ve already talked about steps you can take to protect the privacy 
of your Web connection and your credit card information. As long 
as you’re using an encrypted connection, any purchase you make 
online should be strictly between you and the vendor. Well, you and 
the vendor and the vendor’s payment processor and your bank. And 
perhaps the fulfillment or shipping company. I can’t tell you how to 
shop anonymously online, but most online purchases from reputable 
companies are already as private as they can be. 
One common source of anxiety is giving out your physical address. 
If you’re purchasing physical goods online, you have to provide a 
mailing address. Even if you’re buying digital goods with a credit or 
debit card, you’ll still be asked for your billing address (which helps to 
prevent credit card fraud—a good thing!). Other than renting a private 
mailbox, there’s not much to be done about that. You may not have 
to provide your home address, but you will have to provide some valid 
address at which you can receive statements. As long as you can do so 
over a secure connection, that shouldn’t be anything to worry about. 
Another concern is the security of one’s credit or debit card number, 
even over an encrypted connection. What might happen to it once it’s 
in the vendor’s hands? Is it safe? 
I can’t work up much fear about this, because laws and bank policies 
protect consumers against fraudulent use of a credit or debit card—or 
at least limit liability, as long as you report any suspicious transactions 
promptly. So, keep an eye on your bank statements online and call 
your bank immediately if anything appears amiss. 
If that’s not good enough for you, I can offer a few other suggestions: 
•  When an online vendor asks to store your credit card to simplify 
future purchases, say no. If you’re using a password manager to 
enter credit card details, it’s only a matter of a few clicks anyway. 
However, even if you follow this policy generally, you might 
consider making exceptions for sites you shop from frequently, 
79  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
especially those with one-click checkout systems like Amazon 
and Apple. (It’s rare for a week to go by without my purchasing 
something—an app, album, ebook, or some other digital media— 
from one of these vendors, and I have become extremely fond of 
one-click shopping convenience.) 
•  Use PayPal if that’s an option. Now, I know a lot of people dislike 
PayPal for one reason or another, but one significant advantage is 
that it prevents vendors from seeing your credit card number (and, 
except for goods that must be shipped, your mailing address). Yes, 
you’re trusting PayPal with a credit card or bank account number, 
but at least that limits your exposure. 
•  See if your bank offers single-use credit card numbers for online 
purchases. Mine doesn’t, but many do, and if you want to be sure a 
credit card number isn’t misused after a single purchase, that could 
be an option. 
Many other online payment systems exist—some of which go to greater 
lengths to protect your privacy. The best known is Bitcoin (which is 
accepted at an increasing number of online and brick-and-mortar 
businesses), but numerous other cryptocurrencies have sprung up. 
Feel free to experiment with these if you’re willing to accept some 
financial uncertainty. At this point, the entire field is too unpredictable 
for me to make any specific recommendations. 
80  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improve Email Privacy 
When we began discussing this book, Take Control publisher Adam 
Engst told me that his rule is, “don’t write anything in email that you 
couldn’t stomach appearing on the front page of the New York Times.” 
I said I didn’t think that was a very good rule, and we discussed it (by 
email, naturally) in what became an increasingly contentious debate. 
I won’t repeat the entire exchange here, because I’m sure you’ll read 
it soon enough in the New York Times. 
But to summarize, Adam was trying to make the point that you can 
never have an ironclad guarantee of privacy when it comes to email. In 
that respect he’s absolutely right, for reasons I’ll explain in a moment. 
My point was that in many cases, email is the only practical means 
of communication, and yet it’s completely impractical for me to avoid 
ever sending personal facts, business secrets, colorful language, or 
anything else by email that wouldn’t cause serious problems if made 
public. I think I’m right about that, too. 
But email privacy is extraordinarily difficult to achieve, and the more 
control you try to exert, the more cumbersome it becomes. By the end 
of this chapter, you should have a better appreciation of what makes 
email privacy so tricky. But you’ll also learn how to keep most email 
safe from casual snooping, how to make top-secret email messages 
as private as they reasonably can be, and when it’s best to choose an 
entirely different means of communication. 
81  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Understand the Privacy Risks of Email  
If you send me an email message, you might have the impression that 
you and I are the only two people who can read it. Such assumptions 
are unwise. Let’s look at a few of the places email might be visible to 
someone other than the sender or recipient: 
•  On your end: Your email client may keep a copy of the messages 
you send. If so, anyone who gained access to your computer 
(including thieves and people reading over your shoulder—not to 
mention your employer) could see what you’ve sent. 
•  In transit: At minimum, an email message must travel from 
the device where you compose it to a server, and from a server to 
the recipient. (If both you and the recipient happen to use the same 
email server, no further hops are required, but usually messages 
go to an outgoing email server and then take one or more extra 
steps over the Internet to the recipient’s email server.) An email 
message could be intercepted along any segment of this journey— 
for example, by someone “sniffing” an open Wi-Fi network, or by 
ISPs, corporations, or government agencies monitoring a router. 
As I’ll explain shortly, the message data might be encrypted during 
part of its journey across the Internet, but you can’t count on this, 
even if you use SSL to communicate with your email server. 
•  On email servers: The email server you connect to in order to 
send a message may hold onto that message only for as long as it 
takes to send it, and then delete it. Or it may cache the message for 
much longer—even indefinitely. Unless you run the email server 
yourself, you have no way to know for sure. Once it reaches the 
recipient’s email server, it’ll stay there at least until the recipient 
reads it, but more likely it’ll stick around forever, because most 
modern email systems work best when the server stores the master 
copies of incoming messages, which then sync to client devices. 
In any case, for whatever period of time the message is on a server 
somewhere, anyone with access to that server could conceivably 
read the message without you or the recipient ever knowing. 
82  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: The U.S. government currently needs a search warrant to 
access unopened email that’s been stored online for 180 days or 
less—older unopened messages can be obtained with a (simpler) 
subpoena. But don’t assume opened messages older than 180 days, 
or more-recent unopened messages, are off-limits; the law is murky 
enough that any message on an email server could be fair game. 
•  On the recipient’s end: Everything that’s true on your end is 
also true on the recipient’s end, with the additional complication 
that you have no control at all over what the recipient does with 
a message received from, or sent to, you. And, if the recipient uses 
multiple devices or services for email, your message may be on any 
or all of them. 
•  In backups: You, the recipient, and whoever runs email servers 
that process your messages most likely back up your data to one 
or more other locations such as local hard disks and cloud storage. 
(Good for you! Backups are mighty important.) Those backups 
may be encrypted, but if they aren’t—or if someone with access to 
the media on which the backups are stored can crack or bypass the 
encryption—that’s another way your email message could be read. 
This isn’t even an exhaustive list, but I hope that it explains Adam’s 
contention that complete privacy of email messages between you 
and the other party is little more than wishful thinking. Someone who 
wanted to know what you sent or received by email would have many 
potential ways to do so. 
Note: There’s yet another risk: accidentally sending confidential 
email to the wrong recipient (or even to a mailing list)! I’ve done 
it myself, and I’ve also received confidential email addressed to 
me by mistake. Double-check the address(es) before clicking Send! 
None of this means someone is reading your email. I’d wager that the 
overwhelming majority of email messages are never read by anyone 
other than the sender and recipient. But if you discuss anything 
sensitive by email, you should be aware that the possibility exists. And, 
if the contents of a message are such that someone may have financial, 
83 

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
legal, or political motivation to read it, the odds of exposure increase. 
Unfortunately, because email messages are out of your control the 
instant you hit Send, it’s impossible to quantify the risk. 
Are Gmail Ads an Invasion of Privacy? 
If you use Gmail, you undoubtedly know that Google scans your 
messages for keywords to display ads associated with those words. 
This process is essentially the same one that results in relevant 
Google AdSense ads appearing on the Web sites you visit, but it may 
feel more intrusive in this case because of the impression Google is 
reading email messages that should be none of their business. 
But in fact, delivering ads is pretty much Google’s entire business. 
Displaying more-relevant ads means advertisers make more money 
and therefore buy more ads. So it’s in Google’s best interest to show 
you the ads that are most likely to result in a purchase. The fact that 
Google earns money from advertising to you is the sole reason the 
company gives away Gmail accounts for free. You pay, in effect, by 
agreeing to look at ads, with the qualification that ads should have 
some relevance to you based on what’s in your email messages. 
I always thought Gmail’s free-with-ads concept was both clear and  
reasonable, but many users feel keyword scanning constitutes an  
invasion of privacy. To this complaint, I have three responses:  
✦  Were Google to display ads randomly rather than based on what 
you’re likely to find interesting, the ads would be even more 
annoying because they’d be less relevant. 
✦  Remember that ads are matched with messages algorithmically. A 
computer sees the word “iPad” in an email message and looks for 
an ad that also designates “iPad” as a keyword. Neither Google’s 
computers nor Google employees know or care what you’re saying 
about iPads; it’s a one-way, blind system designed for the sole 
purpose of selling you stuff. In other words, it’s nothing personal. 
✦  If you can’t stomach the idea of targeted ads, you can avoid  
seeing them. Ads don’t show up in an IMAP or POP client, for  
example, and ad-blocking software (see Web Privacy Software)  
works on the Gmail site too. But, neither technique prevents  
Google from scanning your email in the first place. If you want  
Google to stay out of your email entirely, the only right answer  
is use a different email provider.  
84  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reduce Email Privacy Risks  
Now that I’ve told you how hopeless complete email privacy is, I 
want to cheer you up a bit by talking about meaningful steps you can 
take to reduce—not eliminate—the potential for your email messages 
to fall into the wrong hands. In this case, you protect your privacy 
by increasing security. The more of these things you do, the fewer 
opportunities an attacker will have to read what you send and receive. 
In most cases, they’ll be enough. And since you now understand that 
email privacy can’t be perfect, you’ll at least be able to make smarter 
decisions about what should and shouldn’t go in an email message. 
Log In Securely 
In the spectrum of email privacy mistakes, perhaps the worst one 
is to transmit your username and password to your mail server in 
unencrypted, human-readable cleartext. If you do that, anyone who 
intercepts the communication between your device and the server 
can easily obtain your username and password and then log in to 
your account and read all your email—and send email under your 
name. Luckily, this is also among the easiest problems to solve. 
Numerous methods are available for authenticating—that is, logging 
in with a username and password—to incoming and outgoing email 
servers. The good news is that most of these methods encrypt your 
password in transit, even if your email and the conduit through which 
it travels are unencrypted. Odds are excellent that your email app is 
already set up to authenticate securely, but it never hurts to check. 
In your email client (such as Apple Mail or Microsoft Outlook), 
navigate to the preferences or account settings for one of your email 
accounts (Figure 15). Near your username and password, you’ll 
usually see an Authentication setting, often in a pop-up menu. If this 
says Apple Token, GSSAPI, Kerberos, anything with “MD5” (such 
as CRAM-MD5, Digest-MD5, or MD5 Challenge-Response), NTLM, 
or TLS Certificate, you’re in good shape. In addition, if your client is 
set up to use SSL (see Transfer Email Securely, just ahead), then any 
85  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
authentication method will, by definition, be encrypted. However, if  
you are not using SSL and the authentication method is set to Login,  
Password, or Plain, your password is probably being sent in the clear.  
Figure 15: Apple Mail lets you choose, for each account, which 
authentication method to use for incoming mail (shown here) or 
outgoing mail. Remember, “Password” is fine if (and only if) the 
account uses SSL, which this example does. 
Unfortunately, you can’t arbitrarily select a different authentication 
method; you must choose one that your email server supports. Look 
at your email provider’s Web site, or contact its technical support 
department, to find out what your options are. While you’re at it, check 
on whether SSL is supported—if it is, that’s your best bet, and then the 
authentication method is unimportant. 
Keep in mind that in most cases, you must go through this process 
twice for each of your email accounts—once for the incoming (IMAP 
or POP) server and once for the outgoing (SMTP) server. Microsoft 
Exchange accounts are an exception to this rule; they use the same 
server and settings for incoming and outgoing mail. 
86  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transfer Email Securely 
After secure authentication, the next logical step to keeping your 
email private is to use SSL (Secure Sockets Layer), also known as 
TLS (Transport Layer Security), to secure the connection between 
your email client and your email server. With SSL enabled, not only 
are your username and password encrypted on their way to the server, 
but so are the contents of your incoming and outgoing messages. In 
this way, SSL prevents eavesdropping on email traveling between your 
computer or mobile device and your email server, even if you connect 
to the Internet via an unencrypted Wi-Fi connection. 
If you check your email in a Web browser rather than a stand-alone 
email client, SSL still applies—you’ll know you’re using it if the URL 
starts with https: instead of http:, or if your browser displays a lock 
icon—usually in or near the address bar. If it doesn’t, consult your 
webmail provider’s documentation to see how you can enable that 
feature. 
Now, I must be clear about the limits of SSL. It protects messages 
only while they’re in transit between your local device and your 
email provider (going in either direction). SSL does not mean that 
email messages are stored in an encrypted form on your device, at 
your email provider, or on the recipient’s device. And, crucially, SSL 
is only rarely used for email servers talking to each other. So, even 
if I use an SSL connection to send a message from my computer to 
my email server and the recipient of my message does the same thing, 
my message will most likely travel in unencrypted cleartext from my 
email server to the recipient’s email server, and it could be intercepted 
as it moves along that path. 
In addition, a flaw in SSL’s design or a bug in an SSL implementation 
could open the door to hackers—Apple’s SSL bug being one recent 
example, as I mentioned in the sidebar SSL Implementation Bugs. 
Even so, SSL is an incredibly good idea, and if I ruled the world, 
it would be used by default on all email clients and servers. Even 
though I don’t (yet) rule the world, SSL adoption has been increasing 
rapidly, and it’s a default setting more often than not. But sometimes 
87  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
you have to turn it on manually, and in a few unfortunate cases, email 
providers—notably, certain large ISPs—don’t even offer it as an option. 
Enabling SSL/TLS is usually a matter of selecting a checkbox in your 
email program, which in all probability will be in the same place as 
your username, password, and authentication setting (refer back to 
Figure 15, earlier in this chapter). 
As with secure authentication, you must enable SSL separately for 
incoming and outgoing email, for each of your email accounts on 
each device. If you enable it and your email stops working, your 
email provider might not support SSL (shame on them), but check 
with your provider’s tech support to find out one way or the other. 
If your provider says SSL isn’t available at all, you might consider 
looking for a new provider that does offer SSL. 
And, as a reminder, if you have SSL enabled, your username and 
password are automatically encrypted along with all other data on 
that connection, so you can use authentication methods that would 
send your password in the clear were you not using SSL. 
88  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IMAP vs. POP Privacy Implications 
IMAP and POP are the two most common protocols for delivering 
incoming mail from servers to clients. I’ve long been an advocate of 
IMAP, which typically keeps the master copy of each received, sent, 
and filed message on the server but synchronizes these messages 
with each of your local clients. Compared to POP, which usually 
deletes messages from the server after you download them, IMAP 
makes it much easier to use more than one device for email. (For 
more on POP and IMAP, including common misunderstandings about 
IMAP, see my article FlippedBITS: IMAP Misconceptions.) 
An IMAP privacy concern is that if your password were compromised, 
someone could see all your email messages, not just a handful of 
recent messages in a POP account. A combination of an excellent 
password and (if available) two-factor authentication (see the sidebar 
About Two-Factor Authentication) reduces the threat considerably. 
I’ve also heard people say they prefer POP for privacy on the theory 
that the less time messages are stored on the server, the lower the 
risk that an unauthorized person might read them there. However, 
I am skeptical that downloading messages from a POP server and 
deleting them on the server provides significantly better privacy. 
If, for example, a government agency had a black box in your email 
provider’s data center capturing all email, it would catch incoming 
POP messages before they were deleted. And, even though POP 
messages may be deleted from a server after they’re downloaded, 
they could be backed up or cached without your knowledge. If you 
think of POP as a magic bullet to circumvent snooping, think again. 
Meanwhile, it’s often possible to change the settings in an email 
client that’s using IMAP so that only some messages (such as those 
in your Inbox) are automatically synchronized. And that, in turn, 
could increase your privacy if someone gets access to your device, 
because the messages wouldn’t be sitting there waiting to be read. 
(You would, however, want to change your password in the event 
of loss or theft to prevent someone else from connecting to your 
IMAP account and downloading more messages.) 
89  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Email Your Doctor, Accountant, or 
Lawyer Privately 
Members of certain professions, such as doctors, accountants, 
and lawyers, regularly discuss highly personal and sensitive topics 
with their clients. Given everything I’ve said about the privacy 
risks of email, you may be wondering whether you can communicate 
safely with such people by email. The short answer is maybe. 
Privacy laws have led to the widespread adoption of secure 
Web portals for communicating with doctors and some financial 
institutions. The way these work is that both you and the person 
on the other end connect to a secure Web site with a username and 
password, and all email remains solely on that site—it works very 
much like any other webmail service, except that all messages are 
stored encrypted on the server, and are not accessible via POP or 
IMAP (or to Gmail, Outlook.com, or other email services). 
In some cases, a secure Web portal may send you a conventional 
email message to let you know a secure message is waiting on the 
server, and that you should log in to read it. That may seem awkward, 
but there’s a good reason for it: sending the message directly to you 
outside the secure system may be not only risky but also illegal. 
Confusingly, the rules and policies governing secure email vary by 
country and profession, and they’re always changing. When I lived 
in France, I regularly exchanged ordinary email messages with my 
doctor, but my bank pushed me to use a Web portal. Here in the 
United States, my doctor will only use a Web portal, but my banker 
sometimes sends me conventional email. 
If you want to send confidential email to a doctor, accountant, or 
lawyer, ask if she has access to a secure Web portal or a comparably 
secure method of communication. If not, a phone call might be a 
better choice. And, if you’re a professional in one of these sensitive 
occupations and don’t use a Web portal to communicate with clients, 
I strongly recommend reviewing the relevant laws and professional 
conduct standards for your area to determine your best course of 
90  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
91
action. Be careful sending confidential information over ordinary 
email—you could be exposing yourself or others to legal liability.
Encrypt Your Email
Even if you use SSL with all your email accounts, you’ve seen that 
messages are unencrypted while they sit on various email servers, and 
often for their journey from one server to another. The only way to be 
sure they’re private from end to end is for you as the sender to encrypt 
them, and for the recipient to decrypt them.
Encryption, like SSL, is a great idea, and in an ideal world, perhaps 
all messages would be encrypted all the time. In a moment I’ll mention 
a few ways you can go about encrypting messages if you choose to. 
But first, let me try to talk you out of it. That’s right: I think encrypting 
email is a less-than-optimal solution for most people, most of the time. 
Here’s why:
•
Once the recipient has decrypted your email message, anything 
could happen to it, and it’s entirely out of your control. A message 
may stay private all the way to Mr. X, but if he’s not careful (or if 
his computer or phone is stolen or hacked), your message could 
still get out.
•
Configuring an email client to encrypt messages can be (depending 
on the platform and software) a cumbersome process. Once you’ve 
done that, encrypting individual messages is usually simple, but 
requires that your recipients use the same type of encryption, and 
set up everything correctly on the other end. Even then, in some 
cases you must go through extra steps to obtain a public key or 
certificate from the other person before you can send secure email; 
in other cases, both parties must find some way other than email 
to swap passwords. You wouldn’t want to go through this bother for 
every message you send.
•
Although encryption protects the contents of your messages, it 
doesn’t protect their headers, which means that someone with 

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
access to your encrypted email while in transit or on a server could 
still see the message subject, sender and recipient’s email addresses, 
date and time, and other information that may itself be private. 
•  As things currently stand in the United States, the NSA can retain 
indefinitely any encrypted email messages it happens upon, 
presumably to help the agency learn how to break that encryption. 
Unfortunately, the very fact that you encrypt messages—regardless 
of their content—may mark you as a suspicious person subject to 
more in-depth monitoring. Encrypting email messages not only 
draws attention to yourself but could mean that any messages that 
are intercepted will be kept until the NSA can figure out what they 
say or decides it’s not worth knowing. 
Those qualifications aside, if you still want to go for it, there are three 
main techniques you might use: 
•  S/MIME: Almost all modern email clients, including Apple Mail 
on Mac OS X and iOS, Outlook, and Thunderbird, support an 
industry standard called S/MIME (Secure/Multipurpose Internet 
Mail Extensions). S/MIME uses a form of public-key cryptography: 
you give me a public key (in the form of a file called a certificate) 
that I use to encrypt a message I send you, and then only you 
can decrypt it with your corresponding private key. To reply to 
me, you reverse the process, encrypting a message with my public 
key; I decrypt it with my corresponding private key. 
Before you can use S/MIME, you must obtain the necessary 
certificates and install them on your device; it’s a tedious and non-
obvious process. (I describe how to do this in Apple Mail—for both 
OS X and iOS—in Take Control of Apple Mail.) Your 
correspondents must also use S/MIME, and you’ll need their public 
certificates to send them encrypted messages. 
•  PGP/GnuPG: The commercial PGP (Pretty Good Privacy), owned 
by Symantec, and the compatible, open-source GnuPG (Gnu Privacy 
Guard, also known as GPG) represent another flavor of public-key 
cryptography. Conceptually, PGP/GnuPG is roughly comparable to 
92  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S/MIME (in fact, newer versions of GnuPG also support S/MIME), 
although the implementation is different. 
You’ll typically need to install extra software on your device to 
use PGP or GnuPG, and it may not be available for your favorite 
platform or version. However, the process of obtaining public/ 
private key pairs is simpler than with S/MIME, and both systems 
optionally use keyservers, which let you obtain someone else’s 
public key by looking up a name or email address rather than 
having to contact that person first. Although it’s rare for webmail 
services to offer encryption, Hushmail does support PGP. 
•  Encrypted attachments: A somewhat simpler, lower-tech 
approach is to send an ordinary email message containing an 
attachment that’s encrypted; inside the attachment is the private 
content you want to transmit. A popular tool to do this is WinZip— 
despite the name, it’s available not only for Windows but also for 
Mac OS X and iOS. If you and the recipient are both Mac users, 
you can also use Disk Utility to create an encrypted disk image. 
In any case, this approach is great for one-shot communications, 
such as when you need to send someone a Social Security number, 
credit card number, or some other isolated piece of sensitive 
information but don’t need whole email messages to be encrypted 
regularly. However, there’s just one problem, which is that the 
recipient needs the password, and you can’t send that by email! The 
sidebar ahead discusses what to do. 
93  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transferring Passwords Out of Band 
When you need to send someone information using a different 
communication method than the one used for the main content of 
the message, that’s called out-of-band communication. Even if the 
out-of-band channel isn’t secure, the fact that you’re conveying the 
password by a different means than the message itself reduces the 
likelihood that the same person will intercept both pieces of data. 
For example, say you’ve sent me an encrypted file and you need to 
tell me the password. How might you do that? Here are some ideas: 
✦ 
In person. The best and most reliable method, if practical, is to 
tell me the password face to face. 
✦  By phone. Phone calls can be tapped or overhead, but it’s harder 
to do and may be trickier legally than eavesdropping on email. 
✦ 
By chat or private message. Exchange the password with 
an encrypted text or voice messaging system such as Skype or 
Apple’s iMessage. The former is known to have a government back 
door while the latter is currently believed to be highly secure. As 
with all electronic communications, there are no guarantees, but 
they’re safer than email. 
✦ 
Via shared knowledge. If you know the recipient well, you 
may be able to construct a story that implies the password without 
spelling it out. For example, “The comment that girl next to you 
at the concert made about your shirt, plus your sister’s age when 
we first met.” 
Send and Receive Email Anonymously 
In rare cases, email privacy requires anonymity; revealing your name, 
your real email address, your IP address, or other personal facts could 
get you in trouble. I’m thinking, for example, of a confidential source 
contacting a reporter, an informant telling the police about suspected 
illegal activities, or someone making politically hazardous statements. 
In such situations, you may need to disguise the source of the message 
in such a way that it can’t easily be traced back to you specifically. 
94  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Numerous services exist for just such a purpose. A quick Web search 
turns up options that let you send anonymous email with a simple 
Web form (such as SendAnonymousEmail) as well as services that 
let you set up an account that provides disposable return addresses 
(such as Anonymous Speech). With some research you’re bound to 
find many others, including one that suits your particular needs. 
However, as usual, I must caution you to read the fine print. Some 
of these sites log your IP address or other details in such a way that 
messages could be traced back to you if necessary, and no matter how 
secure a site claims to be, vulnerabilities could exist that might expose 
you. And be aware that textual analysis could provide clues to your 
identity based on word usage and writing habits. Tread carefully if 
you feel you must use such a service. 
Use Email Alternatives  
Regardless of encryption or anonymity, you may encounter situations 
in which email doesn’t make sense as a means of communication. In 
particular, if you’re worried about something you write being found on 
someone else’s computer in the future, email is not a good choice. 
In the sidebar Transferring Passwords Out of Band, I mentioned 
several ways you might send someone the password for an encrypted 
file; all the same methods can be used as alternatives to email if you 
have something to say that you simply can’t take any chances with. 
And I go into more detail about one such category in the next chapter, 
Talk and Chat Privately. 
Another option I should mention is the self-destructing digital 
message. Although these take various forms, the general idea is that 
you send someone a link to a message on a Web site, or using a mobile 
app—and once viewed, that message is visible for only seconds or 
minutes, after which time it’s permanently deleted. Although such 
systems aren’t foolproof—the recipient might, for example, take a 
screenshot of the secret message before it self-destructs, or use file 
recovery software to undelete it after the fact—they do reduce the risk 
95  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
that a private message will later be discovered on someone else’s 
device, at least by technically unskilled people. 
I found many such services and apps on the Web, although I haven’t 
tried them personally, so I can’t speak to how effective, secure, or easy 
to use they may be. A few examples: 
• DestructingMessage.com 
• Self-Destructing-Email 
• Snapchat 
• This Message Will Self-Destruct 
96  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Talk and Chat Privately 
I am old enough to remember the days when, if someone wanted to 
converse with another person who wasn’t nearby, both people would 
talk into analog devices called “telephones” to have real-time audio 
conversations. Perhaps you’ve seen such devices in old movies or read 
about them in antique documents called “books.” 
I kid, but analog telephones are rapidly on the way out. My home 
phone, which I used to refer to as a “landline,” bypasses the phone 
company altogether and relies on a box that plugs into my broadband 
router. I happen to use Vonage for my home VoIP (voice-over-IP) 
telephone service, but I could have chosen a similar service from my 
broadband provider or from any of numerous other companies. In 
other words, for me, telephone service is a variety of Internet service. 
And then there’s my smartphone, which is almost never out of reach. 
I use it for conventional audio phone calls maybe once a week on 
average. Of course, I constantly use it for email, instant messages, 
SMS, Twitter, and video chats—most of which, again, travel over the 
Internet—and even those occasional audio calls are more likely than 
not to use a VoIP app such as Skype. 
Meanwhile, my computers and tablets have software for a long 
list of services that provide real-time text, audio, and/or video 
communication—not just Skype but also Google+ Hangouts, AIM 
(AOL Instant Messenger), Apple’s FaceTime and Messages, and 
numerous others you may or may not have heard of, to say nothing 
of the chat services built into games, Facebook, and other social 
networking services. Xbox, PlayStation, and Nintendo game consoles 
all support messaging and voice chat too. 
The question is: How private are any of these real-time communication 
services? 
97  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Understand the Privacy Risks of Real-
Time Communication 
One of the best ways to acquaint yourself with the risks of real-time 
communication is to watch the HBO TV series The Wire. Yes, all five 
seasons. (Go ahead and do that, if you haven’t already, and then come 
back to this page.) 
I’ve mentioned The Wire because a lot of it has to do with electronic 
surveillance (hence the name)—but the main target of this surveillance 
is ordinary mobile phones. On the show, law enforcement agents need 
both special equipment and legal permission to monitor the mobile 
phone use of suspected criminals. But the process ultimately poses 
little technological challenge, and the people being monitored have no 
way to know their conversations aren’t private. 
Now, think about that and consider the fact that monitoring real-time 
communication over the Internet is potentially easier. And, although 
government and law-enforcement entities have greater access to this 
sort of data than ordinary citizens, professional hackers and even 
casual snoops likely have the capability to see (or hear) far more of this 
data than you might suspect. 
As with everything else I’ve discussed in this book, precisely what that 
means to your personal privacy depends on what you say and to whom, 
but in principle there’s almost no limit to your potential risk. However, 
let me now backpedal a bit and point out a few mitigating factors: 
•  Audio data is more difficult to store and analyze than textual data, 
and video data poses a bigger challenge than audio data. Because 
of the sheer inconvenience of dealing with such large amounts 
of data, it’s far less likely that your audio or video calls will be 
kept or searched than email, text messages, or chats. Of course, 
if your VoIP connection were compromised, a computer could 
attempt to transcribe every word of a conversation and turn it into 
conveniently searchable text without having to store the audio or 
video itself. So although there are no guarantees, on the whole, I 
98  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consider voice and video communications over the Internet to be 
safer than any sort of text-based communication. 
•  The previous point notwithstanding, available technical details and 
anecdotal reports suggest that Apple’s encrypted iMessage service— 
which can be used for text messages and file transfer between Macs 
and iOS devices—is highly resistant to hacking and eavesdropping. 
(See the sidebar just ahead for more information.) 
•  Communication that takes place entirely over the Internet (for 
example, Skype-to-Skype calls or FaceTime chats) or entirely over 
analog phone lines is probably safer than communication that 
crosses between the two (such as using Skype or a VoIP service to 
call a landline phone) because calls that traverse multiple networks 
have more potential points of interception. 
Security in iMessage and Other Apple Services 
If you’re curious to learn exactly what security measures Apple uses 
with iMessage, iCloud Keychain, and other services, you can find 
them in the PDF iOS Security, which also applies somewhat to Macs. 
For a less technical summary of the iCloud Keychain portion of this 
document, read Rich Mogull’s TidBITS article How to Protect Your 
iCloud Keychain from the NSA. 
And, to learn much more about how iCloud Keychain works and how  
to use it, see my book Take Control of iCloud.  
Improve Your Real-Time  
Communication Privacy  
If you have money to burn and a powerful need for a “secure line,” 
you can buy secure telephones (landline) or crypto telephones (mobile) 
with built-in hardware encryption. There are also various hardware 
and software products (for example, Silent Circle) that can work with 
existing phones to achieve the same effect. But end-to-end encryption 
means both parties will need interoperable equipment or software. 
99  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the purposes of this book, I’m assuming you don’t need such a 
heavy-duty solution. For improving your day-to-day privacy in real-
time communication, I suggest the following: 
•  Read the privacy policies. Your mobile carrier, ISP, VoIP 
provider, instant messaging service, and other such companies 
will have boring pages of legalese, but you should at least be able 
to scan them to see if the services encrypt your data, and under 
what circumstances they may share your information with others. 
•  Use encryption when available. Encrypted connections don’t 
necessarily mean that no one can eavesdrop. For example, Skype 
(now owned by Microsoft) encrypts communication but recent 
disclosures suggest the service has back doors that make the 
contents of calls (even audio and video) available to the U.S. 
government. Even so, more protection is better than less. But that 
brings me to… 
•  Use obscure products. Tens of millions of people use Skype and 
AIM, making them attractive targets for both official surveillance 
and hackers. Newer and less-popular communication services— 
more of them are popping up all the time—might not be large 
enough to attract that sort of attention. Of course, they also may not 
have the expertise or resources to engineer or operate a high-quality 
service. 
•  Favor higher-bandwidth communication. All things being 
equal, if circumstances permit, choose video before audio, and 
audio before text—simply because anything other than text makes 
it less convenient to capture, store, and analyze your conversation 
(and all the more so if it’s encrypted). Remember, none of this 
means audio or video is entirely safe from snooping, but the odds 
are more favorable than when using text-based communications. 
100  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keep Social Media Sort of 
Private-ish 
At the risk of stating the obvious, social implies interaction with other 
people, which is somewhat at odds with privacy. On the Internet, it’s 
best to think of “social” as synonymous with “public” (even though 
that’s not necessarily true), because once you’ve shared something 
online—in any of a hundred senses of sharing—whoever you’ve shared 
it with can, in turn, share it with someone else. 
As a result, the very best advice I can give you about privacy when it 
comes to social media is not to expect any, regardless of your privacy 
settings. You may imagine that the things you post or tweet are just 
between you and your friends (or “friends,” as the case may be), but 
that’s optimistic at best. Instead, assume anything you put online using 
social media—including chats and private messages on Facebook, 
direct messages on Twitter, and profile details such as your name, 
location, and date of birth—could be discovered by anyone in the 
world, and could be online forever. If you’re unwilling to make any of 
that information public, don’t share it in the first place. 
However, there are still better and worse approaches to social media, 
and you should know how to protect yourself to the extent possible. 
Understand the Privacy Risks of 
Social Media 
Wait, didn’t we just cover that? Yes, any data you put online using any  
social network can potentially become public. I know you know that.  
What I’d like to emphasize here is how that could be a problem for you.  
As I mentioned early in this book, everyone from Local Villains to Big  
Data can easily find you on social media. You might be astonished how  
101  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
much private data could be culled from years of Facebook updates, 
tweets, LinkedIn updates, Instagram pictures, Yelp reviews, blog posts, 
and a long list of other social media activities. 
It’s easy to discover not only basic facts about you and your family 
but also where you’ve been, who you hang out with, which causes 
you support, what your political and religious beliefs might be, and, 
perhaps most important of all, what sort of person you are. Even if no 
individual statement tells the story, the combined data from all these 
sites and services can do something akin to browser fingerprinting (see 
On a Web Server)—it can paint a vivid and precise picture of you. So… 
•  If you’re trying to get a job, a prospective employer may use social 
media to determine whether you’re likely to be trustworthy, polite, 
punctual, and loyal—and to see how you’ve behaved in other jobs. 
•  If you’re applying to a college or university, admissions officers 
may use online profiles to judge your seriousness and confirm any 
personal details you’ve submitted. 
•  If you’re dating, someone thinking about starting a relationship 
with you could also learn a lot about your tastes, biases, character, 
and history with previous partners. 
•  If you’re ever suspected of a crime, the police or prosecutor could 
scour social media for evidence of bad behavior—or a defense 
attorney could try to demonstrate a pattern of selflessness. 
•  If you ever run for political office…well, I hope you’re a saint, 
because anything you’ve ever said online can and will be used 
against you. 
And those sorts of concerns merely involve the historical record. Day-
to-day social media posts can also cause privacy problems: 
•  You mention on Twitter that you’re going on vacation (or just going 
to a concert), and burglars break into your house. 
•  You post geotagged pictures on Flickr that show your location and 
the time you took them—today, just after you called in sick to work. 
102  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Your Facebook relationship status says “It’s complicated,” but your 
romantic interest didn’t think so. 
I could go on, but you get the idea. The stakes when it comes to social 
media are much higher than you may imagine. Your social media 
history can win you—or cost you—a job, love, or even your freedom. 
Check Your Privacy Settings  
Every social media site and service has a privacy policy (see What 
about Privacy Policies?). You should read it, if only to be aware of how 
much data you’re inevitably giving away. 
Beyond that, examine each account’s privacy settings. Some services 
offer very little privacy control—for example, your only real options 
for Twitter are to protect your tweets (meaning you must personally 
approve each follower, and those followers can’t retweet you—not 
a terribly engaging way to use the service, if you ask me) and to hide 
your physical location. Facebook has changed its privacy settings 
repeatedly. It currently offers more control (Figure 16), letting you 
limit who can see various categories of information (for example, 
everyone, only friends, or friends of friends)—but even limiting sharing 
to your friends is no guarantee that one of those friends won’t share it, 
or that a programming error or misbehaving app might not reveal it. 
Figure 16: Facebook’s privacy settings are less detailed than many 
would prefer, but they’re better than nothing. 
103  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In other words, do pay attention to the settings and configure them as 
best you can, but don’t count on them. They aren’t foolproof. 
Here are direct links to access the privacy settings for a few of the most 
popular social networks: 
•  Facebook 
•  Twitter 
•  Google+ 
•  LinkedIn 
•  MySpace 
Use Other Social Media Precautions  
Apart from the obvious advice not to post anything on social networks 
that you’d mind being public, allow me to offer a few privacy tips: 
•  Limit your friend lists. Most people assume the more Facebook 
friends you have, the better. But if your list includes people you 
know only a little or not at all, you can’t think of them as friends— 
you can’t trust them to take care of your private data. Everyone has 
their own rules, but I wouldn’t want anyone to be a Facebook friend 
who I wouldn’t invite into my home for coffee. 
The situation is different with Facebook pages, Google+ circles, 
Twitter followers, and other one-way relationships. You may think 
of these as being more private because you’re not required to friend 
or follow the other person, but that doesn’t stop them from reading 
everything you post about yourself. If you can’t control who sees 
your photos, videos, or updates, censor yourself accordingly. 
•  Don’t assume “private” messages really are. You can send 
messages on Facebook that function much like email messages, 
or have a live chat. You can send direct messages to another user 
on Twitter that don’t appear in your public timeline. And many 
other social networking sites also offer seemingly direct, seemingly 
104  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
private modes of communication with other members. But these 
messages aren’t sacrosanct. Site administrators may be able to read 
them, and can almost certainly provide them to anyone who showed 
up with a court order. And there have been cases where, due to a 
programming error or other security breach, the contents of such 
discussions leaked out. 
•  Don’t assume “secret” services really are. A whole category 
of services has recently sprung up that lets you share thoughts and 
feelings with other people anonymously with mobile apps such 
as Secret and Whisper. Unfortunately, as the Wall Street Journal’s 
Geoffrey A. Fowler pointed out in Psst, Secrets You Share Online 
Aren't Always Safe, such apps can store and transmit enough 
information about you to give away your identity (and are subject 
to hacking and bugs, just like everything else). 
•  Limit apps. On Facebook and other sites that let you install apps, 
just say no. Although each app is different, some of them can read 
everything you write and spread your data around in ways you 
might dislike. 
•  Use HTTPS. On sites that support it (including all those listed 
above), use HTTPS to log in to prevent eavesdropping (see Browse 
Securely). 
•  Use good passwords. As I said in Protect Passwords and Credit 
Card Info, be sure to use passwords that can’t be guessed by human 
or machine. Long (think 14+ characters), random passwords are 
usually best way to go. And, if a site offers two-factor (or two-step) 
authentication, enable it (see the sidebar About Two-Factor 
Authentication, just ahead). That will greatly reduce the chance 
of your account being hacked. Be sure to keep those excellent 
passwords safe—don’t share them, and log out of your user account 
before letting someone else use your computer. 
•  Think carefully about pseudonyms. You may use an alias 
rather than your real name on Twitter, Tumblr, or other sites. 
Although pseudonyms like this can protect your privacy, they’re 
not impenetrable—so again, don’t stake anything critical on them. 
105  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, sometimes pseudonymity can work against you, as 
I describe in the sidebar When Privacy Hurts, ahead. 
About Two-Factor Authentication 
Two-factor authentication, sometimes known as two-step 
authentication, is when a site or service needs more than your 
username and password—it also needs another factor, which could 
be a physical token, a fingerprint scan, or any of numerous other 
options. One common implementation is to require a numeric code 
sent as a text message to your mobile phone or generated using 
a mobile app such as Google Authenticator. 
Two-factor authentication is less convenient than using a password 
alone, but it drastically reduces the chances of an account being 
hacked, because the attacker would need both your password and 
your mobile device (or other factor). 
When Privacy Hurts 
For the most part, I assume more privacy is better than less. But 
there are counterexamples—situations in which you’ll be safer or 
happier with less privacy. For instance: 
✦ 
If you try to get a reservation with Airbnb, the host may want 
evidence that you’re someone reasonable enough to invite into 
their home. Profiles with your real name and information about 
your real college, job, friends, and background could put someone 
at ease, while a fake profile (or none at all) could put them off. 
✦  The same employers, insurers, lenders, and other institutions 
that could ding you for negative information in social media could 
reward you for positive information. 
✦  New friends might feel more comfortable letting you into their 
lives if they can find out more about the real you online. 
✦ 
If the police want to know where you were on the night of the 
16th, you might be able to point them to exculpatory photos 
or tweets—but you better be able to prove they’re really yours! 
I can’t make any blanket statements about what you should or 
shouldn’t keep private; I can only say, as I said before: privacy cuts 
both ways. 
106  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Share Files Privately 
In my world, “sharing files” generally means exchanging business 
documents such as word processing files, PDFs, and screenshots— 
maybe the odd font or disk image. I may be atypical in that regard. 
I have heard stories suggesting that people sometimes share less-
wholesome files, including pirated movies, games, and software. If 
you’re tempted to do that, I invite you to skip back to Take the Pledge 
and follow the instructions there for avoiding online stupidity. 
Having dispensed with that obligatory disclaimer, the fact is that 
what you have to share is none of my business or concern. You may 
have digital content of some kind that, for any of numerous legitimate 
reasons, you want to share online, but for which you have a privacy 
concern. In this chapter, I talk briefly about the privacy risks in file 
sharing and explore a few ways of addressing them. 
Note: If you’re looking for the ultimate guide to sharing illegal stuff 
without getting caught, sorry—this isn’t it. I’ll outline the basics of 
private file sharing here, but remember: this book is about ordinary 
privacy for ordinary people. 
Understand the Privacy Risks of 
File Sharing 
To put it as concisely as I can, most privacy concerns with file sharing 
fall into one of the following categories: 
•  You want to share files with a specific person or group without 
letting anyone else know what you were sharing or with whom. 
•  You want to share files publicly, but without anyone knowing you 
were the person who uploaded or downloaded them. 
Most methods of sharing files offer neither sort of privacy protection, 
which is why you may want to use extra precautions. 
107  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And what are the risks if you don’t? That all depends on what you’re 
sharing. Perhaps a competitor sneaks a look at trade secrets in 
confidential business files you’re sharing with your employees, clients, 
or contractors. Maybe the public gets early access to the top-secret new 
album, software, or game that you were only previewing for your agent 
or investors. Or the other side in a legal dispute sees potentially 
damaging information in a file you intended for your lawyer’s eyes 
alone. And, if you’re sharing copyrighted media, the copyright holder 
can rain all sorts of legal trouble on you. 
Encrypt Transfers, Files, or Both  
A danger when sharing files is that their contents could be intercepted 
in transit between your computer and the recipient’s computer. You 
can reduce the risk of eavesdropping if you Encrypt Your Wi-Fi 
Connection or Use a VPN, but these measures protect data only for 
part of its journey. For end-to-end protection, the connection between 
your computer and the remote computer must be encrypted. 
When you’re connecting to a file server, that generally means using 
protocols such as SFTP (SSH File Transfer Protocol), FTPS (FTP 
over SSL), FTP over SSH, or WebDAV HTTPS. Whatever you do, you 
should not use plain FTP (File Transfer Protocol), which is about the 
least secure file transfer method there is. (Not only is ordinary FTP 
not encrypted, but even your password is sent in the clear!) 
However, protecting files while in transit may not always be an 
option—and even when it is, it only solves part of the problem. If a file 
is going to be sitting on a server someplace, and if you want to restrict 
access only to trusted parties, you might want to encrypt it as well. 
Back in Encrypt Your Email, I mentioned that you might use a 
program such as WinZip to encrypt files, or, to transfer files solely 
between Mac users to create an encrypted disk image in Disk Utility. 
The same advice holds for files you share with other methods—whether 
you upload to a public server or use any of numerous file sharing 
services such as Dropbox, Google Drive, SugarSync, or SpiderOak. 
108  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
But wait! Don’t these and most of the other cloud storage and syncing 
services already encrypt files you upload? Yes! Sort of! 
I’ll take Dropbox as an example, because it’s the most common of these 
(and because I wrote a book about it, Take Control of Dropbox). All the 
files you put in your Dropbox are indeed encrypted, but Dropbox holds 
the encryption key, so the company could decrypt your files if they had 
to (for example, in response to a subpoena). Even if that’s not a worry, 
Dropbox has two different methods of sharing files: 
•  Share a link: Dropbox generates a link to a file or folder you’ve 
stored online, and you can do whatever you want with that link— 
post it on a Web site or send it by email, say. Anyone who follows 
the link gets the contents of the file or folder—unencrypted. In 
other words, once you’ve shared a link, the only thing protecting 
it is the URL’s obscurity. If anyone learns that URL, Dropbox’s 
encryption is moot. 
•  Invite someone to a folder: You can share a folder in such a way 
that only people you invite can share it, and those people must all be 
Dropbox users too. This method enables the files to stay encrypted 
on the server all the time, although of course you can’t control what 
any of the other participants in the folder may do with your files. 
So, for Dropbox, if you’re sharing a link and you want to ensure that 
a file stays private, you should encrypt the file before putting it in 
Dropbox in the first place. Then you can share the password with the 
recipient (see the sidebar Transferring Passwords Out of Band). 
Other services have their own methods (so you’ll need to read the 
fine print), but the general rule is that if you’re sharing a link in such 
a way that the link is the only thing someone needs to access the file, 
the service’s encryption is irrelevant—you should instead encrypt the 
file yourself first. 
Finally, let me mention that if a file is sensitive enough to encrypt, you 
should pay attention to its name too. Sometimes filenames themselves 
give away important information, and if that may be the case, 
obscuring the filename is a smart idea. 
109  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keep File Syncing and Backups Private 
What about files you store in the cloud using a backup or sync 
service, but don’t share with anyone else? Those should be safe 
from prying eyes, right? 
Well, yes—usually. Any cloud syncing or backup service worth its 
salt encrypts your data both in transit and while stored online, which 
means that it should be safe from anyone but you, the person who 
chose the password. However: 
✦ 
A weak password could enable someone else to break in. 
✦ 
Even a strong password might not prevent the provider itself 
from accessing your files, if the provider holds the encryption key. 
Some (such as Dropbox) always do; some (such as SpiderOak) 
never do; and some (such as CrashPlan) give you the choice. I 
say more about this in Take Control of Dropbox and Take Control 
of CrashPlan Backups, but basically: if you don’t control the key, 
you should take extra steps to encrypt any sensitive files yourself. 
✦ 
If you’ve synced files to multiple devices, and if one of those 
devices is stolen, then those files could be visible to the thief 
(unless you’ve protected them in other ways, such as using 
FileVault on a Mac or some other form of full-disk encryption). 
But generally, as long as you’re reasonably careful, files you sync or 
back up to an encrypted cloud service should be fine as long as you 
don’t share them with others. 
By the way, just as you should encrypt backups in the cloud, you 
should do the same for backups stored on a local disk if that disk 
could ever leave your physical control (for example, if you keep 
an extra backup disk offsite). CrashPlan, Apple’s Time Machine, and 
numerous other backup apps can encrypt local backups. 
110  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Use Peer-to-Peer File Sharing  
Another type of file sharing relies on peer-to-peer (or P2P) file sharing 
networks, of which the best known is BitTorrent. Peer-to-peer file 
sharing has many perfectly valid, legal uses, including distributing 
large files without incurring massive storage and bandwidth fees. 
Sometimes you’ll even see musicians and movie studios using P2P 
networks to distribute media to the public. But P2P is often associated 
with illicit sharing of copyrighted materials—fair warning. 
In a P2P network, someone makes a file available for others to 
download, but as soon a recipient downloads a portion of the file, 
that person’s computer also turns into a server, making that portion 
available to other downloaders. Thereafter, anyone trying to download 
the same file may connect to multiple computers at once, fetching only 
small pieces of the file from each one; the client software reassembles 
all the pieces at the end. This makes file transfers more efficient, but 
(slightly) harder to track than conventional client-server transfers. 
Note: There’s an official BitTorrent client, but many third-party client 
apps also work with the BitTorrent protocol. 
How does your P2P client know which other computers are currently 
sharing all or part of a certain file (and if only part, which part)? That’s 
the job of a computer called a tracker, which maintains a list of all the 
file’s pieces, but doesn’t actually store the file itself. 
And how do you find a tracker that knows about a file you want to 
download? Using BitTorrent, that information—basically details about 
the file and the address of one or more trackers—is stored in a tiny file 
called a torrent. Torrents can be sent by email or posted on any Web 
site, but most users get torrents from innumerable Web sites that 
index and distribute torrents by the thousands. 
Frustratingly for those fighting copyright violations, a torrent itself 
(or a site that indexes them) doesn’t contain any of the files’ potentially 
copyrighted contents, only the address of a computer or service that 
111  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coordinates the files’ distribution, piece by piece. The only sure way to 
know who’s transferring what to whom on a P2P network is to join one 
yourself; in the process of transferring a particular file, you’ll also see 
the IP addresses of the other computers uploading and downloading 
portions of it. IP addresses, as we’ve seen, can often be traced back to 
individuals. So, Big Media frequently hires specialized firms to monitor 
P2P sharing of movies and other copyrighted files in order to find out 
which IP addresses should be the targets of legal action. 
Warning! Possibly an even bigger danger than privacy risks using  
BitTorrent and similar networks is that pirated media files often  
contain malware or digital watermarks that can harm your computer  
and/or further endanger your privacy. Be suspicious!  
Now then… What most people want from P2P networks is the public 
yet anonymous transfer of files. That is, you’re not hiding the files’ 
contents from anyone; you simply want to prevent anyone else from 
knowing that you were the one who uploaded or downloaded it. If 
that’s the case, you can consider several options: 
•  Hide your IP address. If you use a proxy server or a VPN (see 
Use a VPN)—or even better, an anonymous VPN that does not log 
connections (examples include BTGuard and TorGuard)—you 
greatly reduce the risk that any particular file transfer can be traced 
to you, at the cost of slower performance. (Of course, this doesn’t 
help you if someone finds the file in question on your computer!) 
•  Avoid suspicious public indexes. You may have heard of a 
site called The Pirate Bay—I won’t link to it here because I’d like 
you to stay away from it! Same goes for IsoHunt. These are among 
the biggest torrent indexers, and they’re also places most likely 
to lead you to torrents that are tracked, contain malware, or both. 
With some research you can find less common indexes, including 
some that are invitation-only. 
•  Avoid seeding. In P2P terms, seeding means making an entire 
file available to downloaders—either as the file’s originator or as 
a public service after you’ve downloaded the whole thing. Seeding 
112  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
is considered a kindness among P2P users, but it also arguably 
increases your legal liability. 
•  Try a friend-to-friend network. Most P2P networks, including 
BitTorrent, are public—anyone can join. A subset of P2P networks 
is the friend-to-friend (F2F) network, which is basically a private 
peer-to-peer network among friends who agree to participate with 
each other—only members can easily see what’s being transferred 
within the group. Retroshare is an example of such a network. 
There are many other varieties of peer-to-peer file sharing systems, 
and numerous apps, services, and techniques designed to keep them 
more private. But if you have to go through that much effort, you may 
be better off creating your very own personal cloud, as I discuss next. 
Create a Personal Cloud  
What if you could combine the simplicity of Dropbox with the security 
of a friend-to-friend network and the assurance that all the data and 
hardware is safely under your control? And what if, in the bargain, you 
got up to 3 TB of file storage that you can access from any computer 
or iOS device, with no monthly fees? If you have a lot of data to share 
privately, you may be interested in a device called the Transporter. 
Transporter is a small gadget containing a hard drive and a network 
interface, much like a NAS (network-attached storage) device. (A 
version called Transporter Sync omits the internal hard drive and 
works with any external USB hard drive you have.) The difference 
is its software, which makes it function very much like Dropbox. All 
transfers to and from your Transporter are encrypted, and if you have 
two or more of them, they can automatically sync any or all of their 
files with each other, regardless of where they’re physically located. 
So, merely by connecting a Transporter or two to the Internet, you 
effectively create a personal cloud for file sharing. 
I’ve had a Transporter for nearly a year, and although it’s not ideal for 
most of my needs (see my TidBITS article Bypassing the Cloud with 
Transporter), I like the fact that it has none of the complications of 
113  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
peer-to-peer networks. If I wanted to share large files with a few 
friends and have near-zero risk of intrusion or detection, that’s how 
I’d do it. (You can even share files in a way that other users need not 
have their own Transporter.) But remember that anyone with physical 
access to one of your Transporters, or who can learn your password 
in any way, could obtain your data, so be sure to take appropriate 
security measures. 
Transporter isn’t the only device in this class. A number of other NAS 
devices (such as Synology’s DiskStation products and TonidoPlug) also 
offer private sharing over the Internet, but Transporter stands out for 
its size, cost, and simplicity. 
It’s also possible to create a personal, Dropbox-like system for syncing 
and sharing files using only software—for example, with the free 
BitTorrent Sync. But because this runs on your computer(s), you’ll 
have to leave at least one computer turned on, awake, and connected 
to the Internet at all times to maintain access to your data from other 
devices. 
114  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maintain Privacy for 
Your Kids 
Everything else in this book has been about managing your own 
privacy. But if you’re a parent of a young child, you have an additional 
challenge: maintaining your child’s privacy. Speaking as the father of 
both a preschooler and an adult child, this isn’t as easy as you might 
think. 
At a certain age, your child will begin making his own decisions about 
what to share online. I can’t tell you what that age is or should be; I 
can only say it will be too young and you will likely be horrified at some 
of your child’s choices. You’ll have to sit down with your child and have 
the online privacy talk, which could be even more stressful than the sex 
talk. You’ll try to lay down the law, but your child will push back and 
find ways around whatever controls you exert. Regardless of when and 
how this plays out, you should brace for the certainty that your child’s 
online privacy will eventually be out of your control, and remember 
that kids always make poor decisions on their way to learning how to 
make good ones. 
Note: In the United States, 13 is a “magic” age when it comes  
to online privacy. COPPA (Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act)  
prohibits Web sites or online services aimed at children from  
collecting personally identifiable information from children under  
13 without parental consent, a requirement that many sites meet  
by refusing to let younger kids have accounts at all.  
What I want to talk about is what comes before then—the time 
between your child’s birth and the moment you hand over the keys 
to the digital world. This is the period when your child’s online privacy 
depends mainly on you, and the choices you make now can affect your 
child forever. 
115  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
My mother has snapshots of me as a young child that were great for 
embarrassing me in front of college girlfriends, but the photos were 
kept in boxes or albums and dragged out only on special occasions. 
At worst, a girl might tell a story about a picture she’d seen, but she 
couldn’t show anyone else. 
But pictures don’t work like that anymore. If you snap a cute shot of 
your young daughter in some comically brilliant situation, it’s much 
more likely to go on Facebook or Twitter than on paper in an album. A 
few years from now, her classmates will be able to see it. All her future 
friends, love interests, employers, and children will be able to see it— 
so will unsavory characters you’d like to protect her from. And anyone 
who sees it will be able to share it with anyone else in the world. Is 
there any possibility your daughter might live to regret your choice? 
Everything you say about your child online—every picture and 
video, every story told or fact revealed—becomes part of your child’s 
permanent Internet record. You can’t ever take it back, and you can’t 
ever control how it might be used. And things that seem innocent now 
might cause all sorts of problems for your child in 10 or 15 years. 
None of this means you should never talk about your child online or 
post photos or videos. It only means you should do so circumspectly 
and sparingly. You’ll have to determine your own rules, but here are 
my tips: 
•  Never post anything online that could be used to predict your child’s 
location (including a route to or from school), at least when a parent 
isn’t around. This includes images with signs or landmarks in the 
background. 
•  No matter how cute your kid is in the bathtub, seriously, don’t post 
any nude photos online. (You did Take the Pledge, right?) 
•  Blog posts and other stories about your child’s behavior problems 
might have far-reaching consequences. Keep it positive. 
•  Kids say and do the darnedest things, but even though your 
children’s antics may entertain other adults, they could result in 
untold cruelty in the hands of a class bully a few years from now. 
116  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Be super careful about sharing anything that has the potential to 
embarrass your child in the future. 
As your child starts using online services without your supervision, 
you will undoubtedly want to teach him good privacy habits, and 
I hope the information in this book (especially in Take the Pledge) 
provides a useful starting point for discussion. If you instill a healthy 
sense of wariness from a young age, your child will be better equipped 
to fully take over the management of his own online privacy when the 
time comes. 
117  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Teach This Book 
This book helps you understand threats to your online privacy and take 
steps to reduce them. But what if you need to help other people make 
better online privacy choices? If you’d like to use the material in this 
book as the basis of a presentation, class, training program, or other 
teaching opportunity, we’d like to offer our assistance: 
Share a Cheat Sheet 
Lots of people won’t read a book like this but still long for better online 
privacy. So we’ve developed a free, one-page PDF handout to cover 
the main points and key tips in this book. You can give it to anyone 
who needs quick advice. Download it here, and you can print copies for 
colleagues, send it to them via email, or share it online. 
Order Classroom Copies 
You can buy discounted copies of this book for classroom use. If you 
want to teach a group about online privacy, classroom copies are an 
inexpensive way to ensure that each participant has a copy of the book. 
Download Training Materials 
Not sure what to say in a course about online privacy? You can 
download a free, simplified presentation (in an iPhone- and iPad­
friendly PDF format, with the option to purchase an editable Keynote 
or PowerPoint file) that covers the main points in this book (contact us 
for purchasing details). Be sure to download the cheat sheet for your 
students too. 
Hire the Author 
For the ultimate experience, you can hire Joe Kissell to speak to your 
group about online privacy in person (or, if you prefer, by video). He’s 
an entertaining and engaging speaker, and can work with groups of 
any size. Besides teaching the material in this book, he can customize 
a presentation to meet your organization’s needs, answer participants’ 
questions, and work with you to develop effective online privacy 
policies. For more information and a price quote, please contact Joe. 
118  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About This Book 
Thank you for purchasing this Take Control book. We hope you find 
it both useful and enjoyable to read. We welcome your comments. 
Ebook Extras  
You can access extras related to this ebook on the Web. Once you’re 
on the ebook’s Take Control Extras page, you can: 
•  Download any available new version of the ebook for free, or buy 
a subsequent edition at a discount. 
•  Download various formats, including PDF, EPUB, and Mobipocket. 
(Learn about reading on mobile devices on our Device Advice page.) 
•  Read postings to the ebook’s blog. These may include new 
information and tips, as well as links to author interviews. At the 
top of the blog, you can also see any update plans for the ebook. 
If you bought this ebook from the Take Control Web site, it has been 
automatically added to your account, where you can download it in 
other formats and access any future updates. However, if you bought 
this ebook elsewhere, you can add it to your account manually: 
•  If you already have a Take Control account, log in to your account, 
and then click the “access extras…” link above. 
•  If you don’t have a Take Control account, first make one by 
following the directions that appear when you click the “access 
extras…” link above. Then, once you are logged in to your new 
account, add your ebook by clicking the “access extras…” link a 
second time. 
Note: If you try these directions and find that your device is 
incompatible with the Take Control Web site, contact us. 
119  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About the Author  
Joe Kissell is a Senior Editor of TidBITS, a Web site 
and email newsletter about Apple and the Internet, 
and the author of numerous books about Mac and 
iOS topics, including Take Control of Your Passwords, 
Take Control of Dropbox, and Take Control of Backing 
Up Your Mac. 
He is also a Senior Contributor to Macworld, was the winner of a 
2009 Neal award for Best How-to Article, and has appeared on the 
MacTech 25 list (the 25 people voted most influential in the Macintosh 
community) since 2007. Joe has worked in the Mac software industry 
since the early 1990s, including positions managing software 
development for Nisus Software and Kensington Technology Group. 
When not writing or speaking, Joe likes to travel, walk, cook, eat, and 
dream (in both senses of the word). He lives in San Diego with his wife, 
Morgen Jahnke; their son, Soren; and their cat, Zora. To contact Joe 
about this book, send him email. 
Shameless Plug 
Although I currently write and speak about technology as my day job, 
I have a great many other interests. To learn more about me, read 
other things I’ve written, and find out what I’m up to beyond the realm 
of Apple products, visit my home page at JoeKissell.com. You can also 
follow me on Twitter (@joekissell) or App.net (@joekissell). 
120  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
About the Publisher  
Publishers Adam and Tonya Engst have 
been creating Apple-related content since 
they started the online newsletter TidBITS, 
in 1990. In TidBITS, you can find the latest 
Apple news, plus read reviews, opinions, 
and more. 
Adam and Tonya are known in the Apple 
world as writers, editors, and speakers. 
They are also parents to Tristan, who has 
reached the age where he can read, understand, and find mistakes in 
the Take Control series. 
Credits 
• Publisher: Adam Engst 
• Editor in Chief: Tonya Engst 
• Editor: Geoff Duncan 
• Production Assistant: Oliver Habicht 
• Take Control logo: Geoff Allen of FUN is OK 
• Cover design: Sam Schick of Neversink 
121  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright and Fine Print 
Take Control of Your Online Privacy 
ISBN: 978-1-61542-425-2  
Copyright © 2014, alt concepts inc. All rights reserved.  
TidBITS Publishing Inc. 
50 Hickory Road 
Ithaca, NY 14850 USA 
Take Control electronic books help readers regain a measure of control in an oftentimes 
out-of-control universe. Take Control ebooks also streamline the publication process so 
that information about quickly changing technical topics can be published while it’s still 
relevant and accurate. 
This electronic book doesn’t use copy protection because copy protection makes life 
harder for everyone. So we ask a favor of our readers. If you want to share your copy of 
this ebook with a friend, please do so as you would a physical book, meaning that if your 
friend uses it regularly, he or she should buy a copy. Your support makes it possible for 
future Take Control ebooks to hit the Internet long before you’d find the same information 
in a printed book. Plus, if you buy the ebook, you’re entitled to any free updates that 
become available. 
You have our permission to make a single print copy of this ebook for personal use. Please 
reference this page if a print service refuses to print the ebook for copyright reasons. 
Although the author and TidBITS Publishing Inc. have made a reasonable effort to ensure 
the accuracy of the information herein, they assume no responsibility for errors or 
omissions. The information in this ebook is distributed “As Is,” without warranty of any 
kind. Neither TidBITS Publishing Inc. nor the author shall be liable to any person or entity 
for any special, indirect, incidental, or consequential damages, including without 
limitation lost revenues or lost profits, that may result (or that are alleged to result) from 
the use of these materials. In other words, use this information at your own risk. 
Many of the designations used to distinguish products and services are claimed 
as trademarks or service marks. Any trademarks, service marks, product names, or named 
features that appear in this title are assumed to be the property of their respective owners. 
All product names and services are used in an editorial fashion only, with no intention of 
infringement of the trademark. No such use, or the use of any trade name, is meant to 
convey endorsement or other affiliation with this title. 
This title is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, 
or otherwise approved by Apple Inc. Because of the nature of this title, it uses terms that 
are the trademarks or that are the registered trademarks of Apple Inc.; you can view a 
complete list of the trademarks and of the registered trademarks of Apple Inc. 
122  

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Featured Titles 
Click any book title below or visit our Web catalog to add more ebooks 
to your Take Control collection! 
Take Control of 1Password (Joe Kissell): Slowed down by entering 
passwords repeatedly? Learn how to let 1Password do the heavy lifting. 
Take Control of Apple TV (Josh Centers): This essential guide covers 
everything you need to know about the Apple TV! 
Take Control of Backing Up Your Mac (Joe Kissell): Set up a rock-
solid backup strategy so that you can restore quickly and completely, 
no matter what catastrophe arises. 
Take Control of CrashPlan Backups (Joe Kissell): Join backup expert 
Joe Kissell as he shares real-world advice about protecting your data 
with CrashPlan’s onsite, offsite, and cloud backups. 
Take Control of Dropbox (Joe Kissell): Discover the many features— 
especially the non-obvious ones!—that make Dropbox an exceptionally 
useful and popular Internet service for file transfer and collaboration. 
Take Control of iCloud (Joe Kissell): Understand the many features, 
get set up properly, and enjoy iCloud! 
Take Control of iTunes 11: The FAQ (Kirk McElhearn): This FAQ-style 
ebook helps you wrap iTunes around your little finger and enjoy your 
media more. 
Take Control of Your Paperless Office (Joe Kissell): With your Mac, 
scanner, and this ebook in hand, you’ll finally clear the chaos of an 
office overflowing with paper. 
Take Control of Your Passwords (Joe Kissell) Overcome password 
overload without losing your cool—and view the comic that goes with 
this ebook! 
123  

