EARLY ACCESS
A free update to this book 
will be available shortly after 
iOS 11 is released.
by JOSH CENTERS
iOS 11 
TAKE CONTROL OF
$15
EBOOK EXTRAS: v1.0
Downloads, Updates, Feedback

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Read Me First .................................................................4 
Introduction ..................................................................6 
What’s New in iOS 11 .....................................................7 
Explore the Lock Screen ................................................27 
Take Control of Control Center ........................................37 
Hone the Home Screen ..................................................48 
Search with Spotlight ....................................................55 
Switch Apps on the iPhone .............................................59 
Speak to Siri ................................................................62 
Command Keyboards ....................................................68 
Use Share Sheets .........................................................76 
An Introduction to iCloud ...............................................82 
There’s an App (Store) for That ......................................89 
All in the Family Sharing ................................................92 
Special iPad Features ....................................................97 
Capture Camera Basics ................................................109 
Get to Know Photos .....................................................117 
Master Messages ........................................................126 
Make Calls .................................................................141 
Go on Safari ...............................................................145 
Find Yourself, Your Stuff, and Your Friends ......................149 
Organize Your Wallet ...................................................157 
2  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Control Your Home ......................................................161 
Additional Apple Apps ..................................................170 
Guard Your Privacy ......................................................175 
iOS Accessibility .........................................................182 
Manage Data Usage ....................................................188 
Improve Battery Life ...................................................191 
About This Book .........................................................197 
Copyright and Fine Print ..............................................200 
3  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Read Me First 
Welcome to Take Control of iOS 11, version 2.1, published in August 
2017 by alt concepts inc. This book was written by Josh Centers and 
edited by Joe Kissell. 
If you want to share this ebook with a friend, we ask that you do so 
as you would with a physical book: “lend” it for a quick look, but ask 
your friend to buy a copy for careful reading or reference. Discounted 
classroom and Mac user group copies are available. 
This book explains the new features in iOS 11, helps you pick the 
optimal settings for your needs, and describes a handpicked selection 
of interesting and important features from prior versions of iOS. 
Copyright © 2017, Josh Centers. All rights reserved. 
Stop! Attention! Achtung!  
Before you update to iOS 11: Be aware that it does not support 32­
bit apps. Developers have received plenty of warning, so most apps 
have been updated, but older apps may be locked out. To see a list of 
apps that will not work in iOS 11, look at Settings > General > About > 
Applications in iOS 10. If you see any apps on that list, be sure to get 
the latest update from the App Store. If there aren’t any, hold off on 
installing iOS 11 until you’ve migrated away from those apps. 
Updates and More  
You can access extras related to this ebook on the web (use the link 
in Ebook Extras, near the end; it’s available only to purchasers). On 
the ebook’s Take Control Extras page, you can: 
•  Download any available new version of the ebook for free, or buy 
any subsequent edition at a discount. 
4  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
•  Download various formats, including PDF, EPUB, and Mobipocket. 
(Learn about reading on mobile devices on our Device Advice page.) 
•  Read the ebook’s blog. You may find new tips or information, links 
to author interviews, and update plans for the ebook. 
If you bought this ebook from the Take Control website, it has been 
added to your account, where you can download it in other formats 
and access any future updates. However, if you bought this ebook 
elsewhere, you can add it to your account manually; see Ebook Extras. 
Basics  
You can find basic instructions for checking what iOS version your 
device is running and for updating iOS in What iOS Version Am I On?, 
part of the Read Me First book by Tonya Engst. 
Touch and Hold vs. Press  
Throughout this book, I use the terms touch and hold and press. 
Here’s what they mean: 
•  Touch and hold: Lightly place your finger on the screen and hold 
it there for a few moments. 
•  Press: Press firmly on the screen (for iOS devices equipped with 
3D Touch) or touch and hold (for devices without 3D Touch). I use 
the same term in both cases because the gestures are usually inter­
changeable. I note the places in which they are not. 
There are situations in which pressing firmly (on devices equipped 
with 3D Touch) does something different than a touch-and-hold. 
Indeed, 3D Touch recognizes two levels of firm pressure—you can 
apply moderate pressure to preview something (a “peek”) and 
stronger pressure to open it all the way (a “pop”). When I need to 
make that distinction, I say press firmly. 
5  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
At a glance, iOS 11 may not seem much different than iOS 10, but there 
are major changes afoot. 
Two things might throw you for a loop: Control Center has been 
redesigned from the ground up to cram a new array of customizable 
controls into a single page, and Notification Center has been done 
away with, having been merged with the Lock screen. 
The new Control Center offers a slew of new capabilities, such as 
screen recording, taking notes from the Lock screen, and quick access 
to the Apple TV remote. Don’t let its strange look fool you—it’s a huge 
improvement over the old design. 
There are improvements abound for all iOS devices, but this year the 
iPad is the star of the show. Apple has rethought how multitasking 
works in iOS 11, with a more efficient App Switcher, a Mac-like Dock, 
and improved Slide Over and Split Screen views. 
Additionally, iOS 11 offers new markup capabilities for email attach­
ments, PDFs, screenshots, webpages, and more. These features, 
marketed as Instant Markup, are highlighted on the iPad, but work on 
all iOS devices. But if you have an iPad Pro paired with an Apple 
Pencil, they work all the better. 
For years, Apple fought Finder-like access to the filesystem on iOS. It 
finally relented somewhat with iOS 8 and the iCloud Drive app, but in 
iOS 11, Apple has replaced it with the Files app, which offers access to 
not only files stored in iCloud, but locally stored files as well, if the app 
that created the file supports it. 
iOS 11 offers niceties for every iOS device, but it pushes the iPad one 
step closer to being a peer to the Mac. 
This is a preliminary release of the book, prior to iOS 11’s official 
launch. After it’s released to all iOS users, I’ll update the book as 
needed. 
6  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What’s New in iOS 11 
iOS 11 brings big changes to how you use your iPad, but it also features 
numerous tweaks for all iOS devices. The Notification Center and Lock 
screen have merged, Control Center is customizable and more 
compact, and you can now directly manipulate files stored locally on 
your device. Let’s dive in… 
General  
iOS 11 features a number of refinements that don’t fit in any specific 
category: 
•  No more 32-bit apps: iOS 11 no longer supports 32-bit apps, so if 
you depend on older apps that haven’t been updated in a while, be 
aware that they may not work. See Stop! Attention! Achtung! to 
learn how to discover incompatible apps before updating to iOS 11. 
•  Aesthetic: Many apps have new looks, including Calculator, Mail, 
Messages, and Wallet. Mail, Messages, and other apps now have the 
big, bold text look that Music and News adopted in iOS 10. Also, 
signal bars are back, replacing the dots. 
•  Instant Markup: Marketed as an iPad feature, Instant markup 
also works on the iPhone, and it lets you quickly mark up screen-
shots and other graphics. 
When you take a screenshot in iOS 11, by pressing the Home and 
Sleep/Wake buttons simultaneously, it now appears as a thumbnail 
in the lower-left corner of the screen. Take multiple screenshots in 
rapid succession and those thumbnails stack. Tap the thumbnail or 
stack to draw on the screenshot(s) (Figure 1). 
Instant markup is also found in Share sheets. For instance, in 
Safari, tap the Share 
icon to bring up the Share sheet and choose 
Markup as PDF to create a PDF of the current webpage that you can 
draw on. See Markup as PDF. 
7  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: After you take a screenshot, it now appears as a thumb­
nail in the lower-left corner. Tap the thumbnail to draw on it. 
•  Inline drawing: Many apps now let you draw in them. For 
example, while composing a new Mail message, tap inside the 
message area to reveal the popover and choose Insert Drawing to 
draw directly in the message. 
•  Automatic setup: When setting up an iOS 11 device from scratch, 
you can place another iOS 11 device near it to transfer many settings 
automatically. 
During setup, choose automatic setup when prompted on the new 
device. Place your old iOS device near the new device and unlock 
the old device. You should see a Set Up New iPhone (or iPad) 
prompt on the old device and a code that looks like a blue cloud on 
the new device, which you will scan with the old device after tapping 
Continue (Figure 2). 
8  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: During Automatic Setup, you scan the visual code on the 
old device (the blue cloud on the left) with the old device, which 
establishes a link between the two devices. 
Be sure to keep the old device near the new one and unlocked until 
you’re told that Automatic Setup is complete. Automatic Setup 
transfers your Apple ID, iCloud, and Wi-Fi logins to the new device, 
but you’ll still have to set up Touch ID manually. 
•  Location: A blue bar now appears at the top of the screen when an 
app is accessing your location in the background. Also, Apple has 
changed the meanings of the Location Services icons in the status 
bar. See Understand Privacy Settings. 
•  Media player: The system media player has been redesigned. 
Notably, the volume indicator now stays out of the way of your 
media when you adjust the volume (Figure 3). 
9  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: The redesigned media player puts the volume control in 
the upper-right corner instead of plastering it all over the video. 
•  Rating prompts: Tired of annoying app review prompts? In iOS 
11, developers have to use Apple’s interface, which can prompt you 
only three times per year, lets you rate the app without leaving it, 
and will never bother you again after you rate the app. It can also be 
turned off entirely by disabling In-App Ratings & Reviews in Set­
tings > iTunes & App Stores. 
•  3D Touch: You can no longer access the App Switcher by pressing 
on the left side of the screen. 
•  Emergency SOS: In iOS 11, you can quickly call emergency 
services by pressing the Sleep/Wake button five times and swiping 
right on the SOS 
icon. You can configure who you call and notify 
in Settings > Emergency SOS. See Deal with Emergencies. 
iPad  
The iPad is a major focus of iOS 11, with a number of features specific 
to Apple’s big-screen iOS devices: 
•  Dock: The Dock has been refactored for the iPad to more closely 
resemble the Mac Dock. It now holds up to 15 apps, and it has a 
section on the right that displays Handoff and recently used apps. 
10  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The new Dock is persistent, and can be accessed from most ap­
plications by swiping up from the bottom of the screen. It also plays 
a key role in the iPad’s new multitasking features. See Manage the 
Dock. 
•  App Switcher: The App Switcher is now optimized for the iPad. 
Instead of swiping through one app at a time, the iPad App Switcher 
displays several apps at once, along with the redesigned Control 
Center (Figure 4). See Multitask on the iPad. 
Figure 4: iPad multitasking is supercharged in iOS 11 with a larger 
and more persistent Dock and a more efficient app switcher. On the 
right, you can see the new Control Center. 
•  Slide Over and Split Screen: These multitasking features have 
been overhauled to be more flexible. See Multitask on the iPad. 
•  Drag and Drop: The iPad now lets you use drag and drop in 
several interesting ways. For instance, if you have, say, Safari and 
Notes both open in Split Screen, you can drag URLs from Safari into 
Notes. Also, you now add a second app to the screen by dragging it 
from the Dock to the right side of the screen. See Drag and Drop. 
11  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Instant Notes: If you have an iPad Pro and an Apple Pencil, you 
can place the Apple Pencil on the Lock Screen to quickly jot down a 
note. See Work with Instant Notes. 
•  Keyboard Flick: Keys on the iPad’s onscreen keyboard now 
feature secondary characters that you can type by flicking down on 
the key instead of pressing it. For instance, you can flick down on 
“r” to type a 4. Note that this isn’t available on the 12.9-inch iPad 
Pro, since it already has a full-size keyboard. See Keyboarding on 
the iPad. 
•  Aesthetic changes: In landscape mode, the time display on the 
Lock screen is centered again. Also, Lock screen widgets always 
display as one column, instead of two in landscape mode as they did 
in iOS 10. 
To learn more about these new features, see Special iPad Features. 
Lock Screen  
The Lock screen sees some major changes in iOS 11: 
•  Goodbye, Notification Center: The Lock screen replaces Notif­
ication Center in iOS 11. Instead, you swipe up on the main Lock 
screen to see previous notifications. 
•  New Locking Mechanism: So what happens when you swipe 
down from above the screen? Instead of pulling down Notification 
Center, it now takes you back to the Lock screen, though it doesn’t 
necessarily lock your device—Apple calls this the Cover Sheet, but 
it’s practically identical to the Lock screen. 
•  Redesigned media player: The Lock screen media player has 
been redesigned to look more widget-like. 
For more on the changes to the Lock screen in iOS 11, see Explore the 
Lock Screen. 
12  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Control Center  
Control Center sees some enormous changes in iOS 11. Refer back to 
Figure 4 to see how it looks: 
•  Back to One Page: In iOS 10, Apple split Control Center into two 
pages—three if you had HomeKit Accessories. Apple has completely 
redesigned Control Center in iOS 11, merging everything back into a 
single page. 
•  Minimalist Controls: You may find the new Control Center 
baffling at first. Apple has shrunk the old controls down into a set of 
minimalist controls, which often reveal more controls and informa­
tion if you press them. 
•  Customization and new toys: Control Center can now be cus­
tomized in Settings > Control Center > Customize Controls. Apple 
has also added a number of new widgets, including Apple TV Re­
mote, the new Do Not Disturb while Driving, Low Power Mode, 
Screen Recording (finally!), and more. 
See Take Control of Control Center to learn how to use it. 
Home Screen  
The Home screen sees a couple of small changes in iOS 11: 
•  Move multiple apps at once: One you drag an app to move it, 
you can tap as many app icons as you like to move them all at the 
same time. 
• Dock: The Dock no longer shows app names under the icons. 
For more, see Hone the Home Screen. 
Files  
The iCloud Drive app has been replaced by the new Files app, which 
not only manages your iCloud Drive files, but also files stored locally 
13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
on your device and even in other cloud services. It also lets you use 
tags to label and sort files and folders (Figure 5). See Say Hello to the 
Files App. 
Figure 5: The new Files app can manage local files in addition to 
those in iCloud Drive. 
Siri  
Siri sees its largest changes since iOS 9, with a new look, new voices, 
new capabilities, and new artificial intelligence features: 
•  New voices: Apple has redone Siri’s voices to sound more natural 
and less robotic. For example, Siri now uses different inflections 
while speaking. 
•  Artificial Intelligence: Siri now uses on-device learning to 
understand you better. Siri also works throughout iOS to help 
recommend things you may like. For instance, Siri may suggest 
Safari searches it thinks you’ll be interested in, words in the Quick-
Type keyboard, and relevant articles in News. 
•  Translation: You can now ask Siri something like, “How do you 
say ‘Welcome to Costco, we love you.’ in Spanish,” and it will speak 
out the translation. 
14  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  More Results: Siri can now offer multiple choices when respond­
ing to a query, including alternative sources. 
•  Personal DJ: If you subscribe to Apple Music, Siri will pull your 
music preferences from it so you can say “Play something I like” and 
Siri will play a song at random that it thinks you’ll like. You can also 
ask Siri questions about the currently playing song, like “Who’s the 
drummer on this song?” 
•  SiriKit additions: Developers can now create app plugins that let 
Siri modify lists, display QR codes, and start workouts. See Use 
Third-party Apps with Siri. 
•  One Siri to rule them all: Siri data now optionally syncs across 
all the devices associated with your Apple ID, so you’re always 
talking to the same Siri. 
•  Type to Siri: There’s a new accessibility setting in Settings > 
General > Accessibility > Siri that lets you type queries to Siri 
instead of speaking them. Unfortunately, with this setting enabled, 
you can no longer speak to Siri by pressing and holding the Home 
button, since this only allows typing, but Hey Siri still lets you speak 
with Siri. 
•  Disable Siri: You can disable Siri in Settings > Accessibility by 
setting Press and Hold to Speak to Off. 
Speak to Siri teaches you the basics of Siri and suggests commands to 
try. 
Keyboard  
Text editing gets some nice tweaks in iOS 11: 
•  Text selection is fixed! Perhaps the greatest feature of iOS 11 is 
that text selection works as it should. The insertion point no longer 
goes bonkers while trying to select text on certain webpages. If 
you’re just trying to select a word, sentence, or paragraph, it won’t 
try to select the entire page or other nonsense. Finally! 
15  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Password autofill for apps: Previously, iOS could store user-
names and passwords, but it could fill them only in Safari and some 
apps. Now you can insert those login credentials from any app via 
the QuickType keyboard. See Autofill Passwords. 
•  One-handed typing: Typing on an iPhone with one hand can be 
vexing, especially with the large Plus models. Touch and hold the 
Emoji or Globe key to reveal a popover that lets you push the key­
board to the left or right of the screen for easy one-thumb access. 
See Type One-Handed. 
•  Dictation: If you have multiple language keyboards enabled in 
Settings > General > Keyboards, you can quickly switch between 
dictation languages. See Dictate Text. 
•  Number pad: The number pad has a new look in iOS 11 (Figure 
6). 
Figure 6: The number pad has a slightly different look in iOS 11. 
See Command Keyboards for tips and tricks for the onscreen keyboard. 
HomeKit  
Not much has changed on the surface with HomeKit, Apple’s home 
automation framework, but there are some big changes under the hood 
which could drastically increase the number of supported devices: 
•  AirPlay 2: Apple is updating its AirPlay protocol and including it 
in the Home app, so you can use it to send audio to multiple devices 
16  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at once. However, as of August 2017, this doesn’t seem to be fully 
implemented. 
•  Zones: The Home app now lets you assign rooms to zones, like 
Upstairs and Downstairs. For instance, you could tell Siri, “Turn off 
my upstairs lights.” 
•  Multi-person automations: HomeKit automations can now 
trigger based on the locations of multiple people. So you could set 
up an automation that turns the lights off if both you and your 
partner are away from home. 
•  Faster Bluetooth response: Bluetooth HomeKit accessories will 
respond faster in iOS 11 once their manufacturers update their 
firmware. 
•  Enhanced device setup: When setting up an accessory, instead 
of waiting for the accessory to appear in Home, you first scan the 
accessory and then choose it on the screen. Device manufacturers 
can now also use QR codes and NFC tags for setup. Additionally, 
accessory setup now seems to be more reliable than it was in iOS 10. 
•  Relative time offsets: Now you can set an automation to not only 
trigger at sunrise or sunset, but 15-minute increments before or 
after. So you could turn your Good Morning scene on 30 minutes 
before sunrise. 
•  Additional conditions: You can now use time and people’s loca­
tions as conditions for automations. For instance, you can have an 
automation trigger when everyone’s left the house, but only after 
sunset. Or you can have an automation trigger at a certain time, but 
only if everyone’s home. 
•  Timers: You can set an action to trigger for only a set amount of 
time, like turning your porch light on for five minutes when you get 
home. 
•  New devices: HomeKit now works with sprinklers and faucets. 
Also, device manufacturers no longer need to get Apple’s approval 
before manufacturing a HomeKit device, so existing devices on the 
17  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
market could potentially gain HomeKit support. And hobbyists are 
now allowed to use HomeKit on their own non-commercial projects. 
See Control Your Home to learn HomeKit fundamentals. 
App Store  
The App Store has been completely redesigned in iOS 11, with more 
emphasis on curated content and daily featured apps. See There’s an 
App (Store) for That. 
Camera  
The Camera app gets a few improvements in iOS 11: 
•  Better photo and video compression: In iOS 11, photos are 
now stored in the standard High Efficiency Image File Format 
(HEIF) and videos are stored in High Efficiency Video Coding 
(HEVC), which uses drastically less storage space. 
•  New filters: The Camera app now includes several new filters to 
stylize your photos. 
•  QR codes: The Camera app can now (finally) read QR codes! Just 
point the camera at a QR code and a notification appears with the 
code’s contents, whether that be a contact, an email address, web 
address or something else. You can even join a Wi-Fi access point 
automatically if it has a QR code you can scan (Figure 7)! 
18  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Camera in iOS 11 can extract contacts and Wi-Fi logins 
from QR codes. 
•  Improved Portrait mode: If you take photos with an iPhone 7 
Plus or other device that supports Portrait mode, you’ll enjoy better 
image quality and low-light performance, as well as optical image 
stabilization. 
See Capture Camera Basics for more on using the Camera. 
Maps  
Maps in iOS 11 features a few welcome new features: 
•  Indoor Maps: Maps now features maps of selected indoor places 
like airports and malls (Figure 8). 
19  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Westfield Valley Fair in San Jose, California is just one of 
many indoor areas now detailed in Maps. 
•  Speed Limits: Maps shows you the current speed limit while 
navigating. 
•  Lane Guidance: Maps will let you know which lane you need to be 
in so you don’t miss your exit. 
•  VR Flyover: If you have an iOS device with an A9 or later 
processor, navigate to a city that supports Flyover, and you can tap 
the new Flyover button to see a VR view of that city. 
See Find Yourself, Your Stuff, and Your Friends to learn about Maps, 
Find My iPhone, and Find My Friends. 
Messages  
Messages sees far fewer changes than it did in iOS 10: 
•  App drawer: Remember Messages apps? iOS 11 features a re­
designed app drawer so they’re easier to access and less likely to be 
forgotten (Figure 9). 
20  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Apple hopes the new app drawer makes Messages apps a 
little less forgettable. 
•  Message effects: Messages has four new effects: Echo, Spotlight, 
Love, and Celebration. See Use Screen Effects. 
•  Person-to-person Apple Pay: Apple has promised a new Mes­
sages app to enable person-to-person Apple Pay payments, but it’s 
not implemented in the iOS 11 beta. We’ll update this book in the 
future to discuss it. 
Note: Apple has promised a feature that will store Messages in 
iCloud, but it is not present in the current beta of iOS at publication 
time. I will update this book with information about that feature when 
it’s available. 
See Master Messages to learn the ins and outs of the Messages app.  
Photos  
Apple focused mainly on Live Photos and Memories for Photos in iOS 
11: 
•  Live Photos: You can now edit the video portion of a Live Photo, 
and even change the still photo by choosing a new key frame from 
the video. There are also three new effects you can apply to Live 
Photos: Loop, Bounce, and Long Exposure. See Work with Live 
Photos. 
•  Memories: The Memories feature has been enhanced with more 
selectors, so it can create collections around things like birthdays 
and the family dog. Also, Memories videos now look better when 
viewed in portrait orientation. Finally, you can now block Memories 
of a day or place. 
21  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•  Animated GIFs: Photos can now play animated GIFs, and there’s 
a new Animated smart album to help you corral them. 
See Get to Know Photos. 
Notes  
Notes has received a lot of love from Apple in the last few iOS updates, 
and that continues in iOS 11: 
•  Document scanner: Notes can now use your iOS device’s camera 
to scan a document, automatically detecting its edges and deskew­
ing it. 
•  Formatting improvements: You can now insert simple tables, 
and there are now dedicated buttons to format text. You can also 
indent and outdent lists, and there’s a new monospaced type option. 
Finally, you can change the background paper style to ruled or grid 
lines. 
•  Pin notes: You can pin a note so that it stays on top of your list of 
notes. 
•  Instant Notes: Not exclusive to the iPad, you can create Instant 
Notes on any iOS 11 devices from the Lock screen if you add Notes 
to Control Center. However, if you have an iPad Pro and an Apple 
Pencil, you can create or edit Instant Notes with a tap. See Discover 
Control Center Functions and Work with Instant Notes. 
•  Handwriting recognition: While sketching in Notes, if you jot 
down some words, Notes will recognize them and include them in 
search results and note names (Figure 10). It works with printing 
as well as cursive, but it works better with printing. 
•  New typeface: No, your eyes aren’t playing tricks—Notes has a 
slightly different typeface. 
22  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 10: Text recognition in Notes is impressive—it instantly 
deciphers my chicken scratch. 
To learn more about these new features, see Additional Apple Apps. 
Settings  
There are a number of new settings in iOS 11: 
•  Do Not Disturb while Driving: The iPhone is great in the car, 
but it also distracts drivers and causes car accidents. The new Do 
Not Disturb while Driving feature can block text messages while 
you’re driving, sending an automatic response explaining why 
you’re not answering. See Enable Do Not Disturb While Driving. 
•  Siri settings: The Siri and Spotlight Search Settings menus have 
been merged. Find them under Settings > Siri & Search. 
23  

 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
•  Safari: There’s a new entry under Settings > Safari called Prevent 
Cross-Site Tracking that’s on by default. I recommend leaving it on, 
as it prevents websites from tracking your Internet journeys. 
•  Shut Down: You can now shut your iOS device down from Set­
tings by choosing Settings > General > Shut Down. 
•  Social accounts: Special entries in Settings for Twitter, Facebook, 
Flickr, and Vimeo are gone. Those apps will now have to integrate 
with iOS like all other apps. 
•  Storage Optimization: iOS now offers a number of storage 
management recommendations under Settings > General > iPhone 
(or iPad) Storage. See Control Device Storage. 
•  Offload Unused Apps: You can now set iOS to automatically 
Offload Unused Apps in Settings > iTunes & App Store. iOS will 
automatically uninstall apps that haven’t been used in a while, but 
will retain the apps’ data, so you can access them again after rein­
stalling them from the App Store. See Control Device Storage. 
•  Disable Auto-Join for Wi-Fi access points: While viewing a 
Wi-Fi access point under Settings > Wi-Fi, tap the info 
icon to 
reveal a new Auto-Join switch that you can turn off. 
•  AirPods: You can now customize the double-tap action for each 
individual AirPod, so double-tapping on the right AirPod can 
activate Siri and double-tapping on the left can pause your music. 
To do so, connect your AirPods to your device, go to Settings > 
Bluetooth, tap the info 
icon next to your AirPods, and change the 
settings for Left and Right. 
•  Background App Refresh: You can now disable Background 
App Refresh while on mobile data. See Manage Data Usage. 
•  Accessibility: There are new Accessibility settings to answer calls 
automatically and a new Smart Invert feature that doesn’t invert the 
colors of images. See iOS Accessibility. 
•  Location: All apps listed under Settings > Privacy > Location Ser­
vices now offer a While Using option. 
24  

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Share Your Wi-Fi: If you’re using an iOS 11 device and another 
iOS 11 device tries to connect to your Wi-Fi network, you’ll receive a 
prompt that lets you send over the password by tapping Send 
Password (Figure 11). 
Figure 11: iOS 11 makes it easy to share your Wi-Fi password with 
friends and family. 
•  iCloud Storage: You can now share iCloud storage with those in 
your Family Sharing circle. Also, the 1 TB tier has been upgraded to 
2 TB for the same price. See All in the Family Sharing. 
Other Apple Apps  
Other Apple apps see small changes: 
•  Clock: You can now set timers down to the second. 
•  Health: You can now sync Health data via iCloud, and can option­
ally share your health data with Apple. Graphs have been re­
designed. The Today and Health Data tabs have switched places. 
25  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Mail: Messages threads in Mail now collapse read messages by 
default—you can change this behavior with the Collapse Read 
Messages switch in Settings > Mail. 
•  Music: The Music app is more social—you can create a public 
profile so your friends can see what you’re listening to, and you can 
share playlists on Apple Music. Also, there’s a new API so develop­
ers can tap into Apple Music. 
•  News: The News app now uses Siri to recommend stories and 
sources based on your preferences. The Explore tab is gone— 
instead, there’s a Spotlight tab for editor-curated stories and a 
Following tab for your favorite sources. 
See Additional Apple Apps. 
Under the Hood  
There are some behind-the-scenes changes that aren’t immediately 
noticeable, but could lead to some powerful new apps: 
•  ARKit: Augmented Reality (AR) uses the input from a camera to 
overlay virtual elements on live images of the real world. ARKit is a 
new framework to make AR apps better and easier to create. Ob­
jects placed with ARKit can interact with real-world objects like 
floors and are affected by room lightning. See my TidBITS article 
ARKit: Augmented Reality for More Than Gaming. 
•  Metal 2: Apple’s 3D graphics framework has been updated, which 
should make apps like 3D games run better. 
•  Core ML: Machine learning is the focus of Core ML, which Apple 
claims will make artificial intelligence easier for developers to 
implement. 
•  Core NFC: For years, iOS devices have included Near Field Com­
munications (NFC) chips, but they could be used only for Apple 
Pay. Now, Apple is granting developer access to these chips, so, at 
least in theory, you’ll be able to use NFC tags to automate actions. 
26  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Explore the Lock Screen 
The Lock screen is the first thing you see when you power on or wake 
up your iOS device, and it contains a wealth of functionality, especially 
now in iOS 11, since it now takes Notification Center’s place for notif­
ication management. 
Dissect the Lock Screen  
Let’s look at each element of the Lock screen (Figure 12).  
Figure 12: The Lock screen features a number of status icons. 
The icons at the left of the status bar signify your device’s networking 
status: 
•  Wi-Fi: This 
icon indicates that the device has a Wi-Fi  
connection. More bars means a stronger connection.  
•  Cellular: If you see a carrier name, then your device has a cellular 
connection. More bars 
next to the name means a stronger 
connection. 
27  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Note: If you use Wi-Fi calling, your carrier might appear with a 
different name, such as VZW Wi-Fi. 
• Airplane mode: If you see an airplane 
icon, the Airplane Mode 
switch in Settings is on and all radio-frequency connectivity is off 
unless you’ve re-enabled a radio individually. 
Partial Airplane Mode 
You can manually re-enable the Wi-Fi and Bluetooth radios while in  
Airplane mode, which is handy if you want to take advantage of in- 
flight Wi-Fi or use Bluetooth to communicate with a keyboard while  
keeping your cellular connection off.  
Turn them back on by tapping their buttons in (swipe up from below  
the bottom of the screen). See Networking Platter.  
Here’s a look at the most common icons that you may see at the right 
of the status bar: 
•  Do Not Disturb: A moon 
icon indicates that Do Not Disturb 
mode is active—your device will not vibrate or make noise. 
•  Orientation Lock: This lock 
icon means the device’s screen 
orientation is locked in portrait or landscape view. 
•  Location: If an app is using Location Services, you see an arrow 
icon here. You can find out which apps are using Location Services 
in Settings > Privacy > Location Services. See Location Services 
Arrow Icons. 
•  Alarm: If you’ve set an alarm in the Clock app (directly or by using 
Siri), you see a clock 
icon here. 
•  Bluetooth: If Bluetooth is enabled, your device displays the Blue-
tooth 
icon. If a Bluetooth device is connected, the icon is white; 
otherwise, it is light gray. 
• Battery: This 
icon represents the remaining battery life. The 
fill color in the icon serves as a quick status indicator: 
28  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‣ Green: The battery life is good. 
‣ Yellow: The iPhone is in Use Low Power Mode. 
‣ Red: You should charge the device.  
A lightning  icon to the right of the battery means your device is 
charging. 
You can opt to display battery percentage as well by going to Set­
tings > Battery and turning on the Battery Percentage switch. 
• Headphones: A headphone 
icon indicates that your device is 
paired with a Bluetooth audio device. If audio isn’t playing through 
you speakers, or if Siri doesn’t seem able to hear you, check for this 
icon! 
Apple offers a full guide to status bar icons. 
Check Time and Date  
The current time appears in big type at the center of the Lock screen 
with the day and date below. 
If you’ve configured a timer with Apple’s Clock app or by using Siri, 
the day and date is replaced by the remaining timer time. Similarly, 
if you have snoozed an alarm, you see the remaining snooze time here. 
Lock Screen Media Controls  
While the screen is locked, you may see playback controls for any 
media that is playing (Figure 13). If you’re unfamiliar with these 
controls, see the section on Control Center’s Media platter. 
29  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13: You can control iOS media playback even when the 
screen is locked! 
These controls make it easy to pause playback or change the volume 
without having to unlock the device. 
Lock and Unlock Your Device  
Unlock the device with the Home button, followed by either your PIN 
or Touch ID. 
Pay attention to the lock 
icon at the top of the screen—your device 
briefly displays “Unlocked” there after a successful Touch ID scan (set 
your finger on the Home button, but don’t press in), after which you 
can press the Home button to leave the Lock screen and go to the 
Home screen. 
To lock your device again, press the Sleep/Wake button. Otherwise, 
your device locks automatically after the amount of time chosen in 
Settings > Display & Brightness > Auto-Lock. 
To access the Lock screen without locking your device, swipe down 
from above the top of the screen. Apple calls this the Cover Sheet, but 
it’s practically identical to the Lock screen. The only key difference is 
that you can dismiss it by swiping up from below the bottom of the 
screen. 
30  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deal with Emergencies 
If a passcode is set on an iPhone, you can’t access most of the 
iPhone’s functions without entering the passcode (or using Touch ID). 
However, entering a passcode correctly in an emergency, whether on 
your iPhone or someone else’s, could waste precious time. 
Luckily, you don’t have to: press the Home button and then on the 
Enter Passcode screen, tap Emergency in the lower-left corner to 
reveal a dial pad. 
You can now call your local emergency services number, but no one 
else. So, in the United States, you can dial 911, but not Yankee 
Stadium. 
But what if you’re indisposed or unconscious? Your iPhone can still 
come to the rescue! If you set up a Medical ID in the Health app, you 
or a medical responder can tap Medical ID in the Emergency call 
screen to reveal vital info. 
However, iOS 11 offers an even faster way to do these things: press 
the Sleep/Wake button five times in quick succession, and then swipe 
the 
icon to the right. That does three things: 
✦ Calls emergency services 
✦ Sends a message to your emergency contacts with your location 
✦ Displays your Medical ID on the screen 
Also note that pressing Sleep/Wake five times to bring up the SOS 
icon temporarily disables Touch ID. That’s good to know if someone 
ever tries to compel you to unlock your device. 
iOS offers several ways to get help in an emergency. Knowing how to 
access them could save your life. 
Manage Lock Screen Notifications  
Notifications give you snippets of key status information. While your 
device is locked, notifications gather on the Lock screen, in the order 
they are received. 
31  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To act upon or remove a notification from the Lock screen, do one of 
the following: 
•  Tap the notification to open it in its associated app. For example, 
tap a Mail notification to open that message in Mail. 
•  On an iPhone with 3D Touch or an iPad, press on a notification to 
bring up additional options. To return to the Mail example, you can 
archive a message or mark it as read (Figure 14). On an iPhone 
with 3D Touch, apply even more pressure to open the item in its 
associated app. 
To dismiss an individual notification, press it to bring up additional 
options, and then either tap the X 
icon or swipe down on the 
notification. 
Figure 14: Press a junk mail notification and tap Archive to make 
quick work of it. 
•  Right-swipe the notification to reveal Open, which you can tap to 
open the notification in its app—or keep swiping to the right to open 
the app automatically. 
32  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Left-swipe the notification to reveal View and Clear (Figure 15). 
View shows the full notification. Keep swiping left on a notification 
to dismiss it. 
Figure 15: While iOS 11 opens up pressing notifications to iPads, 
you can still swipe on them to perform various actions. 
In iOS 11, you can view all your previous notifications from the Lock 
screen. To do so, swipe up on the Lock screen. Swipe up and down to 
scroll through notifications. By default, notifications are grouped 
according to date. 
While viewing past notifications, tap the X 
icon adjacent to a group 
of notifications to clear that group. If you have a 3D Touch device, you 
can firmly press that X 
icon to reveal an option to clear all notifica­
tions. 
Protect Your Notifications 
By default, the Lock screen displays previews of received communica­
tions such as text messages and email messages. This could be 
embarrassing or even a security risk. To prevent such previews, go to 
Settings > Notifications and set Show Previews to When Unlocked or 
Never. 
You can also choose an individual app from Settings > Notifications to 
set Show Previews for only that app. Also from that screen, you can 
turn off Show in History to prevent that app’s past notifications from 
sticking around on the Lock screen. 
Access Control Center  
Control Center offers quick access to common iOS settings and func­
tions. Access it by swiping up from below the screen—unless you’ve 
disabled Lock screen access, as discussed in Secure the Lock Screen, 
ahead. 
33  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Tip: Confused by the new Control Center? See Take Control of 
Control Center. 
Open Camera from the Lock Screen  
You can access the Camera app from the Lock screen quickly by swip­
ing from right to left. 
While using the Camera app from the Lock screen, you can see pre­
views of pictures you’ve taken during the current session by tapping 
the Photo and Video Viewer button. (It looks like a preview of the most 
recent photo—Figure 16.) However, to view any other image in your 
photo library, you must unlock the device. 
Figure 16: The Photo and Video Viewer button, in the lower-left 
corner, previews the most recent photo. 
Wrangle Widgets  
Widgets reside to the left of the main Lock screen, as well as the first 
Home screen—see Hone the Home Screen. To access widgets from 
either of these screens, swipe from left to right. 
Add a Widget 
It’s easy to add a widget: 
1. On the Widgets screen, scroll to the bottom and tap Edit. 
2. Scan your finger with Touch ID or enter your PIN if prompted. 
34  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Scroll to the bottom of the screen to see the More Widgets list and 
find the widget you want to add. 
4. Tap that widget’s green add
 button.  
The widget’s entry moves into the top portion of the list.  
5. If you like, adjust the widget’s position by dragging the grab handle 
at the right of its entry. Drag the handle up or down. 
6. At the upper-right corner, tap Done. 
Delete a Widget 
Removing a widget is equally easy: 
1. On the Widgets screen, scroll to the bottom and tap Edit. 
2. Tap the widget’s red delete
 button. Tap Remove. 
3. At the upper-right corner, tap Done. 
Talk to Siri  
While the device is locked, you can talk to and use Siri as usual, but if a 
passcode is set, there are a few limitations. For example, you can still 
ask Siri for the time or instruct Siri to call your significant other, but 
you can’t have Siri read your new email messages or open apps without 
unlocking the device. 
Make Payments from the Lock Screen 
To bring up Apple Pay on supported devices, double-press the Home 
button on the Lock screen. To disable this feature, tap Settings > 
Wallet & Apple Pay > and turn off the switch for Double-Click Home 
Button. Even with this switch disabled, you can still use Apple Pay by 
placing your phone near a compatible NFC terminal. See Organize 
Your Wallet. 
35  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Secure the Lock Screen  
Unless you set a passcode, anyone with physical access to your device 
can unlock the Lock screen and have complete access to your device. 
Set up a passcode by going to Settings > Touch ID & Passcode (or just 
Settings > Passcode if your device doesn’t support Touch ID and 
tapping Turn Passcode On. 
Even with a passcode set, the Lock screen provides access to some 
settings and personal information. You can reduce, or prevent, this 
access with switches in Settings > Touch ID & Passcode. For example, 
you can turn off access to Control Center, Recent Notifications, and 
Siri (as I write this, the switch for disabling the Widgets screen is still 
called Today View, a holdover from iOS 9). 
36  

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Take Control of Control 
Center 
Control Center is a handy way to access common controls. To open 
Control Center, swipe up from beneath the bottom of the screen. In 
iOS 11, Control Center has been redesigned, compressed back into a 
single page, and made to be customizable (Figure 17). 
Figure 17: Control Center gives you quick access to network set­
tings, brightness, audio controls, and more, including the iPhone’s 
flashlight. To see more options, press a control. 
37  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Use and Customize Control Center  
Control Center is now composed of three types of controls: buttons, 
sliders, and platters—which are groups of buttons. Many Control 
Center controls can be pressed to reveal a panel with more functions. 
It’s possible to add more controls to Control Center than can fit on the 
screen at once. Swipe up or down to scroll through them, or better yet, 
remove the ones you don’t need. 
To customize Control Center, visit Settings > Control Center > Cus­
tomize. It works just like Add a Widget and Delete a Widget: 
• Tap the green add
 button to add a control. 
• Tap the red delete 
button, and then tap Delete to remove a 
control. 
• Drag the grab handle 
up or down to reposition the control. 
However, there are seven controls you cannot remove or reposition: 
the networking platter, media platter, Orientation Lock, Do Not 
Disturb, Screen Mirroring, Brightness, and Volume. 
Discover Control Center Functions  
If you’re an iOS veteran, many of the controls will be instantly familiar, 
but some are all-new. Here’s what each one of them does. 
Networking Platter 
The networking platter (Figure 18, A) lets you quickly turn various 
networking features of your device on and off. In the main Control 
Center view, it displays four controls: 
• Airplane Mode: Tap the Airplane Mode
 button to disable all 
wireless connections: cellular, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and GPS. An 
airplane 
icon appears at the upper-left corner of the screen, in 
the status bar, when Airplane mode is on. 
38  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Once you turn on Airplane mode, you can re-enable Wi-Fi and/ 
or Bluetooth, so an airplane icon in your status bar does not neces­
sarily mean all connections are disabled. 
Use Airplane mode to comply with airline regulations or to reduce 
battery usage. 
Figure 18: Here are the controls in the top of the Control Center: 
networking platter (A), media platter (B), Orientation Lock (C), Do 
Not Disturb (D), Brightness (E), Volume (F), and Screen Mirroring 
(G). 
• Cellular Data: Tap the Cellular Data 
button to disable all  
cellular connectivity, including voice.  
• Wi-Fi: Tap the Wi-Fi 
button to turn Wi-Fi connectivity off or 
on. 
• Bluetooth: Tap the Bluetooth 
button to enable or disable it. If 
you’re not using Bluetooth, leave it off to save battery. 
Press the networking platter to see two additional controls: 
• AirDrop: Tap the AirDrop 
button to choose who you can 
receive AirDrop content from: no one, only your contacts, or every­
one. Contacts Only is a safe choice, because you can receive AirDrop 
content from people you know, but won’t get nefarious stuff from 
strangers. 
39  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
About Continuity and AirDrop 
Continuity describes a set of features that allow different Apple 
devices to work together seamlessly. These include Handoff, call and 
text message forwarding, Instant Hotspot, and AirDrop. 
AirDrop allows you to transfer files or bits of data between Apple 
devices. For example, you could AirDrop a photo from your iPhone to 
your Mac. 
To start an AirDrop transfer, use a Share sheet (see Use Share 
Sheets). For the transfer to go through, the recipient should work in 
Control Center to make their device discoverable for AirDrop transfer. 
To AirDrop between iOS devices, both devices must be at least a 4th­
generation iPad, iPad mini, iPad Pro, iPhone 5, or 5th-generation iPod 
touch. These iOS devices can also send and receive via AirDrop to a 
Mac, so long as the Mac is a 2012 or newer model (other than the 
Mac Pro, which must be a Late 2013 or newer model). 
Handoff, Instant Hotspot, and iOS-Mac AirDrop all rely on Bluetooth 
4.0 networking to facilitate certain aspects of communication be­
tween devices. (Supporting Bluetooth 4.0 is necessary but not suffi­
cient.) 
Relaying calls and text messages from an iPhone to a Mac or other 
iOS device requires only that the devices be running at least iOS 8.1 
or 10.10 Yosemite. 
See Learn About Handoff, Text Message Forwarding, and Call with  
Wi-Fi.  
•  Personal Hotspot: If your iOS device has cellular data 
connectivity, tap this 
button to share that connection over Wi-Fi 
if your carrier supports this feature. Your other devices will be able 
to connect to your iOS device just like any other Wi-Fi access point. 
Devices signed in to your iCloud account will be able to connect 
without a password. Other devices will need to enter the password, 
which you can find on your Personal Hotspot device in Settings > 
Personal Hotspot. 
40  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
Warning! If your cellular data plan has a cap, you could blow 
through it quickly using Personal Hotspot! See Manage Data Usage 
for more tips on avoiding throttling and overage charges. 
Media platter 
The media platter (Figure 18, B) lets you control background audio, 
such as music and podcasts. The platter shows the following: 
•  Track information: For music, the platter shows the song and 
artist. When playing a podcast, it shows the episode title and the 
show name. 
•  Skip buttons: When playing music, these display as previous 
and next track 
buttons. If a podcast is playing, they appear as 15­
second skip 
buttons, which are handy for catching a line you 
missed or bypassing ads. Other apps may present different icons 
here. 
• Play/Pause: These buttons 
/ 
simply play or pause the audio. 
• Output: Tap the Output 
icon in the upper-right corner to 
choose an audio or AirPlay video output. Note that after pressing 
the media platter, that icon changes to this 
, but it does the same 
thing. 
Pressing the platter reveals two more controls: 
•  Scrubber: This shows how far you are into an audio track and the 
total duration. Drag the white knob to change the playback position. 
• Volume: Drag the white knob to adjust the playback volume. 
Other Control Center Functions 
•  Orientation Lock: Tap Orientation Lock (Figure 18, C) to lock 
the screen’s orientation and prevent it from rotating. 
On older iPads with a physical side switch, if you set the side switch 
to Lock Rotation in Settings > General, the Orientation Lock button 
in Control Center becomes a Mute button (Figure 19). Tap it to 
41  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
mute audio from alerts, notifications, and sound effects. Media 
playback will not be muted. 
Figure 19: If your iPad has a physical side switch and it’s set to 
Lock Rotation, the Orientation Lock button in Control Center be­
comes a Mute button (left). 
•  Do Not Disturb: Useful while you are at a performance or asleep, 
Do Not Disturb (Figure 18, D) can be enabled to prevent notif­
ication alerts, FaceTime calls, and phone calls from disturbing you 
with noise, vibration, or your screen’s backlight. Timers or alarms 
set in the Clock app will override Do Not Disturb. 
To allow repeated calls or key people (see Additional Apple Apps) to 
override Do Not Disturb, visit Settings > Do Not Disturb. There, you 
can also set Do Not Disturb to operate on a schedule, in order to 
avoid unnecessary early morning wake-ups. 
•  Screen Mirroring: Unlike most of Control Center’s controls, 
tapping Screen Mirroring (Figure 18, G) does nothing, but if you 
press it, you can select an Apple TV to mirror your device’s screen 
to. To stop mirroring, press Screen Mirroring again and tap Stop 
Mirroring. 
Note: For more about AirPlay, read Take Control of Apple TV. 
•  Brightness: Adjust the slider to a comfortable level (Figure 18, 
E). You can also automatically keep the brightness at an appropri­
ate level: visit Settings > General > Accessibility > Display Accom­
modations to access the Auto-Brightness switch. 
Press the brightness slider to reveal the Night Shift
 button. Night 
Shift warms the colors of your display to make it easier to sleep. Tap 
the button once to either schedule Night Shift or manually turn it on 
until 7 AM. Tap it again to turn Night Shift off. 
42  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On True Tone-equipped iPad Pro models, the brightness slider also 
reveals a True Tone 
button. True Tone adjusts the display to 
maintain consistent color presentation in different lighting situa­
tions. 
•  Volume: Adjust the system volume to a comfortable level. Press 
the slider to see a full-screen volume control (Figure 18, F). 
Note: The following controls can be added, removed, or repositioned 
in Settings > Control Center > Customize. 
•  Accessibility Shortcuts: Press Accessibility Shortcuts to quickly 
access Accessibility features (Figure 20, H). You can choose what 
appears here in Settings > General > Accessibility > Accessibility 
Shortcuts. 
Figure 20: Here are some optional Control Center controls: Accessi­
bility Shortcuts (H), Alarm (I), Apple TV Remote (J), Calculator 
(K), Camera (L), Do Not Disturb While Driving (M), Flashlight (N), 
Guided Access (O), Home (P), Low Power Mode (Q), Magnifier (R), 
and Notes (S). 
•  Alarm: Tap Alarm to open the Clock app to the Alarm tab (Figure 
20, I). 
•  Apple TV Remote: Press Apple TV Remote to reveal a virtual Siri 
Remote that you can use to control your fourth-generation Apple 
TV (Figure 20, J). You can select which device you control at the 
top of the screen (Figure 21). 
43  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21: You can finally control your Apple TV from Control  
Center!  
•  Calculator: Tap Calculator to open the Calculator app. Press it to 
reveal an option to copy the last Calculator result (Figure 20, K). 
(Not available on iPad.) 
•  Camera: Tap Camera to open the Camera app (Figure 20, L). 
Press it to reveal Take Selfie, Record Video, Record Slo-Mo, and 
Take Photo (or Take Portrait on the iPhone 7 Plus). See Pick a 
Camera Mode. 
•  Do Not Disturb While Driving: Tap Do Not Disturb While Dri­
ving Mode to enable or disable the new Do Not Disturb While 
Driving Mode (Figure 20, M). While enabled, you will not see 
notifications of new text messages, and anyone who messages you 
will receive an automatic response informing them of that. See 
Enable Do Not Disturb While Driving. (Not available on iPad.) 
44  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Flashlight: Tapping Flashlight turns on the LED flash on iOS de­
vices that have one, turning your device into a flashlight (Figure 
20, N). Press it to reveal a slider that lets you adjust the flash’s 
brightness. 
•  Guided Access: The Guided Access control enables Guided Access 
for the current app (Figure 20, O). Until Guided Access is turned 
off, the user is stuck in the designated app, which is handy for young 
children. See Other Accessibility Options. 
•  Home: Tapping Home opens the Home app (Figure 20, P). Press 
Home to reveal a panel that lets you control Favorite Accessories 
and Favorite Scenes—switch between the two with the button in the 
upper-right corner (Figure 22). Tap an accessory or scene to turn 
it on or off. Press an accessory to see additional controls. See Con­
trol Your Home. 
Figure 22: The Home control gives you quick access to your favorite 
accessories and scenes. Tap the button in the upper-right corner to 
switch between the two. 
•  Low Power Mode: Tapping Low Power Mode turns Use Low 
Power Mode on or off (Figure 20, Q). (Not available on iPad.) 
•  Magnifier: Tap Magnifier to open the super-handy Magnifier 
feature (Figure 20, R). See Accessibility for Everyone. 
45  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Notes: Tapping Notes while your device is unlocked opens the 
Notes app (Figure 20, S). But tap it while your phone is locked to 
create an Instant Note, which is like a regular note, except that it’s 
accessible from the Lock screen for an amount of time set in Set­
tings > Notes > Resume Previous Note. 
Press the Notes button to reveal these options: 
‣  New Note: Open Notes with a new note. 
‣  New Checklist: Open a new note with a checklist already  
created.  
‣  New Photo: Create a new note and open the Camera to capture 
an image for the note. 
‣  New Sketch: Make a sketch in a new note. 
•  Screen Recording: Tap Screen Recording to begin recording your 
screen (Figure 23, T). The control’s icon turns red while recording. 
Tap it again to stop. Press the control to reveal an option to turn 
Microphone Audio on or off, which is handy if you want to narrate 
your screen recording. Screen recordings are saved in Photos. 
Figure 23: The last of the option Control center controls: Screen 
Recording (T), Stopwatch (U), Text Size (V), Timer (W), Voice 
Memos (X), and Wallet (Y). 
•  Stopwatch: Tap Stopwatch to open the Clock app to the Stopwatch 
tab (Figure 23, U). 
•  Text Size: Press Text Size control to reveal a slider that lets you 
adjust system text size (Figure 23, V). 
46  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Timer: Tapping Time opens up the Clock app to the Timer tab 
(Figure 23, W). Handy for cooking! Press to quickly set a timer 
between one minute and two hours. 
•  Voice Memos: Tap Voice Memos to open the Voice Memos app 
(Figure 23, X). (Not available on iPad.) 
•  Wallet: Tap Wallet to open the Wallet app (Figure 23, Y). Press 
for shortcuts like payment methods and recent transactions. See 
Organize Your Wallet (Not available on iPad.) 
47  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hone the Home Screen 
Once past the Lock screen, you’re presented with the Home screen— 
the grid of icons that you tap to launch apps. Resting at the bottom of 
the Home screen is the Dock, which makes it easy to get to a fixed set 
of your most-used apps regardless of which Home screen page you’re 
on. On an iPhone or iPod touch, the Dock can hold icons for four apps. 
Note: For unique attributes of the iPad Home screen, see Special  
iPad Features.  
Learn Home Screen Basics  
To return to the Home screen from any app, press the Home button on 
your device. 
The Home screen is divided into pages, which iOS automatically adds 
and removes as you install and delete apps. The small white dots above 
the Dock indicate which page is currently visible on the Home screen 
(Figure 24). To flip between pages, flick the screen left or right. 
Figure 24: The dots above the Dock tell you which Home screen 
page you’re on. 
Tip: To jump to the first (“main”) page of the Home screen from 
some other page, press the Home button. 
Manage the Home Screen  
From the Home screen, you can move and delete apps, and arrange 
them into folders. 
48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Move Apps 
To move app icons around the Home screen: 
1.  Touch and hold any icon for a few seconds, until all the icons start 
to shake. 
2.  Touch, hold, and begin dragging the app icon you want to move. 
3.  To move multiple icons, tap them as you’re dragging the first icon. 
They will be added to a stack beneath your fingertip, and a blue 
badge will appear in the upper-right corner of the stack with the 
number of apps you’re moving (Figure 25). 
Figure 25: You can now move multiple apps at once. While dragging 
an app, tap additional apps to add them to the stack. The blue badge 
tells you how many you’re moving. 
4.  Drag the icon or icons to where you want them. To move an icon to 
another page, move it to the edge of the screen and pause until the 
page flips. 
5.  Once you’ve moved the icon or icons where you want them, you can 
move more as long as the icons are still shaking. 
6.  Press the Home button to exit editing mode. 
49  

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tips for Re-arranging Home Screen Icons 
Here are a couple of quick tips for getting your Home screen just how 
you want it: 
✦ Use the Dock, Luke: It can be difficult to move an icon over 
multiple pages. It’s easier to drop it in an empty spot on the Dock, 
flick to the destination page, and drag it out of the Dock than to 
drag it across multiple pages. 
✦ Start fresh: Unhappy with your icon layout? Visit Settings > 
General > Reset and tap Reset Home Screen Layout. iOS moves 
the icons for the built-in apps to their default locations, and places 
any others in alphabetical order on subsequent pages. Any folders 
you’ve created are removed. 
Delete Apps 
Deleting an app’s icon from the Home screen also removes the app 
from your device and deletes all the data stored in the app, except for 
anything that might have been stored in the cloud. 
Note: To re-download a deleted app, go to the Updates tab in the 
App Store app, tap your Apple ID profile picture, and tap Purchased. 
If the app is still available, you’ll be able to get it again. 
To delete an app: 
1.  Touch and hold its icon for a few seconds until all the icons start to 
shake. 
2. Tap the delete 
button in the upper-left corner of the icon, tap 
Remove when prompted, and the icon disappears. 
3.  While the apps are shaking, you can delete another app—or move 
apps, if you like. 
4. Press the Home button to exit editing mode. 
50  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tip: You can also delete apps in Settings > General > iPhone (or 
iPad) Storage. Instead of deleting an app, you can offload it to save 
storage space without destroying the app data. See Control Device 
Storage. 
Make and Delete Folders 
A folder is a handy way to group apps. To create one: 
1. Touch and hold any icon until all the icons begin to shake. 
2.  Move one app icon on top of another and hold it there for a 
moment. iOS displays the new folder and suggests a name for it. 
3.  If you like the suggested name, tap Done on the keyboard. If you 
aren’t enamored of the suggested name, tap the delete 
button to 
the right of the suggested name, type a new name, and tap Done on 
the keyboard. 
You can now tap outside the folder and continue to drag app icons into 
your new folder. Press Home when you’re finished. 
Note: iPhone folders can hold a total of 135 icons (15 pages of 9  
icons). iPad folders can hold 240 icons (15 pages of 16 icons).  
To remove a folder, simply move all of its icons outside of the folder. 
The folder disappears automatically. 
Manage Home Screen Notifications  
We’ve discussed Manage Lock Screen Notifications, but that’s not the 
only place you’ll receive notifications. Notification badges appear on 
the Home screen, and badges and alerts can appear on the Home 
screen or in any app: 
•  Badges: These small rounded images display on app icons to show 
how many unread items are in an app (Figure 26). Enable these 
for only the apps that truly need them, so the badges you see are 
important to you. For example, my email inbox has thousands of 
51  

 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unread junk messages that I haven’t pruned, so I disable the badge 
for Mail. But I leave it on for Messages, since I read all my 
messages. 
Figure 26: Badges are hard to miss, but if they’re overused, they’re 
easy to ignore. 
•  Temporary Banners: Banners drop down from the top of the 
screen and disappear automatically after a few seconds. This has 
been the default notification style since iOS 5 and is usually a safe 
choice. 
To open a banner notification in order to interact with it, pull it 
down like a window shade. Tap it to open its associated app (Fig­
ure 27). 
Figure 27: Banners and alerts appear at the top of the screen. Pull 
them down to open, or tap them to open the app. 
•  Persistent Banners: These are the more annoying version of 
banners. These banners do not disappear automatically—you must 
act on them before they’ll go away. Persistent banners are useful for 
notifications that you absolutely don’t want to miss, like Calendar 
events. 
When you launch an app for the first time, if it has a Notifications 
feature, you’ll be asked whether you’d like to receive notifications from 
that app. I suggest denying notifications from apps that you don’t need 
to hear from, like most games. 
To specify how (or whether) an app notifies you, go to Settings > 
Notifications and then tap the app’s entry to view its Notifications 
52  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
screen. This screen offers a collection of options for how the app 
notifies you. 
Use Reachability  
To make it easier to use big-screen iPhones with one hand, Apple 
introduced Reachability. Double-tap the Home button while in portrait 
orientation—not a double-press, but two light taps. The entire screen 
drops down so you can access interface elements near the top with 
your thumb. To exit Reachability, tap the empty space at the top. 
Reachability works in all apps. If you don’t need it, you can disable it in 
Settings > General > Accessibility. 
3D Touch Tricks  
On devices that support 3D Touch, such as the iPhone 6s, 7, and 7 
Plus, you can use 3D Touch on Home screen icons to access a shortcuts 
menu. Here are some of the things you can do: 
•  Firmly press the Camera app icon to quickly take a selfie, record 
video, record a slow-mo video, or take a regular photo. 
•  If an app has a corresponding widget, a firm press on its icon 
displays it. 
•  Firmly press a folder to rename it. 
•  If an app inside a folder has a notification badge, a firm press on the 
folder lets you open that app directly (Figure 28). 
53  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 28: 3D Touch lets you quickly rename folders and access 
contained apps with notification badges. 
• Firmly press a downloading app to pause or cancel the download. 
54  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Search with Spotlight 
One of iOS’s simple yet powerful features, Spotlight lets you swiftly 
search your device for apps, contacts, songs, and more (Figure 29). 
Developers can integrate their apps with Spotlight to give it nearly 
omniscient search powers. You can also see Siri app suggestions when 
you tap a Spotlight search box. 
Figure 29: Spotlight can find things like upcoming sporting events, 
Wikipedia entries, and App Store entries. 
Access Spotlight Search  
There are two ways to access Spotlight search: 
•  While on the Home screen, pull down from anywhere between the 
status bar and Dock (Figure 30). 
55  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 30: When you pull down on the Home screen to reveal the 
search box, you also see Siri suggestions for recent and frequently 
used apps. Siri App Suggestions is also available as a widget. 
•  From the Lock screen or first page of the Home screen, swipe right 
to enter the Widgets screen, which features a Spotlight search box. 
Either way, tap the search box to begin your search: 
•  You’ll be presented with Siri app suggestions, which is a collection 
of recent and frequently used apps—tap one to open it. 
•  You may also see Siri search suggestions below the Search box, 
which are recent searches you’ve performed—tap one to search for it 
again. You may also see Siri search suggestions as you’re typing a 
query. 
•  To search your device and various services, enter a search term into 
the Search box and tap Search on your keyboard. In the results list 
that appears, tap any entry to open it. 
Learn Spotlight Features  
Spotlight can search app data on your device, as well as a number of 
bits of information from the web. Here’s a partial list of what Spotlight 
can find: 
•  Apple media and apps: Items in the App Store, iTunes Store, 
and iBooks Store. 
•  Apple Music: If you subscribe to Apple Music, you can search for 
songs and play them directly from search results! 
56  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Apps: Spotlight can find not only apps on your device, but also 
content inside supported apps. 
•  Bing: Web pages found by the Bing search engine. 
•  Calendar events: Can’t remember when an appointment is? If it’s 
in your calendar, within a year in the past or a year in the future, it’ll 
appear in a Spotlight search. 
•  Contacts: Spotlight can pull up saved Contacts. A contact result 
includes buttons for placing a call or sending a message (Figure 
31). 
Figure 31: You can FaceTime, message, and call contacts directly 
form Spotlight results. 
•  Conversions and calculations: Like Spotlight on the Mac, Spot­
light in iOS can perform basic calculations and unit/currency 
conversions. 
•  Dictionary: Spotlight can show word definitions in its results. 
•  Email: Spotlight indexes all email messages in the Mail app for 
quick access. 
•  Files: You can use Spotlight to find files stored locally on your 
device in the new Files app. See Say Hello to the Files App. 
•  Knowledge: Spotlight can pull data from Wikipedia and other 
sources, displaying it in a handy table that Apple calls Knowledge. 
Tip: Tap Search in App next to search results to leave Spotlight and  
see the search results inside the source app. You can also tap Show  
More to see more search results from that app or service.  
• Messages: Spotlight indexes all chats in the Messages app. 
57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Movie show times: You can get local show times for movies, 
along with Rotten Tomatoes ratings and MPAA rating (like PG or 
R). 
•  Music, audiobooks, podcasts, and videos: Spotlight can 
search by title, artist, and album. 
•  Nearby places: You can search for local businesses, like 
restaurants. 
•  News: Spotlight keeps track of hot news items and suggests them 
in search results. 
•  Sports scores: Search for your favorite team to see how it’s faring. 
•  Stocks: Look up stocks, like AAPL, to see their prices and more. 
•  Weather: You can view current weather conditions in a city. For 
example: “weather in rio de janeiro”. 
•  Websites: Spotlight suggests popular websites based on your 
search. 
•  Web videos: These suggested videos come from YouTube. 
Customize Spotlight  
Here are a couple of ways to rid Spotlight of things you don’t want: 
•  Disable search suggestions: To clear your search screen of 
proactive suggestions of things you might like to find, open 
Settings > Siri & Search and turn off Suggestions in Search. 
•  Turn off searches per app: Also in Settings > Siri & Search, you 
can choose any app that you don’t want cluttering up your results 
list and turn off Search & Siri Suggestions to eliminate that app 
from Spotlight. 
58  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Switch Apps on the iPhone 
The way you switch from one recently used app to another remains 
unchanged in iOS 11, at least on the iPhone. This chapter covers the 
iPhone App Switcher. For info on the new iPad multitasking features 
in iOS 11, see Special iPad Features. 
Switch Between Apps  
Use the App Switcher to switch to a recently used app, to force-quit a 
crashed app, or to work with Handoff: 
1.  Double-press the Home button to open the App Switcher (Figure 
32). 
Figure 32: The App Switcher lets you select recently used apps. 
2.  If you don’t see the app you want, flick left or right to find it. 
Tip: Spotlight’s Siri Suggestions also offer quick access to frequently 
used and recent apps. See Search with Spotlight. 
3. Tap the app you wish to switch to.  
To force-quit an app, flick its image toward the top of the screen.  
59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tip: Force-quitting can be useful at times, such as when you need to 
restart a frozen app. However, don’t make a habit of force-quitting 
apps, as doing so is usually a waste of time and can hurt battery life. 
See Busting Battery Usage Myths. 
Learn About Handoff  
Handoff is a special feature of some apps that lets you seamlessly 
transfer your work between Apple devices. For example, you can start 
drafting an email message on your Mac and switch to your iPhone to 
finish. (Handoff is also a key feature of the Apple Watch, which is 
covered in Apple Watch: A Take Control Crash Course.) 
Apple’s Calendar, Contacts, Keynote, Mail, Maps, Messages, Notes, 
Numbers, Pages, Reminders, and Safari apps support Handoff, as well 
as many third-party apps, such as PCalc, Pocket, and Things. 
You can turn these features off entirely in Settings > General > Hand­
off. 
Set up Handoff 
Particular settings are required for Handoff to work. On both iOS 
devices: 
•  Sign in to the same iCloud account in Settings > Your Name > 
iCloud. 
•  Enable Handoff in Settings > General > Handoff. 
•  Enable Bluetooth in Control Center or in Settings > Bluetooth. 
•  Connect to the same Wi-Fi network in Settings > Wi-Fi. 
Handoff Hardware Requirements 
Handoff requires a device with a Lightning connector running iOS 8 or 
later, so the older iPhone 4s, iPad 2, and iPad 3 can’t play. 
On the Mac side, Handoff works with any 2012 or newer model, other 
than the Mac Pro, which must be late 2013 or newer. 
60  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use Handoff 
Open an app that supports Handoff and, if applicable, begin working 
in a message or document. Then switch to the other device and bring 
up the App Switcher. A bar should appear at the bottom of the screen 
stating which app wants to transfer Handoff data, and from which 
device (Figure 33). Tap it to switch to that app and pick up where the 
other device left off. 
Note: Handoff can handle only one pair at a time. So if you’re work­
ing on an iMessage on a Mac and looking at a webpage in Safari on 
your iPad, your iPhone’s App Switcher shows the last compatible app 
you used. 
Figure 33: You can accept Handoff data from the App Switcher. 
Handoff with a Mac 
Here’s how to set up Handoff between iOS and macOS: 
✦ Setting up a Mac to use Handoff requires the same basic settings 
as iOS—notably iCloud, Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi—but the Mac interface 
is a little different. 
✦ Go to System Preferences > General and select “Allow Handoff 
between This Mac and Your iCloud Devices.” 
✦ Received handoffs appear in the Mac Dock and Command-Tab App 
Switcher. 
✦ For more information, consult Apple’s Handoff support article. 
61  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Speak to Siri 
Siri is your voice-activated personal assistant, capable of making 
phone calls, playing music, reading your email messages, telling you if 
it’s going to rain, and even booking restaurant reservations. In iOS 11, 
Siri gets a new look, new voices, greater iOS integration, the option to 
edit queries, and some other great features. 
Summon Siri  
There are two ways to summon Siri. First, there’s the old-fashioned 
way using the Home button: 
1.  Hold down the Home button. When you feel two vibrations or hear 
a chime and see multicolored wavy lines at the bottom of the screen, 
Siri is listening. 
2.  Release the Home button. 
3.  Speak. Say something like, “Siri, what’s it like being you?” 
4.  Be quiet. 
Personally, I prefer the voice-activated Hey Siri, which you can enable 
in Settings > Siri & Search > Listen for “Hey Siri”. All iOS 11 devices 
can use Hey Siri, but unless you’re using an iPhone 6s or later, an iPad 
Pro 12.9-inch (2nd generation), an iPad Pro (10.5-inch), or an iPad Pro 
(9.7-inch), your device has to be connected to power for Hey Siri to 
work. 
To use Hey Siri, just say, “Hey Siri” and speak your query—there’s no 
need to wait for Siri to activate. 
Edit Siri Queries 
If Siri misunderstands you, you can fix that. After speaking a query, tap 
Tap to Edit to edit your query with the keyboard. Siri also presents 
suggestions of what it think you might have meant to say (Figure 34). 
62  

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simply delete the incorrect text and replace it with what you meant. In 
theory, this helps Siri understand you better. 
Figure 34: You can edit botched Siri queries. 
Set Up Siri  
In addition to Hey Siri, there are other important settings to check in 
Settings > Siri & Search: 
•  Enable or disable Siri: You can disable Siri entirely by turning 
off Press for Siri. 
•  Your spoken language: Tap Language to select the language that 
you want to speak to Siri with. Generally, you should choose the 
language you are most fluent in, but this is also a fun way to practice 
speaking in a foreign language. 
•  Siri’s accent and gender: Tap Siri Voice. Depending on the 
selected language, you may see accent options. Tap the accent that 
you want to hear when Siri speaks. You can also choose a male or 
female voice for Siri here. 
Note: If you don’t see a Siri Voice option, try picking a different  
language.  
•  Voice Feedback: If you’re tired of Siri’s backtalk, tap Voice Feed­
back, and then select Control with Ring Switch (or Control with 
Mute Setting) to disable Siri’s voice when Mute is enabled. 
•  Introducing yourself: You can tell Siri, “Take me home” to get 
directions to your residence, but first, Siri must know who you are. 
63  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tap My Info and then pick your contact entry from the list. If 
you don’t have one, make one in the Contacts app. 
To check who Siri thinks you are, you can ask “Who am I?” 
Tip: To create a new contact card, whether for yourself or a family 
member, open the Contacts app and tap the Add 
button at the 
top of the main screen (cancel the Search field if you don’t see an 
Add 
button). 
Teach Siri About Your Relationships 
Siri lets you refer to people by relationship. For example, I can tell Siri 
to “call my wife” instead of “call Hannah Centers.” You can teach Siri 
the identity of most of your family members and other important 
people in your life. 
To set this up, make sure you have a card for the person in the Con­
tacts app. Then do one of the following: 
•  Tell Siri: Invoke Siri and tell her about the relationship. For 
example, I can say, “Hannah Centers is my wife”; after 
confirmation, that relationship is set. You can check this with Siri 
later with queries like “Who is my wife,” and “Who is my boss?” 
•  Tell the Contacts app: Open your card in Contacts, tap Edit in 
the upper-right corner, scroll down, tap “add related name,” tap the 
default relationship to pick the desired relationship, tap the info 
icon, and select the person’s card. Tap Done. 
Learn Some Useful Siri Commands  
Siri understands more commands than I can list here, and not every 
Siri command is the most efficient way to complete a task. Here are 
some of the ones I’ve found to be useful: 
•  Identify songs: While a song is playing, activate Siri and ask what 
song is playing. If Siri finds a match, you see the name of the song, 
64  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
the artist, and a button to buy the song in the iTunes Store. If you 
subscribe to Apple Music, you can play the entire song right there. 
•  Make phone calls: You can use Siri to place phone calls, which is 
especially handy while driving. Just say “Call contact’s name” to 
initiate a call (if your contact has multiple phone numbers, Siri will 
ask you which one to call—or you can preempt that step by saying 
“Call Jane Smith’s iPhone.”). If you’ve configured relationships, as 
explained above, you can instead say, “Call my mom,” or “Call my 
spouse.” 
•  Remind me to…: You can tell Siri to remind you of things, like 
“Remind me to take the trash out Tuesday night,” but what I’ve 
found even more useful is telling Siri to remind me to do a task 
when I reach or leave a destination. For example, “Remind me to 
change the cat litter when I get home,” or “Remind me to pick up 
diapers when I leave.” 
•  Remind me of “this”: Siri can create contextual reminders for 
Safari webpages, Mail messages, Maps locations, and more. Tell 
Siri, “Remind me about this,” while looking at a relevant item. 
•  Search photos and videos: You can use Siri to search for photos 
and videos by time or location. For example: “Show me photos from 
San Francisco,” or “Show me videos from Christmas 2015.” Photos 
in iOS 11 recognizes objects, so you can say something like, “Show 
me pictures of water.” 
•  Set an alarm: There are several ways to set an alarm. You can say, 
“Set an alarm for 6 AM” before bed. Or when you lie down for a nap, 
you can say, “Wake me in 30 minutes.” You can also say, “Delete my 
alarm,” to view a list of alarms to delete. 
•  Set a timer: I use this all the time in the kitchen. Tell Siri to set a 
timer for however many hours, minutes, or seconds you need. For 
example, “Set a timer for 5 minutes.” 
•  Find sports info: I’ve found that Siri is the fastest way to find out 
things like “When do the Braves play next,” “What time is the 
65  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mavericks game,” and “How many touchdowns did Marcus Mariota 
throw last season?” 
Use Third-party Apps with Siri  
App developers can hook their apps into Siri, but only for a few types 
of apps. Here are some examples of what you can say: 
Tip: To disable Siri integration, go to Settings > Siri & Search &  
Search > App Name and disable Use with Siri.  
•  Messaging: “Send a text to Jill using Slack.” 
•  Ride booking: “Get me a ride to LAX via Lyft.” 
•  Payments: “Send $30 to Duane for dinner last night using Square 
Cash.” 
•  Photo search: “Look for beach photos taken last winter in 
Pinterest.” 
•  Visual codes: Siri in iOS 11 can be asked to scan and display visual 
codes like QR codes. 
•  VoIP calling: “Call Marcus on Skype.” 
•  Workouts: “Start my daily run workout from Runkeeper.” 
There are also a couple of other ways developers can integrate with 
Siri: 
•  CarPlay: Automakers can create Siri commands to adjust things 
like climate control, radio, and seats on CarPlay-equipped vehicles. 
•  Lists and notes: In iOS 11, Siri can now modify lists, like to-do 
lists, and create and modify notes in apps. 
Note: These are just hypothetical examples. These apps may not  
support Siri functionality immediately.  
66  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Apps That Already Work with Siri 
Long before Apple opened Siri up to any developer, the voice assistant 
worked with a few select third-party apps, and still does: 
•  MLB.com At Bat: Siri can give you baseball schedules and stats. 
Ask for things like, “When is the next Yankees game?” If you have 
the MLB.com At Bat app installed, you can summon more details, 
like player stats. 
•  WolframAlpha Viewer: Siri can call upon WolframAlpha to 
answer complex mathematical questions, like “What is the square 
root of 65?” With the free WolframAlpha Viewer app installed, you 
can see additional details about your question. 
•  Yahoo Sports: Out of the box, Siri has access to all kinds of fun 
sports knowledge. You can ask, “When is the next NFL game?” or 
“Who is taller: Steph Curry or LeBron?” If the free Yahoo Sports app 
is installed, you can even tap the Yahoo logo to open the app for 
more info. 
67  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Command Keyboards 
Typing in iOS is pretty self-explanatory, but a few tricks are easy to 
miss. The keyboard gains a few new tricks in iOS 11, including the 
capability to autofill logins in apps and the option to push the key­
board to the left or right of the screen to make one-handed typing 
easier. 
To learn about special features of the iPad keyboard, see Keyboarding 
on the iPad. 
Look at Special Keyboard Parts  
Let’s take a look at some of the iOS keyboard’s special keys (Figure 
35): 
•  QuickType bar (A): This automatically suggests words as you 
type. Tap one to insert it. The iPad offers shortcuts here for com­
mon actions like cut, copy, paste, undo, and redo. 
•  More/Numbers (B): Tap here to view numbers and special 
characters. 
Figure 35: Keyboard shortcuts and the QuickType bar make typing 
on a touch screen easier. 
•  Next/Emoji (C): This key appears only if an extra keyboard is 
installed. Tap it to switch keyboards. Hold it to see a list of installed 
68  

  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
keyboards. If the only other keyboard installed is Emoji, this key 
shows a smiley face. If some other keyboard is installed, the key 
shows a globe. 
•  Dictate (D): Tap to speak words, and have iOS transcribe them, 
instead of typing. 
•  Period (E): Hold this key while typing a URL in Safari or an email 
address in Mail to see shortcuts for domains, such as .com and .net. 
• Hide Keyboard (F): Tap here to dismiss the keyboard. 
Learn Basic Keyboard Functions 
Here are some basic keyboard functions every iOS user should know: 
• Display the insertion point: Tap in a text area. 
• Move the insertion point: Tap where you want it to go. 
•  Trackpad mode: On newer devices, you can use the keyboard 
area like a trackpad. See Use 3D Touch to Select Text and Use 
Trackpad Mode. 
•  Move the insertion point with precision: Touch and hold 
typed text until a magnifying glass appears. Slide the insertion point 
where you want it. 
•  Type in multiple languages: You can type in multiple languages 
in iOS. To add a new keyboard, go to Settings > General > 
Keyboard > Keyboards, tap Add New Keyboard. To remove a key­
board from the list, swipe left on it and tap Delete. Tap the globe 
key to switch between languages. Alternatively, touch and hold the 
globe 
key to see all available keyboards. 
•  QuickType: As you type, the QuickType bar suggests words. Tap 
one to insert it. QuickType can also suggest things like emojis, 
names, phone numbers, and places. If you have multiple language 
keyboards enabled, it can also suggest words in those languages. 
•  Hide QuickType: Go to Settings > General > Keyboard and turn 
off Predictive. 
69  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Save Time Typing  
Typing on a piece of glass can be frustrating, but iOS includes some 
features that make working with text faster: 
•  Text replacement: You can enter commonly used bits of text, 
such as your email address, by typing only a few characters. For ex­
ample, I’ve created a shortcut where, when I type xtb, it’s replaced 
with TidBITS. 
To create a new shortcut, tap Settings > General > Keyboard > Text 
Replacement and tap the plus 
button in the upper-right corner. 
In the Phrase field, type the text you want to be entered; in 
Shortcut, type a shortcut for it. Tap Save. 
•  Copy text: Touch and hold the text until a magnifying glass image 
appears. Release your finger and a popover appears. To select all 
text, tap Select All. Or, tap Select and then drag the handles to 
highlight the text you want to copy. Tap Copy on the popover (Fig­
ure 36) or tap the Copy 
button on the QuickType bar if it’s 
available on your device. 
Figure 36: To copy text, touch and hold the text you wish to copy to 
open a popover; then tap Select, select the desired text, and tap 
Copy. 
•  Paste text: Touch and hold in the text-entry area where you want 
to paste text to reveal the magnifying glass image. Release and tap 
Paste on the popover or tap the Paste 
button on the QuickType 
bar if it’s available on your device. 
•  Special characters: Typing special characters, like è or ü, is easy 
in iOS. Touch and hold the base letter on the keyboard—for 
example, e for è—until a popover appears, then tap the character 
you want to type. 
70  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
About Universal Clipboard 
The Universal Clipboard feature of macOS 10.12 Sierra or later and 
iOS 10 or later syncs your clipboard between Handoff-capable 
devices, so if you copy something on your iPhone, you can then paste 
it on your Mac or iPad. Items on the Universal Clipboard expire after 
2 minutes. 
If you can’t make Universal Clipboard work, check that your sending 
and receiving devices each meet the Handoff Hardware Requirements 
and go through the Set up Handoff steps. 
Dictate Text  
iOS lets you dictate text using your device’s microphone. Here’s how: 
1. Tap where you want your text to go. 
2. On the keyboard, tap the Dictate key 
. 
3.  If you have multiple language keyboards enabled, tap the globe 
icon to switch between dictation languages. 
4.  Talk. Be sure to explicitly speak punctuation and spaces (for 
example, “Hi comma Tony period”). 
5. Tap the keyboard 
icon when you’re done. 
Unfortunately, you can’t delete or edit text using dictation—saying 
“delete” or “backspace” just types those words. 
Note: Each word is typed as soon as it is recognized, so you can  
quickly spot mistakes.  
Master Emojis  
Invented in Japan, emojis are small pictographs. With emojis, for 
example, instead of typing a colon, hyphen, and parenthesis :-) to 
indicate a smile, you can type a cute smiley face 
! 
71  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enable Emoji 
The emoji keyboard is now enabled by default, but just in case it’s not 
enabled on your device: 
1. Open Settings > General > Keyboard > Keyboards. 
2. Tap Add New Keyboard. 
3. Select Emoji from the list. 
Type Emoji 
Tap the Next/Emoji key. It looks like either a globe 
or a smiley 
face, depending on whether other keyboards are enabled or not. On 
larger-screen devices, you may see both keys at once, in which case the 
globe 
key is the Next/Emoji key and the smiley 
face key is a 
shortcut to the emoji keyboard. 
Swipe left and right to scroll through emojis. 
Tip: The QuickType bar can suggest emojis for you so you don’t have 
to scroll through the enormous wall of emojis. Try typing 100, bacon, 
clown, pizza, and whiskey to get an idea of how it works. 
Type One-Handed  
On the iPhone and iPod touch, when you touch and hold the Next/ 
Emoji key, you now see three icons used to adjust the keyboard’s 
position (Figure 37). 
Figure 37: These keys in the language selection popover let you 
push the keyboard to the left, middle, or right side of the screen. 
72  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tapping one of those icons shifts the keyboard’s position, so if you tap 
the right-hand 
button, it shifts the keyboard to the right so you can 
easily access all the keys with your right hand (Figure 38). 
Figure 38: With the keyboard pushed to the right, the keys are 
easier to access with your right hand. 
You can also set the keyboard’s orientation in Settings > General > 
Keyboards > One Handed Keyboard. 
Autofill Passwords  
For years, Safari has been able to create and manage logins for web­
sites. In iOS 11, this functionality has been grafted onto the keyboard 
so you can use that data when logging in to apps. Here’s how to take 
advantage of this: 
1.  When logging into an app, tap a login field. If you see a login in the 
QuickType bar, tap it to insert it (Figure 39). 
Figure 39: In iOS 11, logging in to an app can be as easy as tapping 
an entry in the QuickType bar. 
73  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
2. If you don’t see a relevant login, tap the key 
icon on the Quick-
Type bar. If you don’t see it, you’ll have to enter the password either 
manually or copy it from a password manager like 1Password. 
3. After tapping the key 
icon, choose Other Passwords. When  
prompted, authenticate with Touch ID or a passcode.  
4.  iOS displays your stored logins, and places logins at the top it thinks 
will be useful for this app. You can use the search box at the top to 
whittle down the list of logins. 
5. Tap a login to autofill it in the app’s login prompt. 
Manage your stored logins in Settings > Accounts & Passwords > App 
& Website Passwords. 
Install Third-party Keyboards  
Does the iOS keyboard not do it for you? The good news is that Apple 
allows third-party developers to create system-wide keyboards that 
users can install. 
To enable a third-party keyboard: 
1.  Install the app containing a keyboard, such as Gboard, from the App 
Store. 
2.  Open Settings and tap General > Keyboard > Keyboards. 
3.  Tap Add New Keyboard. 
4.  Choose the keyboard from the Third-Party Keyboard list. 
5.  Most keyboards require Full Access to be fully operational. To 
enable it, still on the Keyboard screen, tap the keyboard’s name and 
turn on the Allow Full Access switch. An alert warns you that with 
Full Access, the developer can see anything you’ve typed. Tap Allow 
or Don’t Allow. 
To switch keyboards, tap the Next/Emoji key to cycle through key­
boards, or touch and hold the Next/Emoji key to see a list of installed 
74  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
keyboards. (This behavior may change depending on the keyboard in 
use.) 
Use 3D Touch to Select Text  
With 3D Touch, the keyboard can be used like a trackpad to move the 
text cursor and select text: 
•  Move the cursor: Press the keyboard with your finger to feel it 
“click” and then slide your finger to move the cursor (Figure 40). 
Figure 40: The keys look blank while the device is in Trackpad 
mode. 
•  Select text: Slide your finger over a word and press more firmly 
(release slightly and press again) to select the word and see drag 
handles. Drag to expand the selection, if desired. Let go to finish or 
press more firmly again to cancel. 
See Use Trackpad Mode to learn how to do this on an iPad. 
75  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Use Share Sheets 
Share sheets make it easy to transfer something on your device (like a 
PDF displayed in Safari) to another app (like iBooks), or send some­
thing on your device somewhere else (like sharing a link to a webpage 
with Messages or on Twitter). Share sheets often hide other functional­
ity that doesn’t fit anywhere else—see Share Sheet Tricks later in the 
chapter. Here are the ins and outs of how Share Sheets work in iOS. 
Share with Share Sheets  
Whenever you can share content, you see a Share 
icon. Tap it to 
reveal the Share sheet, which displays two rows of buttons. Swipe left 
and right on each half to reveal more functionality. Tap a button on the 
sheet to perform that action (Figure 41). 
Figure 41: Share sheets let you do things like share a webpage 
from Safari with a text or email message, create a reminder for the 
webpage, or add a link to the page in Notes. The Share sheet offers 
other functionality, like searching inside a webpage or creating a PDF 
for markup. 
76  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
What You Can Share 
Here are some examples of what you can share with a Share sheet: 
•  Webpages in Safari and other browsers 
•  Images in the Photos app 
•  Locations in Maps 
•  Email attachments from Mail 
•  Files from the Files app 
•  Apple Music songs from Music 
•  Almost anything else, so long as the developer has included Share 
sheet capabilities and you’ve enabled the extension—see Edit Share 
Sheets later in the chapter. 
Share sheets often conflate the idea of sharing with actions like copy­
ing and printing. For example, pull up the Share sheet in a note to 
reveal options to copy and print that note. 
Note: To print from an iOS device, you either need a printer that 
supports the AirPrint protocol or you need to run a desktop app that 
can act as a bridge, such as Printopia from Decisive Tactics. 
It’s worth checking the Share sheet in each app to see what you can do! 
Where You Can Share To 
Where can you send things from a Share sheet? Here are some exam­
ples: 
•  Messaging apps like Messages, Mail, and Slack. I use this often to 
share webpages with friends. 
•  Text editing apps like Notes. You can share an image to insert it in 
the note or a URL to add a link. 
77  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Social networks like Facebook and Twitter. (You’ll have to install 
those apps and enable their Share sheet buttons—see Edit Share 
Sheets, ahead.) 
•  iBooks, which can hold various PDFs you find around the web and 
elsewhere. (Tap the Copy to iBooks button, if available.) 
•  The Files app, which can contain just about any file you find on the 
web or elsewhere. See Say Hello to the Files App. 
•  Other Apple devices in you vicinity via AirDrop. See About Continu­
ity and AirDrop. 
• Any app or service provided by a third-party extension. 
Share from the Photos App 
Sharing photos and videos from the Photos app works a little different­
ly than it does in most apps: 
1. Select the photo or video you wish to share. 
2. Tap the Share 
icon. 
3.  Tap any additional photos and videos that you wish to share. A 
checkmark 
appears next to selected items (Figure 42). 
Figure 42: Photos lets you select multiple items to share. 
4.  Tap the Share sheet extension you wish to use, such as Messages, 
Mail, or iCloud Photo Sharing. 
78  

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are a few unique sharing options in the Photos app: 
•  AirPlay: This broadcasts your photos and videos to an Apple TV 
without mirroring the entire screen. See my book Take Control of 
Apple TV for an in-depth look at AirPlay. 
• iCloud Photo Sharing: See iCloud Photo Sharing. 
• Slideshow: Display the selected photos in a slideshow. 
•  Use as Wallpaper: Tap this to use the selected photo as the 
wallpaper of your Lock or Home screen. 
See Get to Know Photos for more on managing your photos in iOS. 
Markup as PDF 
The Share sheet often hides special functions that aren’t necessarily 
related to sharing, and I note some of those throughout this book. 
However, there’s one feature new to iOS 11 that you can find in many 
apps’ Share sheets: Markup as PDF, which creates a PDF copy of what 
you’re looking at and lets you annotate it. It’s available in iBooks, 
Notes, Photos, Safari, and possibly more apps by the time you read 
this. 
Tap Markup as PDF and whatever you’re viewing is opened up as a 
PDF that you can modify. There are three main controls here: 
• Tap Done to delete the PDF or save it to the Files app. 
• Tap the Share 
icon to see the usual sharing items, as well as the 
option to save to the Files app. 
• Tap the Markup 
button to see markup options, which is why 
you’re here in the first place! 
The basic markup tools are pretty intuitive: fine-point marker, chisel-
point marker, pencil, eraser, selection tool, and color selection. Tap the 
plus 
button to reveal more options (Figure 43): 
•  Text: Tap Text to insert text, which you can adjust with the text 
settings 
icon. 
79  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Signature: Tap Signature to insert a signature, either synced from 
Preview or Mail on the Mac, or one you draw on screen. 
Figure 43: Markup as PDF offers several tools to add a personal 
touch to images and webpages. 
•  Magnifier: Tap Magnifier to insert a magnifying loupe to highlight 
small elements. Drag the green drag handle around the loupe to 
adjust the magnification. Tap the shape 
icon to adjust the mag­
nifier outline. 
•  Square, circle, speech balloon, line tool: Tap the square, 
circle, speech balloon, or line tool to insert those shapes. 
Edit Share Sheets  
Once you’ve opened a Share sheet, you can rearrange the icons on its 
icons to put the items you use most frequently on the left, so you see 
them easily: 
•  By icon: Move an icon by tapping, holding, and dragging it. 
80  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
•  By row: Tap the row’s More button to open the Activities list (if 
needed, slide the row to the left to reveal the More button). Drag a 
drag handle 
on the right up or down (Figure 44). The higher up 
you drag it, the further left it will be. Tap Done. 
Figure 44: Drag a drag handle to re-arrange a Share sheet row. 
To add or remove extensions, open the app whose Share sheet you 
want to work with, tap the Share 
icon, flick left, and then tap More. 
On the Activities screen, toggle the switches and then tap Done. 
Share Sheet Tricks 
Many apps cram functions other than sharing into the Share sheet, or 
sometimes you can share items in a way you may not have imagined. 
Here are a few ideas: 
✦ Maps: Send a location to a note in Notes. 
✦ Music: Share a song in an iMessage, email message, or tweet. 
✦ Notes: Lock a note with a passcode or Touch ID. 
✦ Photos: Duplicate a photo, start a slideshow, or hide a photo. You 
can even add a photo to a person’s contact card by tapping Assign 
to Contact on the photo’s Share sheet. 
✦ Safari: Save a webpage as a PDF in iBooks, find a search term on 
the page, or request the desktop version of a website. 
81  

 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Introduction to iCloud 
iCloud isn’t a singular thing, but rather a suite of services: email, 
calendar sync, password sync, file storage, and more, all accessible 
from and synced between any of your Apple devices signed in to the 
same iCloud account. With iCloud Photo Library and iCloud Music 
Library, you can even sync your photo and music collections between 
devices, although these last two generally require a fee. Here’s an 
overview of the many services it offers to iOS 11 users. 
Note: For comprehensive coverage of iCloud, read Joe Kissell’s Take 
Control of iCloud. 
Sign in to iCloud and Manage Storage 
To sign in to iCloud and work with your iCloud settings, go to Settings, 
and if you’re not signed in, tap Sign In to Your iPhone and follow the 
prompts. 
Your iCloud account includes 5 GB of free disk space—located on 
Apple’s servers—for storing device backups, app data, iCloud Drive 
files, iCloud Photo Library photos, email, and more. As of iOS 11, you 
can purchase up to 2 TB of total space—see the Apple article iCloud 
storage plans and pricing. You can now also share that space with 
members of your Family Sharing circle if you choose Settings > Your 
Name > iCloud > Manage Storage > Manage Storage > Share With 
Family. See All in the Family Sharing. 
To manage iCloud settings after signing in, go to Settings > Your 
Name > iCloud. An infographic at the top of the screen shows how 
much of your iCloud storage space has been used, and what’s using it. 
There are a few different ways to reduce your iCloud storage usage, but 
the easiest way to do so is to go to Settings > Your Name > iCloud > 
Manage Storage > Manage Storage. Each app and/or service offers 
82  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different management options. However, they usually boil down to 
disabling that service and deleting all the related data. 
Here are some effective, specific methods of pruning iCloud: 
•  If an abandoned device (like a replaced iPhone) has a backup taking 
up space, tap that device listing in Settings > Your Name and tap 
Remove from Account. 
•  If an app is hogging iCloud space, open the Files app, go to your 
iCloud Drive, tap the app’s folder, identify the large file, touch and 
hold it, and then tap Delete from the popover. See Say Hello to the 
Files App later in this chapter. 
•  Clean out your iCloud mailbox in Mail. 
•  Delete unwanted photos and videos from iCloud Photo Library. See 
Deleting Photos and Videos. 
iCloud Services  
For the most part, the iCloud services are listed on the Settings > Your 
Name > iCloud screen with switches that control whether a service is 
on or off. Let’s consider each option, from top to bottom—you can 
toggle most of these options as you read along. 
Note: See the All in the Family Sharing chapter to learn how to share 
purchases, iCloud storage space, and photos with members of your 
family. 
•  Photos: Tap Photos to see these options: 
‣  iCloud Photo Library: iCloud Photo Library sends almost all 
photos and videos in the Photos app to the cloud—using a cellu­
lar or Wi-Fi connection—where they are added to your iCloud 
storage space and synced to any of your devices that are running 
at least iOS 8 or 10.10 Yosemite. Edited photos are also synced, 
and deleted photos are removed from all devices. Hidden photos 
are not synced. See Get to Know Photos. With iCloud Photo 
83  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Library on, you can choose Optimize iPhone (or iPad) Storage to 
store only low-res copies of your photos on your device, thus 
saving local storage space (originals download automatically 
when you need them, such as if you want to make edits). Keeping 
only low-res copies is essential for devices with smaller storage 
capacities. 
Tip: If you have a slow Internet connection or small bandwidth cap, 
you may prefer to keep iCloud Photo Library and My Photo Stream 
off. You can transfer your photos to a computer through a USB cable 
connection. 
‣  My Photo Stream: My Photo Stream automatically syncs new 
photos (but not videos) to your other Apple devices. It works 
only over Wi-Fi, and although it can be tricky to grok its 1000­
photo/30-day limit, it is free and doesn’t take up space in iCloud 
Drive. It’s probably best to leave it off if you use iCloud Photo 
Library. 
‣  iCloud Photo Sharing: iCloud Photo Sharing lets you share 
photo albums from the Photos app and see photo albums shared 
by others. I recommend leaving iCloud Photo Sharing on in case 
a friend or family member wants to share photos with you. 
•  Mail: Apple gives all iCloud users a free @icloud.com email address. 
Leave it enabled even if iCloud is not your preferred email provider, 
because Apple may use it to contact you. 
At the bottom of iCloud settings, there is another entry for Mail that 
lets you adjust iCloud mail settings. 
•  Contacts: iCloud Contacts syncs your contacts with your iCloud 
account, and from there to your other Apple devices. You can also 
view these contacts on the iCloud.com site (as long as you 
sign in with the same Apple ID). 
•  Calendars: This service syncs your calendars with iCloud and thus 
with your other Apple devices, much like contact syncing. You can 
also view these calendars on iCloud.com. 
84  

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To share a calendar in a read/write fashion with another user 
(someone not using your Apple ID), you have to go beyond just 
turning on the Calendar switch. See Scholle McFarland’s Take 
Control of Calendar and Reminders for how to share calendars. 
•  Reminders: The built-in Reminders app is handy for tracking to-
do lists and tasks. This service syncs your reminder lists with 
iCloud.com and between your devices. 
•  Notes: This service syncs notes in the Notes app between devices 
and iCloud.com. If you don’t use Notes, turn it off. 
•  Safari: The Safari service syncs bookmarks and open tabs between 
copies of Safari on your Apple devices. If you use Safari, it can be 
helpful to turn on this service, but if your battery tends to drain 
quickly, constant bookmark syncing may be part of the problem. 
•  News: The News app can use iCloud to sync favorites and saved 
articles between your devices. 
•  Home: This setting syncs your HomeKit settings between devices. 
If you’re using the Home app, you probably want to leave this on. 
See Control Your Home to learn more. 
•  Health: New to iOS 11, you can now sync data from the Health app 
to your other devices. If you’re paranoid about your health data, 
turn this off. See Additional Apple Apps. 
•  Wallet: Keep this switch on if you want to keep your Wallet cards 
synced between your devices. See Organize Your Wallet. 
•  Game Center: This enables or disables Game Center sync between 
devices. If you don’t play games, disabling this may help battery life 
and performance, but it won’t likely have a major effect either way. 
•  Siri: In iOS 11, Siri can sync its data between devices to learn more 
about you. If this gives you the creeps, turn this off. Frankly, I want 
to give Siri all the help understanding me that I can. 
•  Keychain: Keychain syncs saved passwords between your Apple 
devices. It also syncs any credit card information that you’ve stored 
85  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Safari. Note that Keychain requires that you set a passcode for 
your device. 
•  Find My iPhone: This feature—called Find My iPad or Find My 
iPod touch on those devices—makes your device discoverable if it’s 
misplaced or stolen. It also shows the location of devices owned by 
family members if you use Family Sharing. I recommend keeping 
Find My iPhone on, even if you’re not worried about theft. I often 
use it to make my iPad chime to find it in my house. See Use Find 
My iPhone. 
Find My iPhone also enables Activation Lock, which prevents your 
device from being wiped or activated with a cellular carrier if it’s 
lost or stolen. Disable Find My iPhone before selling your device or 
taking it to Apple for service! 
•  iCloud Backup: iCloud Backup automatically backs up your 
device to Apple’s servers once per day if it’s plugged in, on a Wi-Fi 
network, and the screen is locked. You should enable iCloud Backup 
if you have enough iCloud storage space. 
Note: To find out exactly what gets backed up, see Apple’s article,  
iCloud: iCloud storage and backup overview.  
•  iCloud Drive: iCloud Drive provides a cloud-based storage area 
that works like a normal drive for files created by iOS (and Mac) 
apps that support iCloud Drive. 
Files stored in iCloud Drive are accessible on any Apple device 
signed in to your iCloud account (or in Windows with iCloud for 
Windows), although the details vary by device and operating 
system. 
•  Look Me Up: Some apps can look up information about you tied 
to your Apple ID. Any apps that do this are listed here, and it can be 
disabled entirely. In my experience, developers hardly ever use this 
feature. 
•  Location Sharing: Under Share My Location, you can choose 
whether to share your location and from which of your Apple 
86  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
devices to share your location. If you have an iPhone and iPad, for 
instance, you probably want to share the iPhone’s location, since 
you are more likely to take it along when you leave the house. 
When location sharing is enabled, you can also see who among your 
family and friends can view your location. 
Say Hello to the Files App  
The iCloud Drive app has been replaced in iOS 11, or rather updated to 
a new app called Files. In addition to the capabilities of the iCloud 
Drive app, Files can manage files stored locally on your device, in other 
online services, tags, and it allows for true collaboration using iCloud 
Drive. Here are some tips for using it: 
•  Copy or move a file or folder: You can touch, hold, and drag a 
file or folder to move it. Another method is to touch and hold a file 
or folder until the popover appears, tap copy or move, and then 
select which folder you want to copy or move the item to. 
•  Enable third-party services: From the Browse screen or 
sidebar, tap edit, and enable the switch for the desired app. It will 
appear under Locations—tap it to view files from that service. If the 
service you want isn’t listed, you’ll need to install the associated 
app, like Dropbox, assuming it integrates with Files. 
•  Use tags: Tagging is a way to organize files and folders, even if 
they’re not all in the same folder. On the iPad, tags are displayed on 
the left-hand side of the Browse screen. On the iPhone, tags are 
listed on the main Browse screen. If you have files in iCloud Drive 
that have already been tagged on macOS, those tags will be there 
when you first open Files. 
To tag a file or folder, touch and hold on it until the popover ap­
pears, and then choose Tags. Tap the tags you want to select, or tap 
Add New Tag to create a new one. Tap Done when you’re finished. 
You can also open a file, tap the Share 
button, and then tap +Tag 
on the Share sheet. 
87  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Create a folder: Tap the New Folder 
icon in the upper-left 
corner of the file browser. 
•  Operate on multiple files: Tap Select in the upper-right corner. 
Tap each item you wish to act upon—a checkmark
 appears on 
it—and then choose either Duplicate, Move, Share, or Delete at the 
bottom of the screen. 
•  Markup images and PDF: Tapping an image or PDF lets you 
mark up that file, with the tools described in Markup as PDF. 
•  Collaborate on files: One of iCloud Drive’s biggest faults has 
been that it doesn’t let you collaborate on files with others—you 
could send a copy to another person, but you couldn’t both work 
back and forth on the same file. That changes with the Files app. 
To begin, you must pull up the Share sheet for a file or folder. There 
are three ways to do that: 
‣  As mentioned above, tap Select in the upper-right corner, select 
the files or folders you want to share, and then tap Share at the 
bottom of the screen. 
‣  Touch and hold a file or folder and choose Share from the  
popover.  
‣ Tap a file to open it and tap the Share 
icon. 
Choose Add People from the Share sheet. You can tap Share Options to 
choose who can access or modify the file. Choose a sharing method, 
such as Message or Mail, enter the contact information for the recipi­
ent, and send the invitation. 
The recipient will receive a message with a link to the file. iOS 11 users 
who tap the link will open it in the Files app. Users running older 
versions of iOS can view the shared file, but not act upon it. 
Tip: Apple has a short video explaining how to use the Files app. 
88  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There’s an App (Store) for 
That 
The App Store is arguably the most important app in iOS, since it’s 
your portal to a treasure trove of over two million apps. It was the App 
Store and third-party developers that transformed the iPhone from a 
niche gadget to a world-changing phenomenon. In iOS 11, Apple has 
redesigned the App Store from the ground up, with a focus on daily 
updates and human curation of apps. 
Tip: Your App Store login can be separate from your iCloud login. You 
can manage it in Settings > Your Name > iTunes & App Store > 
Apple ID or in Settings > iTunes & App Store > Apple ID. 
Tour the New App Store  
When you first open the App Store in iOS 11, you’ll notice that it’s very 
different than what you’re used to. Here’s how the App Store is now 
organized: 
•  Today: Apple updates this tab every day with new suggested 
content, like daily lists of apps, App of the Day, Game of the Day, 
and new apps. Tap an individual featured app to see its story—a 
short article that tells you about the app. 
•  Games: This tab focuses on games, including new games, lists of 
games the App Store editors love, and lists of the most popular 
games. 
•  Apps: This tab is just like the Games tab, but for non-game apps. 
•  Updates: Here, you can view recent and pending app updates. Tap 
Update next to an app to download its update or Update All to 
update all apps at once. 
89  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•  Search: In this tab, you can search for apps. It also features a list of 
trending searches, which I’ve never found terribly useful. 
Update Apps Automatically 
After you buy an app, there’s a good chance the developer will offer 
free updates with new fixes and features. If you want the latest ver­
sions of your apps with the least amount of effort, you can have them 
update automatically: 
1.  Go to Settings > iTunes & App Store. 
2.  Turn on Updates. 
3.  If your device has a data plan with a data cap, you probably want to 
turn off the Use Cellular Data switch. 
4.  Your apps will not update if you run out of local storage space. Turn 
on Offload Unused Apps here to automatically uninstall unused 
apps while retaining the app data. 
With automatic downloads enabled for Updates, there’s no need to 
check the Updates view in the App Store—iOS automatically down­
loads and installs updates to apps as they become available. Recent 
app updates are listed in the Updates tab. Apps will not update auto­
matically if the device is in Low Power mode. 
Obtain Apps  
When you find an app you’re interesting in downloading, tap one of 
these icons: 
•  Get: This indicates that an app is free. However, the app may 
feature in-app purchases to enable the app’s core functionality or 
additional features—this will be indicated under the Get 
button. 
Note: Enable Touch ID for purchases by going to Settings > Touch 
ID & Passcode and enabling iTunes & App Store. 
90  

  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Price: If the button is a price 
, you must pay that up front 
before the app installs. You will not be charged until you authenti­
cate with Touch ID or your Apple ID password. 
Note: To download a free app, you must authenticate with Touch ID 
or your Apple ID password unless you turn off Require Password in 
Settings > iTunes & App Store > Password Settings. There, you can 
also set how often you’re prompted to authenticate when obtaining a 
new app: Always Require or Require After 15 Minutes. 
•  Download: If the app is already registered with your Apple ID, you 
will see a download 
icon. Tapping that icon will re-download 
that app at no charge to you, without the need to authenticate. 
You can access a list of previously “purchased” apps (even those that 
you paid no money for) in the Updates tab. Tap the picture of your 
face (or whatever photo is linked to your Apple ID) and tap Pur­
chased to see this list (Figure 45). 
Figure 45: To access your purchased apps in one place, go to App 
Store > Updates, tap your picture, and tap Purchased. Here you can 
re-download apps associated with your Apple ID. 
Tip: You can pull down on the Updates screen to refresh the list of 
App Store updates. 
91  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
All in the Family Sharing 
Family Sharing lets up to six family members with separate Apple IDs 
share apps and media, as well as iCloud storage, photos, a calendar, 
and locations. It‘s also required for Apple Music family plans. 
Organize Your Family  
The family organizer sets up and manages Family Sharing and is 
responsible for all charges incurred. The organizer can specify who is a 
parent or guardian, and who is a child. 
Warning! An Apple ID can start or join a family group only once per 
year. 
The organizer can also require that all purchases made by a family 
member under age 18 must be approved by a parent or guardian (the 
specific age may vary by your location). 
Family Sharing Requirements 
To set up or join Family Sharing, you must use a device running at  
least iOS 8, 10.10 Yosemite, or iCloud for Windows 4.0.  
Apple TV software 7.0 or later (which eliminates the 1st- and 2nd­
generation Apple TV models) is necessary to access shared movies.  
You also need a credit or debit card on file with Apple ID. 
Set up Family Sharing 
To set up Family Sharing: 
1.  Go to Settings > Your Name > Family Sharing. 
2.  Tap Set Up Family Sharing. 
3.  Follow the simple prompts and read the informational tips until the 
setup process is complete. 
92  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You can now manage the group in Settings > Your Name > Family 
Sharing. To add additional family members from this screen: 
1.  Tap Add Family Member and choose either Invite via iMessage, 
Invite in Person, or Create a Child Account. Follow the onscreen 
prompts. 
2.  When your family member receives the notification (in iOS or 
macOS), they must open it and follow the prompts to be added 
to your family group. 
About Child Accounts 
In the United States, children under 13 aren’t legally allowed to 
create online accounts (the law varies by country). You can create an 
Apple ID for a child, but it’s important to note that once a child is in a 
family group, they can’t be removed until they turn 13 (the exact age 
varies by country); however, they can transfer to another group, if 
they are invited to it. 
Control Child Purchases 
Family Sharing lets you control what purchases are made on a child 
account: 
•  Appoint a parent or guardian: The organizer can specify any 
group member age 18 or over as a parent or guardian who can 
approve purchase requests. Go to Settings > Your Name > Family 
Sharing, tap that person’s name, and enable Parent/Guardian. An 
adult who isn’t a Parent/Guardian doesn’t need permission to make 
purchases, but can’t authorize child purchases. 
•  Enable Ask to Buy: If a group member is under age 18, the 
organizer, parent, or guardian can restrict purchases (even free 
ones) for that person by going to Settings > Your Name > Family 
Sharing, tapping that person’s name, and enabling Ask to Buy. 
93  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How Ask to Buy Works 
Here’s how Ask to Buy works for both parents and children: 
1. The child attempts to make a purchase or in-app purchase in the  
App Store, iTunes Store, or iBooks Store.  
2. In the Ask Permission alert, the child taps Ask. 
3. A notification appears on all parent/guardian devices. A parent 
opens the notification and taps either Decline or Approve. If the 
parent approves the purchase, they authenticate with Touch ID or 
their Apple ID password to complete the purchase. 
4. The child receives a notification of the decision. If the parent  
approved the request, the purchase downloads automatically to  
the child’s device.  
If an Ask to Buy request isn’t acted upon within 24 hours, it will be  
deleted and must be submitted again.  
If your child receives an error like “This iTunes account is not set up  
to use Family Sharing,” try disabling and re-enabling Ask to Buy.  
Remove a Family Member 
You can remove a family member age 13 or older at any time: 
1.  Go to Settings > Your Name > Family Sharing. 
2.  Choose the family member you wish to remove. 
3.  Tap Remove Name. 
The removed person immediately loses access to shared purchases, the 
Family photo album, Family calendar, and everything else Family 
Sharing entails. 
What’s Shared and Not Shared  
Family Sharing can be a bit confusing. Here’s a clear list of what’s 
shared: 
•  Apple media purchases: Accounts linked via Family Sharing 
share most purchases from the App Store, iBooks Store, and iTunes 
94  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Store, including apps, books, TV shows, movies, and music. You can 
turn this off in Settings > Your Name > Family Sharing > Purchase 
Sharing. 
Note: Purchases for Adults and Parents/Guardians work the same 
they always have, except that the organizer absorbs all charges. 
•  Apple Music family plans: If you subscribe to an Apple Music 
family plan, it will be shared with your group. 
•  iCloud storage plans: New in iOS 11, you can share iCloud 
storage plan space with your family. To do so, go to Settings > Your 
Name > Family Sharing > iCloud Storage and tap Let Your Family 
Know. You’re then prompted to send a message to your Family 
Sharing members, who then are given the option to join your plan 
or to retain their existing plans. 
•  Photo album: Devices in the same Family Sharing group all get 
access to a shared Family photo album in the Photos app. To view 
the family’s shared photos, open the Photos app, switch to the 
Shared view and select the Family photo album. 
To add photos, tap the plus 
button while viewing the photo  
album, select the photos to share, and tap Done.  
•  Calendar: All Family Sharing members can access a shared Family 
calendar in the Calendar app. The shared Family calendar is auto­
matically added to the Calendar app. To show or hide it, open 
Calendar, tap Calendars, and either check or uncheck it. 
While creating a new event, add it to the Family calendar by tapping 
Calendar and selecting Family. To move an existing event to the 
Family calendar, open the event, tap Calendar, and select the Fami­
ly calendar. 
Tip: Set the default calendar for new events in Settings > Calendar. 
•  Reminders: Group members also get a shared Family reminders 
list in the Reminders app. Open the Reminders app to add and view 
reminders on the shared Family card. 
95  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Locations: By default, group members can see each other in the 
Find My Friends app (see Use Find My Friends). Any member can 
stop sharing their location by going to Settings > Your Name > 
Family Sharing > Share My Location, and then turning off the Share 
My Location switch. 
•  Find My iPhone family view: By default, group members can 
locate the devices of all other members, with the Find My iPhone 
app, described in Use Find My iPhone. 
Not all content sold in Apple’s online stores can be shared with a 
family. Items that aren’t shared include: 
•  Songs in iTunes Match that weren’t purchased in the iTunes Store 
•  In-app purchases 
•  Items hidden by a group member 
•  Some apps from the App Store—this is left up to each developer 
Apple Music Family Plans 
Apple Music, Apple’s streaming music service, syncs your music 
library and gives you access to millions of songs. But the $9.99 
individual membership allows you to listen on only one device at a 
time. (Apple also offers an individual student plan for $4.99 per 
month.) The $14.99 family membership offers unlimited access from 
your devices, and lets up to six people share the membership. The 
catch is that all six people must be in the same Family Sharing group. 
To upgrade an individual membership to a family membership: 
1. Go to Settings > iTunes & App Store. 
2. Tap your Apple ID, tap View Apple ID, and enter your password or 
scan your fingerprint when prompted. 
3. Tap Subscriptions and then Apple Music Membership. 
4. Select Family. 
To change your subscription later, return to the Apple Music Member­
ship screen. Or, to unsubscribe, tap Cancel Subscription here. 
96  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special iPad Features 
As iOS has evolved, Apple has made an effort to make the iPad more 
than just a “big iPhone,” adding features that help you take advantage 
of its large screen. iOS 11 takes this to the next level with an overhaul of 
the iPad’s multitasking system and some other new features. 
Work with Instant Notes  
iOS 11 lets you quickly create or edit a note in the Notes app from the 
Lock screen—Apple calls this Instant Notes. Contrary to Apple’s 
marketing, this isn’t an iPad-specific feature, as I explain in Discover 
Control Center Functions, since you can use the Notes button in 
Control Center to summon an Instant Note. 
However, if you use an Apple Pencil with an iPad Pro, there is an 
actual instant way to create an Instant Note. Wake your iPad Pro and 
tap the tip of the Apple Pencil on the Lock screen to create or open an 
Instant Note. 
Tip: Sometimes it takes a second tap of the Apple Pencil to open  
Notes. If that doesn’t work, you Apple Pencil may need to be  
charged.  
By default, Instant Notes brings up the last note you viewed in the 
Notes app. To instead create a new note every time you summon 
Instant Notes, go to Settings > Notes > Show Note on Lock Screen and 
select Always Create New Note. 
If you keep it set to Resume Last Viewed Note, the Require Password 
setting dictates how long you can return to that note without authenti­
cating with Touch ID or a passcode. The default is 15 minutes. 
Tip: Apple has a video showing off some of the Apple Pencil’s new  
tricks in iOS 11.  
97  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manage the Dock  
Apple has redesigned the iPad’s Dock in iOS 11 to make it more like the 
Mac’s Dock. It’s split into two sections. The left-hand section holds the 
apps you place there—up to 15 of them. The right-hand side presents 
recently and frequently used apps and Handoff apps, denoted by the 
Handoff 
icon on the app (see Learn About Handoff—Figure 46). 
You can turn that off with the Show Suggested and Recent Apps setting 
in Settings > General > Multitasking & Dock. 
Figure 46: The new iPad Dock holds your favorite apps, and sug­
gests apps iOS thinks you’ll want quick access to. It’s also now how 
you access Handoff apps on the iPad. 
Apple has a video showing how to use the new Dock. 
Reveal the Dock 
The Dock is always visible on the Home screen, but is hidden when 
viewing an app. Swipe up from the bottom of the screen to reveal it. In 
some apps, you must first swipe up to reveal an arrow 
, and then 
swipe up again to reveal the Dock. 
Tapping an app in the Dock switches from the current app to the app 
you tap. 
Adding and Removing Dock Apps 
To add an app to the Dock, simply drag it from the Home screen to the 
Dock. You can touch and hold until the icons shake, but there’s no 
need to do that. Items added to the Dock are removed from the Home 
screen. 
Tip: The iPad Dock can also hold folders! Moving them in and out of  
the Dock works just as it does with apps.  
98  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
Removing an app from the Dock works the same way—simply tap and 
drag an icon from the Dock to the Home screen. Note that you cannot 
do this in an app—you must be viewing the Home screen. 
Multitask on the iPad  
As with the iPhone, you can double-press the Home button to switch 
between apps. But the iPad offers gestures to help you switch between 
apps, and the iPad App Switcher has been completely overhauled in 
iOS 11. Also, unlike the iPhone, the iPad lets you use multiple apps at 
once. 
Multitasking Gestures 
Repeatedly pressing the Home button can contribute to repetitive 
stress injuries or even wear out your Home button prematurely. On the 
iPad, there are three gestures you can use to switch between apps: 
•  Return to the Home screen: Place four or five fingers on the 
screen, and move them in toward each other. (This works better 
with five fingers.) 
•  Bring up the App Switcher: Place four or five fingers on the 
screen and move them up toward the top of the screen. (This works 
better with four fingers.) 
Note: The iPad App Switcher shows Control Center alongside a grid  
of your open apps. To close an app, swipe up on it.  
•  Switch between apps: Place four or five fingers on the screen 
and move them left or right. 
You can turn these gestures on and off in Settings > General > Multi­
tasking & Dock. 
99  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Use Two Apps at Once 
The iPad lets you use two apps on screen at the same time. There are 
two distinct, yet interconnected, ways to do this: 
•  Slide Over: While working in one app, this approach lets you bring 
up a second app in a side column that is overlaid on the first app. 
You can work only in the app in the Slide Over column while refer­
encing content in the main app. You can hide a Slide Over app off 
the right side of the screen and bring it back on the screen. Slide 
Over works on all iPads that support iOS 11. 
•  Split Screen: This approach lets you use two apps side by side 
simultaneously. A divider in the middle lets you adjust how much 
screen space both apps get. This only works on the iPad mini 4, iPad 
Air 2, iPad Pro, and later models. 
Tip: Apps joined together in Split Screen will appear together in the  
App Switcher.  
To activate either one, reveal the Dock and drag an app from the Dock 
onto the app you’re viewing. Once you’ve done that, what you do next 
will determine if the second app opens as Slide Over or Split Screen: 
•  Open the app with Slide Over: The app you’re dragging will be 
surrounded by a rectangular outline. Release the app to open it as a 
Slide Over app (Figure 47). 
100  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 47: Slide Over apps float over the main app. 
•  Open the app in Split Screen: Drag the app to the far left or 
right edge of the screen. The main app will shift over to one side. 
Release the app you’re dragging to open it alongside the first app in 
Split Screen (Figure 48). 
101  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 48: Split Screen apps work side-by-side. The center drag 
handle lets you adjust how much space each app takes. Pulling down 
on the top drag handle lets you change it to Slide Over. 
Once you’ve made your choice, you’ll want to know how to manage 
multiple apps on the screen at once: 
•  Move a Slide Over app: Touch and hold the drag handle on top 
of the Slide Over app and slide it to the left or right. 
•  Hide a Slide Over app: Move it off the right side of the screen 
with the upper drag handle. 
•  Reveal a hidden Slide Over app: Swipe from off the right side 
of the screen to the left. 
•  Convert a Slide Over app to Split Screen: Touch and hold the 
upper drag handle and drag it down until the app shifts to the side. 
Tip: If your iPad supports Split Screen, you can split Safari to view  
two webpages at once. Touch and hold the Pages  
icon and choose 
Open Split View from the popover. To merge Safari back into a single 
pane, touch and hold the Pages 
icon and choose Merge All Tabs. 
102  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Adjust Split Screen panes: Touch and hold the drag handle in 
the center of the screen and slide it left or right. You can adjust it so 
either app fits into one column—making more room for the other 
app—or you can split the screen equally between the two apps. 
•  Close a Split Screen app: Drag the center drag handle and move 
it left or right until the desired app fills up the entire screen. 
•  Convert a Split Screen app to Slide Over: Drag the top drag 
handle down until the other app again fills up the screen. 
Tip: Apple has a video showing how the new multitasking features  
work in iOS 11.  
Watch Picture in Picture Videos 
Picture in Picture (PiP) lets you watch a video on your iPad while you 
use other apps (Figure 49). As with the other multitasking features, 
to work with Picture in Picture, video apps need to explicitly support it. 
Figure 49: Picture in Picture lets you watch a video on your iPad 
while you do other things. 
Here’s how to use Picture in Picture: 
•  Activate PiP: While watching a video in a supported app (such as 
Videos or FaceTime), press the Home button to leave the app. In 
103  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
some app, you can or should tap the Picture in Picture 
button in 
the video player. The video reappears in a small window. 
You can drag the PiP window around the screen to suit your tastes, 
though it always snaps to the edge of the screen. If you just want to 
listen to the audio, you can even drag the PiP window off the left or 
right edge of the screen. iOS replaces it with a small handle. To 
retrieve it, tap or drag the handle. 
•  Adjust the PiP window size: Pinch out with two fingers to 
enlarge the window or pinch in to shrink it. 
• Pause the PiP video: Tap the PiP window and then tap the Pause 
button. 
•  Resume watching in fullscreen: Tap the PiP window and then 
tap the Fullscreen 
button. 
• Close PiP: Tap the PiP window and then tap the Exit 
button. 
Tip: You can disable PiP with Settings > General > Multitasking &  
Dock > Persistent Video Overlay.  
Drag and Drop  
iOS 11 lets you drag and drop elements between apps and even within 
apps. Here are some examples of what you can drag and drop: 
•  A headline from News into Notes 
•  Maps locations into messages 
•  Attachments between threads in Messages. 
•  Selected text into Notes. 
To use drag and drop, open the apps in Slide Over or Split Screen, 
touch and hold an element until it seems to lift off the background, and 
then drag it onto the other app. 
104  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keyboarding on the iPad  
The iPad’s large screen size affords some special features that wouldn’t 
make sense on an iPhone. 
Tip: The iPad keyboard can display special keys for working with  
text: undo  
, redo 
, cut 
, copy 
, and paste 
. 
Flick Down for Special Characters 
iOS 11 makes typing alternative characters more efficient, by allowing 
you to “flick” down on a key to type an alternate character instead of 
having to cycle through keyboard layouts. 
Look at each keyboard key. Tapping the key will insert the black 
character. Most keys also display a gray character. To type these, flick 
down on the key instead of merely tapping it. Think of it like flicking 
down a light switch. 
If you flick slowly, you’ll notice the key rotating down and becoming 
the key you’re typing (Figure 50). 
Figure 50: As I flick down on the Q key, it types a 1—observe the 
upper-left corner. 
Split the iPad Keyboard 
The standard iPad keyboard is fine if you’re resting the iPad in your 
lap, but if you’re holding the iPad in your hands and need to type with 
your thumbs, it can be impossible to reach the middle keys. 
Thankfully, iOS lets you split the onscreen keyboard so you can type 
with your thumbs: 
• Touch and hold the Hide Keyboard 
key, and then choose Split 
(Figure 51). 
105  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 51: You can split the iPad’s keyboard, making it easier to 
type with your thumbs. 
• Or, touch and hold the Hide Keyboard 
key and immediately 
drag it up. 
Either way, the keyboard splits and moves up to the middle of the 
screen. 
To put the keyboard back together, either drag the Hide Keyboard 
key down or touch and hold the Hide Keyboard 
key and choose 
Merge or Dock and Merge. 
Use Trackpad Mode 
Selecting text can be finicky, so iOS lets you use the keyboard area as a 
trackpad to move the cursor and select characters: 
•  Move the cursor: Place two fingers on the keyboard and immedi­
ately slide them on the keyboard. 
•  Select text: Set two fingers on the keyboard until drag handles 
appear. Move your fingers to expand the selection. To remove the 
selection, lift your fingers and then tap the screen in the text-input 
area. 
•  Select a word: Place the cursor inside the word, and then two-
finger tap on the keyboard. 
•  Select a line: Place the cursor on the line, and then two-finger 
double-tap on the keyboard. 
106  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Learn iOS Keyboard Shortcuts 
You can technically use external keyboards with any iOS device, but 
they’re particularly well suited for iPads, especially when you pair an 
Apple Smart Keyboard with an iPad Pro. Here are some shortcuts 
every Smart Keyboard user should know: 
•  Unlock your iPad with the keyboard: Tap a keyboard key once 
to wake up the iPad and then again to show the passcode prompt. 
You can enter your passcode from the keyboard and press Return to 
unlock the iPad. 
•  Go Home: Press Command-H to return to the Home screen. Note 
that double-pressing this won’t bring up the App Switcher. 
•  Switch apps: Press Command-Tab to bring up an alternative app 
switcher (which is much like the Mac’s App Switcher—Figure 52). 
While holding Command, press Tab to cycle through apps from left 
to right. To cycle from right to left, hold Command-Shift and press 
Tab. 
Figure 52: Command-Tab brings up a Mac-like App Switcher on the 
iPad. 
•  Search: Press Command-Space to pull up the Spotlight search box. 
This also works inside apps. Press Command-Space again to dis­
miss Spotlight. 
Tip: You can use the Command-Space shortcut to quickly launch  
apps. Press Command-Space to bring up Spotlight, type the app’s  
name, and press Return twice.  
•  Page Down and Page Up: Hold Option and press the up and 
down arrow keys to move up and down a page at a time. This works 
in Safari, but may not work in all apps. 
107  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Home and End: Hold Command and press the up or down arrow 
keys to move to the beginning or end of the page. 
•  Discover keyboard shortcuts: Hold Command to see a list of 
keyboard shortcuts for the current app. 
108  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capture Camera Basics 
Camera is one of the most popular iOS apps. Thanks to the ever-
improving quality of iPhone and iPad cameras, many people have 
abandoned point-and-shoot cameras entirely, instead using their iOS 
devices to capture cherished moments. 
Before you take a photo or video, let’s quickly review the icons on the 
main screen of the Camera app (Figure 53). Read more about most of 
these in Pick a Camera Mode, ahead. 
Figure 53: Here’s a look at the Camera controls on an iPhone (the 
iPod touch is similar): (A) Filters, (B) Timer, (C) HDR, (D) Flash, 
(E) Viewfinder, (F) Camera Chooser, (G) Take Picture (shutter), 
and (H) Photo and Video Viewer. Camera on the iPad has similar 
controls, but a different layout. 
Pick a Camera Mode  
Before you press the round Take Picture
 button (G above), you’ll 
want to set up your shot. Start by picking a mode. 
The mode is indicated by a yellow label next to the Take Picture 
button. 
109  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You switch between modes by swiping across the Viewfinder (vertically 
if your device is in landscape orientation, as shown above), or by 
tapping a label. 
Here is a list of the Camera’s modes: 
•  Time-Lapse: The camera snaps a series of images at dynamically 
selected intervals. It then combines the images into a time-lapse 
video (see Take a Time-Lapse Video). 
•  Slo-mo: On supported devices, this mode records video at 120 
frames per second or up to 240 fps on the iPhone 6 and iPhone 7 
models—adjust this in Settings > Camera > Record Slo-mo. During 
playback, you can choose a snippet of this high-frame-rate video to 
be played in slow motion (at the normal rate of 30 fps). 
•  Video: This mode lets you record video at 30 fps. On any iPhone 6 
or iPhone 7 model, tap Settings > Camera > Record Video to switch 
to 60 fps (see Take a Video). 
•  Photo: This mode takes standard rectangular photos. 
•  Square: In this mode, the camera takes square, Instagram-friendly 
images. 
•  Pano: The camera takes a continuous stream of photos as you 
move the device horizontally, and then it stitches those images 
together to create a super-wide image—ideal for capturing land­
scapes. Follow the onscreen instructions to capture the perfect 
panorama. 
To take a vertical panorama, hold the device in landscape orienta­
tion and move it up instead of to the side. 
Tap the white arrow to reverse the direction in which you move to 
capture the panorama. 
110  

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Special iPhone 7 Plus Features 
There’s not just one, but two cameras on the back of the iPhone 7  
Plus. This makes two new features possible on those phones:  
✦ Optical Zoom: The viewfinder of the Camera app has a 1x button. 
Tap this to turn it into a 2x button, meaning 2x optical zoom is 
enabled with the special telephoto lens. You can also drag the 
button to enable up to 10x digital zoom, which isn’t as sharp as the 
2x optical zoom. 
✦  Portrait mode: This special mode takes photos in which the 
subject is in sharp focus, but the background is blurred, emphasiz­
ing the subject. Portrait photos need to be taken up close and 
require a lot of light to turn out well—the onscreen instructions will 
tell you what to do. 
In addition to shooting modes, the Camera app provides a number of 
options for taking and tweaking photos: 
• Flash: On devices with a rear flash, tap the Flash 
button to 
disable the flash, enable it for all photos, or let Camera make the 
decision for you, depending on lighting. 
Note: Some devices have a flash option when the front camera is  
selected, even though they don’t have an actual flash on the front.  
Instead, Camera uses the screen as a flash!  
• HDR: High-dynamic-range imaging, or HDR, is a way to capture 
more light in a photo by combining several photos into one. When 
HDR is enabled, Camera takes two photos with different exposures 
and merges them to produce, in theory, a better final image. Taking 
photos with HDR enabled will leave two pictures in the Photos app: 
one with HDR and one without. 
• Time delay: Tap the time delay
 button to set a 3- or 10-second 
timer—then tap the Take Picture button, get in position, and smile. 
Camera displays a countdown and flashes the camera flash to 
indicate how much time is left before the picture is taken. If your 
device takes Live Photos, and is set to do so, it takes only a single 
111  

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
photo; otherwise, it takes a ten-shot burst, so you should always get 
a usable shot, even if you’re not ready in time. 
• Camera swap: Tap the camera swap
 button to toggle between 
the front and rear cameras. The rear camera takes higher quality 
photos, but the front one is best for selfies. 
Tip: Other apps, like FaceTime, also have this button for switching  
cameras.  
• Filters: Tap the filters 
button (iPhone and iPod touch only) to 
see the effects you can apply to your photo as it is being taken. You 
see a preview of all filters on screen; swipe to see what’s available. 
Tip: You can later remove a filter effect while viewing the picture in 
Photos by tapping Edit, and then Revert. 
Snap a Photo  
Taking a photo isn’t rocket surgery, but the Camera app has many 
subtle features you may miss: 
1.  Choose a camera mode. 
2.  Make sure you’ve set the options described above, like the flash. 
3.  Tap an object in the viewfinder to focus on it. A square reticule 
appears, indicating where the camera is focusing. You can change 
the focus by tapping on another part of the viewfinder. Slide your 
finger up or down the screen to adjust exposure (Figure 54). 
To zoom, pinch in or out on the screen. A slider appears to show 
the zoom level; once visible, you can adjust it manually as well. On 
the iPad, there’s a slider to the side of the viewfinder that lets you 
adjust the zoom level. 
112  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 54: Tap the viewfinder to show the square focus reticle, 
which tells the camera where to focus and lets you adjust exposure 
manually. 
Tip: Touch and hold the viewfinder to lock focus; an AE/AF Lock 
appears in the viewfinder. Tap the viewfinder to unlock focus. 
4. Take the photo: tap the Take Picture 
button or press either 
of your device’s volume buttons. 
Tip: Touch and hold the Take Picture button for Burst mode (on 
supported devices), which takes ten photos per second until you let 
go. 
The Camera app saves your photo to the Photos app in Albums > 
Camera Roll (or Albums > All Photos if iCloud Photo Library is on). 
Burst-mode photos are collected under a single thumbnail; tap it, and 
then tap Select to see all photos in the series. 
113  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Camera Dos and Don’ts 
Camera can do amazing things, as long as you understand its limita­
tions: 
✦ Do: Get close to your subjects, leave the flash off, use Burst mode 
to capture fast-moving subjects, and take videos in landscape 
orientation. 
✦ Don’t: Try to capture faraway things, snap photos in low light, or 
ever, ever take video in portrait orientation (though we’ve all done 
it). 
Live Photos 
Newer iOS devices can take Live Photos, which are otherwise normal 
photos that embed a brief video clip (think of the moving pictures in 
the Harry Potter series). When Live Photos is enabled, video is 
captured automatically whenever you take a photo. 
You can toggle Live Photos on and off in Camera by tapping the Live 
Photos 
button. 
While viewing a Live Photo in Photos, press the photo to see the 
embedded video. 
Be aware that a live photo can take up to twice as much storage 
space as a regular photo. For more about Live Photos, see Work with 
Live Photos. 
Take a Video  
The iPhone’s video camera is no slouch—entire motion pictures have 
been shot with it! I don’t have the skill to help you win film festivals, 
but I can show you how to get started: 
1. Switch to Video mode. 
2. To begin recording, tap the record 
button or press either of your 
device’s volume buttons. 
A counter at the top of the screen lets you know how long you’ve 
been recording. 
114  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Tap the stop  
button to stop recording.  
Camera saves your video in the Photos app, in Albums > Videos.  
Take a Slo-mo Video  
A Slo-mo video is great for capturing actions scenes where you want to 
emphasize the action by slowing it down—like your kid swinging a 
baseball bat or going down a slide: 
1. Switch to Slo-mo mode. 
2. To begin recording, tap the record 
button or press either of your 
device’s volume buttons. 
A counter at the top of the screen lets you know how long you’ve 
been recording. 
3. Tap the stop 
button to stop recording. 
Camera saves your video in the Photos app, in Albums > Slo-mo. 
Camera automatically sets slow-motion points in the video. To adjust 
them, open the video, tap Edit, and adjust the drag handles (Figure 
55). 
Figure 55: Adjust the drag handles (circled in red) to change the 
placement of the slow-motion effect in the video. The slow-motion 
portion is denoted by the widely spaced white lines. 
Tip: If you’re taking a video in dark surroundings, you can brighten 
things up with the flash’s LED. Tap the Flash 
button and then tap 
On to keep the light on as you film. 
115  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Take a Time-Lapse Video  
Time-lapse videos let you capture events that happen slowly—like 
cloud movements—and display them at regular speed. Here’s how to 
take them: 
1. Try to rest the device on a ledge or other solid base, or use a tripod. 
2. Switch to Time-Lapse mode and either tap the record
 button 
or press either of your device’s volume buttons, and hold the device 
still. 
3.  Camera starts shooting and continues until your device runs out of 
space or battery, or you press the stop
 button. 
The Camera app stitches the images together to make a time-lapse 
video and stores it in the Photos app, in Albums > Time-lapse. 
116  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Get to Know Photos 
Once you’ve taken a photo or video with the Camera app, or saved an 
image from another app, you can find it in the Photos app. Images 
from shared albums and iCloud Photo Library also appear in Photos 
(see An Introduction to iCloud). This chapter will get you started with 
Photos and tell you about its new features, but for full coverage, see 
Jason Snell’s Photos: A Take Control Crash Course. 
View Your Photos  
There are four views in Photos: Photos, Memories, Shared, and Al­
bums, accessed by tapping icons at the bottom of the screen. 
The Photos view has three levels. The broadest level, Years, groups 
photos by, well, years. Tap a group of photos in any year, and you see 
Collections, which include photos from smaller date ranges, as well by 
geographic regions. Tap any Collection, and you see Moments, which 
group photos by small units of time and location. 
At any level, tap a photo to drill down; in Moments, tapping a photo 
opens it full screen. To move back up a level, tap the 
arrow at the 
upper-left corner. 
Note: By default, Photos shows only a subset of thumbnails for Years 
and Collections; to make it show all of them, tap Settings > Photos 
and disable Summarize Photos. 
There’s a useful shortcut for browsing your photos: the scrubber. 
When you’re viewing a photo, the scrubber shows tiny previews of 
other photos taken around that time at the bottom of the screen. Drag 
the scrubber to scan through them quickly. 
Swipe up on a photo to see additional details, such as who’s in the 
photo, where the photo was taken, and associated Memories (see Walk 
117  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Down Memory Lane). On supported devices, this view also shows Live 
Photo effects. 
Search in Photos with Siri 
You can search for photos and videos in the Photos app: tap the  
magnifying glass at the top of the screen to bring up the search  
screen.  
iOS suggests some searches, like Nearby, Home, and One Year Ago.  
Tap a suggestion or type a search term, such as a location or date.  
For example, I can search for San Francisco to see the photos I took  
while I was there.  
Even better, you can search for photos and videos using Siri. Try  
queries like these:  
✦  “Show me photos from Nashville, Tennessee.” 
✦ “Search for pictures of oak trees.” 
✦ “Display videos from Easter 2016.” 
Work with Live Photos 
When you expose photo details, if you’re viewing a Live Photo and your 
device supports Live Photos, you will see different effects you can 
apply to a Live Photo: 
•  Live: This is the default effect. It merely plays the mini-video and 
stops. 
•  Loop: The Loop effect plays the mini-video on a repeating loop. 
•  Bounce: This effect is like a backwards loop. When the mini-video 
reaches its conclusion, it plays back in reverse. 
•  Long Exposure: This blends the frames of the mini-video to 
simulate a long exposure photo. 
118  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Select Photos 
Before you can perform operations on photos (like moving or sharing 
them), you must first select them with one of the follow methods: 
•  Select a single photo: Tap the photo you wish to work with, or if 
another photo is already selected, pick the desired photo from the 
scrubber. 
•  Select multiple photos in an album or Moments view: Tap 
Select in the upper-right corner, and then tap each photo you wish 
to work with. A checkmark 
appears on selected photos. Alterna­
tively, you can tap Select All after tapping Select to choose all photos 
in that view. 
•  Drag to select multiple photos in an album or Moments 
view: After tapping Select in the upper-right corner, touch the first 
photo you want, and then drag to keep selecting photos. 
You can lift your finger and repeat this process until you’ve selected 
all the photos you want. 
Note: To learn how to share Photos, see Share from the Photos App. 
Organize with Albums  
Tap Albums at the bottom of the Photos screen to see the default 
albums plus any you’ve created on the device or synced through 
iTunes. 
Default albums that you may see include Camera Roll (or All Photos), 
Favorite Memories, Favorites, People, Places, Videos, Selfies, Live 
Photos, Panoramas, Time-lapse, Slo-mo, Depth Effect, Bursts, Screen-
shots, Animated, Hidden, and Recently Deleted. 
119  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tip: Photos can recognize not only faces, but all sorts of objects as 
well. A built-in album called People corrals photos of recognized 
faces. There aren’t albums for objects, but you can search for things 
like flowers, babies, fish, or birds. It can even identify types of trees 
and dog breeds. 
Create an Album 
Albums let you group pictures together. There are many automatic 
albums, but you can create your own by hand: 
1. In Albums view, tap the plus 
button in the upper-left corner. 
2. Enter a name and tap Save. 
3.  Add items to your album. You can add from moments, collections, 
and years, as well as from other albums. 
4. When you’ve selected the photos you want to include, tap Done. 
Tip: To add an image to the Favorites album, view it and tap the  
heart  
icon. 
Add Photos to an Album 
Adding additional photos to an album is easy: 
1.  Select some photos you wish to add to an album. 
2.  Tap Add To. 
3.  Select the album you want (default albums that are populated auto­
matically are dimmed) or tap New Album, enter an album name, 
and tap Save. 
120  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hide Photos and Videos 
Do you have embarrassing photos or videos you don’t want friends  
and family to see while you show off pictures? Hidden photos don’t  
appear in Moments, albums, or Memories.  
Select the items you want to hide, tap the Share 
icon to open a 
Share sheet, and then tap Hide in the bottom row of the Share sheet. 
Hidden items are stored in a special Hidden album. To unhide a  
hidden photo or video, select it, tap the Share  
icon to open a  
Share sheet, and then tap Unhide.  
Organize Photos by People 
The People album uses facial recognition to organize photos by recog­
nized faces: 
• Favoriting faces: Tap the heart 
icon on a face. You’ll be 
prompted to name the face if you haven’t already. As you type a 
name, Photos will suggest names from your Contacts. Finally, you’ll 
be asked whether other pictures have that person—check or 
uncheck them as appropriate and tap Done when finished. After 
you’ve added one or more favorites, you can hide all other faces. 
•  Naming faces: Tap a face to view its associated photos. At the top 
of the screen, tap Add Name and enter the name. As you type, 
suggested contacts appear. Tap one to associate the contact to that 
face. 
•  Adding faces: Tap the face, scroll down, and tap Confirm Addi­
tional Photos. You will be shown several photos, one a time, and be 
asked to verify if the selected person is correct. 
•  Hide faces: Tap the face, scroll down, and tap Remove From 
People Album. 
Tip: You can also add a person to Memories. Select their face, scroll 
down and tap Add to Memories. 
121  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organize Photos by Places 
Photos now features a special album that displays your photos by 
location. The Places album displays photos either on a map, or in a 
grid divided by location. 
In the map view, photos first appear tightly grouped together, but 
spread out further as you zoom in (Figure 56). 
Figure 56: The Places album displays your photos on a map. The 
further you zoom in, the more spread out your photos will be on the 
map. 
Note: Unfortunately, you can’t add a location to a photo in Photos for 
iOS, although you can in Photos for macOS. 
Delete Photos and Videos  
We live in an age where it’s almost too easy to take a photo! Here’s how 
to delete them to get rid of bad ones and free up space: 
1. Select the item(s) that you wish to delete. 
2. Tap the Trash 
icon. 
3. Tap the Delete button. 
Note: Deleting a photo or video from an album doesn’t delete the  
photo but instead just removes it from the album.  
122  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Recently Deleted Album 
The Recently Deleted album holds deleted photos and videos for 30 
days before trashing them forever. A label on each item notes the 
time remaining. 
If you don’t want to let them compost out of existence in 30 days, 
you can recover items from this album or delete them manually right 
away: 
✦ Recover or delete one item: Tap an item to view it, and then tap 
Recover or Delete. 
✦  Recover or delete multiple items: Tap Select, select the items 
you want to recover, tap Recover or Delete, and tap Recover # 
Items or Delete # Items. 
✦  Recover or delete all items: Tap Select, tap Recover All or 
Delete All, and then tap Recover # Items or Delete # Items. 
Walk Down Memory Lane  
Memories use artificial intelligence to automatically gather photos and 
videos by date, location, people, and objects into collections with 
names like On This Day, Christmas Day 2016, and San Francisco. 
Here’s how to work with Memories: 
•  Create Memories: Photos generates Memories automatically. 
However, you can generate Memories from related photos. Open a 
photo, swipe up on it to see details, scroll down to Related, and tap 
one of the related photo collections there. Scroll down and tap Add 
to Memories to make a memory from those related photos. 
Tip: While you can’t add photos to a memory manually, you can hide 
photos to exclude them from all Memories. 
•  Favorite Memories: If you love a particular memory, view it, 
scroll down, and tap Add to Favorite Memories. You can find Fa­
vorite Memories with the rest of your albums. 
123  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Delete Memories: Memories are computer-generated and there­
fore can sometimes be stupid or insensitive in the photos they bring 
together. To remove a rogue memory, view it, scroll down, and tap 
Delete Memory. 
Tip: Check Memories every day to see pictures that were taken on  
that day in years past.  
•  Block Memories: There’s a new option in iOS 11 to deal with 
offensive Memories. Under Delete Memory is a Block Memory 
option. Tap that to see options to block Memories of that day or that 
place. 
Viewing Memory Slideshows 
At the top of each memory is a video slideshow; tap it to play, though 
you’ll likely have to wait a minute for it to begin. Tap the screen while 
it plays to see more controls: 
•  Themes: Apple provides ten text and music themes to choose 
from, such as Gentle, Chill, and Epic. 
Note: You can’t add photos or videos to slideshows generated by  
Memories.  
•  Transition Length: Choose Short or Medium, to adjust how long 
the slideshow lingers on an image. 
• Share: Tap the Share 
icon to export your slideshow as a movie 
and send it to others. You can also save a movie of the slideshow 
like any other video. 
• Pause/Play: Tap Pause 
 or Play 
to stop or play the slideshow. 
• Edit: Tap Edit 
to adjust slideshow settings: title, music (either 
from Apple’s included tracks or your library), duration, and which 
photos and videos are included. 
124  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iCloud Photo Sharing  
iCloud Photo Sharing lets you share an entire album of photos and 
videos. Friends and family can view the album in the Photos app or on 
the web. 
To share selected photos or videos: 
1. Tap the Share 
icon. 
2. Tap iCloud Photo Sharing in the Share sheet. 
3.  Tap Shared Album to pick any album or make a new one. If you 
choose to make a new album, you’ll be prompted to name it and 
enter email addresses of people with whom you want to share. 
4. Optionally, enter a comment. 
5. Tap Post. 
To see the shared album, switch to the Shared view and tap the al­
bum’s icon. 
To manage a shared album, open it and tap People. From here, you can 
invite or uninvite subscribers, put the album on the web and get a URL 
to it, allow others to post pictures, and more. 
Note: If you have a Family album, it’s shared among everyone in  
your Family Sharing circle and its members can’t be changed in  
Photos. See All in the Family Sharing.  
In the Shared view, you can also see albums that others have shared  
with you. While viewing a shared album, you can “like” photos and  
videos, add comments, possibly upload your own photos, and more.  
125  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master Messages 
Messages has evolved from a simple SMS text messaging app into a 
capable instant messaging tool. Messages can handle SMS messages, 
Apple’s own iMessage messages, and voice messages. Messages lets 
you add visual effects to messages, and developers can create apps that 
integrate with Messages. 
Understand Core Messages Concepts 
SMS (Short Message System) and MMS (Multimedia Messaging 
System) are methods of sending short text messages (or, for MMS, text 
messages with multimedia attachments) over a cellular network. 
They’re fast and convenient, but SMS limits text to 160 characters, 
these methods work only between cellular phones (except with Apple’s 
Text Message Forwarding), and some phone carriers charge per 
message (or provide a limited number of messages per month, charg­
ing for any above that limit). 
Tip: You can choose the tone that’s played when a message arrives  
in Settings > Sounds > Text Tone.  
iMessage is Apple’s alternative to SMS and MMS. iMessage allows 
encrypted messages of unlimited length, those messages are sent over 
a standard Internet connection, and messages can be sent and received 
by the Messages app on any recent iOS device or Mac. Also, iMessage 
isn’t just tied to your phone number—you can associate it with other 
phone numbers and even email addresses. The downside is that it 
works only with other iMessage users—when you send a message to 
someone who doesn’t use iMessage, it falls back to SMS and MMS. 
Note: Messages displays SMS/MMS messages in green bubbles and  
iMessages in blue bubbles.  
126  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Here are the basics of using Messages: 
•  Enable or disable iMessage: Go to Settings > Messages and 
turn on the iMessage switch. 
•  Set send and receive addresses: In Settings > Messages, tap 
Send & Receive. Select your iPhone number and any email address­
es where you wish receive iMessages (messages arrive in the Mes­
sages app, not your email). Still on the Send & Receive screen, 
specify the phone number or email address from which you want 
your iMessages to originate. 
Text Message Forwarding 
Your iPhone can forward SMS/MMS “green bubble” messages to other 
iOS devices (running at least iOS 8) without a phone plan, along with 
Macs running at least 10.10 Yosemite: 
1. Sign in to Messages on your iPhone and the other device with the  
same Apple ID. (On a Mac, choose Messages > Preferences >  
Accounts.)  
2. On the iPhone, open Settings > Messages > Text Message  
Forwarding and turn on the switch for the device you wish to  
forward messages to.  
3. That may be all that’s necessary, but if a code appears on  
the other device, enter it on the iPhone.  
This can work over a cellular connection as well, if your carrier  
supports it.  
•  Decide about read receipts: Adjust the Send Read Receipts 
switch, depending on whether want to send read receipts, which tell 
those you’re conversing with if you’ve read their messages. 
Tip: If an iMessage fails to send successfully from an iPhone with a 
phone plan, Messages can automatically send it as an SMS text 
message instead, if you turn on Send as SMS in Settings > Messages. 
127  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Send a Message  
Messages gives you a bewildering number of ways to send messages, 
all the way from simple text messages to voice messages, video mes­
sages, hand-drawn messages—you name it. In the final version of iOS 
11, you’ll even be able to send money with a message! 
Tip: You can block contacts from messaging, calling, or attempting to 
FaceTime you. Go to Settings > Messages > Blocked to see who 
you’re blocking or add an unwanted contact to the list. 
Starting a Simple Message 
Let’s start with the basics: 
1. In the Messages app, tap the Compose 
icon. 
2.  Start typing a contact name, email address, or phone number in the 
To field. You can keep typing or tap to accept a suggestion. 
3. Enter your note in the message field and tap the Send 
icon. 
Once a message thread is created, tap it in Messages to open it, tap the 
message field, and type your message as described above. 
Tip: An unread message is marked in the Messages view with a  
colored dot  
at its left. To mark all chats as read, tap Edit in the  
upper-left corner of the Messages view, and then tap Read All.  
Use Emojis in Messages 
Emojis are fun, but digging through the emoji picker isn’t. iOS offers a 
couple of quick ways to communicate in pictographs: 
•  Emoji suggestions: The QuickType bar suggests emojis as you 
type (Figure 57). Tap one of the suggestions to replace the current 
word with that emoji. 
128  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 57: While you type in Messages in iOS 11, the QuickType bar 
suggests emojis. 
•  Word replacement: Type a message and switch to the Emoji 
keyboard (see Master Emojis). Words that you can replace with 
emojis are highlighted in orange (Figure 58). 
Figure 58: After you switch to the emoji keyboard in Messages, it 
highlights words that can be turned into emojis. 
Tap a highlighted word to change it to an emoji (Figure 59). 
Figure 59: Tap a highlighted word to turn it into an emoji. 
Add Bubble and Screen Effects 
Messages lets you add bubble and screen effects. Bubble effects affect 
just the message bubble while screen effects are displayed all over the 
conversation. 
To view effects, touch and hold the Send 
icon. Switch between the 
two types of effects with the bar at the top of the screen. 
Use Bubble Effects 
Tap the dot 
next to a bubble effect to see a preview. Tap the Send 
icon to send your message with that effect, or back out with the 
cancel 
button. 
Here are the available bubble effects: 
•  Slam: A large message bubble slams on onto the screen—good for 
driving a point home. 
129  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Loud: The message bubble grows, shakes, and shrinks—useful 
when you need to get someone’s attention. 
•  Gentle: Your message starts small and grows to regular size— 
helpful for messages that need a soft touch, like apologies. 
•  Invisible Ink: This effect obscures the message until its tapped, 
which is helpful when you’re sending some private information 
(Figure 60). 
Figure 60: Invisible Ink messages remain a mystery until tapped. 
Use Screen Effects 
Swipe to switch between screen effect previews. Tap the Send 
icon 
to send your message with that effect. Tap the
 cancel button to 
cancel. 
Here are the available screen effects: 
• Echo: Your message is multiplied and swirls around the screen. 
•  Spotlight: The screen darkens and a spotlight is shone on your 
message. 
• Balloons: Balloons fly up the screen. 
Tip: You can move the balloons by swiping left and right. 
• Confetti: Confetti falls from the top of the screen Figure 61.  
Figure 61: Happily, the Confetti effect is messy only briefly. 
130  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
•  Love: A 3D heart expands out of your message and floats up. 
•  Lasers: Lasers shoot across the screen. 
•  Fireworks: Fireworks explode in the background! 
•  Shooting Star: A star shoots across the screen and explodes. 
•  Celebration: Golden sparks fill the screen. 
Tip: Tell someone “happy birthday” or “happy new year” and see 
what happens! 
Attach Photos or Videos 
Tap the camera 
icon to the left of the message field. The photo bar 
at the bottom of the screen lets you take a new photo on the spot or 
choose a recent photo from your library. 
Using the photo bar, you can: 
•  Take a new photo: Toward the left of the photo bar is a 
viewfinder. Tap the Take Photo 
button to take and insert a  
photo. Tap the Camera Swap  
icon to change cameras. 
•  Insert photos and videos: Tap a photo or video in the photo bar 
to insert it. You can insert multiple photos or videos. 
•  Access Camera or Photo Library: The Camera and Photo 
Library buttons let you access the full Camera app or your photo 
library (Figure 62). Swipe the photo bar from left to right to reveal 
the buttons if you don’t see them. 
131  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 62: The Camera and Photo Library buttons give you full 
access to those features. 
• Remove photos: Tap the delete 
button on a photo to remove 
it. 
•  Add a comment: Once you’ve inserted a photo in the message 
field, tap under the photo, where it says “Add comment or Send,” 
and type your message. 
Tip: Touch and hold a photo thumbnail in the photos bar to view it 
fullscreen. 
Send and Listen to Voice Messages 
You can exchange audio messages with users of iOS 8 or later, users of 
Mac OS X 10.10 El Capitan or later, and Apple Watch wearers. 
Press and hold the mic 
icon to the right of the message box (it 
appears only when there’s nothing in the message box). When a 
controller bar appears, recording starts, and you see an audio wave 
and a timer to the left. Don’t lift your finger until you’re done 
recording. Let go of the icon to stop recording. 
Tap the Play 
button for a preview, delete the recording by tapping 
the delete 
icon or send it by tapping the arrow 
. 
To hear a voice message that you’ve received, tap the Play
 button on 
its entry (Figure 63). Alternatively, simply hold the iPhone up to your 
ear. 
132  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
Figure 63: To listen to a voice message, tap the triangular Play 
button. 
Note: After playback, voice messages disappear after 2 minutes. 
Change that in Settings > Messages > Expire. 
Write a Message by Hand 
To add a personal touch, you can send a handwritten note. 
Here’s what you need to know: 
•  Enter handwriting mode: On the iPad, tap the Handwriting 
key on the keyboard. On the iPhone, rotate it to landscape orienta­
tion—if doing that doesn’t put you into handwriting mode, tap the 
Handwriting 
icon. 
•  Write a note: Draw on the screen with your finger, a stylus, or (on 
an iPad Pro) an Apple Pencil. 
• Scroll around the canvas: Drag with two fingers. 
•  Leave handwriting mode: Tap Done to finish your note and 
insert it in the message. Tap the Keyboard 
icon to discard the 
note. 
•  Insert previous or predefined notes: On the iPhone, tap one 
of the scripts at the bottom of the screen. On the iPad, tap the 
History 
icon to reveal previous and predefined notes. 
Reply with Tapback 
Tapback lets you respond quickly to messages without typing: Touch, 
hold, and release a message bubble to reveal a popover with tapback 
icons. Tap one to add it to a message (Figure 64). 
133  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 64: Tap a tapback icon to apply it to a message. 
You can have only one tapback response on a message at a time, but 
you can change it later. Also, you can remove a tapback by opening the 
popover again and tapping on the current tapback icon. 
Discover Messages Apps  
Developers can create apps for Messages—it even has its own App 
Store! While the keyboard is hidden, you can tap icons below the 
message field to activate an app. Otherwise, tap the App Store 
icon 
to access Messages apps. 
Built-in Messages Apps 
Messages includes a few apps to get you started: 
✦ #images: The #images app lets you add funny animated GIFs to 
your messages. You can use the search bar to find specific ones. It 
suggests GIFs based on trends and your recent conversations. 
✦ Digital Touch: This app lets you use Apple Watch-style messaging 
features on iOS. 
✦ Music: If you subscribe to Apple Music, you can send recently 
played tracks to your friends. However, they can play the full song 
only if they also subscribe to Apple Music. 
✦ Recents: This meta-app displays recently used items across all 
Messages apps. 
✦  Store: This is the Messages App Store, where you can download 
apps that work only in the Messages app. See Access the Messages 
App Store. 
134  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use Messages Apps 
Here’s how to use Messages apps: 
1. If the app drawer isn’t showing, tap the App Store 
icon to the 
left of the message field. 
2.  Tap an app from the app drawer. If the app isn’t showing, touch and 
hold on the bar and swipe left and right to view more apps (Figure 
65). 
Figure 65: Tapping and holding the app drawer enlarges it and lets 
you swipe to see more apps. 
If the app isn’t in the app drawer, tap More to show all apps. You 
can favorite apps in this view to make them always available in the 
app drawer. Tap edit and tap the add
 button or remove  
button to add or remove apps from favorites.  
You can also delete apps in the More view by swiping left on an app 
and tapping Delete. 
3.  After you tap an app, it displays in Messages, where the keyboard 
usually is. Tap an icon to insert it in your message. You can also 
make an app fullscreen by tapping the up
 arrow. 
Tip: After opening a Messages app, you can swipe between apps. 
Use the Digital Touch App 
The Digital Touch app brings the unique messaging features of the 
Apple Watch to Messages. 
Note: Digital Touch messages vanish once they’re viewed, unless one 
party taps Keep. 
Here’s what you can do with Digital Touch: 
135 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Sketch: Drag your finger on the Digital Touch canvas. Tap X to 
cancel or tap the Send 
icon to share your sketch (Figure 66). 
Figure 66: You can use Digital Touch to send silly pictures to your 
friends. 
Tip: Tap the colored circle (or circles in fullscreen mode) to change 
the Digital Touch color. 
•  Tap: Tap the Digital Touch canvas with one finger to send animat­
ed rings that fade away into smoke. 
•  Fireball: Press the canvas with one finger. You can drag your 
finger around while pressing to move the fireball around the canvas. 
• Kiss: Tap the canvas with two fingers. 
• Heartbeat: Touch and hold the canvas with two fingers. 
•  Heartbreak: Touch and hold the canvas with two fingers, and 
then drag your fingers down. 
You can also use Digital Touch to send photo and video messages with 
onscreen drawings. Tap the video 
icon to begin. You can: 
•  Sketch: Drag your finger on the screen to draw, either before, after, 
or while taking a photo or video. Tap the colored circles to change 
the line color. You can also use the previously mentioned Digital 
Touch gestures to overlay the photo or video with kisses, fireballs, 
and so on. 
136  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
• Swap cameras: Tap the Camera Swap 
icon. The front-facing 
camera is the default. 
• Take a photo: Tap the Take Photo
 button. 
• Record video: Tap the record 
button to record videos up to 10 
seconds in length. Tap the stop 
button to finish recording. 
• Send the photo or video: Tap the Send
 button. 
• Cancel the photo or video: Tap the back
 button. 
• Exit camera mode: Tap the delete 
button to return to  
fullscreen Digital Touch.  
• Return to Messages: Tap the down 
arrow to exit fullscreen 
Digital Touch. 
Place Stickers 
Some Messages apps offer stickers, which you can tap to insert into a 
message, or place on top of messages by tapping, holding, and drag­
ging them onto the message bubble. 
Note: Stickers are annoying and you should never use them. 
Unfortunately, they’re a pain to remove: 
1.  Touch and hold a placed sticker. 
2.  Choose Sticker Details. 
3.  On the Sticker Details screen, swipe the sticker you want to delete 
from right to left to reveal Delete. 
4.  Tap Delete. 
Tip: It’s impossible to tell when a Messages app icon is a sticker. Try 
touching and holding on icons to see if they pop free. 
137  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Message Effects and Older OSes 
How do these effects show up on older Apple operating systems? 
Handwriting, Digital Touch, and Stickers all appear as image attach­
ments, though Digital Touch elements may not animate properly 
(videos work fine). 
Effects and tapback are represented with text messages along the  
lines of “Liked message” or “(sent with Slam Effect)“.  
Access the Messages App Store 
It isn’t immediately obvious how you install Messages apps: 
1. Tap the App Store 
icon. 
2. Open the App Store app in the app drawer. 
3. Tap Visit Store. 
The Messages App Store is like a miniature version of the App Store. It 
features stickers (see Place Stickers), games, and other amusements 
and utilities. 
Tip: Many regular apps also include Messages apps. 
Manage Message Details  
While viewing a Messages chat, tap the info 
icon in the upper-right 
corner to uncover a host of capabilities that apply to both group and 
individual chats. 
Deal with Groups 
Certain options are displayed only in a group message: 
•  Name a group: Tap Enter a Group Name to label the group 
message. The group name replaces the participants’ names at the 
top of the chat’s thread and in the chat’s entry in your messages list. 
138  

  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Leave a group chat: You can leave a group chat that just won’t 
end. Tap Leave this Conversation; you may need to scroll down to 
find it. 
Tip: If Leave this Conversation is dimmed, enable Hide Alerts instead 
so you won’t receive notifications from the thread. 
•  Add a contact to a chat: Not only can you leave an ongoing 
conversation, but you can also invite someone else to it. Tap Add 
Contact. 
•  Mute a chat: To remain in the chat but stop receiving a notif­
ication each time a new message arrives, enable Hide Alerts. 
Manage All Attachments 
All chat attachments appear in a grid in Details view. In iOS 11 (as in 
iOS 10), attachments are split into two tabs: Images and Attachments. 
The Attachments tab contains things like saved voice messages, PDF 
documents, and contact cards. 
Here’s how to work with Messages attachments: 
•  Save and share images and attachments: Tap an image or 
attachment to open it. Tap the Share 
icon and either choose Save 
Image or another place to send the image or attachment. 
•  Batch-save images: In the Details view for a chat, touch and hold 
any photo or video until a popover appears, and then tap More. 
Select the items you want to save, and then tap Save # Images in the 
lower-left corner. 
•  Batch-delete images and attachments: Follow the directions 
just above for saving a batch of images, but tap the Trash 
icon to 
delete them. 
139  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Automatically Delete Messages 
Tired of message attachments taking up lots of storage space? By 
default, messages are kept forever. But go to Settings > Messages > 
Keep Messages, and you can tell Messages to delete individual 
messages and attachments after 30 days or 1 year. 
However, audio messages are a different story. By default, they self-
destruct after 2 minutes, but you can opt to keep them forever in 
Settings > Messages > Expire. 
Share Your Location 
It can often be useful to share you physical location with others. Here’s 
how: 
•  Share your location once: Tap Send My Current Location to 
send a map showing your current location to the chat. 
Message participants can tap the attachment that appears to open 
a Maps-like view of your location. From that view, they can start 
navigating toward you by tapping Directions To Here. 
•  Share your location over time: Tap Share My Location to let 
message participants monitor your location for 1 hour, until the end 
of the day, or indefinitely. 
Message participants can view a map of your location in the Details 
view. They can tap the map for more location-related options. 
Sharing your location over time shares it with the people in the chat, 
not just within the chat itself. Chat members can see your location in 
the Find My Friends app (see Use Find My Friends) and in any other 
chats you have with them. 
Tip: To see who you’re currently sharing your location with, go to  
Settings > Privacy > Location Services > Share My Location.  
140  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Make Calls 
Whether or not you have an iPhone, this chapter will tell you how to 
make a “phone” call on your device. There are multiple ways to talk 
with someone in iOS: FaceTime lets you make crystal-clear audio or 
video calls on any iOS device, and third-party apps like Skype can 
integrate with the Phone app. 
Make a Phone Call  
iOS offers a few ways to initiate a phone call. Note that in this modern 
world, it’s often good etiquette to message someone before calling: 
•  Call a contact from Phone: The standard way to phone a friend 
is to bring up the Phone app, go to the Contacts tab, tap a contact, 
and tap the call 
button under their name. 
•  Call a contact from Contacts: Pull up the contact in the Con­
tacts app and tap the call 
button under their name. 
•  Call with Siri: Tell Siri something like “Call Fred.” See Speak to 
Siri. 
•  Dial a number: You can also make a phone call the old-fashioned 
way: in the Keypad tab in Phone. Tap the digits of the number you 
want to call and tap the call 
icon. 
141  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Call with Wi-Fi 
In the Phone app, you can make traditional phone calls over Wi-Fi 
instead of the cellular network using an iPhone 5c, 5s, or any later 
iPhone model. The good news is that Wi-Fi calls tend to be much 
clearer and more reliable than cellular calls. The bad news is that this 
feature is not yet supported by all carriers. In the United States, all 
four major carriers support Wi-Fi calling. 
If your carrier supports Wi-Fi calling, here’s how to activate it: 
1. Visit Settings > Phone > Wi-Fi Calling. 
2. Turn on Wi-Fi Calling on This iPhone. 
If your carrier does not have an emergency address registered with 
you, you may be asked to enter that as you enable Wi-Fi Calling. 
Deal with Incoming Calls  
If a contact is calling, iOS lets you know who it is. If it’s a call from 
someone not listed in contacts, it searches your email to figure out who 
it might be. FaceTime and third-party voice-over-IP apps like Skype 
integrate with Phone too, so when you receive calls on those services, 
they’ll appear like a regular phone call. Here’s how you can deal with 
incoming calls: 
• Accept the call: Tap the Accept 
icon to accept the call or swipe 
Slide to Answer (Figure 67) from left to right. 
Figure 67: Slide to Answer appears when the device rings while 
locked. Slide the phone 
icon to the right to answer the call. 
•  Silence a call: Press the Sleep/Wake icon once to halt ringing; the 
call continues ringing on the other end and eventually goes to 
voicemail. 
142  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Decline a call: Tap the Decline 
button once or press the Sleep/ 
Wake button twice to decline the call and send it directly to voice-
mail. 
•  Respond with a text: If you can’t take the call, but want to 
respond with a text message, tap the Message 
button. Choose a 
canned reply, or tap Custom to send your own message. 
Modify your canned replies in Settings > Phone > Respond with 
Text. 
•  Set a reminder: To set a reminder to call the party back, tap the 
Remind Me 
button. The reminder is stored in the Reminders 
app. 
Tip: Siri can announce a caller’s name or number when the phone  
rings. Enable it in Settings > Phone > Announce Calls.  
Use FaceTime  
FaceTime lets you place an Internet-based video or audio call to 
anyone running at least iOS 7 or 10.9 Mavericks (FaceTime video is 
supported as far back as iOS 4 and 10.7 Lion). 
On the iPhone, you can initiate a FaceTime call from the Phone app 
using any technique besides dialing on the keypad, just by tapping the 
appropriate video 
or audio 
icon, or you can call from within the 
FaceTime app. 
On the iPad and iPod touch, there is no Phone app, so you use the 
FaceTime app for these calls. 
Tip: The iPad’s Picture in Picture feature works for FaceTime video  
chats, too! See Watch Picture in Picture Videos.  
143  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If you haven’t done so already, go to Settings > FaceTime and sign in. 
Then: 
1.  Open the FaceTime app, and, at the top of the screen, tap either 
Video or Audio. 
2.  In the text field below, search for a contact. Or tap the plus 
button in the upper-right corner to choose a contact. Or tap a recent 
contact. 
FaceTime tries to initiate the call. If all goes well, the recipient taps 
the green Accept 
icon and the call begins. (On the Mac, they see 
slightly different button.) 
3. To end the call, tap the red End Call
 button. 
Tip: You can contact someone from within Spotlight by tapping the  
FaceTime  
, Message 
, or Phone 
buttons in the search results. 
Check Voicemail  
If you miss or reject a call, callers can leave you a voicemail. To see 
them, enter the Voicemail tab in Phone. Tap a message, and if playback 
doesn’t begin automatically, tap the Play
 button. You can also tap 
Speaker to hear the message without holding the iPhone up to your 
ear. 
iOS attempts to transcribe your voice messages. If it’s not confident 
about the quality of the transcription, it will ask if the transcription 
was useful or not. 
Tap Call Back to return the call, or Delete to get rid of the message. 
144  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Go on Safari 
Besides App Store and Messages, Safari is arguably iOS’s most impor­
tant app. Let’s start with a look at Safari’s controls (Figure 68). 
Figure 68: Safari controls, from left to right: Back, Forward, Book­
marks, Address/Search, Reload, Share, New Tab, and Pages. 
If you can’t see the controls shown above, they will reappear as you 
scroll up the webpage. 
Tip: When you’re viewing a mobile site but don’t want to, tap the  
Share  
icon, and tap Request Desktop Site. 
Search in Safari  
The Address/Search box allows you to search in several ways: 
•  Enter a URL: To visit a specific webpage, just type its URL into 
the Address/Search box, such as www.takecontrolbooks.com, and tap 
Go on the keyboard. Press and hold the Period key to see a popover 
with common URL suffixes such as .com, .org, and .net. 
•  Search the web: Type your search terms into the Address/Search 
box, and then tap Go. (To delete all text in the box, tap the Clear 
Text 
icon at the right of the box.) 
•  Suggested Sites: Suggested Sites (sometimes called Top Sites 
depending on the results) can often save you the trouble of typing a 
long search query. 
For instance, if I type just obi wan into the Address/Search box,  
Safari suggests the Wikipedia page for the fictional character.  
145  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tip: Safari’s default search engine is Google, but you can change it to 
Bing, DuckDuckGo, or Yahoo in Settings > Safari > Search Engine. 
• Search within a page: There are two ways to do this: 
‣  Enter your search term in the Address/Search box, and tap 
the item in the results list under On This Page. 
‣ Tap the Share 
icon on the toolbar, and then Find On Page. 
Enter your query. 
Use the arrows to navigate the results, and tap Done when you 
finish. 
Wrangle Tabs  
Safari lets you have multiple webpages open at one time, split into 
tabs. Here’s how to use them: 
•  iPad: Tabs work much as they do in Safari on the Mac. Tap a tab to 
switch to it, tap the Clear 
icon to close a tab, or hold and then 
drag a tab to move it. To view all open tabs, tap the Pages 
icon or 
pinch in with two fingertips. Note that if you’re viewing websites in 
Split Screen on a device smaller than a 10.5-inch iPad Pro, tabs will 
likely work as they do on the iPhone. 
Tip: To open a link in a new tab, touch and hold the link and tap  
Open in New Tab.  
•  iPhone and iPod touch: The screen is too small to display tabs 
(except on an iPhone 6 Plus or iPhone 7 Plus in landscape orienta­
tion), so to view and manage tabs, you must tap the Pages 
icon. 
This presents your tabs in a 3D overhead view. 
Scroll through your tabs and tap one to choose it. To close a tab, 
slide it from right to left, off the screen. 
146  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
Tip: Press and hold the Pages 
icon to see an option to close all 
tabs at once. 
• Private mode: To open a private tab, tap the Pages 
icon, tap 
Private, and then tap the New Tab 
button. Private Browsing has 
a darker theme than regular Safari. To leave Private mode, tap the 
Pages 
icon, and tap Private again. 
Note: Websites visited in a private browsing tab won’t appear in your 
Safari web history, which makes the private tab helpful for gift 
shopping. 
Discover and Store Links  
Tap the Bookmarks 
icon to view Bookmarks, Reading List, and 
Shared Links: 
Tip: Bookmarks and Reading List sync via iCloud, so you can access 
them from all your Apple devices. To make sure this happens, enable 
Safari in Settings > Your Name > iCloud. 
•  Bookmarks: Bookmarks are shortcuts to websites you want to 
visit again. To bookmark the current page, tap the Share 
icon and 
then Add Bookmark. To visit a bookmark, tap it in this list. To 
manage bookmarks, tap Edit. 
To access your favorite bookmarks more easily, tap the Address/ 
Search box. To bookmark the current page and add it as a favorite 
quickly, tap the Share 
icon and then select Add to Favorites. 
Tip: Your browser history is also available in the Bookmarks view. 
•  Reading List: You can save a page for later reading by adding it to 
your Reading List. To do so, tap the Share 
icon and then tap Add 
to Reading List. (In many apps, including Safari, you can touch and 
hold a link to send it to Reading List.) 
147  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reader View 
Reader View makes articles easier to read by hiding many superflu­
ous visual elements (including most ads) and filling the screen with 
actual article content. If Reader View is available, a multi-line 
icon 
appears to the left of the URL in the Address/Search box. Tap it to 
enter and exit Reader View. 
You can adjust the background color and typeface in Reader View. 
Tap 
on the right side of the URL field to adjust the look. 
148  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Find Yourself, Your Stuff, 
and Your Friends 
Most of this chapter explains how to Use Maps, but I also talk about 
Use Find My iPhone and Use Find My Friends. I also discuss the new, 
potentially life-saving feature, Do Not Disturb While Driving. 
Use Maps  
Apple’s homegrown Maps app is a built-in window to the world, 
providing maps, satellite images, business information, and directions. 
Move around the Map 
Here are the basics of how to move around the map manually: 
•  Pan: Drag on the map. 
•  Zoom in and out: Pinch in and out. 
Tip: When you zoom in on a location, the current weather is dis­
played in the corner.  
•  Rotate: Place two fingers on the screen and twist your wrist. To 
reset the view, tap the compass 
in the upper-right corner. 
Set Map Views 
You can choose a view by tapping the info 
icon to access the Maps 
Settings panel. Views include: 
•  Map: The Map view displays a drawn map showing roads, cities, 
and basic information (Figure 69). It’s usually the best view to use 
with cellular data, since it’s not as bandwidth-intensive as the other 
views. 
149  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 69: The Standard view shows just the facts. 
•  Transit: The Map view shows some transit lines (only in supported 
cities), but the Transit view shows even more, and emphasizes 
them, displaying routes, route numbers, and stops. 
Tip: Enable the Traffic switch in the Map Settings panel to see traffic 
conditions on the map, if available. 
•  Satellite: The Satellite view provides an overhead picture of the 
planet, and it can show road names and other information if you 
enable the Labels switch in the Maps Settings panel. Satellite view 
changes between day and night themes depending on the time of 
day. 
Note: Drag up with two fingers in Satellite view to enter 3D view. 
Find Yourself 
Wherever you go, there you are, but if you don’t know where you are, 
you are by definition lost! Here is how to find yourself in Maps: 
• Zero in: Tap the Tracking 
arrow. Maps zooms to your location, 
which is represented by a blue dot. 
• Orient yourself: Tap the Tracking 
arrow again to align your 
location on the map with the direction the top of your device is 
pointing. 
As the device rotates, so does map, with a blue cone showing which 
direction you face. Tap the Tracking 
arrow to turn this off. 
150  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Find a Location  
Once you’ve found yourself, you next want to figure where you want to 
go. Here are some tips for doing so: 
•  Search: Tap the Search box to open the Search panel. Tap a Near­
by button at the top of the panel (like Food) or type something 
generic, like restaurant, or something specific, like JJ’s Diner. You 
can also type the name of someone in your contacts list (a contact 
appears in search results only you have an address assigned to that 
contact). 
Tap an item in the search results list to show that location on the 
map. Search results also appear on the map as pins, which you can 
tap to view more information (Figure 70). 
Figure 70: Don’t know what to search for? Maps offers suggestions 
like Food and Shopping. Search results show up in a list and as pins 
on the map. 
•  Business information: To view data about a business, tap its 
entry in the list or on its pin on the map. Numbered pins indicate 
151  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multiple locations near each other—you can tap a numbered pin to 
narrow down the list to those entries. 
From the business information, you can add it to favorites, share 
it, get directions, call it, view its hours, or visit its website, if those 
things are listed. 
Tip: Business info in Maps now indicate whether a business accepts 
Apple Pay. 
When you view information about a business, you see its Yelp star 
rating alongside a sample of reviews if Yelp data is available. If 
you’ve installed the Yelp app, you can also tap Find Out More On 
Yelp to view the business’s full Yelp listing. 
Reporting a Problem in Maps 
Although Apple Maps has improved since its introduction, it still has  
issues. If you see something that’s incorrect, you can report it:  
1. Tap the info 
icon. 
2. Tap Report an Issue. 
3. Choose the kind of problem from the list. 
4. Answer the remaining questions as prompted.  
With any luck, Apple will address your complaint.  
•  Drop a pin: If you need to mark an unlisted location, you can drop 
a pin on it by touching the spot until a pin appears. Here’s how to 
modify that pin: 
‣ To adjust the location of a pin, tap it, tap Edit Location, pan the 
map to adjust the pin’s location, and tap Done when finished. 
‣ Tap the pin to view directions, share the location, and more. 
‣  To delete the pin, tap the pin, tap Edit Location, and then tap 
Remove Marker. 
Note: Maps can show only one dropped pin at a time. 
152  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Get Directions 
Once you know where you’re going, you need to know how to get there: 
1.  Search for a location or tap its pin on the map, choose it from the 
results, and tap Directions. 
2.  Choose from driving, walking, mass transit (in supported cities), or 
ride sharing directions. 
Note: Mass transit directions are available only in select cities. Here’s 
Apple’s full list. To summon a ride-sharing service within apps, you 
need to install a supported app like Lyft and enable it as a ride 
booking extension in Settings > Maps. 
3.  Tap Start to receive turn-by-turn directions to your destination. 
4.  (Optional) Swipe up on the bottom bar and tap Details to view the 
directions as a text-based list. 
5.  (Optional) Add a secondary stop along the way by swiping up on the 
bottom bar and tapping Gas Stations, Dinner, or Coffee. Select your 
secondary stop and tap GO. Tap the blue bar at the top when you’re 
ready to navigate to your main destination. 
6.  When you reach your destination, if Maps doesn’t stop navigating 
automatically, tap End and then End Route. 
Enable Do Not Disturb While Driving 
Distracted driving is a deadly problem. To help combat that, Apple has 
introduced Do Not Disturb While Driving (DNDWD) in iOS 11. When 
enabled, it blocks notifications on your iPhone (and your Apple Watch, 
if you wear one), and anyone who messages you will receive an auto­
matic reply saying that you won’t see the message until you’ve reached 
your destination. The sender can choose to reply “urgent” to force the 
original message through. 
153  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tip: You can set who receives an automatic reply in Settings > Do 
Not Disturb > Auto-Reply To and what the message says in 
Settings > Do Not Disturb > Auto-Reply. 
There are three ways to turn DNDWD on, which you can set in 
Settings > Do Not Disturb > Activate: 
•  Automatically: This enables DNDWD when your iPhone detects 
motion that indicates that you’re driving. If you’re merely riding in a 
car, you’ll have to manually override it. 
•  When Connected to Car Bluetooth: This setting enables 
DNDWD only when your iPhone connects to your car’s Bluetooth 
system. Note that this only works only with automaker Bluetooth 
systems, not aftermarket stereos or Bluetooth adapters. 
•  Manually: When this selected, DNDWD does not trigger automati­
cally. 
You can enable or disable DNDWD by tapping its Control Center 
button—see Discover Control Center Functions to learn how to enable 
it. 
When DNDWD is on, you’ll see a single notification on your Lock 
screen letting you know. To disable DNDWD via the notification, tap it 
and tap I’m Not Driving. 
For more on Do Not Disturb While Driving, check out my TidBITS 
article “iOS 11 to Bring Do Not Disturb While Driving.” 
Use Find My iPhone  
Find My iPhone lets you track errant iOS devices, have them play a 
locating sound, and even lock and wipe them remotely. 
Note: You can also track your devices with the web-based Find My 
iPhone tool by logging in to iCloud.com. 
154  

 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
The main screen is split into two sections: a list of devices, and a map 
showing the location of all of your online devices. To begin, select a 
device from the list and tap Actions at the bottom of the screen: 
•  Play Sound: The function you’ll probably use the most is Play 
Sound, which plays a continuous sound on the device until you find 
it and deactivate the sound. 
•  Lost Mode: Putting your iOS device into Lost Mode locks the 
screen, updates you regularly on its location, and displays your 
phone number on the missing device’s screen, if you like. 
•  Lock: Since Macs don’t have a Lost mode, you can instead lock one, 
using a PIN that you choose while enabling Lock mode. 
Tip: On your Mac, to turn on Find My Mac, go to System  
Preferences > iCloud, make sure you’re signed in to iCloud, and  
select the Find My Mac checkbox.  
•  Track Your Device: If you want to retrieve your device yourself, 
tap the Car 
icon to see driving directions to your device in Maps. 
•  Erase: As a last resort, you can elect to wipe all data from the 
device. 
Note: Learn more about Find My iPhone in the TidBITS article Setting 
Up and Using Find My iPhone. 
Use Find My Friends  
Find My Friends lets you and your friends keep track of each other. 
Like Find My iPhone, it’s split into a map view and a list of friends 
you’ve exchanged locations with. 
Here’s how to manage location sharing: 
•  Sharing your location: To share your location with a contact, tap 
Add, then either select a name or enter an email address, and tap 
Send. You can choose to share for 1 hour, 1 day, or indefinitely. 
155  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tip: By default, all members of a Family Sharing group share device 
locations with each other, so you can track them with Find My iPhone 
or Find My Friends. 
•  Ask see a follower’s location: To request the location of some­
one following you, tap that person’s listing and then tap Ask to 
Follow. 
•  Stop sharing your location: If you want to stop sharing your 
location with someone, tap that person’s listing, tap More, and then 
tap Stop Sharing My Location. 
156  

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Organize Your Wallet 
Wallet is a storehouse for coupons, reward cards, and tickets. It also 
manages your Apple Pay cards and settings. 
Note: The iPad doesn’t have the Wallet app, but you can manage 
Apple Pay payment methods in Settings > Wallet & Apple Pay. 
Manage Wallet Passes  
There are two ways to add passes: 
•  When you encounter a Wallet pass QR code in the real world, open 
Camera, center the barcode in the viewfinder to scan it. Open the 
resulting notification to add that pass to Wallet. 
Note: As of August 2017, this isn’t quite working as intended in the 
iOS 11 beta. Hopefully it will work correctly upon release. 
•  Tap the Add to Wallet button on a webpage, in an email message, or 
inside an app. Some apps may add passes automatically. 
Tip: With an iTunes Pass card in Wallet, you can add funds to your 
Apple ID account at any Apple Store: At the bottom of the App Store 
app’s Today view, tap Redeem. Then tap the Get Started link and 
follow the prompts to add it to Wallet. 
Use and Remove Passes 
Some passes are location- or time-based. These display a Lock Screen 
notification at the appointed time or place. Other passes must be 
pulled up manually by opening Wallet and tapping the card in the 
stack. Swipe down on the card to return it to the stack. 
157  

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
To delete or edit a card, open it, and tap the info 
icon in the lower-
right corner. Tap Remove Pass to remove it, or toggle Suggest on Lock 
Screen. 
Try Apple Pay  
Apple Pay lets you use your Apple device in place of your credit or 
debit card. You can use Apple Pay in stores and apps, as well as on 
websites that support it. Apple has promised person-to-person Apple 
Pay, though it hasn’t been available in iOS 11 betas so far. 
To set up Apple Pay on an iPhone for making mobile payments on-the­
go, you need an iPhone 6 or later (including the SE), or an iPhone 5S 
or later paired with an Apple Watch. 
For in-app purchases and in-Safari (on the Mac) purchases, you can 
also use any of these iPads: at least an iPad Air 2, iPad mini 3, or iPad 
Pro. 
Here’s how to set up Apple Pay in iOS: 
1.  Find out whether your credit or debit card is compatible with Apple 
Pay by checking with the card’s bank or looking for it in this Apple 
support article. 
2.  Go to Settings > Wallet & Apple Pay. 
3.  Tap Add Credit or Debit Card. 
4.  Follow the prompts to add your card(s) to Apple Pay. 
If the details are accepted and your credit card issuer supports Apple 
Pay, the card is added to Wallet—possibly after an additional verifica­
tion step by your financial institution; if not, an error dialog appears. 
158  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using an Apple Watch? 
If you’re setting up Apple Pay on an iPhone 5c or iPhone 5S that’s 
paired with an Apple Watch, you must instead open the Apple Watch 
app, go to My Watch > Wallet & Apple Pay, and tap Add Credit or 
Debit Card. Note that using Apple Pay on an Apple Watch requires 
that you set a passcode on the watch. 
Use Apple Pay in a Store 
Apple Pay works at any Apple Pay partner location (Figure 71). 
Figure 71: Look for these symbols at checkout counters to see if 
you can check out with Apple Pay. 
Here’s what you need to do to make a purchase: 
1.  Place your phone near the Apple Pay terminal. 
2.  While at the Lock screen, double-press the Home button to bring up 
Apple Pay. 
3.  If you’ve set up multiple cards with Apple Pay, tap the one you want 
to use. 
4.  Enter your passcode or touch the Home button to activate Touch 
ID. 
Tip: If you don’t use Apple Pay and keep bringing it up by accident,  
you can disable it by going to Settings > Wallet & Apple Pay and  
disable Double-Click Home Button.  
Use Apple Pay in an iOS App 
Several apps allow you to pay with Apple Pay, as follows: 
1.  In the app, tap the Apple Pay button. 
159  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
2.  At the next screen, review the information and edit as needed. 
3.  When you’re ready to pay, enter your passcode or touch the Home 
button to activate Touch ID. 
Use Apple Pay in Safari 
If you’ve set up Apple Pay on your iPhone or iPad, you can use it to pay 
online when you’re shopping in Safari on the device. 
If you see a “Pay with ” (or similar) option while checking out in a 
web-based cart, tap it. A payment dialog appears. Confirm your infor­
mation and then press the iPhone’s Home button for a Touch ID 
fingertip scan. (Or, on an Apple Watch, double-click its side button.) 
You can also use Apple Pay to pay online with your iOS device (or 
Apple Watch) when you’re shopping in Safari on a Mac running 10.12 
Sierra. The Mac must be Continuity-savvy, meaning a 2012 or newer 
model, other than the Mac Pro, which must be a Late 2013 or newer 
model. 
To set this up: 
1.  On your iPhone, go to Settings > Wallet & Apple Pay and enable 
Allow Payments on Mac. 
2.  On the Mac, open Safari, choose Safari > Preferences > Privacy, and 
make sure the checkbox “Allow websites to check if Apple Pay is set 
up” is selected. 
160  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Control Your Home 
HomeKit is an Apple framework that allows home automation devices 
from different manufacturers to work together the with iOS, tvOS, and 
watchOS in the form of Siri commands and the Home app (Figure 
72). 
Figure 72: The Home app is a central hub for controlling all your 
HomeKit devices. 
Note: This chapter is a mere introduction to HomeKit. Learn more in 
my TidBITS series, A Prairie HomeKit Companion. 
Apple maintains a list of compatible HomeKit devices. If you’re looking 
at a home automation device, check for the HomeKit badge. 
161  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish HomeKit Hubs  
HomeKit typically works over your home Wi-Fi network or Bluetooth. 
But a hub allows you to control your devices when you’re outside your 
home Wi-Fi network. It’s also required for automations—see Automate 
Your Home. 
There are two types of HomeKit hubs: a third- or fourth-generation 
Apple TV, and an iPad running iOS 10 or later. 
If your Apple TV is signed in to the same iCloud account as your iOS 
devices, it acts as a HomeKit hub automatically, as long as it’s connect­
ed to power and your home network (the Apple TV can function as a 
hub even while asleep). 
Your iPad running iOS 10 or later can function as a hub if it’s signed in 
to the same iCloud account as your other devices, and if you tap Set­
tings > Home and enable Use This iPad as a Home Hub. The iPad must 
remain powered and connected to your Wi-Fi network in order to 
function as a hub. (If you leave the house with your iPad, it will cease 
functioning as a hub until you come home!) 
Set Up Your Home  
In the Home app, a home is the top-level container, which encompass­
es all the other categories that I cover. A home can be a home, an 
outbuilding, a second home, an office, etc. For most practical purposes, 
a home is distinguished by a Wi-Fi network. 
The Home view in Home lets you control your homes, listing your 
favorited scenes and accessories on the screen, which you can re­
arrange by tapping the Edit button. The Home view also shows the 
status of your devices. Here are some tips to help you get started: 
•  Initial setup: When you first launch Home, what you see depends 
on your existing HomeKit setup, if you have one from previous 
versions of iOS. Don’t stress about these choices—you can easily 
change them later. 
162  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Add another home: Tap the Home Settings 
icon and choose 
Add Home. Give your home a name and choose a photo for it. 
•  Switch between homes: If you have multiple homes, tap the 
Home Settings 
icon and choose a home from the menu. 
Note: From here on, I’ll assume that you have only one home. To 
access home settings if you have more than one home, tap the Home 
Settings 
icon, choose Home Settings from the menu, and then  
choose the home you want to adjust.  
•  Rename a home: From the Home Settings screen, tap in the text 
field below the Name header at the top. Enter a name and tap Done. 
•  Invite people: You can invite other iCloud users to control the 
devices in a home. On the Home Settings screen, tap Invite and 
enter a contact’s email address or tap a Family Sharing member. 
If everything goes right, the recipient should receive a notification 
on their iOS device(s). Once they accept the invitation, they will 
have access to the home from the Home app. 
Note: Sharing is per home, so you can invite a coworker to control  
your office but not your house.  
•  Edit people: Once another person is added to your home, they 
appear under People in the Home Settings screen. Tap that person’s 
bubble to see switches to allow or disallow remote access or allow 
them to edit HomeKit settings. You can also tap Remove Person to 
remove that person from your home entirely. 
•  Change wallpaper: From the Home Settings screen, scroll down 
and choose either Take Photo or Choose from Existing. Apple 
provides only a couple of generic home photos, so if your home is 
photogenic, you might want to take your own picture. 
•  Take home notes: Near the bottom of the Home Screen, you can 
insert notes that will be seen by everyone you share that home with. 
163  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
• Remove a home: At the bottom of the Home Settings screen, tap 
Remove Home and then Delete. 
HomeKit Naming Tips 
Whenever you’re naming objects in HomeKit, whether they’re homes, 
rooms, accessories, or scenes, keep a few guidelines in mind: 
✦ Be descriptive: If you have smart light bulbs throughout your 
house, a scene named Bright doesn’t tell you much. Which room is 
the scene making bright? However, a scene name Living Room 
Bright tells you all you need to know. 
✦  Be unique: I might have one smart light bulb in my living room 
that I name Living Room Light, but what if I install a second smart 
light bulb in the living room? An accessory name like Living Room 
Couch Corner tells you exactly what it is. 
✦ Be pronounceable: A great advantage of HomeKit is Siri voice 
control. If you have a scene name like BRM BRGHT, Siri will have a 
hard time understanding you. Oddly enough, Siri doesn’t like scene 
names like Bright Bedroom—Bedroom Bright works much better. 
Your mileage may vary. 
✦  Be short: This might seem to contradict my previous tips, but if 
you set a scene as a favorite, that scene’s name has to fit in a little 
bubble in Control Center, so keep them as short as possible. 
However, I consider this my lowest naming priority, as I can figure 
out that Living Room Chaise Cor… is the accessory Living Room 
Chaise Corner and Batten Down the… is my Batten Down the 
Hatches scene. 
Manage Rooms 
A room is, well, a room in a home. It makes the most sense to set up 
HomeKit Rooms to align with actual rooms in your house. 
The Rooms view shows all the accessories and scenes associated with a 
room. Home starts you with a Default room that cannot be removed, 
but can be renamed. I like to use it as a sort of staging area for new 
accessories, but I don’t associate it with any rooms in my house. 
164  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You want to set up a room for each room in your home that has Home-
Kit devices installed, for two reasons. First, it makes organization 
much saner. Second, when your rooms are properly configured, you 
can give Siri commands like, “Turn the Living Room lights off.” 
• Create a room: Tap the Room Settings 
icon, and then tap 
Room Settings if need be. Choose Add Room, and then give the 
room a name and assign a picture to it. 
•  Switch between rooms: Swipe on the screen in the rooms view 
or tap the Room Settings 
icon and choose the room from the list. 
• Adjust Room settings: Tap the Room Settings 
icon and then 
tap Room Settings. Choose a room, and from there you can rename 
the room, change the room wallpaper, and remove the room. 
Add Accessories 
An accessory is an actual HomeKit device in your home, like a light 
bulb, lock, garage door opener, or thermostat. 
In the Home or Rooms view, tap the plus 
button in the upper-right 
corner and tap Add Accessory. The app prompts you to enter or scan 
the HomeKit code for that device, which can be found on the device 
itself and/or on the package (Figure 73). After scanning the code, 
follow the onscreen prompts to set up your accessory. 
Figure 73: When prompted to pair your accessory with HomeKit, 
look for these labels on the device or package. On the left is the 
older, larger style. On the right is the new, much-smaller QR code 
allowed by iOS 11. 
165  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: iOS 11 also supports HomeKit accessory setup via NFC so that 
you don’t have to scan a code. However, both your iOS device and 
the accessory must also support that feature. 
Sometimes, you need to set up your HomeKit device with the vendor’s 
app before you can use it with Home. For example, if you buy a set of 
Philips Hue smart light bulbs, you must use the Philips Hue app for 
initial setup and pairing with HomeKit. Check the documentation of 
your HomeKit devices for details. 
Note: An accessory can be assigned to only one Room at a time. 
To move accessories between rooms, switch to the Rooms view, press 
an accessory, and tap Details. Tap Location to see a list of rooms you 
can assign the accessory to. 
Control Accessories 
By default, Accessories are visible only in the room to which they’re 
assigned, but you can favorite an accessory to have it show up in the 
Home view and Control Center—see Discover Control Center Func­
tions. 
All Accessories are available in the room that you assigned them to, but 
Favorite Accessories are available in both the Home view and Control 
Center. To favorite an accessory, go to the Rooms view, press an 
accessory, tap Details, and enable Include in Favorites. 
No matter where you find an accessory, controlling it works the same: 
•  Turn an accessory on or off: Tap the accessory. 
•  Adjust an accessory: Touch and hold an accessory. The adjust­
ments you see will depend on the accessory. With a smart light bulb, 
there’s a brightness slider and a Color button. Tap the Color button 
to choose from a color palette. To better fine-tune the color, tap Edit 
in the middle of the palette, which lets you choose from a full range 
of colors and white color temperatures. 
166  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tip: To leave the accessory adjustment screen, tap the background. 
These accessory actions can be performed only in the Home app: 
•  Rename an accessory: Press an accessory, tap Details, tap the 
name, and edit it as you see fit. 
•  Group accessories: You can group multiple accessories so that 
they function as one. Press an accessory, tap Details, and choose 
Group with Other Accessories. Check the other Accessories that you 
want to group with that accessory, name the group, and tap Done. 
Those accessories disappear from the Home and Rooms tabs, 
replaced with the group you created. 
•  Ungroup Accessories: Press a group, tap Details, and select 
Ungroup Accessories. The individual accessories will return to the 
Home and Rooms tabs. 
Manage Scenes 
Now that you understand the basics of homes, rooms, and accessories, 
it’s time to learn about scenes, which are the most important aspect of 
home automation. 
Scenes are combinations of HomeKit commands. For example, I might 
have a scene called Chill Out that turns my living room lights blue, 
lowers the brightness to 40 percent, and turns the thermostat down. 
Like accessories, favorite scenes are available from the Home tab and 
Control Center. 
•  Create a scene: From the Home or Rooms view, tap the plus 
button and choose Add Scene. Depending on which accessories you 
have, Home suggests preconfigured scenes for you, such as Good 
Morning and I’m Home. 
a.  To create a more advanced scene, tap Custom on the New Scene 
screen. Give the scene a name and select the accessories to 
include in the scene, if they’re displayed. You can add more 
accessories by tapping Add Accessories. 
167  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b.  Adjust any of the accessories in the scene just as you would 
normally, by pressing the accessory. Tap Test This Scene to see 
a preview. 
c.  If you want easy access to the scene, enable Show in Favorites. 
d.  Finally, tap Done. 
•  Activate a scene: Tap the scene to enable it. Tap it again to turn it 
off. 
Tip: With 3D Touch, press on the Home icon on the Home screen to  
see a list of scenes.  
•  Modify a scene: Press a scene in the Home or Rooms view and 
tap Details. 
•  Set Favorites: Enable Show in Favorites in the Scene Details 
screen. 
Control Your Home with Siri  
Your careful setup of homes, rooms, accessories, and scenes pays off 
when you want to control those things via Siri. Here are some exam­
ples of things you can do: 
•  Turn accessories on and off: “Turn off every light in my office.” 
“Turn on the living room.” “Turn the bedroom lamp off.” 
•  Adjust accessories: “Dim the kitchen lights.” “Set the bedroom 
lights to 30 percent.” “Brighten up the living room.” “Turn the living 
room green.” “Turn the bedroom blue.” 
•  Activate scenes: “I’m home.” “Set scene Dinner Party.” 
Tip: Much of the time, you can simply tell Siri the name of a scene to 
activate it. But if Siri stubbornly refuses to recognize the scene name, 
try saying “Set Scene” before the scene name. 
For the basics of using Siri, refer back to Speak to Siri. 
168 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Automate Your Home  
If you have a compatible hub (refer back to Establish HomeKit Hubs), 
the Automation view lets you automate your home devices with trig­
gers. 
Here’s a look at your trigger options: 
•  People Arrive/People Leave: With these triggers, you can turn 
accessories and scenes on and off when people arrive at or leave a 
location, such as your house. You can also set the automation to 
trigger during certain times of the day. 
•  A Time of Day Occurs: This trigger simply enables and disables 
accessories and scenes based on the time of day. For example, you 
could set your bedroom lights to turn on when it’s time to wake up 
in the morning. 
•  An accessory is Controlled: This trigger activates a scene or 
accessory if an accessory is triggered. For example, you could set 
your living room lights to turn on when the front door is unlocked. 
•  A Sensor Detects Something: To use this trigger, you need a 
HomeKit-compatible sensor like a smoke alarm, carbon monoxide 
detector, or environmental monitor. This trigger could literally save 
your life—for example, you could have your house lights set to red 
and full brightness if carbon monoxide is detected. 
Your automations are listed in the Automations view. Tap one to adjust 
its settings. 
You can enable or disable an automation, adjust the trigger conditions, 
change how accessories and scenes are affected by the automation, and 
delete the automation. 
169  

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additional Apple Apps 
In this chapter, I review a few other Apple apps that are worth knowing 
about, including Calendars, Mail, and TV. All these apps are either 
built in or available for free from the App Store: 
•  AirPort Utility: If you own an AirPort base station, you need the 
AirPort Utility app, which lets you view and manage recent models 
of Apple’s AirPort base station, much like the identically named 
utility on your Mac. It’s particularly handy for checking device 
status and then restarting the base station if need be. To learn more 
about working with AirPort Utility in iOS, check out Glenn Fleish­
man’s Take Control of Your Apple Wi-Fi Network. 
•  Apple TV Remote: Designed with the fourth-generation Apple TV 
in mind, Apple TV Remote perfectly emulates the Siri Remote, 
including Siri voice input. It also has special modes for typing and 
playing games. However, with iOS 11, I prefer the Apple TV Remote 
built into Control Center—see Other Control Center Functions. For 
more on the Apple TV Remote app, read the TidBITS article Apple 
Overhauls the Apple TV Remote App and for more on the Apple TV, 
see my book, Take Control of Apple TV. 
•  Apple Store: You can use the Apple Store app to buy products 
from Apple’s online store, and you can even use it to pay for prod­
ucts at physical Apple Stores without human intervention. The app 
also frequently offers a free weekly download from one of Apple’s 
digital stores, so it’s worth opening every week or so. 
Tip: If you’re the type who orders Apple devices the minute they’re 
available—often in the middle of the night—you’ll want to know that 
the Apple Store app sometimes lets you make a purchase even when 
Apple’s site is overloaded. 
•  Apple Support: The Apple Support app offers support articles, 
and lets you chat with or call Apple support or set up Genius Bar 
appointments. 
170  

  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
•  Calendar: If you lead a busy life, the built-in Calendar app can 
help you organize it. In iOS 11, Siri can suggest calendar events 
found in Mail, Messages, and Safari, like flight and hotel 
reservations. If you add an address to an event, Calendar can also 
tell you when to leave in order to beat the traffic and arrive on time. 
It’d take an entire other book to tell you all you can do with 
Calendar—lucky for you, Scholle McFarland wrote Take Control of 
Calendar and Reminders. 
•  Calculator: A basic calculator, quickly available via Control Center 
(see Other Control Center Functions). Rotate the iPhone to see 
Calculator’s more advanced functions. Not available on iPad. 
•  Clock: Clock is an essential app for setting alarms and timers. It 
also offers a stopwatch function, and a bedtime timer to help you 
get more sleep. 
•  Contacts: A storehouse for all of your contacts. Here are a few 
important things to know about Contacts: 
‣  Favorite contacts have special privileges. They can break through 
Do Not Disturb and Do Not Disturb While Driving and they have 
their own quick-access view in the Phone app. To add a contact 
to Favorites, open their card in the Contacts app, tap Add to 
Favorites, and select your favorite contact method for that per­
son. 
‣  A lot of people enter a nickname for a contact instead of their 
proper name. But that’s bad data management, and can cause all 
sorts of problems. What you can do instead is enter something in 
the Nickname field in a contact card (tap Edit in the upper-right 
corner to see it). Messages and other apps will show the nick­
name (like “Mom”) instead of the person’s real name, but the 
underlying data will be correct. 
‣  It’s also a good to Teach Siri About Your Relationships. 
•  GarageBand: One of the coolest iOS apps is GarageBand. Garage-
Band is essentially a multitrack recording studio that lets you create 
music on your devices. GarageBand has a virtual keyboard, guitar, 
171  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bass, drums, and more, plus the capability to use MIDI input from 
external instruments. 
Note: The Game Center app disappeared in iOS 10, but the service 
still exists. Manage it in Settings > Game Center. 
•  Health: Health is the front end for HealthKit, which corrals data 
from health apps and fitness trackers. Most fitness enthusiasts I 
know don’t care much for the Health app itself, even though they 
find the underlying data useful. However, if you just want to see 
how many steps you take in a day, Health can offer that up quickly. 
•  iBooks: This app serves as a library and ebook reader for titles 
from Apple’s iBooks Store. You can also add ebooks to it from other 
sources, such as the Take Control website or other online stores. 
iBooks can import ebooks in EPUB and PDF format. 
•  iMovie: The included Photos app offers some basic video editing 
functionality, but iMovie expands on those capabilities, letting you 
turn video clips into full-featured productions with title cards, video 
filters, and more. 
•  iTunes Movie Trailers: Do you like movies? Do you want to 
see trailers for upcoming movies? Then iTunes Movie Trailers is the 
app for you. 
•  iTunes Remote: The old Remote app remains in the App Store as 
iTunes Remote. It can connect to not only Apple TVs, but also 
iTunes libraries. 
•  iTunes U: If you’re at all interested in education, you need iTunes 
U. The app offers all sorts of courses—at all levels of instruction— 
(often) for free, and lets teachers and students manage and follow 
entire classes. 
•  iWork: The iWork suite—Pages, Numbers, and Keynote—lets you 
create and edit documents, spreadsheets, and presentations, respec­
tively. To learn about these apps in detail, check out Take Control of 
Pages, Take Control of Numbers, and Take Control of Keynote. 
172  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Mail: The Mail app can connect to your email accounts and lets you 
view and manage your email. There are a number of third-party 
alternatives, but Apple’s Mail app is so baked in that it’s almost 
impossible to avoid. To learn about it in detail, see Take Control of 
Apple Mail. 
•  Music: Music is where you play audio content from the iTunes 
Store, transferred to your device through an iTunes sync from a 
desktop computer, or stored in the cloud through Apple’s iTunes 
Match or Apple Music service. 
•  Music Memos: A recording app for musicians, Music Memos 
offers features like auto-record, backup players, and a pitch tuner. 
•  News: News lets you keep up with your favorite media sources. You 
can subscribe to media sources and topics and save articles you like 
for later reading. News renders articles in a format optimized for 
your iOS device. 
•  Notes: Notes has evolved into a powerful note-taking tool, support­
ing plain text, attachments, checklists, images, sketches, and web 
links. You can also collaborate with others on a note. Inside a note, 
tap the Add People 
icon to get started. Here are some of the new 
features of Notes in iOS 11: 
‣  Document scanner: Notes can now use your iOS device’s 
camera to scan documents. Tap the plus 
button, choose Scan 
Documents, line up a document, and Notes will automatically 
detect it, capture, crop the edges, and deskew it. 
Tip: This Apple video shows how to use Notes to scan, sign, and send 
a document. 
‣  Tables: You can now insert simple tables in Notes with the 
tables 
button. 
‣  Pin notes: You can pin a note so that it stays on top of your list 
of notes by swiping its entry from left to right. Either tap the pin 
icon or keep swiping to pin it. 
173  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‣  Text formatting: It’s now easier to add styles to text, like bold 
and italics, because Notes has dedicated buttons to do so (before, 
you had to choose these from a popover). You can also indent 
and outdent lists, and there’s a new monospaced type option. To 
see these options, tap the text styles 
icon. 
‣  Change paper type: Choose Lines & Grids from the Share 
sheet to pick between different paper styles, such as ruled and 
grid. 
‣  Instant Notes: See Discover Control Center Functions and 
Work with Instant Notes to learn how to quickly create Notes 
from the Lock screen. 
•  Photo Booth: Just like a photo booth at an arcade, this iPad-only 
app is all about having fun taking casual snaps with different filters. 
•  Podcasts: Podcasts are the audio equivalent of blogs, and there are 
thousands to choose from. The built-in Podcasts app is free and 
mostly competent. 
•  Reminders: The built-in Reminders app lets you create to do lists 
and reminders that will notify you at an appointed time or even at a 
given location. To become an expert in it, see Scholle McFarland’s 
Take Control of Calendar and Reminders. 
• Stocks: A very basic stock tracker. 
• Tips: Assorted iOS advice from Apple. 
•  TV: The TV app replaced the previous Videos app. It offers your 
paid iTunes video library, and also integrates third-party services 
that support it, such as HBO NOW and Hulu. The Watch Now view 
keeps track of what you’re watching, and suggests other titles to 
watch. 
•  Voice Memos: A useful, but often-forgotten app, Voice Memos 
lets you make, edit, and share voice recordings. 
•  Weather: An adequate weather app, though there are better 
alternatives. 
174  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guard Your Privacy 
iOS offers many tools to help you protect your privacy, and in this 
chapter I explain how to take advantage of them. 
Set a Passcode  
Everyone should use a passcode. The passcode protects your photos, 
messages, browser history, and more from prying eyes. Here’s how to 
configure it: 
1.  Go to Settings > Touch ID & Passcode (or just Settings > Passcode). 
2.  Tap Turn Passcode On. 
3.  Enter a passcode. 
4.  Enter the passcode again to verify. 
5.  Consider enabling Settings > Erase Data. This feature automatically 
erases everything on a device after ten failed passcode attempts. 
If you recover the device, you can restore it from a backup, though 
that might be difficult or impossible while traveling. 
About 6-Digit Passcodes 
iOS originally used a 4-digit passcode, but Apple changed that 
starting with iOS 9. Touch ID devices now default to a 6-digit 
passcode. However, if you already have a 4-digit passcode, you won’t 
be required to change it. And if your device doesn’t support Touch ID, 
a 4-digit passcode still suffices. 
To create a shorter or longer passcode, visit Settings > Passcode (or 
Touch ID & Passcode) > Change Passcode, enter your existing 
passcode, tap Passcode Options, and then select Custom 
Alphanumeric Code, Custom Numeric Code, or 4- (or 6-) Digit 
Numeric Code. 
175  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Set up Touch ID  
Touch ID, available on newer iPhones and iPads, lets you scan your 
fingerprint on the Home button instead of typing a passcode. In many 
cases, it also replaces your having to enter a password, such as the one 
that goes with your Apple ID. 
If you have a Touch ID–equipped device, you were prompted to set up 
Touch ID when you set up the device. But in case you skipped that 
step, or want to edit your settings, here’s how: 
1.  Go to Settings > Touch ID & Passcode. (If you see only Settings > 
Passcode, either your device lacks Touch ID hardware or something 
is wrong with your device.) 
2.  Enter your passcode, if prompted. 
3.  Tap Add a Fingerprint. 
4.  When prompted, place your finger on the Home button (without 
pressing it), lift your finger up, and repeat until scanning is com­
plete. 
5.  iOS then prompts you to scan the edges of your finger. Follow the 
onscreen instructions. 
6.  Repeat for each finger you might want to use to unlock your device. 
You can scan up to five digits; I recommend scanning at least both 
thumbs and your primary index finger. 
After setup, it’s a good idea to name each finger by tapping its listing in 
Settings > Touch ID & Passcode and entering a name into the text 
field. 
Warning! Don’t forget your passcodes and passwords! You will still 
be prompted for them after enabling Touch ID: when you restart your 
device, when it’s been longer than 48 hours since unlocking your 
device, and whenever you make changes to Settings > Touch ID & 
Passcode. 
176  

 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To delete a Touch ID fingerprint, open Settings > Touch ID & 
Passcode, slide the fingerprint’s entry to the left, and tap Delete. Or, 
tap the entry and tap Delete Fingerprint. 
Tip: If you want a loved one to be able to access your device, you 
can scan one of their fingers, too. 
Set Up Find My iPhone 
I strongly encourage you to enable Find My iPhone in Settings > Your 
Name > iCloud > Find My iPhone. 
Note: This feature is called different things on different devices, like  
Find My iPad, Find My iPod touch, etc. It’s all the same.  
Then, if you ever lose your device, you can erase it remotely (or possi­
bly even find it) from iCloud.com or the Find My iPhone app on a 
different Apple device signed in to the same Apple ID or grouped with 
your lost device through Family Sharing (see Use Find My iPhone and 
my TidBITS article Setting Up and Using Find My iPhone). 
But the most important reason to enable Find My iPhone is that it also 
activates Activation Lock, which makes it extremely difficult for any 
thief to use or resell your device. 
Understand Privacy Settings  
Tap Settings > Privacy to access many options for securing your 
privacy. Let’s look at the high points: 
•  Disable ad tracking: If you do nothing else, you should tap 
Advertising (way at the bottom) and make certain that Limit Ad 
Tracking is on. If this switch is off, advertisers track information 
about you (anonymously) and use it to serve personalized ads 
within certain apps. 
•  Analytics: There are three switches under this listing: Share iPad 
Analytics (with Apple), Share With App Developers, and Share 
177  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iCloud Analytics (with Apple). Apple and app developers use these 
to help improve their products, and your information is protected 
with differential privacy. So feel free to leave them on without 
threatening your privacy, but if you’re truly worried, turn them off. 
•  Microphone: It’s a good idea to check this setting every now and 
again to make sure no apps are listening in without your knowledge. 
About Differential Privacy 
To improve iOS based on usage patterns, Apple needs to collect data 
from you, but it wants to do so in a way that doesn’t risk violating 
your privacy. Enter a technique called “differential privacy,” which 
addresses the concern that attackers could collate sufficient anony­
mous data to identify individuals despite the lack of personalized 
information. With differential privacy, Apple collects certain usage 
information anonymously and also adds fake data to render the data 
meaningless in isolation. 
•  Enable or disable location tracking: Tap Location Services to 
specify which apps can see your geographic location. 
You can turn Location Services off entirely, but that’s a bad idea— 
you won’t be able to use the Maps app, for example. You’re better 
off adjusting location services on a per-app basis, focusing on apps 
that don’t need to know where you are or don’t need to know all the 
time. For instance, a weather alert app may need to know your 
location all the time, but Maps only needs to know while you’re 
using it. And a calculator app doesn’t need to know at all! 
178  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Location Services Arrow Icons 
An item on the Location Services screen may display a tiny arrow 
icon, similar to the Location Services icon in the status bar. This icon 
can help you assess when an app has last tracked your location: 
✦ Hollow 
arrow: The app may use your location under certain 
circumstances. 
✦ Purple 
arrow: The app has recently used your location. 
✦ Gray 
arrow: The app has used your location in the past 24 
hours. 
•  Per app: The Settings > Privacy screen has several options to limit 
access to app data from other apps. For example, tap Photos to see a 
list of apps that have access to your photo library. 
Learn About Two-Factor 
Authentication 
Mere passwords are no longer sufficient to guard your Apple account; 
you also need a second factor—an arbitrary code sent to a secondary 
device. 
iOS 8 introduced two-step verification, but that was only a step en 
route to full two-factor authentication, which Apple introduced in iOS 
9. In iOS 11, you can set up two-factor authentication directly from an 
iOS device, but you have to disable two-step verification if you enabled 
it in the past. 
Note: Some features in the Apple ecosystem, such as unlocking a  
Mac with an Apple Watch, require two-factor authentication.  
Disable Two-Step Verification 
If you still have two-step verification enabled, you’ll have to disable it 
before turning on two-factor authentication: 
1.  Go to appleid.apple.com and log in with your Apple ID. 
179  

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  If you’re on a desktop, click Edit under Security. 
3.  Choose Turn Off Two-Step Verification. 
4.  Choose Turn Off Two-Step Verification again at the prompt. 
5.  Create new security questions and answers when prompted. 
6.  Enter your birthday when prompted. 
7.  Enter a secondary rescue email address when prompted. 
Warning! Turning off two-step authentication will deauthenticate all 
of your Apple devices signed into that account! 
Enable Two-Factor Authentication 
Next, you’ll want to enable two-factor authentication to secure your 
account: 
1.  On your iOS device, go to Settings > Your Name > Password & 
Security. 
2.  Tap Set Up Two-Factor Authentication. 
3.  Tap Continue. 
4.  If any of your devices are running operating systems older than 
iOS 9 or 10.11 El Capitan, you will be warned that they’re not ready 
for two-factor authentication. Don’t worry, you can still authenti­
cate with older operating systems as long as you append the verifi­
cation code to the end of your Apple password. Tap Turn On 
Anyway to proceed. 
5.  Enter the phone number you want to use to verify your identity, and 
whether you prefer a text message or phone call. Tap Next. 
6.  Enter your Apple ID password. You should also receive an email 
informing you that two-factor authentication has been enabled. 
7.  Enter your device passcode. 
180  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use Two-Factor Authentication 
When you authenticate one of your other Apple devices, Apple sends a 
notification to other devices that are already authenticated. 
Tap Allow on the authenticated device to see a 6-digit verification 
code. Enter that code on the device you want to authenticate to com­
plete login. Tap OK on the already authenticated device to dismiss the 
code. 
181  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iOS Accessibility 
One of the best things about iOS is Apple’s commitment to 
accessibility. For instance, Apple has made the iPhone usable for the 
visually impaired. But everyone can benefit from iOS’s accessibility 
features, many of which make things easier for all. 
Night Shift  
Scientific studies have shown that blue light, like that emitted from an 
iOS device’s screen, makes it harder to sleep at night. Night Shift 
reduces the amount of blue light. 
Here’s how to use Night Shift: 
•  Enable Night Shift manually: You can go to Settings > Display 
& Brightness > Night Shift, but it’s far easier to trigger it from 
Control Center (see Discover Control Center Functions). When 
enabled, Night Shift remains on until sunrise. 
•  Set a Night Shift schedule: You can set Night Shift to turn on at 
night in Settings > Display & Brightness > Night Shift. The default 
schedule is from sunset to sunrise, but you can change those to 
custom times. 
•  Adjust Night Shift: In Settings > Display & Brightness > Night 
Shift, you can adjust a slider to maker the effect more or less warm. 
The warmer the temperature, the more yellow the screen appears. 
182  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accessibility for Everyone  
Several accessibility settings are useful for almost anyone. You can find 
them in Settings > General > Accessibility: 
•  Magnifier: The Magnifier lets you use your iOS device like a 
magnifying glass. Enable the setting and triple-press the Home 
button to activate it: 
‣ Zoom: Use the slider to zoom in or out. 
‣ Get more light: Tap the flash 
icon to turn the LED on (if 
available). 
‣ Lock the focus: Tap the lock 
icon. 
‣ Freeze the image: Tap the Take Photo
 button to grab a freeze 
frame. Tap the button a second time to unfreeze it. 
‣ Adjust the color: Tap the filters 
icon to adjust display settings 
and access a range of color filters. 
•  Change text size: Tap Larger Text. Drag the slider to shrink or 
enlarge text. If you turn on the Larger Accessibility Sizes switch, you 
can make text even larger. 
•  Bold Text: Many users have complained that the text in iOS is too 
light. To fix this, enable the Bold Text switch. Tap Continue when 
asked whether it’s okay to restart the device. Once iOS restarts, all 
system text will be bold. 
•  Button Shapes: Tired of buttons that are ill-defined text labels? 
You can add a button outline by enabling Button Shapes. 
•  On/Off Labels: Do you have trouble telling whether setting 
switches are on or off? Turn on On/Off Labels. Disabled switches 
show a 0 (zero), while enabled switches contain a 1 (the 1 looks like 
a vertical line). 
•  AssistiveTouch: Do you have an issue with a repetitive strain 
injury, arthritis, or perhaps a broken button on your device? Tap 
183  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AssistiveTouch and turn on AssistiveTouch to place a virtual button 
on your screen to simulate the Home button; bring up Notification 
Center, Siri, or Control Center; emulate gestures like pinches; and 
many other things. 
•  Reduce Motion: iOS has a lot of neat animations, but they make 
some people physically ill and other people find them distracting. 
You can turn off extraneous animations with the Reduce Motion 
switch. 
•  Disable Vibrations: You can disable all iPhone vibrations by 
toggling Vibration off. 
New! Siri Can Announce Calls 
Siri can now announce a caller’s name or number when the phone  
rings.  
Enable it in Settings > Phone > Announce Calls. You can set it to  
always announce calls, or only announce them when you’re wearing  
headphones or are in a car.  
iOS for the Visually Impaired  
A few of the options already described in this chapter might prove 
useful to those who have trouble seeing, but the choices noted here, all 
available in Settings > General > Accessibility, should be especially 
helpful: 
•  Color Filters: iOS has several screen filters in Display Accommo­
dations > Color Filters. Enable Color Filters and then choose an 
option. There are special color filters for protanopia (insensitivity to 
red light), deuteranopia (insensitivity to green light), and tritanopia 
(insensitivity to blue light). 
•  Invert Colors: If you’re colorblind or having difficulty perceiving 
contrast, enabling Invert Colors in Accessibility > Display Accom­
modations may help. (Invert Colors disables Night Shift.) 
184  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New! Invert Colors now has two options: Classic Invert, which 
inverts everything on the screen; and Smart Invert, which leaves 
images alone. 
•  VoiceOver: You don’t have to see to be able to use iOS, thanks to 
VoiceOver, which reads individual screen elements to you. Enable it 
by tapping VoiceOver. Turn on the switch and configure its options. 
Note: You can select one of many voices to use with VoiceOver in the 
Speech section. 
If you are setting up VoiceOver because you need it, refer to Apple’s 
VoiceOver page to get an idea of what VoiceOver can make possible. 
Generally, with VoiceOver on, tap an element to have your device 
speak its name to you. Double-tap an element to activate it. Use 
three fingers to scroll. For comprehensive guidance, you’ll want a 
copy of the book iOS Access for All, by Shelly Brisbin. 
Note: You can edit VoiceOver’s pronunciations in Settings > Accessi­
bility > Speech > Pronunciations. 
•  Speak Screen: In addition to describing interface elements, iOS 
can read a screen of text if you tap Speech and enable Speak Screen. 
To highlight text as it’s spoken, turn on Highlight Content. 
With Speak Screen on, swipe down with two fingers from the top of 
the screen to have iOS begin speaking. A Settings box appears to let 
you control playback (Figure 74). Tap the x to stop the talking and 
dismiss the box. 
Figure 74: The Speak Screen Settings box lets you control playback 
and playback speed. 
185  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Zoom: The Zoom virtual magnifying glass makes screen elements 
larger. 
Quick On, Quick Off 
A triple-press of the Home button can turn an accessibility switch on 
or off. 
To set this up, visit Settings > General > Accessibility > Accessibility 
Shortcut. Select the options you want available through a triple-
press. If you select more than one, triple-pressing the Home button 
brings up a menu. 
iOS for the Hard of Hearing and Deaf 
iOS offers several accessibility features for the deaf, hard of hearing, 
and hearing impaired: 
•  Software TTY: iOS has long supported hardware teletypewriter 
devices for the hard of hearing, but iOS can place TTY calls without 
dedicated hardware. Enable Software TTY in Settings > General > 
Accessibility > TTY and you’ll see an option to use TTY the next 
time you place a phone call. 
Note: For more information, see the TidBITS article New Accessibility 
Features Coming to Apple’s Ecosystem. 
•  Hearing aids: You can connect your device to Made for iPhone 
hearing aids in Settings > General > Accessibility > MFi Hearing 
Aids, and switch on Hearing Aid Compatibility in Settings > General 
Accessibility to reduce radio interference. 
Hearing Aid Mode Tips 
Hearing Aid Compatibility can reduce interference, but it can also hurt 
2G cellular reception in GSM phones (like those on AT&T and T-Mobile 
networks). For details on this and other tips, read the Apple article 
About Hearing Aid Compatibility (HAC) requirements for iPhone. 
186  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Indicator lights: On an iOS device with an LED camera flash, you 
can enable LED Flash for Alerts in Settings > General > Accessibili­
ty. When a call or other notification arrives, the LED lights up 
briefly. 
Other Accessibility Options  
Here are a few accessibility features that didn’t fit elsewhere: 
•  Auto-answer calls: iOS can automatically answer calls. Visit Set­
tings > General > Accessibility > Call Audio Routing > Auto-Answer 
Calls and turn on Auto-Answer Calls. After enabling it, you can 
adjust how long iOS will wait before automatically answering the 
call. 
•  Disable Shake to Undo: Are you always triggering the Shake to 
Undo functionality accidentally? Turn it off in Settings > General > 
Accessibility > Shake to Undo. 
•  Guided Access: To lock a device into a single app—so the user 
(like a young child) can’t exit that app—tap Settings > General > 
Accessibility > Guided Access. There’s also a Control Center button 
to enable it—see Discover Control Center Functions. 
•  Subtitles: You can turn on subtitles in supported apps by tapping 
Settings > General > Accessibility > Subtitles & Captioning and then 
enabling Closed Captions + SDH. 
•  Switch Control: One of the more interesting settings in Settings > 
General > Accessibility is Switch Control, which lets you navigate 
your device by tilting your head in view of the front-facing camera, 
with an external Bluetooth switch or by tapping the screen. See the 
Apple article Use Switch Control to navigate your iPhone, iPad, or 
iPod touch for more. 
•  Touch Accommodations: If a motor impairment makes using 
a touchscreen difficult, check out Settings > General > 
Accessibility > Touch Accommodations to tweak how the screen 
responds to touch. 
187  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Manage Data Usage 
Internet connections without some kind of bandwidth cap or overage 
fee are difficult to find. Fortunately, there are tricks you can employ to 
manage your bandwidth usage in iOS. All these tricks can help you 
reduce your use of cellular data, but some can also help you stay under 
a general broadband Internet cap, too. iOS 11 also offers suggestions to 
save storage space on your device. 
Monitor and Disable Cellular Data 
Usage 
In Settings > Cellular, under Use Cellular Data For, iOS lists every app 
that has used cellular data, along with a tally of how much data it has 
used since you last tapped Reset Statistics at the bottom of the screen. 
Turn off the switch for any app that you don’t want using cellular data. 
Beware that if you disable cellular data for an app, it won’t be able to 
use cellular data for any purpose, possibly rendering it useless when 
off Wi-Fi. 
Tip: Wi-Fi Assist makes your device automatically use cellular data 
when your Wi-Fi connection is poor, but that can lead to surprise data 
overages! Disable it at the bottom of Settings > Cellular. 
Stop Automatic Downloads  
When you buy an app, ebook, or music from Apple, it downloads to 
your device automatically. These purchases can also automatically 
download to all your other devices, so long as they are signed in with 
the same Apple ID. For example, if you bought this ebook from Apple’s 
iBooks Store on your iPad, it may have downloaded automatically to 
your iPhone. Although this feature is convenient, it can eat data quick­
ly. 
188  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To disable automatic downloads—and turn off automatic app up­
dates—toggle the appropriate switch in Settings > iTunes & App Store. 
If you don’t want to disable automatic downloads entirely, you can 
instead disable Use Cellular Data on this screen. 
Tip: If you disable Updates, you should occasionally open the App  
Store app, tap Updates, and manually download available updates.  
Restrict Background App Refresh  
Background App Refresh keeps certain apps updated even when 
they’re in the background. While this feature keeps app content fresh 
and saves you from waiting for data to load when you launch an app, it 
can also eat data without you realizing. 
You can disable Background App Refresh entirely, or on a per-app 
basis, in Settings > General > Background App Refresh. You can also 
tap Background App Refresh at this screen and choose Wi-Fi to disable 
Background App Refresh when on cellular data. 
Limit iCloud Data Usage  
Some iCloud services (shown in Settings > Your Name > iCloud) can 
use a lot of data, including Photos, Safari, News, and Backup (backups 
happen over Wi-Fi only). Consider disabling these services if you don’t 
use them—see An Introduction to iCloud. 
Turn Down the Music  
The Music app can consume an overwhelming amount of data, espe­
cially if you use Apple Music, iCloud Music Library, iTunes Match, or 
listen to online radio. 
189  

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Tap Settings > Music > Cellular Data to find options for controlling 
Music’s cellular bandwidth usage: 
•  Turning off Cellular Data not only eliminates the app’s mobile data 
usage, but also leaves you without downloadable tunes in the Music 
app while you’re out and about. 
•  Enabling Cellular Data in Music lets you control whether Music can 
use cellular data for streaming or downloads separately. 
•  If you choose to enable Streaming, you can turn off High Quality 
Streaming to lessen the impact on your data cap. 
You can also enable Automatic Downloads in Settings > Music to 
automatically download songs in your library for offline playback. This 
cuts down on data usage, but drastically decreases the free storage 
space on your device. The Optimize Storage setting in Settings > Music 
automatically removes downloaded music when your device is low on 
space. 
Tip: Developer Johnny Ixe offers three apps that can help you keep 
an eye on your data use: DataMan Next, DataMan Pro, and DataMan 
Enterprise. Visit the DataMan website for details on each one. 
Control Device Storage  
Visit Settings > General > iPhone Storage (or iPad Storage) to see how 
much space you have, what’s taking up space, and suggestions for how 
to reclaim space, such as automatically deleting old Messages conver­
sations, reviewing large message attachments, and automatically 
offloading unused apps. 
Offloading an app, as opposed to deleting it, removes the app from 
your device, but retains its data, so when you download it again from 
the App Store you won’t be missing anything. 
I highly recommend enabling offloading of apps. To enable or disable 
it at any time, flip the Offload Unused App switch in Settings > iTunes 
& App Store. 
190  

 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improve Battery Life 
Keeping mobile devices powered is a persistent challenge. As iOS tries 
to do more and more for you, features like background tasks, Location 
Services, iCloud syncing, and Background App Refresh can strain a 
battery. Fortunately, iOS offers some tools that can extend your battery 
life. 
Note: This chapter refers to many Control Center actions. Refer back 
to Discover Control Center Functions to familiarize yourself with 
them. 
Tame Battery Usage  
In Settings > Battery, under Battery Usage, apps are sorted by how 
much power they’ve used, but apps near the top aren’t necessarily 
wasteful. If you use an app often, it will naturally use more battery. 
Tip: If, in Settings > Battery, you see a section called Battery Life 
Suggestions (it suggested Reduce Brightness to my publisher), you 
would do well to heed the advice. 
Apps with the Background Activity label are using a lot of power in the 
background. In some cases, this is okay. For instance, I want Mail to 
run in the background so it can notify me of new messages. However, if 
an app (like Facebook) is draining a lot of battery in the background, 
consider disabling its background refresh and Location Services. 
Tip: Facebook can be an especially egregious juice-sucker. Curb  
its battery usage by limiting what it can do on the Location Services  
and Background App Refresh screens. Or better yet, just uninstall it  
and use Facebook in Safari.  
191  

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Go to Settings > General > Background App Refresh to turn off back­
ground refresh on a per-app basis—or get rid of it completely by  
turning off the Background App Refresh switch.  
To turn off Location Services on a per app basis, tap Settings >  
Privacy > Location Services and disable location sharing for those apps  
you don’t want wasting power tracking you. You can also set an app to  
track you only while you are using it.  
Find Out if Your Battery Is Draining 
It can be difficult to tell whether a battery is draining normally or a 
particular app is being an energy hog. Here’s the definitive way to find 
out: 
1.  Charge your battery to 100 percent and unplug your device. 
2.  Put your device to sleep and don’t use it for an extended period— 
overnight is a good time for this test. 
3.  In the morning, go to Settings > Battery. 
4.  Under Time Since Last Full Charge, at the bottom, check the Usage 
and Standby time. If you haven’t used the device since charging it, 
but the Usage time is close to the Standby time, then an app is 
preventing the device from sleeping soundly. 
If you think an app is the culprit, look for apps with the Background 
Activity label in the Battery Usage screen. 
192  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
The Batteries Widget 
The Batteries widget tracks the battery life of your device and Blue­
tooth-connected devices (Figure 75). 
Figure 75: The Batteries widget shows the remaining battery life of 
all Bluetooth devices connected to your iOS device. 
The Batteries widget displays only when a Bluetooth device is 
connected. To learn how to add widgets to the Widgets screen, see 
Add a Widget. 
Turn Down the Brightness  
An iOS device’s display is one of the most significant drains on the 
battery, so you want to keep the screen only as bright as is necessary 
for comfortable use. 
Adjust brightness with the Brightness slider of Control Center. Gener­
ally, you can get away with a lower brightness setting while in a dark 
environment, but brighter situations, such as direct sunlight, call for 
more brightness. 
The Auto-Brightness switch in Settings > General > Accessibility > 
Display Accommodations can help manage this for you, making 
adjustments depending on ambient light levels. 
Shut Off Radios  
The radios in your device eat power: 
•  Bluetooth: Keeping Bluetooth enabled when you’re not using it 
can use battery power unnecessarily. 
193  

  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Cellular: If your device has a voice or data plan, it’s a good idea to 
disable the cellular radio when you have poor connectivity. Other­
wise, the device will constantly strain to find a signal, consuming a 
lot of power while doing so. 
•  Wi-Fi: If you’re desperate to improve battery life, you can turn off 
Wi-Fi. However, if your device has a bandwidth cap, Apple recom­
mends that you leave Wi-Fi on to ensure that your device connects 
to the Internet over Wi-Fi when possible. 
Control Center lets you turn all of these off and on quickly (see Net­
working Platter). Or, turn them all off by enabling Airplane mode—tap 
the Airplane Mode 
button in Control Center. 
Tip: Using an iPhone for turn-by-turn directions while driving— 
particularly if you have it display the map constantly as well—is 
terrible for battery life. To avoid draining your iPhone’s battery, plug 
your iPhone into power in the car when relying on GPS-based direc­
tions. 
Use Low Power Mode  
Available only for the iPhone, Low Power mode disables certain 
services in exchange for adding hours to battery life. iOS prompts you 
to enable Low Power mode when your iPhone’s battery charge falls to 
20 percent (and then again at 10 percent, if you ignored the first 
prompt). iOS disables Low Power mode automatically once the charge 
reaches 80 percent. 
You can also enable or disable Low Power mode at any time in Control 
Center or Settings > Battery. 
With Low Power mode on, the following features will not work: 
•  Automatic downloads 
•  Background App Refresh 
•  Mail fetch 
194  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
• iCloud sync 
• Some visual effects 
Tip: Don’t leave your device in a hot car or baking in the sun if you 
can avoid it. Conversely, in the depths of winter, try to keep your 
device warm or you’ll see battery life drop precipitously. Apple’s 
recommended temperature range is 32° to 95° F (0° to 35° C). 
Busting Battery Usage Myths  
There are many myths surrounding battery life. Let’s take a look at the 
two most prevalent: 
You Should Kill Background Apps 
Many people recommend closing background apps that aren’t in use, 
but according to former Apple Genius Scotty Loveless, that can make 
the problem worse. The reason is that when an app is “open” in the 
background, it’s still present in RAM but not consuming any CPU or 
battery power. If you close that app, it will consume more battery 
power when you launch it again. So you shouldn’t “kill” background 
apps in the App Switcher indiscriminately. But… 
If an app is using a lot of battery power unnecessarily, it’s a good idea 
to close it in the App Switcher—see Switch Apps on the iPhone. 
You Should/Shouldn’t Overcharge 
Modern device batteries don’t have problems with over- or under­
charging. However, every battery has a limited life span, as defined by 
complete charge and recharge cycles. So, when an Apple device is 
charged to 100 percent, you should unplug it and use it until it drops to 
about 20 percent, then recharge it. It’s not a good idea to frequently 
use a battery until it runs out of power. 
195  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
The Life and Death of Batteries 
To everything there is a season, and even for lithium-ion batteries 
there is a time to die. 
Battery life spans are measured in cycles, and sooner or later, yours 
will reach its last. If your device rapidly loses charge throughout the 
day, or suddenly dies, even though the battery display in the status 
bar shows it as having well over 1 percent remaining, then your 
battery is likely on its last legs. The only way to know for sure is to 
have it tested. The Genius Bar at any Apple Store can run a special 
battery-diagnostic test on your device. 
If your battery needs to be replaced, you can either buy a replace­
ment and do it yourself, following a guide like those provided by 
iFixit, or pay Apple $79 to replace the battery. Alternatively, Apple’s 
AppleCare+ plans cover battery replacements, but your battery must 
be holding less than 80 percent of its original capacity before Apple 
will replace it for free. 
Unfortunately, neither option is ideal. For a first-hand account of DIY 
battery replacement, see Adam Engst’s TidBITS article Replace a 
Dying iPhone 5 Battery; to read about my experience with getting 
Apple to replace an iPhone battery, see my TidBITS piece Replace a 
Dying iPhone 5 Battery: Take Two. 
196  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About This Book 
We hope that you found this book both useful and enjoyable to read. 
We welcome your comments. 
Ebook Extras  
You can access extras related to this ebook on the web. Once you’re 
on the ebook’s Take Control Extras page, you can: 
•  Download any available new version of the ebook for free, or buy 
any subsequent edition at a discount. 
•  Download various formats, including PDF, EPUB, and Mobipocket. 
(Learn about reading on mobile devices on our Device Advice page.) 
•  Find out if we have any update plans for the ebook. 
•  Read postings to the ebook’s blog. These may include new informa­
tion and tips, as well as links to author interviews. 
If you bought this ebook from the Take Control website, it has been 
automatically added to your account, where you can download it in 
other formats and access any future updates. However, if you bought 
this ebook elsewhere, you can add it to your account manually: 
•  If you already have a Take Control account, log in to your account, 
and then click the “access extras…” link above. 
•  If you don’t have a Take Control account, first make one by follow­
ing the directions that appear when you click the “access extras…” 
link above. Then, once you are logged in to your new account, add 
your ebook by clicking the “access extras…” link a second time. 
Note: If you try these directions and find that your device is incom­
patible with the Take Control website, contact us.  
197  

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
About the Author  
Josh Centers is the Managing Editor of TidBITS and author of Take 
Control of Apple TV. He has been featured in Macworld, Scientific 
American, the Washington Post, Boing Boing, and other fine publica­
tions, as well as on Comedy Central and HuffPost Live. 
About the Publisher  
alt concepts inc., publisher of Take Control Books, is operated by Joe 
Kissell and Morgen Jahnke, who acquired the ebook series from 
TidBITS Publishing Inc.’s owners, Adam and Tonya Engst, in May 
2017. Joe brings his decades of experience as author of more than 60 
books on tech topics (including many popular Take Control titles) to 
his role as Publisher. Morgen’s professional background is in develop­
ment work for nonprofit organizations, and she employs those skills as 
Director of Marketing and Publicity. Joe and Morgen live in San Diego 
with their two children and their cat. 
Credits 
• Publisher & Editor: Joe Kissell 
• Cover design: Sam Schick, Neversink 
• Logo design: Geoff Allen, FUN is OK 
198  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
More Take Control Books 
This is but one of many Take Control titles! Most of our books focus 
on the Mac and macOS, but we also publish titles that cover iOS and 
other Apple products, along with numerous general technology 
topics. 
You can buy Take Control books from the Take Control online catalog 
as well as from venues such as Amazon and the iBooks Store. But it’s 
a better user experience and our authors earn more when you buy 
directly from us. Just saying… 
Our ebooks are available in three popular formats: PDF, EPUB, and 
the Kindle’s Mobipocket. All are DRM-free. 
199  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright and Fine Print 
Take Control of iOS 11 
ISBN: 978-1-947282-08-7  
Copyright © 2017, Josh Centers. All rights reserved.  
alt concepts inc. 4142 Adams Ave. #103-619, San Diego CA 92116, USA 
Why Take Control? We designed Take Control electronic books to help readers regain 
a measure of control in an oftentimes out-of-control universe. With Take Control, we also 
work to streamline the publication process so that information about quickly changing 
technical topics can be published while it’s still relevant and accurate. 
Our books are DRM-free: This ebook doesn’t use digital rights management in any 
way because DRM makes life harder for everyone. So we ask a favor of our readers. If you 
want to share your copy of this ebook with a friend, please do so as you would a physical 
book, meaning that if your friend uses it regularly, they should buy a copy. Your support 
makes it possible for future Take Control ebooks to hit the Internet long before you’d find 
the same information in a printed book. Plus, if you buy the ebook, you’re entitled to any 
free updates that become available. 
Remember the trees! You have our permission to make a single print copy of this 
ebook for personal use, if you must. Please reference this page if a print service refuses 
to print the ebook for copyright reasons. 
Caveat lector: Although the author and alt concepts inc. have made a reasonable effort 
to ensure the accuracy of the information herein, they assume no responsibility for errors 
or omissions. The information in this book is distributed “As Is,” without warranty of any 
kind. Neither alt concepts inc. nor the author shall be liable to any person or entity for any 
special, indirect, incidental, or consequential damages, including without limitation lost 
revenues or lost profits, that may result (or that are alleged to result) from the use of these 
materials. In other words, use this information at your own risk. 
It’s just a name: Many of the designations in this ebook used to distinguish products 
and services are claimed as trademarks or service marks. Any trademarks, service marks, 
product names, or named features that appear in this title are assumed to be the property 
of their respective owners. All product names and services are used in an editorial fashion 
only, with no intention of infringement. No such use, or the use of any trade name, is 
meant to convey endorsement or other affiliation with this title. 
We aren’t Apple: This title is an independent publication and has not been authorized, 
sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc. Because of the nature of this title, it uses 
terms that are registered trademarks or service marks of Apple Inc. If you’re into that sort 
of thing, you can view a complete list of Apple Inc.’s registered trademarks and service 
marks. 
200  

