 
 
 
 
 
 
TERRIER
 
Beka Cooper 01
 
By
Tamora Pierce
 
 
This is a work of fiction. Names,  characters,  places,  and  incidents either are the
product  of  the  author's  imagination  or  are  used  fictitiously.  Any  resemblance  to
actual persons, living or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
 
Copyright © 2006 by Tamora Pierce
 
Jacket art copyright © 2006 by Jonathan Barkat
 
Published in the United States by Random House Children's Books, a division of
Random House, Inc., New York.
RANDOM HOUSE and colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.
www.randomhouse.com/teens
Educators  and  librarians,  for  a  variety  of  teaching  tools,  visit  us  at
www.randomhouse.com/teachers
 
v1.0
 
 
Acknowledgments
 
With thanks to  Mallory  Loehr,  my  Random  House  editrix,  who  suggested  first
person  and  the journal format,  and  to  Bruce Coville,  my  reading  partner  in  crime,
who  worked  extra  hard  with  me  on  the  dynamics  of  first-person  writing  and  on
Beka's very real voice: if the shape of this book is unique and works, it's due to both
of you.
To Lisa Findlay and Sara Alan, who also  gave me much-needed  editorial advice
on a very tough book.
To Christine M. Cowan at Undiscovered Treasures, source of my first fire opal in
matrix (and many other glorious stones and crystals).

To  the posters  of  SheroesCentral,  who didn't  know (as  I didn't)  that  they  were
teaching me to write journal entries!
To  the  pigeons  of  Riverside  Park,  including  Gloucester,  Gimpy,  Cloak,  Hart
Crane, Tex, Footloose, Bandit, Pinky – What? You thought I made them up?
To  Jack  Olsen,  a gentleman and  a crime writer, with a good  word  to  spare  for
someone with an unpopular opinion.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To Tim
This one's all yours. It's time. And you deserve this and more, for putting all that
effort into us.
 
 
 
 
 
PROLOGUE
FROM  THE  JOURNAL  OF  ELENI  COOPER,  RESIDENT,  WITH  HER  SIX-YEAR-OLD
SON, GEORGE COOPER, OF SPINDLE LANE, THE LOWER CITY, CORUS, THE REALM
OF TORTALL
 
March 18, 406 [H.E.: the Human Era]
In all those lessons for which I was made to memorize chants and prayers I never
used, couldn't our temple priestesses have taught one – just one! – lesson on what to
do with a boy who is too smart for his own good?
I am at my wit's end! My George was taken up for stealing and I had to go to the
Jane Street Guard station.
I thought I might die of the shame. I know it is this place and the friends he makes
here. Even the families who do not teach their children the secrets  of  theft look  the
other way because it puts food on the table. And I am too newly come. I cannot tell
them, "Keep your children away from my son. Do not let them teach him to steal."
I want him to rise in the world. We are poor now, but I pray we will not always be
so. And I cannot afford a better place to live. My family will not have me back, not
after our last meeting. So I am left here, trying to raise a lad who sees and hears and
thinks too much, in the city's worst slum.
At the station there my scapegrace was, seated on a bench with the Guard who'd
caught him. "It was but a handful of coins left on a counter,  Mistress  Cooper,"  the
Guard said. "And I recovered them all. It's his first time, and  I owe  you  for  makin'
my wife's labor  so  easy."  He looked  at George.  "Next time it's  the cages  for  you,
and maybe a work farm," he warned. "Don't go makin' your good mother weep."

I grabbed  George's  arm  and  towed  him  out  of  there.  We'd  no  sooner  passed
through the gate into the street when he tells me, "Up till a hundred year ago they was
called  Dogs,  Ma."  He  was  talking  broad  Lower  City  slang,  knowing  it  made  me
furious.  "Ye know why they changed  it? They thought folk mightn't respect  'em if
they went about callin' them after curs like they done for three hundred – "
I boxed his ear. "I'll have no history  lessons  from  you,  Master Scamp!"  I cried,
tried beyond  my sense  of  dignity.  "You'll  keep  your  tongue  between  your  teeth!"
Everyone  we  passed  was  smirking  at  us.  They  knew  our  tale,  knew  I'd  been
dismissed  from  the temple. They believed  I  thought  myself  better  than  they  were,
because I kept my home and my child as clean as may be and taught him his letters.
Let them think it. We will not always live in the Cesspool.  My George  is meant for
better things.
Thieving is not among them, I swear it.
When I got him to our rooms, I let him go. He stared at me with his hazel eyes, so
like mine. The  beaky nose  and  square  chin were his father's,  a temple worshiper  I
saw but for one night. George would be the kind of man women would think was so
homely he was handsome, if he lived. I had to make certain he would live.
"The shame of it!" I told him. "George Cooper, how am I to face folk? Stealing!
My son, stealing!"
He looked  me boldly  in the face.  "We're  gettin' no  richer from  your  healin'  and
magickin', Ma. I hate bein' hungry all the time."
That cut me. I knew he was hungry. Did I not  divide my share  so  he had  more,
and it still wasn't enough? So he would not see me in tears, and because he needed
it, I sat on our chair and turned my rascal over my knee. I gave him the spanking of
his young life.
I stood  him  on  his  feet  again.  His  chin  trembled,  but  he  refused  to  cry.  The
problem is, my lad and I are too much alike.
"There's  more  important  things  than  wealth,"  I  said,  trying  to  make  him  listen.
"There's our family name.  Us  above  all, George,  we don't  take to  thieving." I had
thought to  wait until he  was  old  enough  to  understand  to  tell  him  about  Rebakah
Cooper, but I believe the Goddess's voice in me was saying it was time. He needed
to hear this. I took down the shrine from the wardrobe top, where I kept it safe from
small boys. I opened the front to show him the tiny figures of the ancestors.
"See  how  many  of  your  great-grandfathers  wore  the  uniform  of  the  Provost's
Guard? What would our famous ancestress say if she knew one of her descendants
was a common thief?"
"We've got a famous ancestress?" George asked, rubbing his behind.
I picked up Rebakah's  small, worn statue.  I took  it out  often  when I was  a girl,
because  she  was  a  woman,  of  all  the  ancestors  who  wore  the  black  tunic  and
breeches of the Guard.  There was  the cat  at her feet, the purple  dots  of  paint that
were its eyes worn away just as the pale blue paint for her eyes was worn away. The
shrine  was  old,  given  to  me  by  my  great-aunt  when  I  was  dedicated  to  Temple
Service.
I
 showed
 him
 the
 figure.
 "Rebakah
 Cooper,"
 I
 said.
 "Your
six-times-great-grandmother. Famed in her day for her service as a Provost's Guard.
She was fierce and law-abiding and loyal, my son. All that I want for you.  And she

was doom on lawbreakers, particularly thieves. Steal, and you shame her."
"Yes, Ma," George said quietly.
"Remember  her,"  I  told  him,  giving  his  shoulder  a  little  shake.  "Respect  her.
Respect me."
He put his arms around my waist. "I love you,  Mother,"  he said.  Now he talked
perfectly, as he'd been taught. He helped me to clean up  from  the medicine making
and to make supper.
It  is  only  in  writing  about  this  day  that  I  realize  he  never  said  anything  about
thieving.
No,  he  will  obey  me.  He  is  a  good  boy.  And  I  will  make  an  offering  to  my
Goddess to guide him on Rebakah Cooper's path.
 
 
FROM  THE JOURNAL  OF  MISTRESS  ILONY  COOPER,  MOTHER  OF  REBAKAH  C
OOPER, RESIDENT  OF  PROVOST'S  HOUSE,  PALACE  WAY  AND  GOLDEN  WAY,  C
ORUS, THE REALM OF TORTALL
 
Novembur 13, 240
My hart is the betur for this day. When my Beka told me the pijins talked to her I
feerd she was mad. I feerd my lady wood lok her up as my lady dos not  lyk Beka.
Beka mayks my lord lyk being a komun Dog to much.
I thot  to  take Beka to  my husbands  mother.  Granny Fern  wood  no  if  ther  was
madnes in his blud. So I tuk Beka ther today and left the littel ones with Mya.
Beka had bred in her pokets and fed pijins all the way to  Klover Lane. She  says
the birds say wher they was killd. I feerd somwon ov Provosts Hows wood see the
bred and say she stole it.
Wen I told Granny Fern why we come Granny laffd.
She is no mor mad than me, she says. Beka has the magikal Gift. Tho som say its
not the Gift exakly. Its not biddebel. You hav it or you dont. Bekas father had it and
his sister and unkl befor him.
I sayd a prayr to the Godess. My girl is not mad. Gifted is not good but its beter
than mad.
Granny Fern mayd Beka churn her buttr. Beka thumpd the churn so hard! Granny
Fern told her, You can tickl the magik a bit. You need to, girl. Elswys the ghosts that
ryd the birds  will dryv  you  mad with tawk you  onli heer  part  way.  Pijins  cary  the
dead. Them as died suden, them as had biznis to do.
Them as got merderd, Beka says.
Pijins ar the Blak Gods mesingers, Granny says.  They gathr souls  to  tayk to  the
Peesful Relms, but som wont go. They hold to the bird until they see whats becom
ov them. And they talk. Som ov what they say is useful, Beka. Thats why you must
lern how to heer theyr voyses. Hav you herd  othr  voyses,  Beka? On  street  corners
mayhap?
I dont no, says Beka.
Lets go see, says Granny.
We finishd the buttr  ferst  bekaus  it dont  wait. Then Granny took  us  to  a  street
corner but to bloks frum her house. A dust spyner was ther, spyning leevs and  dirt

arond and abowt lyk a smal wirlwind.
Yore fathr namd it Hasfush,  Granny says.  Or  told  us  his name is Hasfush.  Hes
one ov the dust spynrs that nevur goes away. Step in and lissen, Beka.
Beka nevr argus with Granny Fern. Onli with me. Into the spynr she wakd.
What if she choaks? I askd.
She wont, says Granny. She haz the Ayr Gift.
The dust spynr got smal. Beka cam owt a mess.
I hav to wash her, I says. My ladee will hav a fit.
Beka lookd at Granny.  Hasfush  is alive. He told  me evrything he hurd.  Then he
got happi.
Next tyme bring him dirt frum othr parts ov the citee, Granny says. Yer fathr sayd
he lyked that. Ilony, send her to me in the afturnoon.  I wil teech  Beka how to  heer
the ghoasts and the dust spynrs. Its writ down in a book ov the famlee.
She can taym it. The listning. She isnt mad.
I was so afeerd for my Beka. I no I wil dy frum this rot in my chest. My childrun
must mayk theyr own way then. Beka wil hav the hardist tyme. She was in the Lowur
Cytee for to long. Magik wil help. Evun frends that ar birds and street wind and durt
wil help.
 
 
FROM  THE  JOURNAL  OF  MATTHIAS  TUNSTALL,  PROVOST'S  GUARDSMAN,
RESIDENT OF ROWAN'S LODGINGS, BOTT STREET, PATTEN DISTRICT, CORUS, THE
REALM OF TORTALL
 
November 13, 244
Tonight my lord Gershom took Clary and me to supper at Naxen's Fancy. It was
his way of  thanking us  for  bringing down  Bloody  Jock.  (I would have done  more
than hobble him and bring him for  a court  to  sentence.  The  scummer  would rob  a
couple, killing the man and kissing the woman while her man was lying there.)
It was  our  third supper  at Naxen's  Fancy.  Me and  Clary could  never afford  the
place on our own, but when we wind up  big cases,  we get a fine dinner there with
my lord. So the wine was flowing well, and there was brandy after supper. We were
all feeling good, and Clary asks the thing we both always wanted to know: how did
my lord manage to hobble the Bold Brass gang six years  back?  Seemed  for  a year
they roamed Prettybone, Highfields, and Unicorn Districts, helping themselves to the
treasures of folk who pay the Rogue not to be burgled. There was even talk that His
Majesty was  looking for  a new Lord  Provost.  Then suddenly  there was  the  whole
gang in chains, my lord with new estates awarded by the King, and the Vice Provost
transferred to a command on the Scanran border.
"What stories did you hear?" my lord  asks  with that little smile, like he knows  a
very good joke.
We tell the ones we heard most. One of Bold Brass's women caught her man with
someone  else. A palace  mage lowered himself to  Dog work to  get revenge  on  the
gang for robbing him. The gang had killed a horse some duke loved and he paid for
the mages himself.
My lord starts a-laughing. "None of those are right," he says.  "It  was  a little girl,

only eight years old."
I look  at my glass  of  brandy.  "This  stuff  is better  than the swill I'm  used  to,"  I
say.  "I  could've  swore  you  said  the  Bold  Brass  gang  got  took  down  by  an
eight-year-old."
My lord nodded and says, "She took against one of them. He was living with her
mama. When he found out her mama had lung rot,  he beat  her up  and  took  all she
had of value. The girl Dogged him. Dogged him like you two would do  it, kept  out
of his sight. If she lost him, she just found him later at his favorite places."
"How'd she know he'd be worth all that work?" Clary wants to know.  "Why  not
just stick a knife in him?"
My lord  says,  "The  piece  of  pig  turd  gave  her  mama  jewelry  he  couldn't  have
come by honest, then took it back when he left."
"Yeah,"  Clary says,  "she's  got  to  be  from  the  Cesspool.  Those  Cesspool  little
ones know what kind of baubles belong down there and what don't."
My lord  goes  on.  "So  Beka –  that's  her name, Rebakah  Cooper  –  finally  Dogs
him all the way back  to  where  he  met  up  with  his  mates.  She  spies  on  them  and
knows she has the den of the Bold Brass gang. Then she  goes  to  her nearest  Dog,
only this Dog don't believe her."
Clary mutters,  "Probably  Day  Watch."  My  partner  thinks  the  only  Dogs  worth
bothering with work the Evening Watch like us.
My lord says, "So Beka goes to her kennel, but they laugh at her. She  even tries
to tell my Vice Provost. He has her tossed in the street. He thought she was trying to
witch him. Beka's no mage, but she has these light blue-gray eyes. When she's angry,
it's like looking into a well of ice. She was angry by then. It's unnerving in a little girl,
but she can't help her eyes.  So  one  day  I'm  riding through the Daymarket and  this
mite  of  a  child  grabs  my  Oso  by  the  bridle.  You  know  Oso  –  he  doesn't  like
surprises.  I almost drew  steel on  her before  I  saw  she  was  a  child  and  how  Oso
calmed down when she talked to him. She was telling me if I wanted the Bold Brass
gang,  I'd  best  listen  to  her.  My  Vice  Provost's  ready  to  take  a  whip  to  the  girl.
Meantime, I feel like I'm looking into the eyes  of  a thousand-year-old  ghost.  Unlike
my Vice Provost, I'm not spooked. I listen to her. And she does it. She gives me the
Bold Brass gang. Then she thinks she  can  disappear,  but  I know a trick or  two  of
my own.  I find her home and  her family. The  Coopers  are living in my household
now."
"Meaning no  disrespect,  my  lord,  but  why?"  I  ask.  "A  handful  of  gold  shows
you're grateful."
He shakes  his head.  "A mother with  lung  rot,  and  my  healers  say  she  can't  be
helped. It's too far along. Five bright, promising little ones – Beka is the oldest. All in
some  Mutt Piddle  Lane midden.  The  mother's  an herbalist  on  her  good  days,  but
those are going to run out. I'd an idea Beka was already learning to steal. His Majesty
was about to find a new Provost. I owed that ice-eyed mite. Beka Cooper saved me
from disgrace. I think she'll make a good Dog when she's old enough. Her brothers
and  sisters  will  do  well  in  the  world,  given  a  chance.  And  her  mother  will  die  in
comfort. I believe in thanking the gods  for  saving my position."  My lord  raises  his
glass. "I love being Lord Provost."
We raise ours. "We're glad to have you," Clary says.  "Who  else takes  notice  of

the Dogs who do the work?"
Now I can't get that story out of my head. Dogging a cove like that when she was
only eight. I hope if she does go for the Provost's Guard that she doesn't think she
knows all there is to what we do. She'll quit soon enough if she does. I hope my lord
doesn't build her up that way. She'll die of boredom and wash out before she's been
in the work for a month. Or  she'll think because  she  did  it once,  and  did  it young,
that she  knows  it all. Then she'll just get herself killed, and  maybe any other  Dogs
who are with her, too.
 
 
 
 
THE JOURNAL OF REBAKAH COOPER
 
 
 
Wednesday, April 1, 246
Written on the morning of my first day of duty.
I have this journal that I mean  to  use  as  a  record  of  my  days  in  the  Provost's
Guard. Should I survive my first year as a Puppy, it will give me good  practice  for
writing  reports  when  I  am  a  proper  Dog.  By  setting  down  as  much  as  I  can
remember word by word, especially in talk with folk about  the city, I will keep  my
memory exercises  sharp.  Our  trainers told  us  we  must  always  try  to  memorize  as
much as we can exactly as we can. Your memory is your  record when  your  hands
are too busy. That is one of our training sayings.
For my own details, to make a proper start, I own to five feet and eight inches in
height. I have good  shoulders,  though I am a bit on  the  slender  side.  My  build  is
muscled for a mot. I have worked curst hard to make it so, in the training yard  and
on my own. My peaches are well enough. Doubtless they would be larger if I put on
more pounds, but as I have no sweetheart and  am not  wishful of  one  for  now,  my
peaches are fine as they are.
I am told I am pretty in my face, though my sister Diona says when my fine nose
and cheekbones have been broken flat several times that will no  longer be  so.  (My
sisters do not want me to be a Dog.) My eyes are light blue-gray in color. Some like
them. Others hold them to be unsettling. I like them, because they work for me. My
teeth are good. My hair is a dark blond. Folk can see my brows and lashes without
my troubling to darken them, not that I would. I wear my hair long as my one vanity.
I know it  offers  an  opponent  a  grip,  but  I  have  learned  to  tight-braid  it  from  the
crown of my head. I also have a spiked strap to braid into it, so that any who seize
my braid will regret it.
I am so eager for five o'clock and my first watch to begin that my writing on this
page is shaky, not neat as I have been  taught. It is hard  to  think quietly. I must  be
sure to write every bit of this first week of my first year above all. For eight long year
I have waited for this time to come. Now it has. I want a record of my first seeking,

my  training  Dogs,  my  every  bit  of  work.  I  will  be  made  a  Dog  sooner  than  any
Puppy has ever been. I will prove I know more than any Puppy my very first week.
It is not vanity. I lived in the Cesspool  for  eight year. I stole.  I studied  with the
Lord  Provost  for  eight more year. Three  year of  that eight I ran  messages  for  the
Provost's  Dogs,  before  I  went  into  training.  I  know  the  Lower  City  better  than  I
know the faces of  my sisters  and  brothers,  better  than I knew my mother's  face.  I
will learn the rest quicker than any other Puppy. I even live in the Lower City again,
on  Nipcopper  Close.  None  of  the  others  assigned  to  the  Jane  Street  kennel  do.
(They will regret it when they must walk all the way home at the end of their watch!)
Pounce says I count my fish before they're hooked. I tell Pounce that if I must be
saddled  with a purple-eyed  talking cat,  why  must  it  be  a  sour  one?  He  is  to  stay
home this week. I will not  be  distracted  by  this strange  creature  who has  been  my
friend these  last four  years.  And I will not  have my Dogs  distracted  by  him. They
will ask all manner of questions about him, for one – questions I cannot answer and
he will not.
My greatest fear is my shyness. It has grown so much worse since I began to put
up my hair and let down my skirts. I was the best of all our training class in combat,
yet earned a weekly switching because  I could  not  declaim in rhetoric.  Somehow  I
must  find  the  courage  to  tell  a  stranger  he  is  under  arrest  for  crimes  against  the
King's peace, and detail those crimes. Or I must get a partner who likes to talk.
I am assigned  to  the Jane Street  kennel. The  Watch  Commander  in this year  of
246 is Acton  of  Fenrigh.  I  doubt  I  will  ever  have  anything  to  do  with  him.  Most
Dogs don't. Our Watch Sergeant is Kebibi Ahuda, my training master in combat and
the  fiercest  mot  I  have  ever  met.  We  have  six  Corporals  on  our  watch  and
twenty-five Senior Guards.  That's  not  counting the  cage  Dogs  and  the  Dogs  who
handle the scent hounds. We also have a mage on duty, Fulk. Fulk the Nosepicker,
we mots call him. I plan to have nothing to do with him, either. The next time he puts
a hand on me I will break it, mage or not.
There is the sum of it. All that remains is my training Dogs.  I will write of  them,
and describe them properly, when I know who they are.
 
Written at day's end.
As the sun touched the rim of the city wall, I walked into the Jane Street  kennel.
For  our  first  day,  we  had  no  training  before  duty.  I  could  enter  in  a  fresh,  clean
uniform. I had gotten mine from the old clothes room at my Lord Provost's house. I
wore the summer black tunic with short sleeves, black breeches, and black boots. I
had a leather belt with purse,  whistle, paired  daggers,  a proper  baton,  water  flask,
and rawhide cords for prisoner taking. I was kitted up like a proper  Dog and  ready
to bag me some Rats.
Some of the other Lower City trainees were already there. Like me, they wore  a
Puppy's white trim at the hems of sleeves and tunic. None of us know if the white is
to mark us out so Rats will spare us or so they will kill us first. None of our teachers
will say, either.
I sat with the other Puppies. They greeted me with gloom. None of  them wanted
to be here, but each district gets its allotment of the year's trainees. My companions
felt  they  drew  the  short  straw.  There  is  curst  little  glory  here.  Unless  you  are  a

veteran Dog or  a  friend  of  the  Rogue,  the  pickings  are  coppers  at  best.  And  the
Lower City is rough.  Everyone knows  that  of  the  Puppies  who  start  their  training
year in the Lower City, half give up or are killed in the first four months.
I tried to look as glum as the others to keep them company. They are cross that I
wanted to come to Jane Street.
Ahuda took her place at the tall Sergeants' desk. We all sat up. We'd feared her in
training.  She  is  a  stocky  black  woman  with  some  freckles  and  hair  she  has
straightened and cut just below her ears. Her family is from Carthak, far in the south.
They say  she  treats  trainees the way she  does  in vengeance for  how the Carthakis
treated her family as slaves. All I know is that she made fast fighters of us.
She nodded to the Evening Watch Dogs as they came on duty, already in pairs or
meeting  up  in  the  waiting  room.  Some  looked  at  our  bench  and  grinned.  Some
nudged  each  other  and  laughed.  My  classmates  hunkered  down  and  looked
miserable.
"They'll eat us alive," my friend Ersken whispered in my ear. He was  the kindest
of us, not the best trait for a Dog-to-be. "I think they sharpen their teeth."
"Going to sea wouldn'ta been so bad." Verene had  come  in after me and  sat  on
my other side. "Go on, Beka – give 'em one of them ice-eye glares of yours."
I looked down. Though I am comfortable with my fellow Puppies,  I wasn't  easy
with  the  Dogs  or  the  folk  who  came  in  with  business  in  the  kennel.  "You  get
seasick," I told Verene. "That's why you went for a Dog. And leave my glares out of
it."
Since Ahuda was  at her desk,  the Watch  Commander  was  already in his office.
He'd  be  going over  the assignments,  choosing  the  Dog  partners  who  would  get  a
Puppy  or  just  agreeing  to  Ahuda's  choices.  I  asked  the  Goddess  to  give  Ersken
someone who'd understand his kindness never meant he was  weak. Verene needed
Dogs that would talk to her straight. And me?
Goddess, Mithros, let them be good at their work, I begged.
Who would I get? I know who I wanted. There were three sets  of  partners  who
were famous for their work. I kissed the half moon at the base of my thumbnail for
luck.
Outside, the market bells chimed the fifth hour of the afternoon  –  the end  of  the
Day Watch and the beginning of the Evening Watch.  Dogs  going off  duty  lined up
before  Ahuda's  desk,  their  Puppies  at  their  backs,  to  muster  out.  When  Ahuda
dismissed them, they were done for  the day.  Their Puppies,  six of  our  classmates,
sighed with relief and  headed  out  the door.  Before they left, they told  us  what  we
were in for, each in their own fashion. Some gave us a thumbs-up. A couple mimed
a hanging with a weary grin. I just looked away. What was so hard for them? They'd
had Day Watch. Everyone knew that Evening Watch got the worst of it in the Lower
City.
With the Day Watch gone, Ahuda called out the names of a pair of Dogs. They'd
been lounging on one of the benches. When they looked at her, she jerked her thumb
at  the  Commander's  door.  They  settled  their  shoulders,  checked  each  other's
uniforms, then went inside. I knew them. My lord  Gershom  had  commended  them
twice.
Once  the  door  closed  behind  them,  Ahuda  looked  at  us.  "Puppy  Ersken

Westover. You're assigned to those two Dogs for training. Step up here."
Ersken  gulped,  then  stood  to  whistles  and  applause  from  the  veteran  Dogs.  I
straightened his clothes. Verene kissed him, and our fellow trainees clapped  him on
the back or shook his hand. Then Ersken tried to walk across that room like he was
confident he could do the job, in front of about twenty ordinary folk and  the Dogs
of the Evening Watch.
Hilyard  elbowed  me.  "You  coulda  given  him  a  kiss,  Beka,  to  brighten  his  last
hours."
I elbowed him some harder. Hilyard was always trying to cook up mischief.
"My  kisses  ain't  good  enough?"  Verene  demanded  of  him.  She  punched  his
shoulder. "See what sweetenin' you get when they call you."
Ersken came to attention before Ahuda's desk. She  looked  down  her short  nose
at  him.  "Stop  that.  Relax.  The  Commander's  giving  them  the  speech,  about  how
they're not  to  break  you  or  dent  you  or  toss  you  down  the  sewer  without  getting
permission from me first."
The Dogs laughed. One of them called, "Don't sweat it, lad. We're all just workin'
Dogs down here."
"They keep the honor and glory and pretty girls for  Unicorn District."  That  Dog
was a woman whose face was marked crossways by a scar.
One of them said, "Up there, the fountains run rose water. Here they run – "
" – piss!" cried the Dogs. It was an old joke in the Lower City.
The Commander's door opened. Out came the two Dogs. They looked resigned.
The  heavyset  one  beckoned  to  Ersken.  "Heel,  Puppy.  Let's  get  our  glorious
partnership rolling. You don't say  nothin',  see?  We  talk, you  listen." He clamped  a
thick hand on Ersken's shoulder and steered him to the door.
Ahuda  called,  "Remember,  tomorrow  you  Puppies  report  an  hour  early  for
combat training before your watch. No more easy starts like today!" Ersken's Dogs
let the door close. Ahuda then called for a new Dog pair to see the Commander and
for the next of us to wait for  his training Dogs.  It was  Hilyard's turn. Just  as  she'd
threatened, Verene gave him no kiss.
While we waited for the Dogs to collect Hilyard, a citywoman called, "Sarge? Be
there word of  who left old  Crookshank's  great-grandbaby  dead  in the gutter?" We
looked at her. She was here to visit a man in the Rat  cages  out  back,  mayhap.  She
had five little ones with her. She must have feared there was some killer out there and
refused to leave them at home.
Ahuda shook  her head.  "There  is  no  news,  mistress.  If  you're  scared  for  your
own, I'd counsel you to let go your fear. Crookshank is the evilest pinchpenny scale
and landlord in the Lower City. He buys for coppers what's valued in gold. If one of
his  firetraps  burns  with  a  mother  in  it,  he  sells  the  orphans  for  slaves.  He's  got
more'n enough enemies. Any of them could have strangled that poor little one."
"Aye, but no one kills women and children," muttered a Dog. "They're no part of
business."
Ahuda glared at him. "We'll catch the Rat and flay him living, but  I'll bet  anyone
here Crookshank  drove  some  poor  looby  to  Cracknob  Row.  Your  little  ones  are
safe, mistress."
It's true, Crookshank is the most hated man in Corus. It's true also  that family is

off-limits if they aren't in your enemy's  line of  work.  To  kill a rival's child kin is to
become outlaw.
"I'll wager the ol' scale got the best to seek  the lad's  killer," a cove  said.  "Come
on, Sergeant. Who'd  Crookshank  buy  special  t'  get put  on  the murder? I heard  he
got teams on each watch out seeking."
"He did, not that it's your business," Ahuda said, not looking up from her writing.
"Who's it on this watch?" someone else called.
Ahuda looked  up  with a scowl,  ready  to  tell these  folk to  hold  their tongues.  It
was old Nyler Jewel who said, "Why, me and Yoav, good cityfolk."
They  all  stared.  Doubtless  they  knew  that  Yoav's  sister  hung  herself  but  three
months back. Her husband had sold her to pay a debt to Crookshank, then she had
killed herself in the slave pens. Jewel and  Yoav would never sweat  to  seek  Rolond
Lofts's  killer,  no  matter  how  much  his  great-grandda  paid  in  bribes.  The  Dogs
picked from the Night and Day Watches were also Dogs with a grudge. Crookshank
had so many enemies he didn't even know them all.
While  Ahuda  read  out  the  names  of  the  fourth  pair  to  see  the  Commander,
Matthias Tunstall and Clara Goodwin came in. I put my head down so my bangs hid
my eyes and  watched  as  they found  themselves a patch  of  wall to  lean on.  Of  the
three  good  pairs  here  on  Jane  Street,  they  were  the  best,  Goodwin  a  Corporal,
Tunstall a Senior Dog. They could have had any posting in Corus, but they'd kept to
the Lower City.
One night, my lord had invited them to supper for a task they'd done very well. I
hid in the drapes  of  the little supper  room  at Provost's  House  to  hear  the  legends
talk. Lord Gershom offered them a place in Highfields, but  they'd  refused.  Tunstall
said, "Clary and me, we know the Lower City. The worst ones know our little ways.
The people  of  the Court  of  the Rogue  have memorized our  bootprints,  bless  their
silly cracked heads. It suits us, don't it, Clary?"
And Goodwin, she'd chuckled.
"The pickin's are richer elsewhere." My lord Gershom was amused, I could  hear
it. "The Happy Bags of bribes for the kennels are fatter in other districts."
"We're humble folk," Goodwin  said.  She  had  a voice  like dark  honey.  "We  like
humble pickings. And the bones  that come  from  the Rogue's  Happy  Bags are rich
enough."
I'd never be assigned to them, I knew. They didn't get Puppies.
Goodwin and Tunstall gossiped with their friends among the Dogs as other pairs
came out  with a Puppy.  The  Lower  City  veterans  are  a  hard  crew,  wearing  metal
throat protectors and metal-ribbed arm guards  as  well as  the regular uniform. Even
other Dogs are wary of these folk, respectful of their ability to stay alive.
I would be the last one called. I looked  around  as  my last yearmate left with his
Dogs. I wiped my sweating hands on my breeches. Then I nearly swallowed my own
tongue, because Ahuda called, "Tunstall and Goodwin."
"No!"  Goodwin  looked  at  me,  her  brown  eyes  sharp.  "No.  No.  We  don't  get
Puppies. We don't like Puppies. No offense, whoever you are. We have never had a
Puppy."
"You're past due, then." Ahuda had no sympathy in her eyes. "Your luck just ran
out."

Goodwin headed into the Commander's office like a hawk that had  sighted prey.
Tunstall ambled after.
They are a mismatched  pair. Corporal  Goodwin  is two  inches  shorter  than  me.
She is built strong, wears her dark brown hair cut short.  She  has  a small beak  of  a
nose, full lips. They said she'd put down a Scanran berserker when he'd killed three
men in a fight, her alone with her baton. She is fast and all muscle. She's been a Dog
seventeen years.
Senior  Dog  Tunstall  has  partnered  with  her  for  thirteen.  He's  been  a  Dog  for
twenty  in  all.  He  is  about  six  foot  three,  long-armed,  long-legged,  with  deep-set
brown  eyes  and  a  long,  curved  nose.  I  think  he  looks  like  an  owl,  though  he's
popular enough with mots. He wears his hair cropped short all over his head. There
is gray in it and  in his short  beard  and  mustache.  He  is  funny  and  easygoing.  He
could be a Watch Commander, even a Captain. So could she. Neither of them want
it. Kennel rumor says he is some kind of hillman, mayhap even a renegade from one
of the eastern tribes. Whatever he'd been before coming to the Provost's Guard, he
is one of us now.
"Rebakah Cooper."
From the laughter in the room, it wasn't the first time Ahuda had called my name. I
went to stand before the desk. She looked down at me. "Don't let them rattle you,"
she advised. "You've got the best. That's the only extra chance  I wangled for  you.
And if you're smart, you won't depend on your other connections high up to grease
your way."
I looked down. As if I'd ask for help from my lord!
"Better not be cooing our tales in his ear, neither." I didn't know the voice  and  I
didn't turn to look.
"She never did when she was a runner. I knowed  she  saw  plenty. She  had  three
years' worth of chances." That was a voice I knew, Nyler Jewel's. "Never you worry
about lil' Beka."
I just watched  the floor.  I hate being talked about.  All the  same,  turning  to  talk
back like Hilyard or  Verene would do  made my tripes  wring out.  Besides,  I could
hear shouting behind the Commander's closed door. Since the Commander is a man,
I knew it was Goodwin who wasn't happy.
She walked out of the Commander's office, slamming the door.  I added  another
prayer to my string of them. I wanted to survive my Dog partners.  She  came up  to
me and looked me over. "I have two rules for you, Puppy."
I looked down. I always do, I can't help it. Meeting people is the hardest for me.
It never gets any easier. She grabbed my chin with her hand and forced me to meet
her eyes. "Look me in the face when I'm talking to you, Puppy Cooper. Two rules.
Speak when you're spoken to. And keep out of my way." She let go of my chin and
glared up  at Tunstall, who had  joined  us.  "All  right?  Time  to  start  the  babysitting
detail."
He smiled, looking even more like a tall, gangly owl. "Come on, Puppy Cooper."
His voice is deep, with a little bit of accent.
I followed them outside. I wasn't going to tell Goodwin that I well knew the rules
to follow with our training Dogs: Speak when you're spoken to. Keep out of the way.
Obey all orders. Get killed on your own time.

"Practice tomorrow at four!" Ahuda called after me. "Every day  you  have street
duty, Cooper!"
Between the kennel door and the Jane Street gate is the courtyard where message
runners  and  people  with  kennel  business  wait.  The  crowd  was  bigger  than  usual.
They knew Puppies were being assigned and wanted to see who got what. The noise
they  made  when  they  saw  Tunstall  and  Goodwin  with  a  trainee  was  deafening:
whistles, laughter, plenty of comments about what Tunstall might do with me.
I tried not  to  listen. I didn't  think  the body  could  bend  in those  directions.  Not
that I'd know. Most of the other girl Puppies had been with a lad or two – and some
mots,  like my old  friend  Tansy,  are  already  married  by  sixteen.  I  tried  it  once.  It
seemed  well enough,  but  my mama's  life was  reason  enough  not  to  let  myself  get
hobbled by a lad. And there was my dream. Since Lord Gershom brought my family
into his house, I have only wanted to be a Dog. Falling in love would just ruin things.
Passing  through  the  gate,  I  saw  movement  in  the  shadows.  One  cat-shaped
shadow came over to walk with me.
"Pounce," I muttered, "scat! Go away!" Pox and murrain, he never listened! I told
him I didn't want him about this week! The curst animal always finds me. I'd locked
him  in,  folly  though  it  was.  I  had  shuttered  the  windows,  and  barred  them,  and
locked  my door.  I had  made sure  he  was  inside  –  I'd  heard  his  yowling  as  I  ran
down the stairs. Eventually he always gets out, but I'd hoped he'd take the hint and
leave me be! "I'm on duty!"
"I'd  best  not  be  hearing  noise  from  you,  Puppy,"  Goodwin  called  over  her
shoulder.
I shut up and flapped my hands at Pounce. He ignored me, dratted  creature  that
he is. Stupid cats stay home when they're locked in. I wouldn't have this problem if
he were normal.
"Tunstall, why is there a cat following us?" Goodwin  asked.  "I  don't  want to  be
falling over some stray black cat."
"It's not a stray, Goodwin. He wears a collar." Tunstall bent  down  and  scooped
up Pounce.  I  glared  at  my  cat,  silently  daring  him  to  scratch  or  bite.  Instead  my
contrary animal turned his whiskers forward in a cat's smile, and let Tunstall scratch
him under his chin. Pounce  didn't  even struggle when Tunstall halted in a patch  of
fading sunlight to inspect him.
Then he saw Pounce's eyes. "Mithros. Goodwin, look."
Goodwin looked. She swore. It's about half and half, who swears and  who talks
religion, when they see  Pounce's  face.  I  can't  blame  them.  I  nearly  fell  out  of  the
stable loft when I found a kitten with purple eyes.
"Are you a god?" Tunstall asked Pounce.
"Manh!" my idiot cat  said.  He added  a few sounds  like mrt,  as  if  to  prove  his
catness. For once they even sounded like cat to me. So many of his cat noises seem
like speech.
"If he is a god, he chooses not to say," Goodwin said.
"He wears Cooper's collar." Tunstall looked at me. "Do you have a magical kitty
cat, Puppy Cooper?" he asked me, raising an eyebrow. "You may answer."
The words stuck in my throat. I shook my head, wishing I could fall through the
slops and garbage of Jane Street. He's just Pounce, I wanted to  say.  He's  odd,  but

you get used to his ways. But of course I couldn't say a word.
"Her cat?"  Goodwin  looked  at Pounce's  collar. "And  with those  eyes,  he's  not
magic?"  My  soon  to  be  sold  for  dumpling-meat  cat  reached  out  and  patted
Goodwin's  nose.  "Stop  that,  you."  But  she  smiled  when  she  said  it,  and  she
scratched him behind the ears. Pounce rubbed his head against her hand like she was
the one who spent precious coppers on meat that she chopped for him herself. "You
brought your cat? Speak up, trainee."
I tried. I did. And I remembered her warning to look her in the eye. So I managed
that, but the speech just wouldn't come out of my throat.
Goodwin lifted Pounce from Tunstall's hold. "Did you bring him to the kennel?"
That was  easy.  I shook  my  head  and  got  out,  "N-no,  Guardswoman."  I  didn't
think I could call her "Dog" without permission, or even "Goodwin."
"He  followed  you  here."  Goodwin's  fingers  were  brisk  but  affectionate  behind
Pounce's ears. The little traitor wrapped his forelegs around her neck.
"Yes, Guardswoman." I would have given anything not to have to meet her clear
brown eyes.
"Clever cat," said Tunstall.
Goodwin put him down. "You, scat. She has work to do. Hard work, staying out
of my hair."
I glared  at  Pounce  –  Wait  till  I  get  you  home,  you  ungrateful  furball!  –  and
pointed in the direction of our lodgings. He trotted across the street. I couldn't watch
him further, because Tunstall and Goodwin were on their way.
People greeted them from doorways and stalls, wanting to know who the Puppy
was. I hung my head as they laughed and shouted their offers to buy me or play with
me. And for the hundredth time I cursed my shyness that made it so hard to talk to
my Dog partners, even when I was bidden to, or to answer the street folk back, the
way Tunstall did. "But she's our Puppy, Inknose. If we let her fetch you, she'd just
hurt you."  "Leave the lass  alone, Wildberry,  you  saucy  wench.  She'll  never  be  as
beautiful as you and your sisters." "Shut up, Paistoi. You ain't paid the Dogs for the
last batch of Puppies you sold in Siraj."
In between his remarks to  them, Tunstall explained things to  me. "Since  we're a
senior pair, Cooper,  we have no  fixed route.  Three  nights a week, starting tonight,
we roam the Nightmarket and the Lower City between Rovers Street and Koskynen,
Northgate and  Stormwing. That's  Wednesday,  Friday,  and  Sunday.  We  go  where
there's likely to be trouble. Thursday and Saturday we're in the Cesspool, Stormwing
Street to  Mulberry and  Charry Orchard.  We  do  our  own seekings unless  assigned
one by  Ahuda,  we get papers  when we need  help on  a  seeking,  and  we  have  our
flocks of Birdies who give us what we need in order to seek. And if we have aught
that's good, we wander off our wanderings. Clary? Aught to add?"
She looked at him. "I'm bored."
Tunstall scratched the back of her head. "And you say I'm a barbarian. At least I
know how to train a new warrior. Halt right there, Cooper.  Look  about  you.  What
do you see?"
It was too easy. Not ten feet away, a pickpocket moved in on a pickle woman.  I
put my hand on my baton, but Tunstall slid over like ink in water. He laid his baton
gentle-like on the boy's hand just as the lad touched the mot's purse. Tunstall shook

his head. The pickle woman started  to  shriek at the thief. Tunstall gave her a smile
and  a  copper.  "How  about  one  of  your  pickles,  sweetheart?"  Like  anyone  in  the
Lower City, she got distracted by business. When she started to fish for a pickle in
the barrel, Tunstall raised his baton from the lad's hand. The pickpocket ran.
Tunstall traded copper for pickle with a bow and took a big bite of his snack.
"Oh, get on. No wonder they call you lads  Dogs,  thinkin' you  can  charm an old
hag  like  me  with  a  wag  of  your  tail!"  The  pickle  seller  bridled  and  blushed,  then
tucked her coin away and headed on down the street. There was a twitch to her hips.
I'd wager she'd give her husband an extra-warm night, thinking of  the tall Dog who
had flirted with her.
"If her husband comes looking for you, I won't be your second, not after the last
time." Goodwin  nudged  him with her elbow.  "I  stood  there like an idiot while you
made the cove laugh so hard at your jokes  he ended  up  buying all of  us  breakfast.
Some duel that was."
"Well,  I  didn't  kill  him,  and  he  didn't  want  to  kill  me.  Everyone  was  satisfied,
except  maybe  for  the  seconds."  Tunstall  looked  at  me  and  beckoned  for  me  to
come up level with him. "Now, Puppy, you saw him. That's good. You'd've made a
fuss – maybe not so good. What grade pickpocket was he?"
Great Mithros, a training question. My brain scrambled.  Then I remembered  and
met Tunstall's eyes. "He'd no knife, so he was a true pickpocket. Slow as  he is,  he
prob'ly won't live to be a master pickpocket."
Tunstall prodded me. "And what's the street word for 'master pickpocket'?"
"'Foist,' sir," I replied.
"So she knows the words," Goodwin muttered. "So what?"
Tunstall patted her shoulder, then turned to me. "Well, we don't go around raising
a fuss for minnows, Puppy. I don't like standing before the Magistrate any more than
I must. It's less time spent out here looking for truly dangerous folk."
That made sense. I nodded and saw that Pounce had returned to sit at my feet. I
tried to nudge him away with my boot.
"Come on,"  said  Goodwin.  "The  evening's young,  and  I was  thinking we might
pay Crookshank a visit. I'd like a word with him about that load  of  pink pearls  that
went missing off  of  Gemstone  Mews.  If he's  half as  cracked  by  grief as  they say,
mayhap he'll get careless in his talk."
I did look up then. She was grinning, with all her teeth on show. They were strong
and white, like the wolves' in the royal menagerie.
"Now, Clary, that's not nice," Tunstall told her. "He's  in deep  mourning for  little
Rolond." Quick as a snake, he looked back at me. "Puppy, who's Crookshank?"
He startled me, so that I answered  without thinking. "Biggest of  the Nightmarket
scales. Owns a piece of most of what's lifted, half of the luxury goods, minimum. A
quarter of the loaner trade. He's got about twenty buildings in the Cesspool. Twenty
more in the greater Lower City." I swallowed and remembered where I was and who
I spoke to. "Sir."
"What  do  you  expect,  Mattes?"  demanded  Goodwin.  "She's  lived  in  my  lord
Gershom's  pocket  for  eight  years.  She  had  to  pick  up  something  if  she  wasn't
completely  stupid.  Knowing  isn't  the  same  as  doing."  She  walked  out  into  the
crossing  of  Gibbet  Corner  and  Feasting Street,  where  stalls  filled  the  huge  square

before us. We had come to the Nightmarket.
I nearly fell over my like-new boots with surprise. She knew who I was! I was fair
certain it wasn't covered in what the Commander said when I was assigned to them.
She'd known of me before.
Does  she  know I'm  friends  with Crookshank's  granddaughter-in-law Tansy,  and
my mama with his daughter-in-law Annis?  I  wondered  sudden-like.  How?  No  one
from their old Cesspool district was ever allowed at the house.  So  I should  tell the
Dogs....
Trotting  to  catch  up  with  them,  I  changed  my  mind.  It  wasn't  needful.  Tansy
wouldn't come out to  say  hello to  visitors,  if Dogs  could  rightly be  called visitors.
She hadn't  left the house  since  Rolond  was  found  dead.  If Annis came to  see  us,
she'd never give me away. She was a hard one, as fit a woman who made herself her
father-in-law's  right  hand.  I  could  tell  Goodwin  and  Tunstall  I  had  friends  in  the
household later, when we were off the street.
The Nightmarket was  stirring up  for  business.  The  torches  were just lit, the sun
being behind the wall in the Lower City. Plenty of folk were still at their daily work.
This  was  quiet  time.  Buyers  and  sellers  were  talking  among  the  stalls,  collecting
gossip,  beginning  to  cook,  adjusting  weapons.  It's  my  favorite  time  in  the
Nightmarket.
We walked along. Stall vendors and market regulars called greetings to  Goodwin
and Tunstall. Two  other  pairs  of  Dogs  worked  the Nightmarket, but  we didn't  see
them.
I was trying to wave Pounce off again when Tunstall halted. I could  see  that big
beak of his twitching. "I smell apple-raisin patties," he announced.
Goodwin  turned  to  him  and  rolled  her  eyes.  "Glutton,"  she  said,  her  smile  a
mocking hook at one corner.
Tunstall led us down the bakers' and spicers' row of the market until he stopped
at the stall that spread  those  good  smells.  I  don't  know  anyone  who  won't  swear
before  all the gods  that Mistress  Deirdry Noll  is  the  best  baker  in  all  Corus.  And
Tunstall's luck was in, because Mistress Noll herself was minding the trays of baked
goods. "Mattes, I should have known that you would sniff out my patties!" she said
with  a  laugh.  She  even  reached  up  and  tweaked  his  nose.  "Give  me  your
handkerchief,  you  great  lummox.  Mistress  Clary,  how  do  you  fare  this  good
evening?"
"As ever, Mistress Deirdry," Goodwin said. "None of your daughters could  take
the stall tonight?"
"Not  tonight."  Mistress  Noll  placed  six  fat  patties,  heavy  with  cinnamon,  on
Tunstall's handkerchief. She looked  as  she  always had  to  me: plump,  her gray hair
braided, pinned, and coiled at the back  of  her head,  brown  eyes,  a small nose  and
straight mouth. She wore a brown cloth gown under her white cook's apron. Seeing
her like a Dog must, I guessed her age to be about fifty now.
She  tied  Tunstall's  handkerchief  to  make  a  bundle  of  patties  and  handed  them
over. He reached for his purse. She put fists on hips and drew  herself up  as  tall as
she could go, which was no more than my shoulder.
"As if any Dog in the Lower City paid me for something to get him through to his
supper!" she said, all huffy. "I'd smack your  face  if I could,  Mattes Tunstall!" She

looked  at Goodwin.  "Men! No  notion  of  what's  a  gift!"  She  flicked  out  a  slip  of
cloth that had been washed so often it was almost sheer and settled three patties on
it. "That's for you, Clary, since I know you're nicer about your handkerchief than he
is, the big barbarian."
Tunstall mumbled something through hot filling and crumbs.
Goodwin  leaned  in  and  kissed  Mistress  Noll's  cheek.  "Thank  you,"  Goodwin
said, her deep voice amused. "Don't mind him. He wasn't housebroke when I bought
him."
Mistress Noll looked down. "Pounce, you little beggar, what are you doing here?
Don't tell me you've run away from Beka. The two of you are melted together."
My friend cried, Look in front of you! in cat talk. It amazes me that he can decide
who will understand him and who will not.  He's  done  so  since  he bade  me to  find
him four years ago, when he was a noisy kitten.
This time I was  the only one  who understood.  Mistress  Noll only chuckled  and
offered him some fish paste she'd been using for dumplings she fried at the brazier in
the stall. When she  straightened,  she  saw  me.  "Goddess  bless  me,  it  is  Beka!  All
grown up and – partnered with you two?" She looked at Goodwin and Tunstall.
"She's a trainee, not a partner." Goodwin smiled, barely. "How'd you get to know
her, Mistress Deirdry?"
Out  came  another  worn  bit  of  clean  cloth.  Mistress  Noll  popped  three  apple
fritters onto it – she knew well they were my favorites.
"Hey," said Tunstall, "hers are bigger."
I grinned at him. Then I ducked my head.
"Well, you'd best take care of her. I've known her all my life, and you couldn't ask
for a better-hearted gixie," said  Mistress  Noll. "I  told  her she  ought  to  have let me
make dumplings of you years ago," she told Pounce, scratching his ears.
Pounce mewed sad enough to pull her heartstrings. He might have been  thanking
her for the scratch with his last, starving breath. I glared at him, telling him with my
eyes,  You're disgusting.  Tell  me  you  didn't  have  a  beef  supper  before  I  left.  He
licked his chops as Mistress Noll gave him an even bigger ball of fish paste.
Goodwin  asked,  "Mistress  Deirdry,  did  you  hear  about  old  Crookshank's
great-grandson?"
Mistress  Noll looked  at Goodwin  sidelong.  She  knew she  was  being played for
information. Tunstall gave her a big shrug, as if to say, She's my partner. What can I
do?
Mistress Noll busied herself with pressing dough on a small table by the cook pot.
"As if anyone didn't know, poor little mite. It's a disgrace, it is, taking a quarrel with
the old man into his family. Barbaric. Mayhap they carry on so in Scanra, or Barzun,
but not here. Whoever did it won't last long, breaking the Rogue's law like that."
Tunstall grimaced. Goodwin sniffed. The Rogue is old and should make way for
someone young and strong who could keep order among the city's  thieves. Instead
he's fixed the Court of the Rogue to keep himself alive. He doesn't look out for the
people  of  the  Lower  City  anymore,  only  his  chiefs  and  the  folk  who  add  to  his
treasure chests.
Pigeons  started  landing  on  the  stall's  canopy.  "Scat,  you  nasty  things!"  cried
Mistress Noll, grabbing a broom  and  jabbing at the canvas.  "Don't  you  go  leaving

your mess on my goods! Beka, stand somewhere else!"
"Mistress Deirdry, she's our  trainee, she  must  stand  with us,"  Tunstall reminded
her. "And what's she got to do with pigeons?"
I swallowed and thanked the Goddess I hadn't done just as Mistress Noll had bid
me. I'd have been in trouble if I'd moved at someone else's order. Above us I heard
the whispers of voices as the birds whirled and spun over the thumping canopy. Bits
of human talk were coming through pigeon calls, as always. "Rest at..." "Spend it..."
"Mama!"
Pounce's loud and imperious meow cut through the noise. As  if he'd  given them
an order, the pigeons flew over to Moneychangers' Hall and settled  on  the carvings
that decorated the front of the place.
"Beka  always  has  some  tailing  her,"  Mistress  Noll  told  my  partners.  "A  bit  of
strange  magic,  I  wouldn't  doubt.  It's  in  her  father's  family."  She  smiled  at  me.
"Maybe one of the birds got reborn into your cat, girl."
"You'd  think they'd  be  roosting,  this  hour  of  the  night."  Goodwin  brushed  her
sleeves as if she thought to find droppings on her.
"There's so much light here they carry on like it's day," Tunstall said. He plunked
down a copper noble. "One of your beef pies, Mistress Deirdry, as a grieving gift."
He leaned closer and said quietly, "Any little whispers about anyone who might have
been around the Crookshank child who shouldn't have been?"
Mistress Noll carefully settled the pie into a cheap  basket.  "Mattes  Tunstall, you
know very well anything useful doesn't  come  to  someone  like  me.  No  one  shares
anything with old folk. We're finished, we just haven't died."
"But you're not finished," Tunstall told her with a flirty smile. "You sharp old folk
are everywhere, aren't you? You're everywhere, and you see and hear everything."
"And if you did hear something...," Goodwin hinted.
"It would be a wondrous thing. Still, I'd pass it on to the two of you, respectful as
you are. Would  that others  were like you."  Mistress  Noll gave Tunstall his change
and the basket. "Fare you well. If you return the basket,  you'll get five coppers  for
it."
"No problem," Tunstall said with a grin. "I'll just have my Puppy fetch it back to
you."
Crookshank's  house  was  to  the  rear  of  the  Nightmarket,  the  biggest  house  on
Stuvek Street.  Pounce  wandered  off  into the market whilst a  manservant  let  us  in.
We waited in a sitting room  as  he fetched  Annis  Lofts.  I  wondered  yet  again  if  I
ought to tell my Dogs that my mama had been friends with Mistress Annis.
She came before I could fish the words from where they were stuck in my chest.
She wore black for Rolond, a long black tunic over a black underdress. She'd been
crying.
"You can see Father Ammon, for the good it will do you," she said. It took me a
moment  to  know  who  Mistress  Annis  meant  by  "Father  Ammon."  He'd  been
Crookshank for so long, I'd forgotten the old scale's real name was  Ammon Lofts.
"He's done little but sit in the dark. He hates you two enough, mayhap he'll move for
you. This way."
Goodwin looked  at me. "Puppy,  sit,"  she  ordered  as  she  and  Tunstall followed
Annis.

Instead  I walked around  the  room,  pricing  the  little  pretty  things  and  hangings.
Crookshank  had  probably  bought  furniture and  all with one  day's  taking  of  stolen
goods,  and  he'd've  paid  them that stole  it only a part  of  its worth.  That  was  what
scales did.
In a moment Mistress Annis returned. "Well, he didn't throw them out." She tried
a smile on me, but it didn't  work that well. She  offered  me no  embrace,  for  all her
sorrowing.  "Look  at  you,  all  kitted  out  like  a  Dog.  Will  you  start  tattling  on  old
friends, then?"
"All Dogs walk that line," I told her.
"So you do." Her face shook. "Oh, Beka, I wish your mother was still with us. I
miss her so much."
"I miss her, too." Only two years Mama has been gone. It still hurts. "I know she
would comfort you if she could."
She wiped her eyes. "You'd think I'd be done with tears by now. But Rolond was
only  three!  Who  would  kill  a  baby  only  three,  who  went  up  to  everyone  just  as
friendly as you could ask for?" She blew her nose. "Will you see  Tansy?  It will do
her good."
I  wanted  to  see  her.  It's  hard  nowadays.  Crookshank  don't  like  his
granddaughter-in-law mingling with old friends from the Cesspool. Old friends from
the Cesspool  who live  in  Provost's  House  are  even  worse.  And  with  a  child  and
husband,  Tansy  finds  it even harder  to  get  away.  "I  was  ordered  to  stay  here,"  I
said, trying not to whine.
Annis gave me the oddest  smile. "Do  you  think they'll complain to  know you're
friends with Tansy?  Dogs  are always looking  for  a  back  door  to  a  house.  Up  till
now, they've never had one here. They'll be delighted."
I didn't  know about  "delighted,"  but  I  used  my  wits  for  a  moment.  Annis  was
right. They would be  glad I had  friends  in Crookshank's  very  own  family.  I  hope
they won't  be  vexed if I don't  go  bearing  tales.  From  the  little  I  have  heard  from
Tansy, Crookshank is a cruel father-in-law and  grandfather.  I won't  bring his anger
down on Tansy and Annis by taking tales to my Dogs if I can help it.
I nodded.
"I'll tell your Dogs where you are, if they're done with Father in any hurry," Annis
said. "He was growling and  snapping  when I brought  them to  him, though.  They'll
want to see what they can wheedle out of the old coin cutter. Come. See if you can
get Tansy to eat sommat." She led me through the house, past servants who nodded
at her and gawped at me. I wish I could say it was the uniform that drew respect, but
I glimpsed smirks and pointed fingers as they remarked on my Puppy trim. Only my
first day of wearing it, and I can't wait to get that part of the uniform off.
"She's got another babe coming," Annis told me as we climbed a narrow servants'
stair. "She  can't  starve  herself like this."  Two  stories  up,  we came out  of  the  stair
and walked down a hall. Annis showed me into a fine bedchamber.
There Tansy lay on a large bed, staring at the ceiling. I could see the swell of her
belly. She has mayhap four months to go yet. The room wasn't a good place to think
of such things, with a bed draped  in black  muslin. The  small mirror was  draped  in
black, too. Tansy wore a black gown and a rumpled head cloth. Annis whispered to
her, begging her to sit up and greet me.

"Go  away!"  Tansy  cried,  flinging  herself  across  the  big  bed.  "I  don't  want  to
live!"
There was a water pitcher nearby. I picked it up and said,  "Excuse  me, Mistress
Annis." I judged my throw carefully and tossed the water all over Tansy.
She shrieked and  came off  that bed  like a  scalded  cat.  She  hurled  her  sopping
head cloth at me. I dodged it. Then she  came at me, ready  to  claw my eyes  out.  I
grabbed her wrists, just liked they'd taught us.
"Shame  on  you,  wailing  like  a  cracknob,  not  thinking  about  your  poor
mama-in-law  or  that  babe  you've  got  coming,"  I  told  her.  "Shame!  You  hold
Rolond's ghost here. Let him go on to the Black God's realm peaceful-like." I knew
it was a lie. It was being murdered that kept that baby's ghost about, but Tansy will
fret herself to death if you don't speak stern to her.
She crumpled up and began to cry. I sat her on the bed and took the drying cloth
Annis gave me. "Are you  going to  eat something now,  like a sensible  girl?"  Annis
asked her. "Or do I refill the water jug?"
Tansy  nodded.  "Soup,  please."  Her  voice  was  hoarse.  "Mayhap  some  rolls.
And...and milk." She  smoothed  her hands  over  her belly. When Annis went to  get
those things, Tansy looked at me. She gave me a quivery smile, though she was still
crying. "You never had patience with me. Even when you was five and me eight, you
was still lecturing like a granny."
"Especially when you was making an ass of yourself," I reminded her. "If  you're
going to mourn, do it proper, in a temple. Give Rolond toys  for  an offering, or  his
favorite sweets. But this does you nor him no good at all."
Tears  rolled  down  her  face.  "Who  would  kill  Rolond,  Beka?  A  little  boy  who
laughed whenever he saw a new face?"
Like  as  not,  that's  how  whoever  doused  Rolond  caught  him,  I  thought.  "The
Dogs  will  find  out,  Tansy.  They'll  catch  whoever  done  it  and  make  them  pay."
Except  that I knew better.  Jewel and  Yoav had  the hunt  on  Evening  Watch.  They
didn't  see  the sweet  little lad I had  known.  Rolond  had  never  grinned  for  them  to
show  off  his new teeth, or  played pat-a-cake.  When they thought of  Rolond,  they
thought only that someone  had  made Crookshank  suffer  by  killing  him.  I  am  near
positive the Dogs that have this hunt on the Day and Night Watches feel the same.
It's  the  way  things  are  always  done.  That  doesn't  make  it  right.  Rolond  was
innocent of  Crookshank's  wickedness.  He  deserves  a  Dog  seeking  justice  for  his
murder, even if the Dog is only a Puppy. At least I know him as himself.
Tansy wiped her eyes on her sleeve. "Goddess bless us, you're dressed up like a
Dog.  A  Puppy.  You'll  get  yourself  killed,  Beka.  Knifed  in  an  alley  somewhere,
strangled, dumped in the river – "
I glared at her. "And  you  weeping in a chamber  is better  than me  doing  honest
work?"
Tansy  held her head  up.  "Leastways  I'm  not  poor  and  scraping  burnt  porridge
from a pot to feed..." Her mouth trembled. "I wanted out of Mutt Piddle Lane, Beka.
Herun wanted to take me out of there. I've a good man and a fine house."
I couldn't argue. It's thanks to my lord Gershom that I am out. That Mama had a
decent bed to die in, and that my sisters and brothers are learning proper trades.
Since talking was discomforting, I did what the training masters  said  and  looked

Tansy's room over. The Lofts family lived well. The clothes presses were fine cedar,
ornamented  with  mother-of-pearl  and  polished  brass.  A  table  supported  pots  for
perfumes  and  lotions.  Tansy  had  shell  combs  and  brushes,  ribbons  in  a  carved
wooden bowl, and a figure of the Goddess as Mother to bless her room. Shelves on
the walls held pretty  things with no  real use  to  them. I wandered  over  to  look  at a
row of stone figures. Among them was a piece of uncarved rock. In the candlelight it
sparked  bits  of  colored  fire  from  a  light  pink  bed,  rough  to  my  fingers  like
sandstone.  I  turned  it  every  which  way,  fascinated.  The  fires  came  from  smooth
pieces  in the stone,  strips,  dots,  and  even one  tiny  shelf  that  shimmered  pale  red,
blue, and green in a creamy setting. The stone was really no bigger than the first joint
of my thumb, including the nail, but it invited me to stare at each piece of it.
"What's this?" I asked, turning to show it to her.
"Goddess,  take it! I don't  ever want to  see  the curst  thing  again!"  Tansy  cried.
"Herun brought it to me. Gave it to me like a jewel, said it's going to see us all move
to Unicorn District. The next day they stole my Rolond. It's ill luck, is what it is!"
"I don't see magic signs." I held the stone to my nose and sniffed. "I don't smell
oils or suchlike."
"I don't care." Tansy  was  weeping again. "You  know what they say.  If sommat
new comes in your life and bad luck follows, then it followed the new thing. If bad
luck follows you,  Beka, my advice? Throw  the rock  in the Olorun with a curse  to
whoever sent it."
I put the stone in my pocket. "Tansy, can you think of anyone fool enough to try
this way to attack Crookshank? Or why?"
Her eyes flashed.  "Go  away, Beka. You talk like a Dog.  Just  take that bad  luck
rock with you."
I hesitated,  but  I knew I'd  made a mistake. I went  to  put  my  arms  around  her.
When she drew away, I gave her a glare of  my own.  "It's  not  the Dog as  wants to
hug you,  pox  rot  it." She  hesitated,  then let  me  hug  her.  "Gods  bless.  The  Black
God will keep Rolond's spirit safe until you come to him again," I whispered. I hope
so, anyway. He was murdered. The Black God may not have him yet.
The door  opened.  Annis  came  in  with  a  maid,  who  held  a  tray  of  food.  "The
Dogs  are asking for  you,  Beka,"  Annis told  me. "I  told  them  I'd  hoped  you'd  do
Tansy good, and I was right. Get along with you." She hugged me, too, and kissed
my cheek. "Do you burn the incense for Ilony's ghost?" I nodded. Annis pressed a
copper into my hand. "Buy that lily-of-the-valley scent she loved, and tell her I miss
her."
"I'll  do  that,  Mistress  Annis.  Goddess  bless  you  and  yours."  I  ran  off,
remembering the way downstairs. I didn't want Goodwin and Tunstall waiting for me
a moment longer than needful,  particularly  not  if  they  were  vexed  that  I'd  left  my
post.
Goodwin scowled  when I came up.  Tunstall was  munching a pastry.  He swung
the empty pie basket  on  his finger. "Trot  this  back  to  Mistress  Noll,  Puppy,  then
meet us right here," he said as we walked outside. He flipped the basket into the air.
I caught it and did as I was bid, shouldering my way through the small crowd of
customers. I looked around for Pounce, but he was nowhere in view.
"You  were  longer  than  I  expected,"  Mistress  Noll  said.  She  passed  me  the

coppers  she  would have kept  if Tunstall hadn't  returned the basket.  "Don't  tell me
they actually talked to the old bootlicker."
I shrugged and smiled, then returned to my Dogs. That's one of the big rules: Dog
business  stays  with  the  Dogs.  Of  course  she  wanted  to  know  if  Crookshank  had
said anything. I wanted to know if he'd said aught of interest. Not that I dared ask.
My Dogs  waited still before  Crookshank's  house.  Though  the  Nightmarket  was
filling up and those that passed greeted them, I noticed that folk took care to give the
two Dogs some room. Goodwin stood with her feet apart, balanced, hands hooked
in her belt, her dark eyes not missing a face.  Tunstall juggled his dagger,  flipping it
from hand to hand, always catching it by the hilt, though it spun end over end in the
air.
"Puppy," Goodwin said, pointing to the spot right in front of her. "Mistress Lofts
informed us  she  was  a  friend  to  your  mother,  and  you  are  a  friend  to  the  young
Mistress Lofts, the mother of the dead child. How is it you neglected to mention it to
Mattes or me? Look at me when I'm talking to you, Puppy Cooper."
"You didn't ask, Guardswoman Goodwin," I said real fast.
"She's got a point, Clary." Tunstall gave his dagger a last flip and tucked it into its
sheath  with  the  same  move  he'd  taken  to  catch  it.  "When  you  have  connections
someplace where we're poking our noses, Cooper, speak up. We're good, but we're
no mind readers."
"Did Tansy  say  anything?" Goodwin  asked.  "No,  don't  tell  us  here.  Save  it  till
we're secure. You'd better not have depths, Puppy Cooper. People with depths  are
usually more trouble than they're worth."
"She says so because she's deep," Tunstall explained to me as  Goodwin  walked
on.
"I heard that," she called over one shoulder.
I fell in behind them, turning the rough stone over in my hand. I wanted to keep it
to myself, seek on my own to see if it was important or not. Herun Lofts thought it
was valuable, and he'd been raised at Crookshank Lofts's elbow.
Still, the training masters were strict about that kind of thinking. No going behind a
partner's  back.  Definitely  no  going  behind  your  training  partners'  backs.  But  how
could a sparkly little piece of stone change Crookshank's fortunes and so Herun's? I
knew rubies, emeralds, and sapphires didn't look too promising when they were dug
from the ground, but at least they were single, solid rocks.
The clocks were chiming the eighth hour when we heard an uproar. We followed
shouts into the Nightmarket. A crowd  was  by  the square's  fountain. From  the way
folk yelled and traded coin, there was a fight at the heart of the crowd.
Tunstall rose  on  his  toes  to  get  a  look.  "The  Parks  brothers.  Some  poor  scut
must have looked at them wrong. They're taking it out of his hide."
Goodwin poked one cheering man with her baton. "What are the odds?"
"Three  to  two  against the new fish,"  he told  her without looking away from  the
fight. "He's  supposed  to  be  wrestlin'  champion  in  his  sheep  scummer  village.  He
says  his brothers  are  bull  throwers  –  Mithros,  if  those  two  are  the  brothers...I'm
offerin' five to three against the Parks lads!"
I heard  wood  splinter. Someone  screeched  for  the  Guard.  Goodwin  sighed.  "I
was about to  make some  money.  Tunstall, Puppy,  come  on.  Puppy,  just stand  by

with your baton out and watch. If someone  tries to  brain me or  Tunstall, then  you
can move. Otherwise keep out of our way."
I got out my baton  and  followed as  they pushed  through the crowd.  They used
their batons when their voices didn't make folk move fast  enough.  We  shoved  into
the fighting ring. The breaking wood must have been the nearest ale seller's stall. The
poles that supported its canvas sides had been broken. Its roof hung down. Leather
jacks and wooden cups were scattered over the cobbles in puddles, at least until the
quick fingers who haunted the Nightmarket ducked in to steal them.
What held the crowd's attention was the five brawling coves  at the center  of  the
mess. I knew the two Parks brothers.  The  other  three were country  lads  who were
country big and country built. One  of  them proved  it when he picked  up  the older
Parks  brother  and  lifted him over  his head.  He aimed for  the five-leveled  fountain,
dedicated to the memory of King Jonathan the First.
Goodwin stepped in. Gently, for  a Dog,  she  thumped  the country  fellow across
the belly with her baton. The air went out of him. He dropped his man.
Another country cove, with eyes as blue as the sky and a face as open as a field,
stepped in to save the first one from the small woman. He didn't know Tunstall had
come up between him and the remaining cove. My male partner didn't even take out
his baton. Tunstall just grabbed the second cove's head and the third country man's
and banged them together like eggs. Then he let them sit down.
The Parks who'd been fighting with that third country  man was  too  stupid  to  be
glad his battle was over. He roared and charged Tunstall, head down. Tunstall turned
to the side and swung up his bent knee. He caught the charging Parks brother on the
chin. The cove decided to lay down.
I looked  at the Parks  brother  who'd  been  dropped.  Plainly he'd  struck  his head
hard. He lay unmoving. Goodwin bent down to check his heartbeat. Then she peeled
back his eyelid. "Well, if he's got a brain, it's still working. He – "
"Hey!" someone yelled behind me. "Boys, cityfolk done attacked the Weatherskill
lads! To me! To me!" I turned. Three more country men were running straight at me.
The one in the lead, who did the squalling, had a chopping knife out. It was fully two
feet of  blade  on  a hilt. Evidently no  other  Dogs  had  seen  it and  made him stow  it
before he walked the streets.
I did as Ahuda had taught. This  cove  watched  Tunstall and  Goodwin.  He never
saw me smack his wrist with my baton.  When he dropped  the weapon,  he bent  to
grab it. I hit him on  the spine,  praying I  hadn't  done  it  too  hard.  I  didn't  want  to
cripple him, just stop him. One of his friends grabbed my arm. I got hold of his little
finger with my free hand and bent it back hard. I'd had it done to me. I know that's
too much pain to bear for long. Sure enough, he let go with a yell.
Then Goodwin and Tunstall were there, taking care of the two louts still standing.
When they were all down,  Tunstall got  his whistle. He blew three short  blasts  and
two long, the signal for the cage Dogs on duty outside the Nightmarket.
"Take  all  these  scuts,"  Goodwin  said  when  they  came.  "Let  them  argue  about
what happened while they enjoy the cages." She looked at Tunstall and me. "I don't
know about you, but I worked up an appetite."
Someone yelled, "I had bets on that fight!"
"Nobody won, cracknob!" someone else called. "Ye don't win an' ye don't  lose.

Get yer coin back or maul them as stole it!"
"You with the bets!"  Tunstall's  bellow could  shake  the palace.  "Pay  back  every
copper you hold. If I hear that anyone cheated a bettor, that cheater sees me on his
doorstep – or hers – on the morrow!"
"He means it, too," someone whispered. "Give the money back,  y'  looby.  Tha's
Tunstall talkin'."
As  we  passed  through  the  crowd,  I  heard  folk  murmur.  "Nice  work,  Puppy."
"Neat job." "Cool head, this one." "Ilony Cooper's oldest girl. You know the one."
"Mother woulda been proud."
Goodwin moved back to walk next to me. "You think you're their gold girl now,
Cooper?"  she  asked,  speaking  for  my  ears  alone.  "Wait  till  you  have  to  take  in
someone they love, someone popular. One of the ones  with the easy  smile and  the
charming way about  them. You'll learn fast  enough whose  side  they're on.  Now,  I
thought I told you to stand fast and do nothing." I opened my mouth.  She  raised  a
finger. "You  did  right. That  harvesting knife would have been  a  real  problem,  and
you were closest. Just don't make a habit of it, understand me?"
"Yes, Guardswoman Goodwin." I met her eyes for a moment, because I had  to,
before I looked away, cursing my shyness.
She and  Tunstall led me down  Pottage  Lane, to  a small eating  house  called  the
Mantel and Pullet. Everyone there knows my Dogs. They even have their own table.
Tunstall gave me a copper noble and jerked his head toward the bar. "Ale for  us
two, and whatever you're drinking," he said. "We'll order you the baked rat special."
I had  his measure enough to  dare  a small smile before  I hurried to  the barkeep.
He'd already drawn ale for  Goodwin  and  Tunstall in leather jacks  with their names
burned into the sides. "What of you, pretty Puppy?" he asked, leering at me. "A nice
strong ale to loosen your belt? Wine for your first day?"
I didn't have to look at him. "Barley water, sir, if you please."
"You're joking." His voice was flat as he said it.
"No, Master Barkeep. Barley water, please."
"You've something against my good brown ale? Strong enough to  stick  a spoon
in!  'Tis  good  enough  for  any  Dog  or  soldier  as  walks  through  that  door,  good
enough that the King himself, gods  save  him, has  drunk it, whilst you turn up  that
dainty nose – "
A man leaned past me and knocked on the plank bar. "Listen, keg tapper. Rather
than  waste  time  yapping  at  a  pretty  girl  who's  not  interested,  why  not  occupy
yourself pouring out for me and my ladies, and let her be about her business?"
I glanced at him and  stepped  to  the side.  He was  lean and  deadly-looking, with
blade-scarred  hands  and  sharp  bones.  He  was  also  white-skinned  and  dark-eyed,
with hair so fair it was nearly white. He winked at me as he leaned in for the barman's
attention. I figured him to be in his early twenties. I was first in my class at guessing
men's ages, so I felt sure of that.
A barmaid passed me a mug of water. "If you wants a jack, bring yer own,"  she
told me, eyeing the newcomer  with wicked intentions.  "With  your  name  on't,  so's
you  won't  be  tasting  anyone  else's  mouth  leavings."  She  skipped  away  from  the
barman's slap. I went back to my Dogs with our drinks.
"Took you long enough," Goodwin said. She grabbed her jack and  downed  half

the  ale.  I  placed  Tunstall's  before  him.  Like  everyone  else,  he  watched  the
newcomer. The cove took his drinks over to a pair of women who had  grabbed  an
empty table. One was plainly Scanran, a tall blond mot two or three years older than
me, wearing men's  clothes  and  a  sword.  The  smaller  one  was  brunette,  of  mixed
blood, my height. She wore a sleek blue dress. I could  not  tell her eye color  in the
murky light.
"What  do  you  think,  Cooper?"  Tunstall  asked.  "Guard  from  some  other  city?
Off-duty army?"
"The blond mot could be a mercenary of some kind." It was easier to  speak  if I
looked  at  her,  not  him.  "The  cove's  never  been  near  military  discipline."  I
remembered  a  Y-shaped  scar  in  his  eyebrow  and  the  scars  on  his  hands  and
muttered, "Or if he was, it didn't go well."
Goodwin emptied her jack and shoved it at Tunstall. "I'll have a second. Tell that
bar scut if he gives our Puppy a hard time again, I'll make him eat a keg after I empty
it."
As Tunstall left us, Goodwin said, "Read me out the man. Don't look at the man.
Look at me."
I opened my mouth and croaked. My throat had gone dry. I cleared it. No sound
at all came out.
Goodwin  snorted.  "Drink some  water, and  don't  look  at me, then, if that helps.
Mother save us, you'd think I was a monster.  The  man, Puppy,  the man. He might
be escaping with the crown and scepter this very moment. Tell the kennel Dogs who
they're sniffing for."
I drank and read out the man's looks as I was  taught in training. "Early twenties,
five feet, ten inches,  slim, muscled.  Sideways  forked  scar,  left eyebrow.  Hair  very
fair, eyes  black,  skin pale. He's  never worked  hard  labor,  not  with that skin. Long
nose, full lower lip, thin upper.  High cheekbones,  thin cheeks.  Very striking. Blade
scars  on  the hands.  Carries  a  purse  and  his  belt  knife  in  sight.  Knife  at  the  back
collar, one inside both forearms, knives over each kidney, boot knives. I'm not sure
if there's a buckle knife. If there is, it's a design I don't know. Earring, left ear, silver
skull."
Goodwin  leaned  back,  whistling  softly.  "Very  well,  then.  You've  earned  your
supper. I won't throw you in the river, either." She looked at the ivory man, rubbing
a scar on her cheek as she did. "That's a very dangerous new cove  who's  come  to
town, and what for? Trouble, no doubt." She seemed to be talking to herself.
Tunstall  came  back  with  more  ale  for  both  of  them.  He  was  followed  by  a
cookmaid with a tray of  supper.  My Dogs  hadn't  stinted.  There  was  eel tart, roast
hare,  split-pea  soup,  and  cheese  fritters,  along  with  a  loaf  of  country  bread  and
butter to spread on it.
"Eat up," Tunstall ordered as he cut  into the hare. "It  gets  busier  as  the evening
gets older."  He and  Goodwin  served  out  the food.  "So  what do  you  think  of  our
pale cove?"
Goodwin was ladling soup. "All the city knows that Kayfer Deerborn is a joke as
a  Rogue.  The  carrion  crows  and  the  hopefuls  are  coming  to  town.  It's  to  be
expected."
I knew what she meant. Our thief king rules because he lets his district chiefs keep

the biggest part of their profits. In return they guard his life. Now word  is out.  The
chiefs aren't as vigilant, or they're lazy. More and more young folk are restless under
a Rogue  who lets no  one  move up  in the way of  things. It's  time for  a  new  ruler,
they're saying.
Goodwin reached across the table and tugged my hair. "Puppy! Tell us how you
came to be talking all friendly-like with the dead baby's mother while me and Tunstall
traded lies with Crookshank. Don't look at us or we'll be here all night. Just report."
I drew  on  my plate with my dagger and  told  them how Mama was  friends  with
Crookshank's  daughter-in-law.  How  Annis  was  a  customer  when  Mama  sold
perfumes,  soaps,  and  herbs.  When  my  lord  Gershom  took  us  in,  Annis  stayed
friends with us. She and Mama often shopped the Daymarket on Mama's good days.
How one time, I went to see my friends and Tansy got the notion that we should go
to the Daymarket. There we found Mama, and Annis, and Annis's son. Herun looked
at Tansy's curls and dimples and bright eyes....
"Young love," Tunstall said with a wistful sigh. "It's so simple. Remember when it
was simple?" he asked Goodwin.
"Simple  for  you.  You're  a  simple  creature,"  Goodwin  told  him.  She  made  a
beckoning gesture to me. I have a feeling I will get very familiar with this gesture,  a
come-on twitch of just two of her fingers. "What did Annis and Tansy say tonight at
Crookshank's?"
I repeated all of it, as exactly as I could  remember.  Then I handed  over  Tansy's
rock.  Tunstall pushed  aside  the plates  and  set  it between them.  He  reached  into  a
pocket and fetched out a small thing like a white pearl. He blew on it and set it on the
table next to the stone.
Light  spread  from  the  globe.  While  the  room's  lamps  flickered,  this  light  was
steady. As it touched the stone, it brought glints of fire from its surface in colors like
cherry red,  sapphire  blue,  grass  green.  The  shiny  step-like  bit  changed,  now  red,
now green, now mixes of both colors with flecks of blue.
"Pretty toy." Some of the other Dogs had come over. It was Jewel's partner who
spoke. "Where'd y' get it?"
"Tansy  Lofts,  Crookshank's  granddaughter-in-law  that  married  young  Herun
Lofts, she gave it to our Puppy," Goodwin told him. "Ever seen anything like it?" I
was trying not to slide under the table. I did make myself as small as I could. I have
to get better at being around folk.
More Dogs and a few off-duty soldiers came to see. Seemingly the customers not
on  the  side  of  the  law  knew  to  mind  their  own  business  in  this  place.  Of  them
Goodwin asked, all either shook their heads or said no.
Otterkin,  one  of  the  Dogs  with  the  magic  Gift,  touched  the  stone.  It  sparked,
throwing off lights in the colors of its glassy bits, then turned back to normal.
"It's  no  spellstone,"  Otterkin said.  "I  suppose  it could  be  used  for  one,  but  it's
like none  I was  ever schooled  with." She  shrugged.  "You  could  always  take  it  to
Master Fulk."
Everyone groaned or rolled their eyes. I clenched my fists and watched my Dogs.
I'll take the stone to Master Fulk if they order me to, but he'd best play nice.
"We should, though I trust your expertise over Fulk's," Goodwin told Otterkin. "I
saw him turn a boil into a case of them once, all over the poor Dog who went to him

for help." The other Dogs muttered agreement.
Tunstall's globe faded. He picked it up, then the sparkly stone.  "It'll make a nice
toy for your cat," he told me, handing the stone to me. "Young Herun Lofts isn't the
sharpest arrow in the quiver. No doubt he thought he'd discovered  rubies,  or  some
such. Anything else to report, Puppy?"
"Nothing more to report, Guardsman,"  I mumbled, wishing the others  would go
away.
And they did wander back to their tables to finish their suppers. Goodwin ordered
me to do the same.
One more big thing happened after supper, but I am too weary to write of it now.
And too miserable. On the morrow, mayhap, I will hurt less in my pride. I will write
of it then.
I will not be the Puppy who is made a Dog in the shortest space of time.
 
 
Thursday, April 2, 246
Written before baton practice.
Some details of my work I do  not  want to  write out.  It is bad  enough that they
happened. I will record them in a general way, but it is more than I can bear to write
each word of it.
Last night, after supper, we went back to the Nightmarket. There was a cutpurse.
Tunstall lunged for him and saved the purse, but missed the thief.
Goodwin pointed at the runaway Rat and said, "Puppy, fetch."
I was gleeful. I could prove how good I was. I was after the cutpurse in a leap. I
chased  him down  Stuvek Street.  My training forgot,  I never saw  his  lookout.  The
cove stuck out a foot and I went flying.
There'd been a seller of fried food. On one side of his frying cart was the crate of
fresh fish he cooked up for passersby. On the other side was the pile of heads, guts,
and tails left as he cut those fish up  for  the cooking.  I made my acquaintance  with
the pile, full out. The cutpurse escaped.
Now it is day and my pride still hurts. I do not want the world to see me again. I
do not want any Dogs to see me again. My sisters, my brothers, Lord Gershom, all
will have the tale by  now.  My lord  will be  wondering how he could  have  been  so
mistaken  in  me.  Diona,  Lorine,  Willes,  and  Nilo  will  do  as  brothers  and  sisters
always do. They will never, ever let me forget this.
Can a mot die of shame? If I report back to the kennel tonight (if I don't just pack
my things and head for the nearest ship away from Tortall) I will find out.
Everyone  who  saw  me  clapped.  Vendors,  shoppers,  street  Players,  and  Rats
whistled, stomped, and cheered.  Except  my Dogs.  Tunstall was  busy  hobbling the
lout who had tossed me into that mound of fish garbage. Goodwin just stood there,
arms crossed over her chest, one eyebrow raised.
It was  near the end  of  our  watch.  Goodwin  sent  me  to  the  docks  to  rinse  off
under the big barrels they kept for the fishermen. She ordered me just to go on home
and care  for  my  uniform.  I  fetched  a  change  of  clothes,  then  took  myself  to  the
bathhouse  around  the  corner  from  my  lodgings.  There  I  scrubbed  me  and  my
uniform. The  attendants  were  more  used  to  waiting  on  street  women  and  Players

than Puppies. They swore by the Goddess they couldn't smell fish by the time I was
done, but they smirked as they swore. I couldn't tell. I think the stench  was  burned
into  my  poor  nose.  I  passed  over  a  five-copper  piece  for  a  special  jasmine  and
lavender bath and soaked until I couldn't smell a thing. Then I went home and threw
myself into my bed.
I will  be  known  forever  as  the  Puppy  who  chased  a  cutpurse  and  caught  fish
garbage instead. My descendants will pretend I'm not in their bloodline. No – no one
will want to make descendants with me.
I might have hid until I'd worked up the courage to run off to sea, but Pounce  is
determined. He washed my nose. He meowed and clawed at my bedclothes. He dug
all around me until he found a way in. His yowls were deafening inside the covers.
"Pesky  beast,"  I growled,  winding  him  up  in  sheets  and  throwing  them  off  the
bed. "You don't have to face the world."
Will you waste all your free time sulking? he asked. Get up!
When I stood,  there he was,  on  top  of  the blankets.  I wish I knew how he  did
that. "I told you to stay home last night, and not go a-playing off your tricks on me."
I checked  the  bolts  on  my  shutters.  They  were  still  fastened.  "What  do  you  do,
magic them open?"
He just sat on the bed, looking at me, head cocked sideways, his whiskers shoved
forward in his small cat smile. "I hate it when you  charm me,"  I told  him. I draped
him over  my shoulder.  He purred  and  climbed around  the  back  of  my  head,  then
washed my temple. He stayed there, balanced, while I poured water in the basin and
cleaned  my  teeth  and  face.  Combing  my  hair  was  more  activity  than  he  wanted,
though, so he sat on my lone table for that. I was probably smiling like a looby  the
whole time. I don't know why I am so fortunate as to have this magical creature for
my  friend,  but  he  makes  things  better,  the  little  and  the  big.  When  Mama  died,
Pounce comforted all of us, not just me. Today he eased my sore heart.
I pulled  on  breeches,  shirt,  and  boots  and  gathered  a  string  bag  and  my  belt
purse. I had time to shop, feed my pigeons, eat, and still run away to sea if I didn't
laze about anymore. I was putting what I'd  need  for  the day  in my pockets  when I
saw the stone that Tansy had given me among my bits  of  things. I carried  it to  the
window and  opened  the shutters.  The  mid-morning  sun  poured  in  as  a  couple  of
pigeons landed on the sill. While they made simple pigeon noises, I found the bag of
cracked corn I kept inside the window and spread some on the sill to quiet them.
Then I held up the stone. The sparkling pieces were even brighter in the daylight. I
turned it here and  there, fascinated  by  the colors.  The  little red  bits  were the best.
The only time I'd ever seen red so bright was in the paintings in the great temple of
the Mother Goddess the day Mama took  me for  blessings  on  my first monthlies. I
kept  turning  it,  finding  new  spots  that  cast  off  light,  until  Pounce  leaped  to  my
shoulder and yowled Wake up! in my ear.
"Pounce!" I yelped. He'd shattered some glass bubble around me. I looked down.
The  pigeons  were  gone,  their  corn  all  eaten.  The  sun  had  moved  enough  that  a
shadow lay on the edge of  the sill. "How  long was  I standing here, gawping at the
rock?" I asked my cat.
Pounce said, Long enough, and jumped to the floor.
"Someday  I'm  selling you  to  a dumpling maker,"  I told  him.  I  shoved  the  rock

into my breeches pocket. Then I closed and locked my shutters once more.
Pounce and I rattled downstairs. As we passed through the door to the street, my
landlady leaned out  her window and  called, "Would  ye  bring  me  some  fish,  then,
Beka, there's a good gixie."
I heard folk laughing as we went down the lane. It's going to be a long time before
I stop hearing that little joke. I heard three different types of it before I got  to  Bis's
bakery. The one I liked despite myself was how Pounce had done  well for  himself,
making his home with a Fishpuppy.
Old  man  Bis  grinned  when  he  saw  me  and  took  my  three  coppers.  The
four-day-old bread bin had more than enough to fill my bag. It feels good  to  know
that I no longer get bread there for my family and that I can afford more than a lone
copper's worth.
I was about to go when Bis offered me a small loaf of bread in the shape of a fish.
He'd glazed its scales with egg to bake  up  shiny. He cackled  when I bit the thing's
head off and gave Pounce the tail.
"You'll show 'em, Beka Cooper!" Bis told me. "I seen it when you was naught but
a peck o' rawhide an' eyes like ice. I see it now! Fish guts and all!"
I shook my head at him and fled. I don't know where the old man came by such
belief in me. How did  he even tell me apart  from  the mumper children  that  waited
around the shop in hope of a stale roll? But he'd known me right off when I moved
back  to  the Lower City. He'd  offered  me  a  fruit  bun  in  welcome.  It  was  why  I'd
chosen his shop for getting my precious stale bread.
Pounce and I wandered on down through the Lower City. I do love it there during
the day.  Mothers  sit  on  their  doorsteps,  gossiping  with  friends  as  they  sew,  feed
their babes,  and  buy  from  passing  vendors.  The  pigs  are  everywhere,  snuffling  in
garbage when the dogs  and  cats  aren't  vexing  them.  The  pigeons  are  everywhere,
too, hunting out food. Children run around the muddy streets  and  in the dooryards
of places big enough to have them, playing games and chasing animals. Mostly folk
here  walk  or  ride  horses  or  mules.  No  one  comes  down  here  in  a  carriage.  The
streets are too narrow. The mud tracks twist and take quick  turns.  Now and  then a
wagoner might get lost hereabouts. He'll be stuck, and before he knows it, his cargo
is gone. So, too, are his clothes, purse, and whatever poor beast pulled the wagon.
There is always something going on: a deal, a birth, a wedding, a fight, lessons in
sommat or other. Folk are alive in the Lower City, not bottled up like the merchants
and the nobles. They laugh at what they find funny, and they weep if they are sad. If
they have a little, they help their kin and friends. And they want better lives, however
they can manage to get them. I am just the same. I knew plenty of mots and children
who'd  been  like Mama, at the mercy of  a  Rat,  who'd  thought  no  one  would  help
them. I'd  made  sure  that  Rat  paid  for  his  thieving.  Who  would  do  that  for  other
families like mine had been?
Most  of  the  folk  who  lived  here  knew  me  by  sight  and  to  nod  to,  though  I'd
learned being a Dog, even a Puppy, made a difference. The little ones would run up
to me, laughing and  holding out  their hands,  yelling, "Put  the cords  on  me! I been
bad!"  And  their  parents  would  chuckle,  but  the  laugh  never  reached  their  eyes.
Everyone in the Lower City knew of  goings-on  that  cracked  the  law,  even  if  they
never  took  part.  Any  Dog  wanting  to  curry  favor  or  make  a  mark  could  drag

someone in for questioning and come away with a tidbit of tasty information.
I'll not be doing that. I suppose it's easy enough to bully strangers, but the folk of
the Lower City are  my  neighbors.  Besides,  I  have  sources  most  Dogs  don't.  My
Birdies aren't human, but real, winged birds and creatures of the air.
I walked  down  Messinger  Lane  to  the  corner  of  Holderman  Street.  There  was
Glassman Square.  Mots  sat  on  the  rim  of  the  big  pool  at  the  center,  visiting  and
filling their buckets.  Other  mots  and  gixies did  laundry in stone  tubs  fed  by  pipes
from  the  pool.  I  bought  two  Scanran  pasties  with  mutton,  onion,  and  currants,
sharing the gristly meat with Pounce. Then I wiped my fingers on  my handkerchief
and sat on one of the raised stone blocks around the square.
As  soon  as  I  began  to  rip  the  first  stale  loaf  of  bread  into  small  pieces,  the
pigeons came in hordes. They are the most common birds in all Corus. Folk kick at
them, dogs  chase  them, cats  and  children kill them, hawks eat them, and  still  they
thrive, the silly things. They go everywhere, see everything, and serve the Black God
of  Death,  carrying  those  who  are  not  ready  to  enter  his  Peaceful  Realms.  Their
colors are mixed. I have seen  ones  who are wondrous  shades  of  copper  and  pink
and others who are almost as black as Pounce, with a blue-green tinge to them.
My old  friend Slapper,  who landed on  my knee, is one  of  the  blue-black  ones.
He'd  come  to  me  first  in  my  Lord  Provost's  stable  yard,  yet  somehow  he  had
tracked  me  here.  I'd  named  him  Slapper  for  his  bad  habit  of  hitting  me  with  his
wings. He was also dirty and had a clubbed foot, a hunched back, and wide yellow
eyes with the tiniest of pupils. He looked as if he'd accuse you of plotting to murder
him in his sleep.
I offered him bread. He grabbed for it (I've been feeding him for three years  and
he still doesn't trust me) and in the grab,  he fell off  my knee. I put  down  my hand
and let a heap of bread crumbs fall next to my leg. Slapper balanced himself on  his
bad foot and went to work on them.
In  came  Pinky,  a  bird  I'd  met  just  a  week  ago,  a  silver  and  dark  pink  pigeon
whose wings are tipped in snowy white. She is a bold wench, shoving her way right
up to me. Fog  is more of  a pale blue-gray, with a blue-green collar and  dark  wing
tips.  White Spice  is clean and  white, perhaps  someone's  pet,  with  copper-colored
spots from the back of his neck down to the middle of his wings. He is a handsome
fellow and knows it, always strutting before the ladies.
I have not named them all, of course. Like the pigeons who live around the Lord
Provost's  house,  they are quick  to  learn a source  of  food.  It  took  these  fifty-odd
birds but three days of my coming here at this time, with my basket, to know me and
to gather when I began to rip up my bread. I wished I could say I did it for my love
of birds.
But they are not  pets.  They  are  informants.  Seated  at  the  heart  of  this  flock,  I
listened for the ghost  voices.  The  pigeons  cooed  and  chrred deep  in their throats,
vying for food. Slowly, out of their sounds, the words of ghosts rose.
"Didn't know he'd  come  home so  early,"  a  mot's  voice  said.  "Why'd  he  come
home so early?"
"These dolts never tie doon  the loads  right." The  cove  spoke  with the burr  that
comes from the mountain folk of the north. "Sloppy work, sloppy."
"I don't  like this, Gary.  That  looks  like a slave  ship.  I'm  right,  aren't  I?  You've

been trading in slaves!" The  voice  was  a mot's,  and  frightened. Seemingly her folk
belonged to the growing faction that hated slavery.
"Mama, I'm cold. Naught looks right. Mama, they took me away. I didn't want to
go, but there was a parrot, and then I was sleepy. I want to come home!"
A dog ran through the pigeons, scattering the flock. I cursed as Pounce took off
after the dog with a yowl, swinging his claws. The dog yelped as Pounce  leaped  to
his back and dug in. Shrieking, the dog fled the square, Pounce still attached to him.
I broke  up  more rolls, waiting for  the birds  to  return. Unless  a  hawk  was  near,
they would come back. They never forgot meals. Even the city's beggars could learn
from them.
And here they came, recovered from their fright. I tossed out small pieces as they
dropped  to  the stones,  talking to  each  other.  As  they settled,  once  more  the  dead
began to  speak.  I looked  for  the pigeon who carried  that small child's  soul  on  his
back.
"There was a little girl and a little boy with me. They was scared." That was him.
Lucky for me that after they're dead,  even the smallest baby  can  tell its tale with a
clear voice. Perhaps, as the priests say, the soul is ageless.
"Why did the hooded men take us, Mama? There wasn't a parrot. They lied, and
then they made me sleep. They gave me porridge with bugs in it. And – "
The entire flock took flight. I looked up. High overhead glided a red-tailed hawk. I
sighed.  It  would  be  long  before  the  birds  came  back  if  a  hawk  was  nearby.  My
gathering  here  was  done,  for  today  at  least.  But  now  I  knew  something.  A  very
young boy  had  been  kidnapped  and  held  with  other  children.  It  could  have  been
slavers.  Slave  taking  is  disliked  in  Corus,  but  it  isn't  illegal.  Kidnapping  children
without their parents' leave is illegal, though.
He could have been Tansy's Rolond.
It was near half past one by the time I'd visited all my little flocks.  I had  time to
see Granny Fern before my watch. I helped around  her house,  meaning I did  work
and she went around after me fixing what I'd done, explaining how I did it wrong.
We talked about  Diona, Lorine, and  the boys  as  she  made us  a  lunch  of  green
pancakes with sorrel and ginger, then noodles  with cheese.  There  was  even cheese
for  Pounce.  She  finished  with  a  winter  apple  tart  for  me.  "And  this,"  she  said,
handing me a parcel wrapped in reeds as I was kissing her goodbye.
I took it unthinking before the smell reached my nose. Fish.
"For the furball," she said wickedly, and closed her door in my face.
"For my furball indeed," I muttered to Pounce as we returned to my rooms. The
city's bells were ringing three of the clock. "Today was the first day she's given you
food. Just did it to score a bit of fur off of me."
Pounce said, She's a wicked old woman. I like her.
"You would," I said as we climbed our stairs. "You're wicked yourself."  I let us
into my two little rooms.
Pounce only looked smug and began to wash. I got ready for practice and watch.
 
Night, after duty.
As soon as I walked into the training yard  behind the kennel for  baton  practice,
the  others  began  to  jeer.  I  dumped  my  uniform  bag  on  the  side  of  the  yard  and

picked up my training baton, wishing I could sink into the beaten dirt. It would have
been bad enough only to have Puppies to comment on my shame, but life isn't  that
simple. Three years' worth of Dogs were also there to  talk about  my smelly fate of
the night before. Baton practice is demanded of Puppies and Dogs for four years of
service –  three for  the Goddess  and  one  extra  for  Great  Mithros.  The  higher-ups
figure if you survive that long, you are getting plenty of practice on the streets.
A group of my fellows circled  me, sniffing loudly, saying the fish smell lingered
yet.  I  thought  about  breaking  the  rule  about  no  stick  work  without  the  training
mistress  in  the  yard,  but  Ahuda  settled  that  for  me.  She  arrived  unnoticed.  She
knocked the feet from under two of them and raised dust from the quilted jackets of
two more with her split bamboo stick. Even with padding  and  her armed only with
bamboo they would show ugly bruises – she was that good.
"You  think you  wouldn't've  been  taken  last  night?"  she  asked  them.  "Not  even
when  they  hit  you  like  this?"  Her  baton  went  sideways  into  Hilyard's  ribs.  He
collided  with  Verene,  tumbling  down  on  top  of  her.  "Or  this?"  She  got  a
second-year Dog named Phelan in her next blow, thwacking him over the shoulders.
She swept the baton so fast I never saw it move, slamming Phelan behind the knees.
He yelped. We had no padding there. I winced as Phelan pitched forward.
Quick  as  that  she  jumped  over  him,  her  baton  headed  straight  for  my  gut.  I
blocked it, holding my baton vertical and two-handed. I jammed my knee up into her
side. She wasn't there, of course. She never is.  Her baton  slammed the side  of  my
left knee. She was nice about it, though. I stumbled, but I didn't drop.
On she  went to  Ersken.  She  showed  everyone in the yard  that it wasn't  wise to
laugh at someone who got  taken by  surprise.  That  afternoon  I would have sold  an
eye to be as good as she was. I loved her. She left them with no breath to laugh.
After, when we had washed and  climbed into our  uniforms,  Ersken walked over
and  hugged  me  one-armed  about  the  shoulders.  I  looked  into  his  blue  eyes  and
smiled. Ersken handled my shyness from our first day by ignoring it. He liked to hug
and stand with an arm about a mot. We mots got used to it. We even treated him the
same.  I  used  to  wonder  how  Ersken,  with  his  soft  brown  curls  and  gentle  eyes,
would fare as a Dog. Then when we were called in on a riot at Out-walls Prison, he
worked as hard and as tough as any of us, putting new-learned fighting skills to use.
He could be strong at need.
He didn't  need  it just now.  "Fishpuppy's  going to  wear off,  Beka,"  he  told  me.
"The first time you startle them, they'll forget it entire. Besides, if it hadn't been you,
it would've been me. I went full-front in the gutter last night. I'd've been Slimepuppy
for certain, if not for you."
I giggled and gave him a quick hug back, then slid free of his kind arm. I wouldn't
want anyone thinking I could not stand on my own.
My welcome inside the kennel was  as  cheerful as  at  training.  The  Dogs  hooted
and  laughed  when  they  saw  me.  "Hello,  Fishpuppy,"  called  Jewel.  "Guess  you'll
remember that Rats have lookouts now, eh?"
Someone yelled, "Fish for supper, everyone?" Even Ahuda grinned as the others
laughed and whistled.
I ground my teeth and saw my Dogs. Tunstall beckoned me over. When I fell in
next to him, I heard Goodwin sniff the air. I looked at the floor.

Then she said, "A kennel is no place for a cat, Fishpuppy."
I asked  him to  stay  home!  Yet  here  he  was,  seated  right  in  front  of  Goodwin,
looking up at her with his whiskers forward in his cat smile.
"Guardswoman, I swear I didn't bring him." I felt sweat trickle down my back. "I
swear by the shield of Mithros – "
Tunstall put a hand on my shoulder. "Don't call Mithros into a small matter with a
cat, even a purple-eyed one, Cooper. I believe you."
You would not believe me if I told you the truth, I thought. You would not believe
if I  said  a  Great  God  might  be  the  only  one  who  could  tell  you  anything  about
Pounce!
Goodwin crouched and tickled my traitor cat under the chin. "You know you're a
handsome fellow, don't you?"
Tunstall leaned down slightly to whisper to me, "She likes cats."
"I heard that," she said. Pounce  leaned into her scratching  hand.  "What's  not  to
like, small lord?" she asked him. "Discreet, clean, following your own course in life.
You take commands from no one, not even Fishpuppies."
I winced. Pounce, the nasty thing, leaped onto Goodwin's shoulder.
"Well!"  she  said,  and  actually  laughed.  She  straightened,  Pounce  riding  her
shoulder as he did mine. "It seems he's determined to go with us."
He knows who to grease to get his way. This time he chose Goodwin as the one
to convince that he had the right to trot along with us like the four-legged dogs some
pairs took with them. I could see those dogs from the corners of my eyes. They sat
and watched  my cat  with mild interest. None of  them  showed  any  signs  that  they
might chase him.
"Muster up!" bellowed Ahuda. She looked as crisp as if she hadn't just spent the
last  hour  thrashing  us.  Everyone  formed  ranks.  "First  item.  No  word  on
Crookshank's  great-grandchild  from  the  assigned  pairs  on  the  three  watches.
Goodwin  and  Tunstall  got  some  conversation  there,  including  words  with  the
grandmother and the mother. Nothing useful, but there may be more where that came
from.
"Second item. Tonight's collection night. Birch and Vinehall, check each coin as it
goes in your Happy Bag. No more counterfeits. Hobble anyone who slips fakes into
your Bag. The rest of you, keep an eye on your coins, too."
I could see the two Dogs she had mentioned turn deep red with shame. Not only
had  they  brought  useless  coin  to  the  kennel,  but  counterfeiters  were  worse  than
murderers.  They  could  turn  a  kingdom's  money  to  trash  in  weeks  if  they  weren't
caught.
"Well, you curs aren't filling Happy Bags sitting on your rumps," Ahuda snapped.
"Muster out. Not you, Goodwin, Tunstall. Master Fulk has time for you now."
I didn't  miss  the trade  of  sour  faces  between my partners.  I didn't  blame  them,
either. "I had to ask for him," Goodwin said. She sounded almost ashamed. "If only
so no one thinks we're holding back what rightfully ought to go in the Happy Bag for
the split. You still have the sparkly, Fishpuppy?"
I dug it out of my pocket and offered it to her. She waved it off. "Give it to Fulk.
Come on."
The three of us (and Pounce) went into the small office  that served  the mage on

duty. There was  Fulk, perched  at his desk  on  a chair that guaranteed he would be
head and  shoulders  above  any working Dog.  Mage Fulk was  a nasty,  grubby  little
man even on duty. He'd not shaved his gray and brown whiskers; his curling brown
and gray hair looked like it hadn't  been  washed  in a week or  ten. It was  his eyes  I
liked the least: green and full, too moist, with brown stains under them, like he never
slept.
No, I disliked his eyes secondmost. It was his roaming hands, with their pinching
and stroking fingers, I disliked even more. Every girl runner and trainee did. I'd heard
more than one junior Dog complain of him, too.
I kept to the back, letting Tunstall stand between me and the desk.
"Well? Where is it?" Fulk demanded. "I haven't got all night."
I offered the stone to Goodwin again, but  she  jerked her head  toward  the mage.
The look in her eyes said I'd best not vex her by hesitating.
"You  let a trainee  hold  this  thing?"  Fulk  made  the  word  sound  dirty.  Then  he
smirked. "Trainee Fishpuppy, at that."
"We do when it's our trainee." Tunstall had such a warm voice, it was strange to
hear it go  cold.  "And  whatever we Dogs  might call each  other,  you're  not  a  Dog,
Fulk. Give him the stone, Cooper."
I stepped up (I couldn't make my Dogs look bad, not when Tunstall had spoken
for me) and put the stone on the desk. Quick as a snake, Fulk grabbed my wrist. He
smiled  into  my  eyes,  his  fingers  rubbing  my  arm.  I  went  still,  thinking  of  the
punishment I might get if I pinched his wrist until he bled.
"Let her go,  Fulk."  Goodwin's  voice  was  iron. The  mage and  I  both  looked  at
her. "Touch her again and I'll start an investigation on you for continued breaches of
the  Goddess's  Law  protecting  women.  I've  heard  whispers.  Mayhap  it's  time  I
looked to see if there's anything behind them."
Fulk let me go. I looked at Tunstall, entirely confused.
He gave me a smile.  "At  the  last  eclipse,  the  Mother  of  Starlight  temple  chose
Magistrates.  Goodwin's  now  the  Goddess's  Magistrate  for  the  Lower  City.  She
signs a writ, and the warrior mots with the sickles come for him."
Fulk grabbed the sparkly stone with fingers that shook.  He released some  bit of
crimson  light  that  sank  into  it.  "I  am  a  mage  with  power  of  my  own,  and  the
protection  of  the  King,"  he  muttered,  but  he  was  sweating.  Tiny  sparks  of  light
leaped from the stone, then dropped back into it. He held it up. From the look in his
eyes, we were forgotten.
He produced more red fire. It slithered over the stone and dripped to his desk. He
muttered and  passed  his hand  over  the rock,  his palm trailing red  light.  The  stone
shimmered, then went dark.  "Valueless  in  terms  of  coin.  A  curiosity.  I  will  test  it
further, then report to my Lord Provost. You Dogs are dismissed." He looked at us
and frowned. "I'm keeping it. Aren't you supposed to be making collections?"
Pounce  leaped  onto  his  back  from  behind  his  chair.  Fulk  yelled  and  thrashed,
dropping the stone and breaking a couple of the jars on his desk. He scrambled after
the stone. So did I, fearing that it might be fouled by the oil that spilled from the jars.
The stone  skipped  from  Fulk's  reaching  fingers,  spun  onto  the  ancient  floor,  and
dropped  through an empty knothole in a plank. There  was  no  telling  where  it  had
gone.

Fulk screamed.  "That  cat!  Who  let it in here? I loathe  cats!"  He  sneezed.  "Get
out! I must make a summoning spell.... Take that disgusting animal with you!"
Despite the jumping and shouting and the leak of magical things, I had to duck my
head to hide a smirk. All Corus knew Fulk couldn't Summon. If he could, he might
have his own work as a mage, not kennel work.
Then I thought on  the lost  stone.  I liked  it.  It  was  the  best  of  the  Lower  City,
ordinary enough, with tiny specks of  real beauty where you  would never seek  it. It
was gone. Like as not, some four-legged rat was carrying it off  to  impress  his lady
rat.
We left Fulk's office, Pounce leading the way.
"What was  going on  in there?" Sergeant Ahuda wanted to  know.  "If  you  killed
him, you get to find us a new one."
"He's  alive and  whining," Goodwin  said.  "We're  tired of  playing with the mage.
We're off to the Court of the Rogue."
Goodwin  and  Tunstall were silent as  we walked  into  the  street.  Pounce  left  us.
Seeing my Dogs  slip their batons  from  their belts  to  carry  them two-handed,  I did
the same. As they settled into the walk that must  be  in their bones,  I calmed down
and  began  to  think.  With  my  brain  working,  I  scarce  noticed  the  calls  of
"Fishpuppy" from some of  the folk we passed.  The  thought that had  been  waiting
for my attention bobbed  to  the  surface.  Did  my  Dogs  notice  the  thing  that  I  had
seen? The light was very bad in Fulk's lair. I was the only one standing close to him.
Surely they had seen it.
Still, my duty was plain. I cleared my throat.
"Speak  up,  Puppy,"  Goodwin  said.  She  never  took  her  eyes  from  the  faces
around us. Tunstall kept his on the windows above.
"Um – he lied," I said. "Fulk did. He knew something big about that stone."
"You're  good  at  observing,"  Lord  Gershom  had  told  me  often  enough.  "Tell
people what you see. A good Dog trusts what she observes."
I had to believe my lord knew what he was talking about. I swallowed the lump in
my throat. "Fulk came all over greedy. He wanted the stone, and he didn't want us to
know it was worth sommat." I could feel my face turn red and blessed the shadows.
I finished with a mumble. "At least, that's how I think it."
Goodwin  and  Tunstall halted, so  I  halted  as  well.  Then  they  did  an  odd  thing.
Goodwin dug in her belt purse, and Tunstall put out his hand.  Goodwin  put  a coin
into it. Tunstall flipped it in the air, caught it, tucked it into his pocket, and turned to
look at me. "I bet her a five-copper piece you'd picked that up."
Goodwin turned, too, her arms folded over her chest. "He's being nice. I also bet
you wouldn't have the guts to tell us. So I was twice wrong. Yes, we saw."
I took a tiny breath of relief. It would have been very bad for me, then, if I'd kept
quiet. They'd  have thought me either too  stupid  to  watch Fulk's  expression  or  too
shy to do as I was told and report to my Dogs.
Tunstall  ran  his  fingers  over  his  short-trimmed  beard.  "Otterkin  said  there  was
nothing to the stone."
"She's the same as Fulk," Goodwin answered. "If she could do more than charm
mice  from  her  flour,  she  wouldn't  be  a  Dog.  Fulk  nearly  wet  himself  when  that
sparkler lit up." She shook her head. "Curse it the stone was lost. Gods know what's

under the kennel. Snakes, maybe. Mud that slithers clean to the river. The place has
been here since the first King's reign – "
I heard a familiar yowl, blocked by something. My cat made that sound when he
was truly pleased with himself. I looked for him. Pounce trotted between my feet and
dropped something on my left boot.
Slowly Tunstall bent  and  picked  it up.  I didn't  dare  move as  he  used  his  water
bottle to rinse cellar slime and who knew what else from the sparkly rock. I knew the
look that Goodwin and Tunstall gave first me, then my cat.  It was  the same look  I
often felt on my face when Pounce did something uncanny.
"He's  just a cat?  You're  no  mage, or  anything?" Goodwin  asked  me after she'd
been quiet for too long. "Don't look at me, just answer, Cooper."
"I found  him in my Lord  Provost's  stable  loft, Guardswoman,"  I said,  being as
polite as  I could.  "He was  a purple-eyed  kitten.  And  you'd  have  heard  if  I  was  a
mage."
"He does strange things often, does he?" Tunstall asked.
"Often enough, sir," I replied. I picked my cat up.
"Were there portents  when you  were born?"  Tunstall sounded  as  if  he  asked  a
normal question. "Eclipses, eagles in the birth chamber, things like that?"
I was  so  startled  I  looked  up  at  him.  He  seemed  more  like  an  owl  than  ever,
though I never heard  of  an owl whose  eyes  twinkled with a joke. "My papa  lost  a
copper noble piece, betting I'd be  a boy.  Mama says  it was  the last big coin  Papa
ever had."
Goodwin took the stone from Tunstall and dried it on her tunic. "Why don't you
and – "
"Pounce," I said.
"Pounce," she replied. "Why don't you two guard this for a while? Whilst Tunstall
and me see  if someone  trustworthy  can  tell us  about  it.  Because  now  we  know  a
thing.  If  Fulk  wants  this  bad  enough  to  lie  and  keep  it  to  himself,  then  mayhap
Crookshank's grandson Herun was right. Mayhap there is money in these things, and
Crookshank is up to something."
"And maybe got his grandson killed," Tunstall said with a nod.
"Step closer and put the cat down," Goodwin ordered. As I obeyed, she bent to
adjust her boot and slipped the stone to me. I tucked it into my breeches pocket as I
straightened whilst Goodwin told Pounce what a good fellow he was. No one on the
street would know I had the stone.
"Now. Let's get to work, girls," Tunstall said. "Time to shake the tree."
Other Dogs collect Happy Bags from each business that wants to know otherwise
ill-paid Dogs  will watch over  them  with  diligence.  Tunstall  and  Goodwin  gathered
none  of  those.  They  called  only  on  the  Rogue,  at  the  Court  of  the  Rogue.  We
walked on  west  of  the waking Nightmarket and  the Market of  Sorrows,  where  the
slaves were sold.  I hate it. The  smell  makes  my  tripes  cramp.  Too  many  families
around Mutt Piddle Lane come here to sell extra children to  make a little money,  if
they don't try illegal sales for more.
Up Koskynen Street my Dogs  and  I turned  away from  Sorrows,  headed  deeper
into the part of the Lower City called the Cesspool, where Mutt Piddle is. There are
no street torches here, except those provided by drinking houses, outdoor gambling,

and brothels. Houses are kept  together with rope  and  magic charms.  The  pigs  that
root  in street  garbage are rail-thin.  Hard  and  hungry  folk  with  nowhere  else  to  go
hold the Cesspool's streets after dark.
Children swarmed  us,  begging for  a copper.  Once,  I'd  been  among  them.  Now
they surrounded  me, thinking I was  new meat. I  twirled  my  baton  from  the  thong
around  my  wrist  and  swept  it  around  me  in  two  half  circles,  moving  them  back.
"You  crew  don'  go  flappin' your  ticklers my way,"  I told  them softly  in Cesspool
cant. "I'm no more an eye for you than the Ladymoon."
They wasn't used to hearing their own gab from a Dog. They scampered.
My  Dogs  turned  to  watch  me,  their  faces  a  study.  "You  do  that  very  well,"
Goodwin said.
I looked down.
"Fishpuppy, I'm talking to you." There was a warning in her voice.
I met her eyes. "Eight year we lived on Mutt Piddle Lane, Guardswo – "
"Goodwin," she corrected me. "I suppose you have family around here still?"
"Yes, Guar – Goodwin. My Granny, a few blocks from here."
"I was told something of the kind," she said finally. "But it's one thing to hear the
gossip  and  another to  hear your  own Puppy  talk like a  Cesspool  Rat.  How  many
more secrets have you got, Cooper?"
I thought of  the corner  dust  spinners.  Mistress  Noll had  already  hinted  to  them
about the pigeons. "Very few, Goodwin."
"Good.  I hate secrets.  Don't  talk Cesspool  cant  anymore.  You're  a  Dog,  not  a
Rat." She set out again, Tunstall beside her, Pounce and me behind.
Half a block  west  on  Festive Lane was  a big black  stone  house.  It  had  been  a
noble's  place  once,  when the city was  new. As  the nobles  moved  to  other  places,
merchants had taken it. When they moved  on,  it had  served  as  a courthouse  for  a
time, then a kennel. For a long while it was  home to  dozens  of  poor  families. Now
guards  in  leather  armor  stood  watch  around  the  ten-foot-high  wall,  crossbows
trained  on  the  open  ground  in  front  of  them.  Torches  blazed  in  iron  holders  all
around  the wall and  on  the building inside. Guards  on  the gate opened  it to  let  us
through without so much as a challenge.
The Rogue expected us.
Inside the house,  we walked down  a hall filled with petitioners,  armsmen on  the
watch for trouble,  thieves, rushers,  them that sell their bodies  –  mots  and  coves  –
and the children of the folk who share the building with the Rogue Kayfer. Under the
dirt and smoke stains, I could see the place must have been beautiful once. Someone
went  to  trouble  carving  out  the  stone  columns  and  wooden  moldings.  Now  both
were chipped, scratched, and smoke-stained.
A lean  spintry  in  a  loincloth  and  not  much  else  decided  to  amuse  himself  by
teasing the Puppy. Surely he knew I was  too  busy,  and  too  poor,  for  his services,
but he beckoned  to  me, flexing hard  chest  muscles.  I looked  away.  It  was  a  very
tight loincloth.
"She's  on  duty,  my  buck,"  Goodwin  said.  Did  she  ever  miss  anything? "Find
yourself another playmate."
"I'll settle for you, flower," he said, giving her a going-over with his eyes. "I love
full-blown roses, who know what a man is for."

"I have a man – a real man. One who doesn't break when I play with him." When
she grinned, all her teeth flashed. The spintry shrugged and moved off.
I couldn't imagine Goodwin having a man.
Then I saw a familiar face, one I never thought to see in the Court.  I cleared  my
throat.
Tunstall glanced at me and  saw  where I looked.  He  poked  Goodwin  before  he
strolled over to Mistress Noll. "Grandmother, I'm shocked!" he said, bending down
to kiss her cheek. "What brings you to so nasty a place?"
"Maggots in my flour. My merchant says the Rogue buys his best now," she said,
her face sour. "Taking advantage of  an old  woman making her way in the world,  I
say.  I left Gemma with my stall and  come  to  make my plea to  the Rogue  to  send
some  of  the good  flour my way. I'm  sure  he'll want something for  his trouble.  He
always does."
"Alone?" Goodwin asked with a frown.
"Goddess, never!" Mistress Noll pointed to just inside the hall. One  of  her sons
and another cove were talking with one of the guards in quiet voices. "Yates and his
friend  came  with  me.  It's  good  to  have  one  son  who  still  lives  in  Corus."  She
lowered her voice. "How did your visit with Crookshank go?"
"As well as you'd expect," Tunstall replied.
"I heard Beka here got to see her old friend Tansy." Mistress Noll's eyes twinkled
as she looked up at Tunstall.
"You knew Beka and Tansy Lofts were friends?" Goodwin asked.
"They  used  to  play on  my street,"  Mistress  Noll  said.  "That  Tansy  was  a  pert
gixie, wasn't she, Beka? But pretty  as  a flower even then. We  all knew she'd  catch
some lucky cove's eye. Ah. I think Yates finally got the right lad to bribe."
To be sure, Yates was beckoning to her. She went to him. I looked  at the floor.
Didn't Mistress  Noll have words  with Tansy  once  or  twice? And what if she  had?
Mistress  Noll's  a  mother.  She'd  speak  kindly  of  a  mot  who'd  lost  her  first  child.
Anyone would.
"Let's go, Puppy. Time to show off that uniform," Goodwin  told  me. "Chin up.
We're here in the name of the Lord Provost."
She must have guessed that would be the spell to put iron in my spine  and  bring
my head  high. I could  walk bold  for  the man who had  taken my family out  of  the
Cesspool.
Pounce  kept  well back  as  we entered what must  have been  the  great  hall  in  the
days when nobles had lived here. Now it was the Rogue's  throne  room.  The  chiefs
sat at tables near one end of the room, their doxies and rushers  around  them. On  a
platform  inches  above  the  floor,  at  a  level  with  the  broad  hearth,  was  a  fellow  I
guessed  to  be  the Rogue  himself –  Kayfer Deerborn.  He sat  on  a throne  made  of
cobbled-together  crates,  wooden  barrels,  and  pieces  of  furniture.  There  he  talked
with a brown-skinned  Carthaki woman in breeches  and  a shirt. There  were  tattoos
around her eyes and ruby studs on the rim of one  ear. She  had  the look  of  a slave
trader to me. Two more Carthakis waited just off the platform at her back. The one
in a slave's collar held the leashes  of  two  big mastiffs.  He was  even more muscled
than the mastiffs.
Waiting there for Kayfer to notice us, I took the chance to fix him in my memory.

All the Cesspool's older women said how broad his shoulders were at one time, how
blue his eyes,  how quick  his smile. I saw  a flabby  cove  in his  early  forties  with  a
smooth arch of nose who was losing his short brown hair. The eyes were very blue,
with plenty of lines around them. He wore a black pearl drop as big as my thumb in
one ear, a silver  hoop  in  the  other,  and  a  gold  ring  with  a  sapphire  the  size  of  a
pigeon's egg on his right index finger. There were tales about how he got that gem.
The smile was well enough.
Kayfer clapped the slave trader on the shoulder. She unhooked a purse  from  her
belt,  but  she  wasn't  so  rude  as  to  hand  it  to  him.  Instead  one  of  Kayfer's  mots
guided her to a small room on the other side of the hearth. The trader's guard, slave,
and dogs followed. The Rogue beckoned to one of his chiefs who was standing.
"We get to wait," Tunstall said, his lips barely moving. "It's  how he proves  he's
still the Rogue."
"Some Rogue," a familiar voice drawled. We looked to our  right. The  bone-pale
cove  from  last  night  and  his  two  ladies  sat  against  the  wall  with  the  rushers  who
served  the  Rogue  and  his  chiefs.  "Sits  on  his  arse  like  a  sarden  king  and  bribes
others to stand for him. I'd hope for someone livelier in charge here."
Goodwin glanced at Kayfer. He was whispering with the chief who had  gone  up
to  him.  Tunstall  ambled  over  to  one  of  the  female  chiefs,  Ulsa.  Her  district  was
Prettybone, across the river. Ulsa grinned and  nudged  out  a chair for  him with her
foot. He took it.
Goodwin  sat  on  her hunkerbones  in front  of  the pale cove.  His right-hand mot,
the small one  who was  as  sleek  as  a  cat,  sat  at  his  side  with  her  ankles  crossed,
fingering her gown. I saw her hand could reach her knife or a curious series of coins
knotted in crimson thread that hung from her belt. These looked like magic. The big
blond mot at the man's left only leaned back against the wall, one hand dangling from
her propped-up knee.
"Now, laddybuck," Goodwin said, friendly as a rat about to eat her young, "why
don't you tell me what kind of lively you're looking for? I'll direct you where to find
it, away from Corus." She smiled, but it wasn't a nice smile.
He gave her the same kind of  smile. Then he looked  at Tunstall, who had  made
the Prettybone chief laugh. Lastly he looked at me. I turned my eyes away.
The cat  mot  nudged  him with her shoulder.  "Stop  it, Rosto,"  she  said.  "Fidget
someone who fidgets you back." She nodded to  Goodwin.  "He's  Rosto  the Piper.
I'm Kora, and that's Aniki." The blond who looked  to  be  a swordswoman  raised  a
lazy hand  in greeting. "We  heard  life was  more...interesting...in  Corus,  so  here  we
are." She gave Goodwin a friendlier smile by far than the one Goodwin gave her.
"Scavengers always come looking when they hear of a feast. So far it's been long
put  off,"  Goodwin  told  them.  "Kayfer  –  his  chiefs  –  have  done  away  with  any
challengers."
"Oh,  we're not  looking to  challenge,"  Rosto  said.  "We  hope  to  be  entertained.
Scanra was that bare of entertainment."
"Here's  a fine-looking cat,"  Aniki said.  Pounce  had  arrived. He sauntered  up  to
her. "A very handsome, elegant – " She gulped.
"Purple  eyes,"  Kora  said  quietly.  "Odd-colored  eyes  in  a  creature  mean  it's
god-marked." She leaned forward and stroked my cat, who butted  his head  against

her palm. He is soft on mages.
"He's the Puppy's," Goodwin said, watching them. "He's a clever beast."
Pounce gave the ripple of mrts that was his laugh, though I was the only one who
knew it.
Rosto looked past us and raised his eyebrows. "Hello. What's this?"
In walked Crookshank,  gaunt, unshaven,  hollow-eyed. His narrow leggings were
wrinkled, as if he'd slept in them. His knee-length tunic was  little better.  There  were
stains on it, too. His black hair was snarled. Two of his manservants  followed him,
empty  sword  and  dagger  scabbards  at  their  belts.  The  guards  had  taken  their
weapons.
Tunstall left off  talking to  Ulsa and  came to  stand  by  us.  Goodwin  rose,  too.  I
placed  myself  at  Goodwin's  elbow,  making  sure  I  did  not  block  anyone's  view.
Aniki, who was nearest to me, winked.
"Kayfer,  you  two-faced  scummer,  we  was  partners!"  screeched  Crookshank.
"Even  a  sucking  leech  like  you  shoulda  been  content  wi'  your  share,  you
greedy-gutted spintry!"
The  Rogue  stood  on  his  platform,  rubbing  the  top  of  his  head.  "I  beg  you,
Ammon, calm down," he said, his voice soothing. "Whatever your grievance wi' me,
we can surely sort it out."
"Grievance?  You  call  my  great-grandson's  murder  a  grievance?"  Crookshank
yelled, pointing at Kayfer, his bony finger quivering. "What kind of monster takes  a
wee child from his family and murders 'im for profit? Did you think you could  hide
behind notes smuggled into my house and I would not suspect you?"
Kayfer stepped down off his platform, both hands out, his face as sorrowful as a
professional mourner's. "Ammon, I know it is your grief which makes you say these
things."
"Butter just melts on 'is tongue, doesn't it," Rosto murmured.
"Bad laddie," Aniki told him. "Hush. Listen to a master work."
I glanced at Goodwin and saw the corners of her mouth twitch. I began to  think
mayhap she liked these three impudent rascals from the north.
"Of  course  it's  my  grief,  Stormwings  take  your  eyes!"  screamed  Crookshank.
"Your  Shadow  Snake  murdered  my  Rolond,  when  he  was  not  in  our  business!"
Tears rolled down his face. I almost felt bad for him. Then I remembered  that he'd
kicked my cousin Lilac's family from their lodgings when she was having a bad time,
and Lilac lost her baby.
"Ammon, the Shadow Snake is a bogey to frighten children." The Rogue's voice
was as smooth as warm oil. "You must be cracked spun with grievin', to say I'd deal
with a monster out of tales. And as for me of all folk sendin' anyone t' harm a child
..." His voice cracked when he said "child." "Ammon, I swear on the names of  my
own grandbabies, I did not do it." Kayfer's blue eyes were steady on Crookshank's
brown ones. They did not waver. Not a muscle of his mouth twitched to give away a
lie. I supposed the Rogue would have to be the realm's best liar, but I believed him
even so. Kayfer went on, "In the name of Bright Mithros and the Goddess herself, I
swear it. I would never bring such harm to any family of yours. We depend on each
other,  old  friend. I never conjured  up  a nightmare like the Snake.  I never  gave  the
task of murderin' your little cove t' any of my chiefs. My chiefs would never do such

a thing at my biddin'."
"Curst right we would not!" cried Dawull, the huge, redheaded chief who had the
Waterfront District on  both  sides  of  the river. Kayfer shot  him a glare, but  Dawull
only smiled. I wondered when Dawull might decide that a Rogue's take from  all the
chiefs might be better than most of the take from only Waterfront District.
Crookshank  spat  at  Kayfer's  feet.  "Liar."  He  glared  at  everyone  in  the  room.
"You're  leeches,  living off  the rest  of  us  and  feeding  this  oathbreaker!"  His  voice
rasped with exhaustion. "Look at the lot of you!" He swung his hands wide. "Sitting
here lapping up drink and food like caged birds. I curse him. If you take his orders
and  protect  his  throne,  then  I  curse  you  in  Rolond's  name.  You  best  mind  your
children!"
"Crookshank, you're mad!" Ulsa cried. "There is no such creature as the Shadow
Snake!"
Kayfer snapped his fingers, calling his rushers. Four of them seized Crookshank's
guards.  Another  grabbed  the  old  man  by  the  arm.  Kayfer  stepped  closer  to
Crookshank. "It is terrible, what's happened. We all are sick with sorrow for it," he
said, his voice quieter. "But why you, Ammon? Why might someone  callin' himself
Shadow  Snake  target  your  house,  your  family?  What  tidbit  has  come  into  your
hands of late? Why have you not offered a taste to your Rogue?"
Crookshank lunged at Kayfer with a knife he'd pulled from the folds of his tunic.
The chiefs  jumped to  their feet with a  roar,  trying  to  get  to  the  Rogue  before  his
throat got cut.
But it was Rosto who got there first – he was a blur, as quick as Sergeant Ahuda.
Had he  been  waiting  for  it?  Or  had  he  just  been  ready  to  move  at  need,  like  the
Sergeant was always telling us to do?
"Quick little spintry, isn't he?" Aniki asked, her voice just reaching us Dogs. "You
should see him swarm up a house wall. A thing of beauty, he is."
"I'll pass  on  the  house  wall,  thanks  so  much,"  Goodwin  replied,  her  voice  the
same kind of quiet. "I'd hate to arrest such a pretty fellow."
"He  promises  to  be  interesting,  if  he  manages  to  live,"  Tunstall  murmured  as
Rosto plucked the dagger from  Crookshank's  hand  and  gave it to  one  of  Kayfer's
rushers. Only after Rosto searched Crookshank did he let the old  man up.  He was
very good.  Those  who didn't  have the same point  of  view as  we Dogs  would not
have seen Rosto slip something into his own left boot top.
"Oh,  well, living," Kora  said.  "Aniki, a silver –  what's  that  local  coin?  A  silver
noble that the big redheaded chief is the first to offer Rosto a job."
"Done," replied Aniki.
"Two  silver  nobles  it's  Ulsa,  the  chief  of  Prettybone,"  Tunstall  said  without
turning to look at them. "She likes handsome coves that know what they're doing."
He glanced back at them. "Even more if they have pretty mots who also know what
they're doing."
Aniki reached up, offering her palm. "Bet."
Tunstall turned and clasped it. "Bet."
Rosto was sauntering back to us, hands in his pockets.
"Puppy, fetch," Goodwin ordered me in a voice that just reached my ears.
I couldn't believe she would say that to me, after the night before. Then I steeled

myself. I knew what she wanted. I had to redeem myself. Goddess, please don't let
me fumble, I prayed,  turning my baton  in my fingers. I went to  rearrange it on  my
belt. As Rosto drew level with me, I dropped it on the floor and lunged for it, right
across his shins. Quick as he was, with my body in the way he didn't see I'd put my
baton  between  his  feet.  Down  he  went  as  I  turned,  making  us  a  tangle  of  baton,
Puppy, and Rosto.
"Dear, if you'd asked,  I'd've  considered  it," he muttered as  he tried to  undo  us.
"You're a pretty thing when you look a cove in the eye."
I stammered apologies, seemingly trying to get my baton untangled from his legs.
That was a trick to manage, with him being so nimble. He almost freed himself twice
before  I thought we'd  been  at it long enough that he'd  be  too  flustered  to  think to
check his boot top soon. By the time we stood, Dawull of Waterfront led the guards
as they dragged  the screaming Crookshank  from  the hall. The  chiefs  now  went  to
Kayfer  to  congratulate  him  on  his  escape.  Goodwin  came  over  to  straighten  my
clothes  and  scold  me  for  my  clumsiness.  As  she  did,  I  passed  her  the
leather-wrapped lump that had been in Rosto's boot.
"Now, Clary, the Pup can't help it," Tunstall said, watching us. "Her second day,
after  all.  She's  yet  to  get  used  to  things  breaking  out  sudden-like."  He  knew
something was up. I saw it in his eyes. I met his gaze and raised my brows, flicking
my  eyes  beyond  his  shoulder  to  warn  him  we  were  about  to  have  company.
Goodwin saw me do it and turned. So did Tunstall.
Kayfer nodded  to  them as  he passed  us.  He offered  his hand  to  Rosto,  whose
mots  fussed  over  him, tugging at his clothes.  With the Rogue  standing  there,  they
stepped  back  to  take positions  just behind  Rosto.  Aniki  hooked  her  hands  in  her
sword belt. Kora folded hers before her, lowering her long lashes.
Rosto took the hand  that Kayfer offered.  "The  least I could  do,  Majesty. I saw
the  knife's  shape  against  the  old  cuckoo's  tunic.  Sad  work  your  guards  done
searching 'im, you ask me."
Kayfer's  smile had  a lot of  friendliness in it. "You've  a  good  eye.  Are  you  and
your gixies here lookin' for work? My gate crew goes for a swim tonight, unless they
convince  me  they  can  make  their  way  back  into  my  good  graces  as  wounded
mumpers."
I winced. A choice between death and life as a maimed beggar was a hard one.
"Majesty, you're not talking of breaking the law in violence before three Dogs, are
you?" Tunstall asked. His voice was so polite he might have been speaking of temple
services. "We can't have that on our watch. Not when we're standing right here."
Kayfer  looked  up  at  Tunstall  and  laughed.  "Never  a  bit,  Mattes  Tunstall.  Why
don't you and Goodwin come settle our business. Young Rosto and I can talk later.
Maybe extra sweetenin' will make it into this week's  Happy  Bag, to  assure  you  I'd
never do violence with the Dogs out." He glanced at me and then pinched my cheek.
"Leave the Puppy. She doesn't look like she'll last."
I clenched my jaw so tight I heard my teeth creak.
He led Goodwin and Tunstall back to his precious throne. I took the rest position,
baton gripped two-handed before me, my feet braced a forearm's width apart. Those
who'd  heard  Kayfer enjoyed a laugh at my expense  before  going about  their  other
business.

"A nice trick, lifting that pouch from me." Rosto stood at my elbow. "If you're a
Fishpuppy  like  the  gossip  says,  it's  because  you're  so  slippery.  I  don't  suppose
you'd take a silver noble to tell me what it is, once your Dogs have a look? From the
feel it's gems, but it never hurts to be certain."
I forgot myself enough to glare at him. His eyes were mocking. I looked away just
as quick as I'd glared. It was  one  thing to  trip the cove  on  Goodwin's  orders,  and
quite another to talk to him. Besides, I was on duty.
"Not  taking offense  over  a bit of  bribery,  are  you?"  There  was  mockery  in  his
voice as  well  as  his  eyes.  "On  the  very  night  your  Dogs  are  here  to  collect  their
bribes from the Rogue?"
I glared  at  the  floor  this  time.  I  expected  a  cityman  to  talk  so  foolish,  not  an
experienced rusher. "That's different. That's for all the work every one of us does, to
keep the streets orderly. You're asking me to sell out my Dogs."
I saw his booted feet rock back on his heels.
"Hel-lo!  It  has  a  bark  and  a  bite!"  He  sounded  startled.  "Here  I  was  thinking
you're a mousy little bit. But you're not mousy, are you?"
Seeing the start of movement, I blocked his arm before his slap touched my face.
I turned  my  hand  around  to  grip  the  inside  of  his  wrist.  When  I  found  the  gap
between two of the tendons there, I dug my thumbnail deep into it.
"Ow," he said, trying to yank free. I'd put  my hand  so  the harder  he tugged,  the
deeper I could thrust my thumbnail.
"Rosto,  you  take shy  as  fearful. Why would a coward  become  a Dog?  There's
easier ways for a pretty gixie to make a living." Aniki propped one elbow on Rosto's
collarbone and leaned on him like he was a convenient post. She smiled down at me.
"Normally he's not thick about mots, but he's slow when they're not in love with him.
Me and Kora had to knock him around until he got us figured out. Say you're sorry,
Rosto, and don't try to bribe the nice Puppy again."
"I'm sorry, all right? I'm bleeding."
I  had  broken  his  skin.  I  took  my  hand  away  and  wiped  my  thumb  on  my
breeches. That was the good thing about black. It didn't show stains.
It was easier to look into Aniki's smiling blue eyes than Rosto's. I told her, "Two
days as a Dog and I've my first bribe offer. I think it's a record."
She laughed and cuffed Rosto lightly. "She's shy, cabbage head, not stupid."
Rosto  had  a  handkerchief  pressed  to  the  wound  I'd  left  in  his  wrist.  "So  I'm
learning. What's your name, then, shy-not-stupid Puppy?"
I told him my name. There was no reason not to. Besides, I had a feeling that I'd
see these  three  again.  If  Kayfer  didn't  decide  it  was  to  his  advantage  to  kill  such
talented new people, they might rise high in the Court of the Rogue.
I saw movement at my side. Kora stepped in next to me, cuddling Pounce in her
arms. "I heard folk say last night that your mother was an herbalist." She had a soft,
pretty voice and demure eyes. "So then you might be able to  tell me where I could
get  good  dried  and  fresh  herbs,  the  reliable  sellers?  We're  still  learning  our  way
around. With so many markets I hardly know where to look."
It was odd to speak of something innocent. Odd, but nice. Rosto had an interest
in the subject of herbs, more than I expected of a cove.  He even argued with Kora
about the benefits of dried chamomile against fresh for lightening hair. Aniki drifted

away to play dice with some of the rushers.
"So, Cooper," Rosto said after Kora had thanked me, "how quick  is this Rogue
to  wield  the  whip?"  When  I  looked  at  him  and  waited,  he  explained,  "That
Crookshank fellow. What did the Rogue call him?"
"Ammon,"  I  said.  "That's  his  birth  name,  Ammon  Lofts.  In  the  streets  he's
Crookshank, scale and landlord."
"Ammon Lofts," Rosto  said.  "Him. Your Rogue  daren't  let him go  unpunished,
can he? Not  after Master Lofts  called Crookshank  spits  at  his  feet  in  front  of  his
whole court."
I know as well as anybody Crookshank must pay for what he's done, but it's been
three years since Kayfer pulled up and belted his own breeches.  It was  folly to  say
as much, though. "You'd have to ask the Rogue," I said at last. "How was it done in
Scanra?"
"Right then and  there,"  Rosto  told  me. "The  one  time I saw  it done.  Poor  fool
was drunk. Not that it stopped our Rogue." He went on with the story, with Kora to
put in the bits  he left out,  about  the Rogue  for  Scanra.  At last my Dogs  returned,
their  packs  with  the  Happy  Bags  heavy  on  their  backs.  Rosto  and  Kora  nodded
goodbye as Pounce and I fell in behind them.
As we walked out of that house, I felt visible. The Rogue's Happy Bags had more
than just the coin in bribes paid to the Jane Street kennel. They also held gems, fine
statues,  magical devices,  and  other  items. Now we walked  into  the  Cesspool  with
fortunes  on  the  backs  of  my  Dogs.  They  do  this  every  week  and  live?  The  hair
prickled on the back of my neck. Surely this was asking a great deal even from them.
Usually pairs took the Bags to collection points, where armed crews gathered the
week's earnings to be split among the Dogs. Did we have such a crew? I wanted to
ask. Or did we carry the Rogue's Bags alone, to make a point about his power in the
Cesspool and ours? What if the Dogs thought that no one would dare try to rob the
Rogue's own Bags?
"Stop sweating, Puppy," Goodwin told me as the gates closed behind us. "It's  a
thing of pride, to go in there and come out on our own. The Rogue's always known
that, if anything happens to  the Dogs  who call for  the Happy  Bags,  his stronghold
will be ash by dawn. Some laws a madman breaks. But we're not stupid."
A block  away,  five  Dogs  with  horses  waited  for  us.  Three  were  mounted  and
armed with crossbows.  I knew them: they were part  of  the  guard  who  served  my
lord Gershom personally. Jakorn had taught me to use a crossbow. He grinned and
nodded  to  me. The  two  guards  on  foot  I knew from  the Jane Street  kennel.  They
took the packs from Tunstall and Goodwin with a little conversation, then looked at
me.
"She manage her first visit with the Rogue and his milk-fed geldings?" asked  one
of them.
"She  did  well for  us.  We'll keep  her,"  Tunstall told  them. "Run  along,  children.
We have work to do yet. And Ahuda doesn't like to wait."
They trotted off into the darkness of the Lower City. Goodwin was still watching
them when she asked me, "So did he try to bribe you? Rosto?"
"Yes,"  I  replied.  "He  wanted  to  know  what  was  in  the  thing  he  took  from
Crookshank."

"We'll have a look  over  supper,"  Tunstall said.  "Very nice work with the baton,
Cooper."
"I liked  how  you  shielded  it  with  your  body,  so  he  couldn't  see  you  use  it  to
tangle him up," Goodwin said. "You outthought him."
I shook  my head,  and  Tunstall  saw  it.  "You  planned  for  him  being  better  than
you?" I nodded.  "Smart  Puppy,"  he said  with approval.  "You  earned your  supper
again for the night."
"Well, she has a while till she gets it," Goodwin said, making sure her gorget was
fastened. Tunstall was doing the same. "We've a way to go  before  we can  think of
eating." She  pulled out  the gloves tucked  into her belt and  put  them on.  They had
mail stitched on the backs  and  palms.  She  then strapped  her wrist guards  over  the
edges of the gloves. Tunstall's gloves had metal straps on the back  instead  of  mail,
though he had mail over his palms.
Goodwin  looked  me over.  "We  need  to  get you  a gorget,  Cooper.  And  proper
gloves. Leather isn't good enough in the Cesspool. Stick close to us for tonight."
"I'll see to the gear," Tunstall added. He clapped me on the shoulder. "It may take
a couple of days. Should be quiet, with all their chiefs and rushers in for the Happy
Bag, Cooper. They like to frolic in the Cesspool  once  Kayfer turns  them loose,  to
show who's on top and who's low-down. Most folk will keep out of sight."
I soon realized that Tunstall's idea of a quiet night and mine are different. By the
time we reached Mulberry Way, we'd stopped three robberies, two casual beatings,
and two tavern brawls. At least, my Dogs did. I was ordered to stand off and watch.
It was an honor, so neatly did they work. We hobbled no one.  My Dogs  found  no
one worth the trouble. They explained what they did as they did it, so I would learn.
The  robbers  got  a  broken  arm  each,  since  they  attacked  only  for  coppers.  They
would pay more to healers than they had hoped to get from  their victims, who fled
as soon as my Dogs stepped in. In the cases of the beatings, Goodwin and Tunstall
administered  broken  fingers  to  several  of  the  rushers  involved.  They  broke  one
rusher's hand, because he worked for a slave trader who liked to force folk to sell to
him. Those victims ran away, too. In the case of the tavern brawls, my Dogs simply
kicked everyone out.
They did let me hold on to two of a gang of boys who thought torturing a piglet
was a night's fun. Pounce led the piglet away while Goodwin  delivered businesslike
paddlings with her baton. I gave her my captives when their turn for a lesson came.
Those  scuts  would  wish  their  mothers  had  taught  them  better,  limping  for  some
weeks after the unkind kiss of a Dog's weighted stick.
On we wandered. Most of what we saw up this way was owned by Crookshank,
Tunstall said.  Thousands  of  families had  him for  a  landlord.  He  could  be  rich  on
their coin alone and never go near stolen goods.
"His greed  don't  stop."  Goodwin  said  it  with  the  strictness  of  a  Mithran  priest
speaking for the good of our souls. "Could I but catch one of his bookkeepers and
make him sing, we might be able to roll the monster up. Speaking of monsters, what
was that gabble about the Shadow Snake?"
"I've been wondering about that myself," Tunstall said. "Crookshank's so cracked
with grief he's making up babies'-tale creepies."
"He got the idea someplace," Goodwin said.

I'd been hearing a fight for  the last moment as  we walked along, a mot's  shouts
and  children's  shrieks.  Then  a  cove  bellowed.  We  heard  crockery  shatter  in  the
building just to the left. Someone screamed, "Goddess save them, she's got a blade!
Come on, Jack, stop 'er afore she does yer babes!"
A mot yelled, "She's curst near done him!"
A shutter flew open  on  the ground  floor.  A cove  leaned out.  He looked  around
and saw us. "She says she'll crop the littles' nobs, an' she's a knife in her hand! Two
stories up!"
Goodwin and Tunstall traded looks. No Dog likes to be caught in a family brawl,
but if the neighbors were right, this mot was threatening to cut her babes' heads off.
They charged  through the  house's  doorless  entry  and  up  the  rickety  steps,  me  at
their heels. We  had  to  shove  our  way past  clumps  of  neighbors  at  both  landings.
None of them wanted to get caught in this, not when knives were involved. They did
point to the door where the worst of the noise came through.
It was the babble of children pleading for their mother to  stop,  to  be  nice. They
told her they loved her. She screamed she would cut their throats if they didn't shut
their gobs. A cove was telling her to calm down.
"In the name of the King's law!" Tunstall shouted as he tried the latch. The  door
wasn't  locked.  He shoved  it open,  showing  up  a  middling-sized  main  room.  Here
was their hearth and table and the children's pallets. The little ones stood in a corner
on the far side of the window, two girls and a toddling boy in a dirty napkin. Their
papa stood closer to us, near the tiny hearth in the wall. Between them, at the center
of the room,  was  the woman.  She  had  a  long  knife  in  her  hand,  and  she  swayed
where she stood. I could see her small brown eyes, flicking quick like a bird's from
Goodwin  to  Tunstall.  My  Dogs  spread  apart  to  make  it  look  like  she  could  dart
between them to reach the door. I was in that opening, but she might think she could
shove by me.
The oldest of the little ones had a black  eye. Another had  a scratched  face.  The
cove  had  blood  on  his  face  from  cuts  around  one  eye.  His  lip  was  split  and  his
patched shirt ripped. From the broken crockery at his feet, she had thrown a jug at
him. I knew by the vinegar and mint smell that it had held hotblood wine.
Goodwin  sighed  and  scratched  her  head.  "Mistress,  what  do  you  think  you're
doing?"  she  asked.  "You've  gone  and  upset  your  neighbors.  We  can't  have  you
disturbing the King's peace.  Your man  will  need  a  healer  for  those  cuts,  and  you
know  what  healers  cost  these  days.  Added  to  that,  you'll  have  the  cost  of  the
Magistrate's fine. Don't make it worse for yourself. Put the blade down. Come  with
us."
The mot replied with a suggestion so foul I was impressed.
Goodwin didn't even twitch. "That's very nice. The blade, Mistress – What's your
name?"
She cursed us again.
"Orva,"  the cove  told  us  wearily. "You've  gone  too  far this time. Put  down  the
knife and do as you're told."
I hadn't seen her other hand or guessed she might have something in it, like a little
stone  mortar they'd  use  for  grinding herbs.  I saw  it now,  when she  threw it at  her
man's head. Tunstall knew it was  there, because  he caught it easily. And Goodwin

knew  that  it  was  there  and  that  Tunstall  would  catch  it,  because  she  lunged  for
Orva's arm, the one holding the knife.
The  mot  was  quick  enough  to  have  been  a  good  Dog.  I  saw  her  move  as
Goodwin  lunged.  Orva  struck  backhand,  her  fist  turned  sideways.  She  caught
Goodwin with the butt of the hilt square on the hinge of the jaw. Goodwin dropped,
her eyes rolled up in her head.
The children screamed. Then Tunstall said very quietly, "Orva. You struck a Dog
with a blade."
She turned and leaped through the unshuttered window. I went after her. I didn't
even think, or it might have occurred to  me that I was  jumping to  a pair of  broken
legs or a broken back. It turned out this window opened onto stairs that went down
the outside of the house. I hit on the landing with a jarring of  my ankles. Orva  was
racing down those stairs. I scrambled to my feet and followed.
She took  me through the Cesspool,  alley by  alley, through puddles  of  slop  and
hollows of  mud.  The  only light leaked from  the open  doors  of  drinking  dens  and
brothels. Hotblood wine, filled with herbs, kept Orva going long after a mere drunk
would have dropped.  I slipped  and  stumbled  into a tumbledown  fence  somewhere
behind the Court  of  the Rogue.  Orva  was  nowhere in view. I blinked, listening for
her running steps rather than trusting my eyes. I heard the rustle of cloth behind me
and jumped away just as she thrust that knife through the gap in the fence behind me.
She had circled around. I found the opening she used and darted through. She  was
off again, plunging between two dark houses.
I was closing the gap between us when she dove into the back door of a tavern. I
followed, ignoring curses and swerving to avoid a cook chopping rats for stew meat.
I  dodged  a  serving  girl  who  tried  to  smack  me  with  a  wooden  tankard.  In  the
common room Orva made for the door, jumping over drunks and showing her knife
to the ones who didn't get the message.
I saw my chance and leaped onto the tables as a shortcut  to  the door.  I ignored
the yells of fury. I was a Dog in pursuit. If these  tosspots  couldn't  see  my uniform
under the muck, they could see the baton in my hand.
Orva was through the door just before I reached it. She slammed it shut. The bar
on  the  inside  thumped  down  the  moment  the  slam  shook  it  from  its  position.  I
wrestled the bar up and got the door open  in time to  see  Orva  turn a corner  a half
block away, where torches from a cockfight lit that part of the street.
She took me through another drinking den. The third time, I skidded around to the
front door. When she came dashing through, I swung my baton around, straight into
her middle. She  doubled  over,  dropping  the knife. I  kicked  it  out  of  the  way  and
wrenched one of her arms up behind her back.
"Kneel," I said between gasps for air. "I arrest you in the name of the King." As a
Puppy, I wasn't really allowed to arrest someone, but I doubted  that Orva  knew as
much.
She wailed. "I di'n' do nothin'. Why di'n' you lemme go?" She was even more out
of breath than I was. Her head lolled on her neck.
"Orva, you struck a Dog," I reminded the stupid drunken creature. I tightened my
grip. "Now will you kneel, or will I dump you on your front?"
"I want to see my children," she whined.

With a sigh I levered my strength down on her captive  arm. She  had  to  kneel or
get an elbow broken. I didn't want to use my baton, in case some looby decided to
help her. As it was, people were coming out of the tavern and gathering on the street
to watch.
Orva knelt, babbling about her little ones. I thought that if they and their papa had
any sense,  they would be  halfway to  Barzun by  now.  But I wouldn't  bet  a copper
that papa and the little ones wouldn't beg the Magistrate to free Orva.
I tied her wrists with my rawhide cords, their first use. Then I used a pair of cords
to tie her ankles so she could walk, but not so well that she wouldn't fall if she tried
to run again. Not that I thought she might. Her legs trembled even worse than mine.
I looked  at  my  surroundings.  Mithros,  we'd  come  almost  to  the  North  Gate!
There was no point in going back to her house. Tunstall would have taken Goodwin
in for care. He'd know I would report back to Jane Street  if we were separated,  so
Jane Street was where we'd go. Orva was bound for the cages anyway.
I looked for the knife. Someone had taken it. "I want the blade and I want it now,"
I said, feeling more than a little cross. It was  easier to  talk with my face  in shadow
and a Dog's uniform, even a Puppy's, on my body. "It's evidence in a crime. In the
King's name."
Some of the watchers chuckled. I gripped my baton hard. Did I have the strength
to break a few heads like a good Dog, to make my point, or should I just let it go?
Then, to my surprise, a little one came forward with the knife and offered it to me. "I
di'n't mean no harm by't, Guardswoman," he (or maybe she) mumbled.
I swallowed an odd  feeling in my throat.  I'd  never been  called  "Guardswoman"
before.  "All right, then,"  I said,  sounding  properly  gruff in  my  own  ears.  "You've
done your duty."
The child touched  a knuckle to  his, or  her, forehead  for  respect  and  went back
into the crowd.
Still feeling strange, maybe even proud,  I poked  Orva  with my baton.  "Walk,"  I
told her. "And walk silent."
The crowd  parted  so  we could  pass  through.  Now that I  was  calming  down,  I
could feel every bone  in my feet, because  each  of  them hurt. It was  going to  be  a
fearful long trip back to Jane Street.
 
It was well past suppertime and my belly was growling by the time I hauled Orva
into the kennel. Only the threat  of  my  baton  and  a  ride  partway  on  a  chance-met
wagon  had  brought  her  this  far.  She  had  the  gall  to  drop  to  her  knees  and  cry,
"Thank the Goddess!" when we walked through the door. "I'm weary to death!"
I swore never to turn into one of those Dogs who hit their Rats as easy as talking
to them. I was sore tempted, though.
We  were  halfway  to  Ahuda's  desk  before  I  thought  to  look  for  Goodwin  and
Tunstall. They were in the corner  by  the healers' room.  The  beds  inside were  full.
Tunstall watched as a healer worked her magic on Goodwin's swollen face. Then all
three of them turned to stare at me. Tunstall's mouth fell open. I looked  around  the
room. Everyone there – Dogs on duty, visitors for those in the cages, hangers-on –
gaped at me and my first captive Rat.
Then I heard Ahuda, high on her perch, say, "Great Mithros bless us, you actually

 caught her."
I  was  so  startled  I  looked  at  the  Sergeant.  Wasn't  catching  her  what  I  was
supposed to do? "Sh-she hit a Dog with a blade," I stammered.
Tunstall came over. "And I didn't even have to say 'fetch.'"
"Here we were thinking you were naught but a Fishpuppy, and you turn out to be
one  stubborn  little  terrier."  Ahuda  was  shaking  her  head  as  she  opened  the  thick
arrest book. "Lockup!" she yelled. "Rat coming in!"
"I want to see my children," Orva whined. "I want my Jack. He'll be tellin' you – "
"Shut your gob," said Ahuda. I thought I'd seen her at her worst  when she  dealt
with us trainees. I was wrong. "You tell me nothin' in my kennel. Here, I am Queen
Bitch, and you will muzzle yourself." She turned to the cage Dogs.  "Get  her out  of
my air – she stinks of hotblood wine. And make sure Cooper gets  her cords  back,
uncut. If you have to cut them, give her good replacements." She turned to me now.
"Cooper, you don't leave till you get one or  the other  and  sign my supply  book  to
claim which. Cords cost money."
My knees were frightful wobbly, from work and from talking before all those pairs
of eyes. "Yes, Sergeant."
Ahuda pursed her lips. "Sit, girl, before you fall. Over by the healers. Tunstall, get
her a cup of that restorative tea, the one that tastes like hay."
I  sat  on  one  of  the  benches  near  the  healers'  room.  Then  I  had  to  change
positions. Tunstall was pointing me to a seat directly across from Goodwin and the
healer who tended her jaw. I took a quick glance as  I settled  into the new place.  A
huge bruise went from Goodwin's cheekbone under her chin on that side,  but  there
was no swelling.
The healer stood back and looked at it. "You'll be sore for some days, and you'll
need to eat on the other side, but given you'd a cracked jaw and a knot the size of a
walnut, you'd best not complain. You're lucky I do  bones  so  well or  you  wouldn't
talk for a week. What were you hit with, a hammer?"
"The hilt of a butcher knife," Tunstall said when Goodwin opened her mouth and
winced. "I don't suppose you have it, Puppy."
Given all her whining and foot dragging, I'd needed the hand  that didn't  hold  the
baton to keep Orva moving. Thrusting the knife into my belt would have meant the
tip pricked my thighs. I reached inside my tunic and fished it out. I'd  prayed  all the
way to the kennel that I wouldn't fall and stab myself.
"Mithros," whispered Tunstall. "The thing's a pig sticker."
Goodwin smiled crookedly and beckoned for the knife. I gave it to her, hilt first.
It was  black,  heavy wood  at the  hilt.  The  thing  had  been  valuable  once,  before  a
thousand sharpenings had made the blade as thin as a lock pick. The healer whistled,
looking at it. "The Mother blessed you tonight, Guardswoman. Had this struck you a
little harder, your jaw might well have shattered beyond my skill."
Tunstall got my cup of tea. I looked at it, wishing I had  the gumption to  ask  for
food instead.
"You're  starvin',  an'  so'm  I,"  Goodwin  said.  "Knock  that  back,  an'  we'll  get  a
proper supper."
"Soft foods for you," the healer warned Goodwin.
"May  I  feed  our  Puppy  now?"  Goodwin  asked  with  frightful  patience.  "She

d'serves a treat."
I looked at her, shocked.
"Don't worry," Tunstall reassured me. "She'll get over it eventually."
I hoped so. I couldn't have Goodwin changing her nature on me from day to day.
I liked to know where I stood with people.
Most  of  the  usual  Dog  trade  had  been  and  gone  by  the  time  we  reached  the
Mantel and  Pullet.  Now  my  legs  ached.  I  hoped  it  wasn't  the  run.  As  a  message
runner I had covered the city at a trot. I'd hate to  think I was  so  out  of  trim. True,
even  a  run  from  Unicorn  District  to  the  palace  was  not  the  same  as  chasing  a
half-mad female through the Cesspool, then dragging her back to Jane Street.
Tunstall beckoned  one  of  the server  girls over.  "A  quiet  room,"  he  said.  Silver
passed from his hand to hers. "No fuss about it," he added.
The server girl led us into a narrow hall. Along one side were four doors covered
with flimsy curtains. She pointed us  through the third. We  ordered  our  food.  Poor
Goodwin  requested  pease  porridge,  which  made  the  girl  take  a  step  back.  Once
she'd brought it all, she closed a wooden door behind the flimsy curtains.
"No magic in these rooms," Tunstall told  me as  he cut  a thick slice of  ham into
tiny pieces. "The host  is paid  extra to  make sure  of  it." He looked  at Goodwin  as
she poked the contents of her bowl. "Mayhap you should go home after this, Clary,
leave me'n Cooper to finish the night."
"Curst if I will," she muttered. "We'll go back to th' Cesspool. If I get t' break s'm
heads, I'll cheer up."
"If  you  bang  your  jaw,  you  won't  be  cheery,"  Tunstall  warned.  "Cooper,  take
more of them parsnips. You need some meat on your bones."
"Mother hen," Goodwin said.
"Will you  gabble till the giants return, or  will  you  show  us  what  that  canny  lad
Rosto foisted from Crookshank?" Tunstall asked. Then, slowly and with great care,
he  buttered  a  fat  roll  bursting  with  nuts  and  raisins  and  ate  it,  making  sounds  of
delight.
Goodwin swiftly took a spoonful of porridge, levered it back with her free hand,
and released it like a catapult. The porridge flew to land on Tunstall's forehead.
I covered my mouth with both hands that I might not giggle. The toughest Dogs in
the city still have some play in them!
Tunstall used an unbuttered piece of roll to wipe his forehead. He popped roll and
porridge into his mouth. "You've been practicing," he mumbled with his mouth full.
Goodwin  smirked and  dug  in her breeches  pocket.  "Don'  torture  me wi' what  I
can't eat, Mattes," she warned. "Not wi' my belly growlin' like menag'rie bears." She
fetched out the leather pouch as Tunstall and me shoved plates aside. She spilled out
five stones.
They were like the rock in my breeches pocket. When Tunstall drew the oil lamp
closer,  they  showed  brilliant  flashes  of  color.  One  had  a  bulge  of  glasslike  stuff.
Within the glass were dark  orange flecks,  some  clear patches,  and  a strip  of  deep,
green blaze. One had a lump of clear stuff the size of my thumb.  In the lamplight it
flashed lilac, blue, and palest orange. Another threw off green fire in a rippling strip
along its spine,  a  fourth  shone  with  tiny  yellow,  green,  and  blue  sparkles.  A  fifth
showed spots that looked like deep glass wells, one green, one dark blue.

"Oh,  we got t'  get a mage,"  Goodwin  said.  "Tunstall,  we  need  you-know-who.
First thing tomorrow."
Tunstall raised his eyebrows. "You're certain?"
Goodwin nodded. She gently slid each  stone  back  into the pouch.  "We've  seen
plenty  a'  gems  in  our  day,  Mattes.  These're  diff'rent.  Goddess,  m'jaw  hurts.
Crookshank took these t' Kayfer."
"You  think he meant to  bribe  the Rogue?  He  went  about  it  strangely."  Tunstall
offered Goodwin the tiniest bit of ham on the tip of his knife. She  took  it, chewing
carefully.
"One of the chiefs?" I asked. I didn't look at them for fear they might scowl.
Then I heard Goodwin say, "Go on."
"Dawull of Waterfront – he helped the guards take Crookshank away last night." I
drew patterns in the gravy on  my plate. In my mind's  eye I saw  the big redheaded
Dawull chivvy the rushers along. "Since when does  one  of  the Rogue's  own chiefs
take out the trash? Were me, I'd  worry more that Crookshank  might remember me
when he got his feet under him again."
Tunstall rested his chin on his hand. "Good point."
"Dawull's first 'mong the chiefs. All them waterfront toughs t'  call on,"  Goodwin
said. "Strong fellow. When he was  movin' cargo  in Port  Caynn,  he'd  knock  an ox
down, f'r bet money. He c'n stand a few challenges if he's Rogue."
"Crookshank's  money,  he  could  buy  some  of  the  other  chiefs,"  Tunstall  said.
"Enough to overset Kayfer, though?"
"Might Kayfer actually claim to be this Shadow Snake?" I asked. "If he did and he
killed Rolond, the chiefs might turn on him. Crookshank could buy them then."
"You b'lieve that?" Goodwin asked. "No, Crookshank's been at th' bottle, t' yelp
of th' Snake. My nursey tol' me that one. Waits at th'  crossroads  an'  swallows bad
children. It's a bogey story, Cooper. You never heard it?"
Of course I'd heard of the Shadow Snake. I'd just never known anyone cracked –
or hard – enough to use the name for anything, let alone the murderer of a child.
"Someone  calls  himself  the  Shadow  Snake,  to  do  business,"  Tunstall  said,
thinking  out  loud.  "They  use  the  bogey  story,  to  put  the  fear  into  him.  To  pay
Crookshank back for something. The old man's up to his skull in enemies. Now he
knows someone's out there who's so full of hate they'll not stop at child murder. So
Crookshank pays to buy all kinds of guards."
"But he doesn't  trust  the Rogue.  He thinks the Rogue  is  the  Shadow  Snake,"  I
said. "And he's  got  enough coin  to  buy  one  of  the Rogue's  chiefs.  That's  a lot of
coin, even for Crookshank – where's it from?"
"I'm bettin' it's these rocks," Goodwin said as Tunstall picked up the leather bag.
"What are they? How'd Crookshank come by 'em? Too many questions. I don' like
questions."
"Dogs don't like questions," I said, the first half of the saying. Tunstall finished it
with me as he stuffed the bag inside his tunic. "Dogs like answers."
Goodwin asked, "What'd Rosto want of you, Cooper? While we were up greasin'
Kayfer's vanity?"
I spat out a mouthful of buttered greens  beside  my bowl so  I wouldn't  talk with
my mouth full. "He wanted to bribe me to know what was in that leather bag."

"How much?" Tunstall asked.
"A silver noble. I told him no," I replied.
Goodwin slapped the back of my head smartly. I gaped at her. "Don'  be  a fool,
wench! One an' a half, an' you tell 'im!"
"Then  split  the  takings  with  us.  That's  how  it  works,"  Tunstall  said.  "Personal
bribes don't go in the Happy Bags. They're for the Dogs who earn them. Sooner or
later word of these stones will get out. So we'll control who hears of them. Then we
follow the rumors.  Maybe learn something.  Never turn down  a bribe,  Cooper.  It's
bad  for  business.  Bad  for  you,  and  bad  for  us,  because  we get half of  everything
you get. We train you, after all."
"Folk  don'  trust  a Dog what  don'  get  bought,"  Goodwin  told  me.  "You're  too
good t' be bought, they start thinkin' maybe you got some other angle – "
"Or  some  other  master.  Then it gets  bloody."  Tunstall stuffed  a sweetmeat into
his mouth.
I ate the vegetables I'd spat out. I never waste food.
"No sense lettin' you get yourself killed if we're puttin' work into you,"  Goodwin
said, glaring at her bowl. "This Rosto, if he survives,  might be  a good  connection.
Aniki and Kora, too."
"If the Rogue don't kill them for being too good," Tunstall reminded us both. "Eat
up, girls. We still have the rest of the Cesspool patrol."
As I stood, I heard crackling. I'd forgotten about my clothes. They were covered
in dried muck. I'd need a bathhouse at the end of my watch again. I'd need to pay a
laundress to get these gummy stains from my uniform. My hoard of coins dwindled
in my mind's eye. I'd saved plenty, from my allowance at Provost's  House  and  the
tips  I'd  made  as  a  runner,  but  buying  furnishings  and  taking  rooms  ate  into  it.
Laundry and baths ate still more.
I put  it from  my mind. I had  to  be  alert on  the streets,  doubly  so  if Goodwin's
pain distracted her. A mage's healing was  all very well, but  after a point,  the Dog's
body had to do the rest. That bruise looked like it hurt.
So on we went as the clocks chimed eleven. Once more I stood by and watched
as Goodwin and Tunstall broke up tavern fights. Finally it was time to return to Jane
Street. If Goodwin's pain had an effect on her work, I did not see it. My sole bit of
excitement was when one looby crashed into me. I tripped  him with my baton  and
smacked his ankle so he'd remember me.
My legs were filled with nails by the time we mustered off watch. The thought of
reaching a bathhouse was as lowering as paying for it.
Once  we'd  told  Ahuda that we'd  finished our  evening alive, she  dismissed  us.  I
was about to drag myself out the door when Goodwin put a hand  on  my arm. She
gave me a circle of wood with the Provost's mark on one side and her name on the
other. "Where's the Dogs' bathhouse, Cooper?"
I blinked at the piece of wood. "Stormwing Street, right around the corner." I was
so weary the marks on the wood  smeared  in my vision. Goodwin  was  sore,  too.  I
had to listen hard to understand her because her jaw was so stiff.
"Good Puppy. Go there. Show 'em this. Tell the 'tendants I said clean you'n your
clothes, 'n give you a spare uniform for t'morrow. Yours'll need soakin'." She thrust

the  piece  of  wood  closer  to  my  face.  "Take  it,  Cooper.  They  won'  let  you  inna
Dogs' bathhouse till you're no Puppy, 'less you've got one of these."
"But I can't afford – " I reached for my purse. A spare uniform cost  money.  I'd
have to take the coin  from  my food  budget.  I couldn't  take it from  the rent or  my
pigeon money. Those birds were my informants.
"Pay  me  your  share  of  Rosto's  bribe,  if  it  makes  you  feel  better,"  Goodwin
snapped. "I don't need a bathhouse.  I'm  goin' home t'  let my man scrub  my back.
An' you need spare uniforms if you keep gettin' muck on you. Now scat."
I wanted  to  argue,  but  pride  is  something  only  folk  with  money  can  afford.  I
scatted. As I moved off, I heard Tunstall ask, "All the bribe money? That's hard."
"I'm  short  of  coin  this month,"  Goodwin  said,  her  voice  tart.  "Maybe  she'll  be
wise and make 'im pay 'er two silver nobles, keep th' extra half for 'erself."
The bathhouse attendant made me leave my clothes in the rinsing room. I wore a
robe to the hot pools. Dogs were coming in, looking strange without their uniforms.
Two of them started to come toward me. Each time an attendant grabbed their arms
and whispered in their ears. Did they tell their friends that I was here with Goodwin's
permission or just to let the Fishpuppy swim alone? Once I'd soaped and rinsed my
hair, I slumped  on  my underwater bench  until I was  hidden up  to  my lips.  If  they
couldn't recognize me, they wouldn't think about me.
The next  thing  I  knew,  the  attendant  was  shaking  my  shoulder.  The  Dogs  had
gone.  She  lifted me out.  I was  pink and  wrinkled  like  a  new  babe.  She'd  found  a
spare uniform and stitched on white trim while I slept. She even helped me dress.  I
found a couple of coppers for a tip, but she pushed them away.
I managed the walk to my rooms. Pounce jumped to my shoulder as I let myself
in, leaping on and off me as I undressed.  He talked like mad in plain cat,  attacking
my braid as I stripped off my clothes and got into my nightshirt.
At last I fell into my wonderful bed, curling up under my divine blankets to  write
in this journal. Somehow I woke up for that, as if I live the day  afresh  to  record  it.
Now, though,  my  eyelids  are  heavy.  Pounce  is  purring  in  my  ear.  It's  a  soothing
sound. I will end this, before I sleep and get ink on everything.
On the whole, a better day...
 
 
Friday, April 3, 246
When I stood this morning, I nearly fell, my legs hurt so bad. Even the hot  soak
last night did only so  much.  I kneaded  them like Mistress  Noll taught me to  knead
bread,  biting my lip  to  keep  from  yowling  like  Pounce.  As  I  worked  on  one  leg,
stretching it out  in front  of  me on  the floor,  he draped  himself  over  the  other.  He
understood his warmth eased the muscles.
Once  I  could  move  without  crying,  I  unlocked  my  trunk.  Back  when  I  was  a
runner, Mama made a big jar of ointment for my legs. I think my lord's cook paid a
mage to charm it, because it worked the best of all Mama's concoctions. I only used
it when I could do nothing better for myself, because it worked and because Mama
had made it. This was one of those times.
"How  far  did  I  chase  that  addled  creature?"  I  asked  Pounce  as  I  rubbed  the
ointment in. As I got dressed, I muttered about getting new work, where I spent my

time on my back.
Today my landlady said naught as I left, though she was there at the window. She
nodded, but there was a strange expression on her face. Pounce looked up at me, as
if I might know why she was so quiet. I only shrugged at him.
That was when the rotten vegetables hit me, one turnip square in the shirt, one old
onion glancing off  my shoulder.  I reached  for  a baton  I didn't  carry  just  then  and
looked  for  my  enemy.  Orva's  two  gixies  stood  in  the  street,  their  bruises  highly
colored in daylight. As I spotted them, the older girl threw a cabbage.  I dodged.  It
splatted on the front of my lodging house.
"Y' took our mama!" she cried. "Give 'er back, y' stinkin' puttock!" The other one
started to cry. They were bony, ragged, and sad. With rotten onion stink in my nose,
I should have been furious.
Mama  only  paddled  us  when  we'd  done  wrong.  She  always  told  us  why.  She
wouldn't let her men knock us about. She sang to us, when she had the breath for it,
and went short  of  food  and  clothes  for  us.  Yet these  little ones  loved  their mama,
too. Like me, they were going to lose her. Never mind it would be for a shorter time
than I had lost mine. It didn't matter that last night their mama had threatened to cut
off their heads. Mamas were such strong creatures to their children.
"Your mama did a bad thing when she struck a Dog with a knife," I told the older
gixie. "There's no forgiving that under the King's law. You draw  a blade  on  a Dog,
the Magistrate sends  you  to  prison.  If your  mama behaves,  she'll come  home  one
day. But she was going to prison the moment she attacked Guardswoman Goodwin
with steel."
"Here, you beggars – you've done enough damage! Scat!" It was Rosto the Piper.
Somehow I don't think he'd come along by accident. "Be grateful you're still alive to
cry for your ma. Be gratefuller still your da has two eyes in his head yet."
I wasn't surprised that Rosto knew of their case, either. But I was surprised when
he flipped each of the girls a copper. They jumped to catch the coins before they got
lost  in  the  street  muck.  Then  they  ran  off  before  he  could  change  his  mind.  He
sauntered up to me, more graceful than Pounce,  hands  in his pockets,  the folds  of
his tunic loose, the dark blue cloth clean. Even his leggings were barely touched  by
street dirt. I marked the print of six knives against his tunic. The  flat blades  hidden
on the insides of his wrists made me itch to handle them. I do love a good weapon.
"Here."  He took  a cord  with a wooden  disk  on  it from  around  his  neck.  There
were magical signs carved deep in the wood. "Kora made it for me, to get stains out
of my clothes. She does very good charms, our Kora." He looked behind me at the
rows of houses. "Nice neighborhood, this. Handy to the markets and the riverfront."
I hesitated and looked the street  over.  My own charm against bad  magics didn't
warn me by turning warm against the skin of my chest, so I took the thong from his
fingers. Slowly I passed the disk over the places where the vegetables had  smeared
my shirt. The wood glowed for a moment, then went dark. The muck dried and fell
from my clothes.
"Thanks."  I  gave  the  disk  back.  He'd  just  saved  me  three  coppers'  worth  of
laundering. "Appreciate it. I don't owe you anything, though."
He waved that aside. "Look, Cooper, I insulted you, offering a noble last night – I
see that now. I was naughty."

I glanced at him sidelong and  waited. Pounce  wandered  over.  He  stood  on  his
hind legs, stretching until his paws were braced on Rosto's thigh. Then he flexed his
claws, hooking them into Rosto's leggings.
"Look here, you, whoever you are, I am not a scratching post." Rosto crouched,
taking care not to startle Pounce into ripping his clothes. Gently he rubbed my cat's
ears. Then Rosto looked up at me, his dark eyes wicked. "A noble and a half."
I nibbled on my lip, then said carefully, "You don't want to  know bad  enough,  I
suppose. Pity."
Rosto made a face like he'd eaten some rotten onion. "Two  silver nobles.  It had
better be worth it."
I thought about driving the price higher, just to prove I could. Then I decided not
to get greedy. After all, we didn't know what the stones were. "Pay up."
Pounce turned out of Rosto's hold and jumped to my shoulder.
"Interesting cat, he is." Rosto reached over to scratch Pounce's chin again and let
two silver nobles slide into my fingers so no one could see.
"Rough, sparkling stones, very colorful, tucked in reddish rock like the kind you
find all over the Lower City," I told him softly. "My Dogs have never seen  any like
them. We had another stone  like these.  Crookshank's  grandson  gave it to  his wife,
who's a friend of mine. My Dogs will find a mage to see what they are." I wondered
if I should tell him Fulk had tried to  steal the first stone.  I chose  not  to.  He'd  only
paid to know what he'd stolen from Crookshank, after all.
"Stones  that two  experienced  Dogs  can't  name?  That's  a  curiosity.  This  Lower
City of yours is all tied in knots, you know." Rosto looked down at me. "You  take
care, Cooper, before you get strangled."
"I'm not a cove who's a bit too interesting and a bit too fast at Kayfer's Court," I
said. But Rosto was on his way already, whistling a jig. I wished I'd thought to ask if
he'd sworn to one of the Rogue's chiefs or not.
I looked at the sun. Perhaps if I rushed, I could still see my pigeons as well as the
spinners....  No.  It  was  near  eleven  o'clock.  Dust  spinners  it  was.  Pigeons  are
everyday birds who leave scummer on my clothes and puke on me sometimes when
I cut thread from their feet. Dust spinners are magic. They're exciting. Some corners
always have a  whirlwind  of  dust,  leaves,  and  bits  of  this  and  that.  Even  on  days
when  there's  no  breath  of  air  anywhere  else,  the  spinners  will  be  stirring  on  their
cobbles. They won't cool folk off on those hot days, though. Their touch is always
dry as bone.
They don't only pick up solid things. They gather talk that comes their way. With
work and thought the information I collect  from  them is useful. Best  of  all, I don't
have to give them bribe money from my wages. The spinners  are happy  to  give up
their burden  of  talk for  nothing. The  weight of  our  joys  and  sorrows,  even  in  the
small bits carried to them by the city breezes, bears them down. They can hand that
burden over to me and be free, at least for a time.
I can't  see  them all in one  day,  of  course.  I try to  get to  them all once  a  week.
Today I went to those of the Lower City. I started with Shiaa, the dust spinner just a
block from me at the corner with Koskynen Street. She's lively, spilling all kinds  of
talk straight from the slave markets into my ears as she tugs at my tight-braided hair
and  my  well-tucked  clothes.  I'd  brought  her  grit  from  Charry  Orchard  Street  so

she'd have something new to taste. She liked that. I memorized what she'd given me
to  go  over  later,  then  went  to  see  Aveefa  at  Messinger  and  Skip.  She  usually
collected the talk of the Northgate Guards and travelers. For her I had grit from  the
Jane Street kennel.
I  could  see  Hasfush  as  I  approached  the  corner  of  Charry  Orchard  and
Stormwing.  He  was  eight  feet  tall,  the  biggest  I'd  ever  seen  him,  and  solid  gray.
Something was wrong. The spinners hate to do anything that might make folk think
they're more than just bits of wind at corners. My tripes clenched. Pounce yowled.
"I don't  like it,  neither,"  I  told  him.  "But  there's  only  one  way  to  know  what's
bothering him." I gritted my teeth and stepped into Hasfush.
My ears filled with cries for mercy. They were cut off with dreadful sounds. I had
heard murder done in my visits with the dust  spinners,  but  never so  many at once.
No  wonder  Hasfush  had  picked  up  all  the  dirt  and  litter  he  could,  to  stop  more
sounds from entering his sides. I hadn't seen him in, what, two weeks?
"I'm  sorry,  old  fellow," I whispered  as  he dropped  the mess  he'd  picked  up  to
protect himself. "I've been starting a new life." Guilt was pricking me. I hadn't  been
that far from here last night – but no. I'd been off chasing Orva before I would have
come any closer.
I opened the bit of cloth I'd carried my gift of Rovers Street grit in and let it trickle
to  the  ground,  thinking.  Sorting  out  the  sounds,  I  decided  there  had  been  seven
killings, maybe eight or nine if some sounds covered more than one death at a time.
People  disappear  all the time in the Cesspool,  but  not  like this.  Moreover,  it  must
have been very recent. Elsewise the pigeons would have told me. So seven, eight, or
mayhap nine had  been  killed, for  what? The  killers had  been  professionals.  They'd
said nothing at their bloody  work.  Before Hasfush  had  blocked  out  more  of  what
they did,  they'd  begun to  dig. Grave and  killing ground  were the same.  They were
upwind of Hasfush.
How could I tell my Dogs? Was there a way to  shake  up  a few Rats  here in the
Cesspool? Surely someone had heard of folk gone missing.
Wake up, Fishpuppy! said a scornful voice in my head. Half the Cesspool could
go missing and folk would make it their business not to notice!
The spinner at the corner of Holderman and Judini held more screams and deaths.
These were fainter, being downwind of Hasfush, thank the Goddess. I forced myself
to  walk  up  Holderman  to  the  spinner  who  lived  where  Holderman  crossed
Stormwing.  That  spinner  was  across  from  Hasfush,  in  the  same  wind.  It  was
dreadful to hear the murders again, almost as strong  as  Hasfush  had  heard  it, but  I
was rewarded despite my fear.
"You three tell a living soul of what you have done, even your fellow guards, and
you will join the dead." The voice was silky and female. "When I clasped your hands
at the start, when you hired on, I put a mage mark on each of you. Talk of this, and
you'll want to lop your own hand off before you die."
Seven to  nine dead  folk buried  where  they  fell,  I  thought  as  I  turned  my  steps
toward home. Add to them three killers with mage marks on their hands, fatal ones.
And a woman who's a mage. How can I tell my Dogs about this so they might take it
serious?  It would help if they already knew folk are missing from  the Cesspool,  if
those missing folk didn't just vanish as so many people do. If those folk have names

and families who seek them.
So  deep  in  thought  was  I  that  Pounce  had  to  claw  my  shoulder  (startling  me
nearly out of my boots) for me to hear someone call loudly, "Cooper."
I spun  around,  yelping as  Pounce  dug  in.  Tunstall  stood  behind  me,  wearing  a
cityman's  dark  brown  tunic and  leggings. Off  duty,  he wore  a  sword  as  well  as  a
dagger. He knew better than to walk out unarmed.
"Cooper, did you get street muck in your ears? I've been  calling you  for  the last
block."  He  looked  me  over  and  raised  his  brows.  "Puppy,  what  have  you  been
rolling in?"
I looked  at  myself  while  Pounce  insulted  him.  There  was  grit  on  my  shirt  and
breeches. Leaves and other trash stuck to my clothes. My hands were smeared with
dirt. I felt my hair and pulled away a twig.
"I'll wait while you change," Tunstall said. "Wake up, Cooper. Our work doesn't
end with the watch. Do you want to learn what those sparklers  are? We're  going to
talk to a mage. A good one."
"I'll hurry," I said, and walked home as fast as my poor legs would take me. The
clocks were chiming two. I might well not make it back before it was time to train, so
I tucked my Dog's gear in my pack, changed shirts, and brushed off my breeches. I
washed my face and hands and combed out my hair. Dirt and clutter fell to the floor.
I'd  never  come  away  so  filthy  from  the  spinners  before.  Upset  as  they  were,  I
couldn't be surprised.
Ready to go, I looked at Pounce. He stared at me, purple eyes slits, as if he was
thinking, Are you going to tell me I may not come?
I opened the door and bowed for him to leave before me. He trotted past, tail high
like a victory flag. At least I'd spared myself the shame of  having him appear  when
I'd sworn I'd left him behind.
Tunstall let us walk alongside him for  a block  or  so  before  he said,  "I  followed
you for a while. You stood  inside dust  spinners.  Everyone else avoids  them. Most
people think they're bad spirits. But you stood in one, your face turned up as if you
were happy to be there."
I stared  at the muck under  my  feet,  my  brain  scrabbling  for  something  to  say.
Time stretched, too much for it to seem as if I did  anything but  refuse  to  answer a
Senior Dog.
Tunstall  put  a  hand  on  my  shoulder.  "Tell  me  when  you  invent  a  good  lie,
Cooper." His voice was kind. "Or if you respect me, the truth. The truth is better if
it's something me and Goodwin ought to know. Elsewise, keep it to yourself. We all
have our odd habits. I have a little garden I keep in window boxes in my rooms."
I gawped at him. Tunstall just doesn't seem like the gardening sort.
"Oh, yes," he said with a nod.  "It's  soothing.  I grow miniature roses.  A Yamani
friend taught me. Red ones and yellow ones, the size of your little fingernail. Even a
normal fellow like me has a surprise or two." He took out a toothpick and  turned  it
over in his fingers. "You're not limping as bad as I expected."
"I had an ointment, sir," I mumbled.
He led us onto Jane Street. It was busy with the carts that supplied the businesses
of the Daymarket. We kept to the high stone walkway that lifted us clear of most of
the splashings.  Even though we  didn't  wear  our  uniforms,  everyone  gave  us  clear

passage. From the way many of them looked at him, I think they knew Tunstall, or
there was something about him that said "Provost's Dog."
He tucked the toothpick into a pocket. "The spinner. Is it like Mistress Noll said,
that night we went to Crookshank's?  She  told  us  your  grandda  and  da  had  strange
magic with birds, and pigeons follow you. Is it like that? Or does it just feel good?"
I swallowed. He was my training Dog. "The spinners collect things that folk have
spoken, the really hurtful things, the wondrous things, the big things that get caught
on breezes."
Tunstall halted to stare at me. "For true?"
Three people  dodged  around  us.  The  third  was  a  big  fellow,  even  bigger  than
Tunstall.  He  opened  his  gob  like  he  was  about  to  say  sommat.  Tunstall's  head
snapped up. He stared at the bigger cove with no  feeling in his eyes  whatever. The
big man blinked, then hesitated. Tunstall shifted the tiniest bit.
The other cove hurried on his way.
I thought to memorize just how Tunstall had looked and moved so that I could do
the same. Then I gave it up. I was  no  owl of  six-odd  feet in height. And for  all of
Tunstall's humor, he had a deadly look.
"I hear all manner of  things in the spinners,"  I told  him, to  answer his question.
"Mostly nonsense. Not always."
He drew me against a shop's wall so folk could get by. "Do they listen? Do  they
know you hear?"
I shook  my head.  "They're  just happy  I carry  it  away.  It's  like  weight  to  them.
They don't want it."
I watched him as he went to tap the end of a baton he wasn't carrying. I wondered
if I'd do the same after years as a Dog.
"Did you hear anything of use today, Cooper?"
I licked my lips. This  was  a great matter, not  passing  bits  to  my lord  Gershom,
but  using  them  on  my  own  account.  "Three  spinners  heard  at  least  seven  folk
doused one or two nights back. They're buried secret where they were killed. Mots
and  coves  alike.  Them  that  killed  them  are  mage-marked.  If  they  talk,  they  die.  I
heard the mage tell them that – a woman mage."
Tunstall began walking again, rubbing his chin. I had  to  step  double  to  keep  up.
"No names, no faces, just seven folk. We don't know where they're buried. They've
just  vanished.  Cooper,  ten  times  that  vanish  from  the  Cesspool  any  night  of  the
week. Run off, die."
I nodded. It sounded like a mumper's brag – all noise, no coin. "But those folk go
one at a time, not all together." I had to say it, even if I half choked to do it.
Pounce leaped to Tunstall's shoulder and delivered a good scolding in cat. I was
afraid  Tunstall  might  dump  him  in  the  street  muck.  Instead  he  began  to  laugh.
"Master Pounce, give us names or a place to dig, and we've somewhere to start," he
said.  "We'll  tell  Goodwin.  We'll  talk  with  our  Birdies  and  ask  around.  Mayhap
someone out there knows more of this story, if your spinners didn't just blend tales
together. Magic is a chancy thing, Cooper." He looked at me sidelong.  "When  you
led my Lord Provost to the Bold Brass gang, you may have been only eight, but you
knew to  track  a man,  not  whispers  on  the  wind.  That's  what  good  Dog  work  is.
Rumors and what your Birdies say are useful, but in the end  it's  the Dog work that

matters."
I nodded  as  I looked  at the  ground.  He  was  right,  as  far  as  it  went.  He  didn't
know the pigeons served the God of the Dead. And mayhap he didn't know it took
Dog work to seek out the voices heard by a spinner as well as it did to chase down a
scummernob who thought he could smash any woman he liked.
Tunstall  went  on,  "My  lord  Gershom  didn't  place  you  with  Goodwin  and  me.
Ahuda did that, though gods forbid anyone say she's got a soft spot for you. But I
wasn't brokenhearted to have you with us. I always wanted a Puppy. It's Clary who
needs convincing. She always fusses over what's new. I was startled you picked the
Lower  City,  though.  Being  my  lord's  foster  daughter,  you  could  have  gotten  any
district you asked for."
I shrugged. "It's what I understand," I mumbled.
"With  your  chances,  I'da  picked  Unicorn  District,  or  Prettybone.  Hold  up,
Puppy. We're here."
"Here" was the Gem Merchants' Guild Hall in the Daymarket. The windows were
barred,  with  magic  symbols  writ  around  them  and  on  the  bars  themselves.  Signs
were even carved  into the stone  walls. The  doors  were solid  oak  with iron  fittings
bespelled in their turn. Tunstall took me to the front entrance.
"Who's  that?" One  of  the  guards  swung  her  ax  down  to  block  Pounce's  way.
Pounce clearly had it in mind to vex the great dolt. He batted at the ax as if it was a
toy, then leaped over it as if it was three times as big.
"It's our cat," Tunstall said. "We've heard you've  a terrible mouse  problem.  Our
cat is so excellent he'll do for all your mice and some of your bigger rats, too. Don't
bother to thank us." Tunstall scooped up Pounce. Then he smiled. In some strange
way  all  the  friendliness  in  his  manner  until  that  moment  vanished  with  his  smile.
"We're  on  the  King's  business,  and  you  know  my  face.  This  is  Guardswoman
Cooper, my partner. We've an appointment with Jungen Berryman."
He called me "Guardswoman"!
"Let 'em go," the man on duty told his partner. "I know Tunstall. And Berryman'll
just bore them to death." To Tunstall he said, "Try to walk out afore you die of his
gabble. I don't want the work of haulin' your carcasses away. Even the cat's."
I  followed  Tunstall  inside.  Pounce  draped  himself  over  Tunstall's  shoulder,
pointing his whiskers at me in his smuggest  smile. I wished I could  say  he'd  never
been so venturesome before I became a Puppy, but it would have been a lie. Pounce
is a venturesome stinker.
The  short  hall  was  marked  with  frescoes  showing  folk  in  the  gem  business,
measuring, inspecting,  setting, weighing. Up  beautifully carved  stairs  of  fine  wood
we climbed, passing windows with pieces of colored glass set in to make pictures. I
was awed. Surely even the King's palace was not so grand.
I might have gawped  all day,  but  Tunstall hustled us  onto  the second  floor  and
down a hallway. At the very last door on the left he stopped and knocked hard, then
thrust the door open.
"I was meditating on a very important spell!" A man was seated at a big desk by
an open window – one with no glass, only shutters. His round cap was crooked on
his bald head and he fought to sit upright, which made his meditation look more like
a  nap.  He  had  a  weak  chin  and  looked  like  he  rarely  saw  the  sun.  When  he

recognized  my  partner,  he  dropped  back  into  his  seat.  "Tunstall,  you  wretch!  I
thought you were some idiot wanting me to check yet another load of pearls."
"Then put out a warning sign before you take your nap," Tunstall told him.
"I  but  closed  my  eyes  for  a  moment!"  the  mage  protested,  smoothing  his
well-made tunic. "So would you, if you'd tested three dozen pearls in a week!"
"Pearl fakery's become a problem to the guild?" Tunstall asked. "Cooper, bar the
door. Put that card on the string on the latch outside first so we're not interrupted."
I  did  as  I  was  told.  When  I  turned  around,  the  mage  Jungen  Berryman  was
squinting  at  me.  "What's  happened  to  Goodwin?"  he  asked  worriedly.  "I  hadn't
heard – "
"Goodwin's  fine.  Cooper  is  our  Puppy.  Rebakah  Cooper,  Master  Jungen
Berryman."
He flapped a white hand at me. I gave him enough of  a bow  for  a guild mage. I
could have bowed deeper, I suppose, but he wasn't my lord, and he was nothing in
the Provost's ministry.
"Pull up a chair and tell me what you want, Tunstall. And if you've got any good
stories, I'll even feed you and your Puppy – whoa!"
The "whoa" was  Pounce's  fault. He leaped  on  to  Berryman's  desk  and  batted  a
cloudy blue, gold, and black stone with his paw. Berryman saved it from falling.
"That's Pounce," Tunstall explained. He took a chair. "He's  going to  be  the first
cat to  earn pay  as  a Dog.  Cooper,  close  the shutters.  You might want to  light  the
lamps, Berryman."
Berryman took another stone from Pounce. "That's an uncut ruby you're chewing
on, my friend. Tunstall, not the shutters! I kept them closed all winter – it's spring, in
case you haven't noticed!"
I closed and locked them anyway. I answered to Tunstall, not some  goggle-eyed
bead  counter.  When  I  turned  around,  there  were  fires  in  all  the  room's  lamps.
Berryman had  good  ones,  with bright-polished  brass  in back  of  the flames to  cast
triple the light.
"There's dark doings in the Lower City, Berryman," Tunstall told the man. I went
to stand behind my Dog. As if he took that getting-paid folly seriously, Pounce sat at
Berryman's side,  tail curled  around  his forefeet.  "Murder  and  vanishings. We  think
these stones may be involved." He upended the washed leather pouch  on  the desk.
The stones spilled out.
I  remembered  the  stone  in  my  breeches  pocket,  pressing  against  my  leg.  I
wondered if I should remind Tunstall I had it. No, I decided, he wouldn't forget there
was one more in my keeping.
Berryman pushed the stones apart with a rod he kept on his desk. Pounce reached
out and drew away two. Then we all watched as Berryman's eyes  got  wide. Would
he do  as  Fulk had  and  pretend  the stones  were unknown to  him or  worthless?  He
would be  a looby  of  the noblest  class  if he did,  because  his face  gave away  even
bigger fortunes than Fulk's had.
He reached  out  a hand.  A lamp sailed over  from  a shelf nearby.  The  lamp  was
made special, the flame protected by a glass chimney so it didn't gutter in the air like
others did. Half of it was backed with silver polished so bright it reflected an image
of the flame. It did even better than brass to make the light brighter.

Berryman lifted a pitcher  that sat  on  his desk  and  started  to  pour  from  it into a
cup that was there, but his hand shook. He tried to  steady  the pitcher  and  slopped
the contents on his papers.
"Cooper," said Tunstall.
I stepped around to take the mage's pitcher. I could see we'd been right about the
stones, and Fulk had made a mistake in lying to us. They had to be greatly important
if a mage who handled pearls and rubies got the shakes so bad over them. Carefully
I poured water from  the pitcher  into the cup.  Berryman dunked  two  fingertips into
the cup  and  let  them  drip  onto  the  rock  with  the  biggest  bulge  of  clear,  jelly-like
stone. Then he held it up before the lamp. The green stripe blazed out of the orange,
brighter than we'd ever seen before. Tiny bits of red and blue sparked out along the
edges. Now we could see a small pool of purple on the back side of the thing.
"Shakith's scales," said Berryman. He put the stone to one side. He did the same
thing with each rock, showing us darts and blazes of color that appeared only when
they were touched with water and held up to the light. He drank off the water in the
cup,  then  motioned  for  me  to  pour  him  another.  I  did  so,  though  I  considered
dumping the pitcher on his head to remind him I was no serving wench.  He looked
so rattled I changed my mind.
Berryman sat  back  in his chair. He ran his  fingers  over  his  lips  time  after  time,
staring into the distance. Finally Tunstall began to tap his foot on the floor. Berryman
came to himself with a start. When Tunstall opened his mouth,  the mage shook  his
head. First he snapped his fingers four times. Signs appeared in glowing yellow light
on the walls, ceiling, and floor, then on the doors (there were three) and the window
shutters.  They  faded  away.  More  yellow  light  appeared  in  keyholes,  in  the  gaps
around the doors and shutters, on the doors, and on the sides of the room's standing
cabinets. That too faded. Then I yelped as yellow light coated Tunstall, Pounce, and
me. My skin tickled. Then the light was gone.
"Forgive me, Cooper,  is it? But it's  easy  to  attach  listening spells  to  someone,"
Berryman said. "Please, sit down. I assume Tunstall here trusts  you."  He looked  at
Tunstall.  "You'll  understand  my  caution  in  a  moment.  Is  there  a  problem  with
Goodwin on this?"
Tunstall shook his head. "She'll hear of this meeting when we go on duty. We've
talked about  these  baubles.  Far  as  we know,  we're the only  ones  who  have  them,
apart from  Crookshank.  Fulk handled the first one,  that  Beka  got.  Give  it  to  him,
Beka. And then you can sit down."
I tried not to let my dismay show  as  I winkled the first stone  from  my breeches
and placed it before the mage. It was so beautiful, I didn't want him to  take it from
me. But orders  are orders.  I knew I'd  have  to  give  it  up  sometime.  Once  I  put  it
down, I sat on the edge of the chair.
"Beautiful,"  said  Berryman,  holding  it  before  the  light.  "Even  without  water  or
proper  grinding  to  bring  out  the  inner  fires.  So  we'll  assume  Master  Fulk  knows
there's one of these stones about, but not more."
Tunstall and I looked at each other. He wasn't about to tell Berryman of Pounce's
aid in stealing this one.
Berryman put my stone down and opened a desk drawer.  From  it he removed  a
black cloth bag embroidered with gold signs. Carefully he placed all of the stones in

it but the one I'd been carrying. "I'll ward  these  against magical prying,"  he said  to
Tunstall. "That will keep the likes of Fulk from calling them to him. It's not worth it
with  this  one."  He  tapped  my  stone  and  did  nothing  when  Pounce  nudged  it.
"There's no piece of gemstone in that one big enough to be worth money. There are
just tiny pockets of the gem in the matrix – the surrounding rock."
"You may as well keep it, then, Cooper," said Tunstall. "A good luck stone, since
it came to you your first night as a Puppy."
Pounce  had  pushed  it  to  the  edge  of  the  desk.  I  grabbed  it  before  they  could
change their minds. I love the pretty thing.
Berryman traced each gold sign on the bag with his fingernail, yellow light trailing
as he did so. Then he pulled the drawstring tight and thrust the bag across the desk
to Tunstall. It only went halfway. We  all watched  as  Pounce  walked over,  grabbed
the bag, and dragged it over to my Dog.
"Thank you," Tunstall said as he picked it up.
"What  an  odd  creature."  Berryman  didn't  seem  much  interested  in  things  not
involving gems, even cats who weren't catlike. He leaned back in his chair and said,
"Those stones are raw fire opals. The smallest fire opal that can  be  separated  from
its matrix without cracking is worth more than I earn from the guild in a year. They
are very, very rare, partly because they are hard to cut. There's a mine that's almost
played  out  in  Legann,  another  in  Meron,  five  more  in  Carthak,  and  none  have
pink-colored matrix stone like this. Only a trickle of  new gems enters  the market in
any one year." He bit the nail on his little finger.
Going on, Berryman said, "Two finished stones and a pound  of  rough ones  like
these have come  to  this guild hall in the last two  months.  The  seller is keeping his
name  secret,  and  the  broker  is  sworn  to  him.  The  stones  are...extraordinary.  An
auction of fire opals is to be held at the end of July – a big auction. So big that gem
merchants from fifteen countries are either here already or on their way. I thought the
auction talk was  just  gossip."  He  sighed.  "I  was  wrong.  If  you  sold  those  rough
stones  in the bag  there –  a good  cutter  could  get at least one  finished  stone  from
each – you would be wealthy."
Tunstall smiled. It was his turn to lean back. He put his palms together before his
face, then cupped them and began to tap his fingertips together, one, two, three....
It seemed  Berryman  wasn't  the  sort  of  fellow  who  needed  folk  to  keep  asking
questions.  "All  opals  are  powerful  magical  stones.  Fire  opals  are  fascinators  –
bewitchers. Properly enchanted – which these aren't, you'll be glad to know – they'll
take and  hold  the attention of  anyone the mage shows  them to.  They leave people
open to suggestion from the mage or the person he works for. Fire opals don't hold
spells for more than three or four days. If you leave them in water for a time, then let
them dry out, the stone will crack. It will be useless for spell making after that. Most
people love them for their value, because their magical uses are so limited. It's better
to sell the stones  and  get very  rich."  Berryman  rubbed  his  eyes.  "Where  are  they
coming from, Mattes?"
Tunstall's tapping fingers slowed to  a stop.  "We  don't  know,"  he said.  "But the
native stone is very like that of the Lower City."
"Surely not!" Berryman said. He seemed horrified and amused. "That  –  it would
be  like  finding  pearls  in  dung!  We  would  have  found  any  stones  of  value  there

centuries ago."
I fidgeted.  The  Lower  City,  so  the  tales  went,  had  been  good  farmland  when
Corus was  first built on  the Olorun River. Then had  come  the Centaur Wars.  The
first way to halt the armies was with huge earthworks, built from our soil. They were
carted away when the Annste kings built the first city wall. The  Lower City's  farms
were less fruitful after that. In the Decade of Floods, the Olorun swamped the lower
ground, where folk still farmed, and  carried  much of  it back  to  the riverbed with it
when its waters shrank. With each flood there was less black soil in the Lower City.
By the time the wall encircled the Lower City, the rich black soil was but a couple of
feet deep, and beneath it was the stone that shaped the ridges of Corus. So Granny
Fern's tales explained how we spent as much of our summers yanking twice as much
reddish rock from our small garden as we did vegetables.
Tunstall caught me thinking. "Cooper?" he asked with a smile.
I did my best  to  look  at him, who I knew. "The  old  stories  say  the Lower City
used  to  have beautiful farms  for  all the good  dirt there."  I  tried  to  say  it  like  they
taught us for Dog reports, firm and clear. "But it got taken away, and now all we've
got is scrapings and rock. Rock like the rock in the stones."
"What does a Puppy know of  such  things?" Berryman asked.  He was  surprised
Tunstall  even  let  me  speak.  "Maybe  she's  been  educated  to  be  a  Dog,  my  dear
Mattes, but I should think I have the advantage in knowledge of the land!"
"She grew up in the Lower City," Tunstall explained.
"A Lower City wench,"  Berryman said  flatly. "Lessoning  me on  whether or  not
opals may be found in the disgusting sewer they call the Cesspool."
I clenched my fingers, wondering if his head would split like a melon if I hit it right
with my baton.
"No  offense,  girl,"  Berryman  told  me.  "But  you  must  leave  the  matter  of  what
stones are found where to those who are educated to these things."
I looked  down.  He  might  be  one  of  those  mages  who  could  read  murderous
thoughts in my eyes. What did this underbaked  flour dumpling know of  the Lower
City and the people who lived there?
Tunstall slapped the desk. I was on my feet before  he was.  "Berryman, thanks,"
Tunstall said. "You'll keep news of the stones to yourself?"
"But you haven't told me anything about them,"  Berryman complained.  The  man
was actually whining. "They're part of a crime, aren't they? A robbery?  No,  it must
be a murder, for Lower City Dogs to be holding a fortune in fire opals.  How many
were  killed?  Where  were  they  from?  Carthak?  Why  haven't  I  heard  of  a  hijacked
shipment of gems? As far as I know, there aren't any Carthaki gem merchants in the
city yet, and  they're the only ones  who  could  have  so  many  fire  opals.  And  they
usually – "
Tunstall put his finger to his lips. Berryman pouted.
"It's  an  investigation,  my  friend,"  Tunstall  explained.  "A  secret  one.  Even  my
Lord Provost doesn't have the details. Lives are in the balance and depend on  your
discretion."
"You always say that." Berryman had turned from a man of power to a child who
can't have a sweet.
"Have I ever lied?" Tunstall asked him.

The mage still pouted. "No."
"Goodwin or I – or Cooper here – will tell you all of it, depending  on  who lives
and when the Rats  are caged.  Right now it is a thing of  blood  and  theft  and  dark
deeds in the Lower City." Tunstall said it like a corner storyteller. From the shine of
Berryman's goggling eyes, he drank it like the storyteller's audience. Had  there been
thunder  and  lightning  outside,  I  think  Berryman  would  have  paid  Tunstall  for  the
pleasure of hearing him.
"Promise?" Berryman asked.
"Promise,"  Tunstall  replied.  "Cooper  promises,  too,"  he  added.  "Don't  you,
Cooper?"
"I promise," I said to the desk.
"I should have been a Dog," Berryman told us. "You have such dashing lives. All
I do is a bit of magic here and there and then off to home." He sighed.
I started. He believed our lives dashing? What would he have thought of jumping
through Orva's window with no inkling of what lay on the other side? Would he have
found landing in fish guts dashing?
Tunstall kicked me lightly on the ankle. I don't know if I would have said  what I
truly thought.  Mayhap Tunstall was  used  to  Goodwin  and  kicked  me  to  keep  me
silent just in case.
"Berryman, we could  not  do  this without your  advice,"  he said,  as  solemn as  a
priest. "Be sure your name will be in our final report to my Lord Provost."
Berryman was  so  happy  with  this  that  he  walked  us  to  the  guild  hall  entrance.
Though I wondered if he didn't do it so the guards could hear him call Tunstall "my
friend" and watch him clap my Dog on the shoulder. I'd seen people  like Berryman
at Provost's House, folk who thought it daring to  be  friends  with Dogs.  I was  just
surprised  to  see  any  of  them  could  be  of  use  for  more  than  buying  supper  and
drinks.
"He's a very good mage," Tunstall said as we went on our way. "And he'll do all
kinds of mage work for Dog gossip. You need folk like him, Cooper. He's a useful
cove to know."
Pounce cried, "Manh!" as if he agreed.
"Good cat," Tunstall said, and picked him up. "Between you, me, and Goodwin,
we'll get this Puppy licked into shape."
 
Tunstall had an errand to run. He left me at the kennel gate so  I could  go  to  the
training yard and  stumble through an hour  of  practice  on  aching legs. When I saw
him at muster,  he was  giving Ahuda the bag  of  fire opals  to  be  logged in. I had  a
feeling that wealth would not go into the Happy Bag for the street Dogs, but I could
only shrug. Unlike scummer, gold flows uphill.
Goodwin was in better spirits when we mustered for our watch. She listened close
as Tunstall explained what Berryman had told us on our way to the Nightmarket. "So
we just kissed  our  fortunes  farewell." She  also  sounded  better  after a night's sleep
and time for the healing to  work.  The  bruise  on  her jaw was  still astounding,  but  I
could understand her well now. "That will teach us to be honest. Maybe we ought to
take Berryman on  rounds  sometime,  Mattes.  He'll  probably  faint  before  we  cross
into the Cesspool,  though."  She  looked  back  at me as  we ambled  up  Jane  Street.

"He's not a bad sort. He just sometimes lets being a merchant's mage do his talking
for him. When you smarten him up, he improves."
I glanced at her. Had she gotten the temptation to hit him, too?
"At least we know what the rocks are now," said Tunstall with a nod to a passing
ragpicker.
"I'd  like to  see  where  Crookshank  gets  them. I hate to  know that old  spintry  is
getting any richer." Goodwin spun her baton on its rawhide cord. "If they were clean
and legal, Berryman would know.  They'd  have come  through the guild hall. Which
means they're smuggled or local. Either way, too many big money stones  could  set
up a robbers' ball down here."
I cleared my throat. Without looking back at me, Goodwin held up her hand and
twitched her first two fingers, telling me to cough  up.  "Why  didn't  Berryman try to
keep the stones?" I asked. "He's a mage. And he said they'd make us rich."
"Addled, poor  cuddy,"  Tunstall told  me over  his shoulder.  "Doesn't  care  about
fattening his own purse. I think he's spelled so he's never tempted to pocket all those
gems he handles."
"He's got a rich wife," Goodwin said. "Some folk just aren't greedy."
"Don't say that where the gods can hear," Tunstall whispered. "They hate talk of
things unnatural."
"Then  they should've  stomped  Berryman years  ago,  because  it's  unnatural for  a
man not to want to lift a ruby here and there."
The  first  half  of  the  evening  passed  easily  enough.  Plenty  of  drunken  loobies
greeted me by trying to say "Fleet-footed Fishpuppy." Orva's man (Jack  Ashmiller,
he was called) came to apologize for his woman to Goodwin. She was gentler to him
than she'd  been  with anyone but  Pounce  that I'd  seen.  The  cuts  on  his  face  were
swollen, the one over his eye holding it shut.  He had  no  coin  for  a healer mage or
even a hedgewitch's stitching, poor mumper. Whilst Tunstall and me waited for them
to finish talking, something rotten hit the back of my uniform. I heard a hiss from the
shadows. However their papa felt, the young Ashmillers wouldn't forgive me for my
part in their mama's hobbling.
On we walked, my muscles groaning with each step. I got to stand off and watch
as my Dogs put a halt to three purse cuttings, four  pocket  pickings,  and  five thefts
from shops.  It was  wonderful to  see  how  quick  they  moved,  how  smoothly  they
broke up trouble. Tunstall asked me what they looked for on the purse cuttings and
pocket  pickings beforehand,  until even  Goodwin  said  I  could  spot  cutpurses  and
foists  better  than most  second-year  Dogs.  Whenever we had  three or  four  Rats  in
hobbles, we'd take them along to  the cage  carts  positioned  around  the Lower City
for transport back to the kennel.
"Just a swing along the Stuvek side of the Nightmarket," Tunstall said at last. "I'd
say all three of us have earned our supper good and truly tonight."
"I can pay for my own," I heard my fool self say. "And I owe you a silver noble
and five coppers from Rosto's bribe. I got two silvers out of him."
"I'll take those  coins,"  Goodwin  said,  putting out  a hand.  I turned  them over  to
her.
As I did, Tunstall said, "Crown pays for half of our meals wherever we feed. And
me and Goodwin say who pays the rest."

"You're  a good  Puppy,  you  do  your  work,  we feed  you,"  Goodwin  told  me.  I
blinked. Tunstall was  supposed  to  be  nice  to  me.  Goodwin  was  supposed  to  be
gruff. "After last night, you've earned your meals for a while, so be quiet about it and
– Goddess!"
We were half a block from Crookshank's house by then. What startled Goodwin
was the crack of breaking glass – and aren't glass windows stupid  and  gaudy for  a
man living right on the edge of Nightmarket?
A moment later flames shot out of the front  of  Crookshank's  house  from  a hole
where a window had  been.  The  front  door  slammed  open.  Folk  threw  themselves
out onto the steps. We saw orange glare over the wall around the house's side. The
fire starters had struck there, too.
We took out our batons. "Now we know the Rogue's revenge," Goodwin said as
we started to run. "Cooper, wet your handkerchief in the fountain, keep it over your
mouth and nose. Fountain."  She  pointed  with two  handkerchiefs  in that hand,  hers
and Tunstall's.  I grabbed  them, yanked mine out,  dashed  over,  dunked  them,  and
fetched them back, soaked. Tunstall grabbed his and ran. Goodwin waved me to the
front door. "Upstairs, Cooper, the garret. Get whoever you can, get them out. Send
them through the side doors. I'll be on the second floor. Don't be stupid."
I clapped my handkerchief over my mouth and nose. In we went, under the plume
of  smoke  that  came  from  a  burning  room  off  to  the  side.  I  smelled  cooking  oil
before I followed Goodwin up one set of stairs and ran up two more on my own. A
couple of maids darted past me. I ran on up the tiny steps to check the rooms under
the steep roof – empty.
Back down one flight I went. Tansy  was  dumping her jewelry case  into a pillow
slip. I boxed her ears for wasting time, shoved the case into the slip, and knotted it.
Then I poured her water pitcher on the sheet, threw the sheet over  her, and  shoved
her out the door. Her maid was huddled, forgotten, in the corner, stiff with terror.  I
couldn't  get her to  stand.  I finally dragged  her from  the room  and  down  the steps
until she scrambled to her feet and ran out.
Back to Tansy's floor I went. I checked room after room. Looking out a window,
I saw folk down below had formed bucket brigades to douse the fires on the ground
floor. Once I was certain everyone on the third floor was gone, I went to the second
floor to look for Goodwin. I'd had a notion  she  wasn't  clearing the household  out.
My notion was right.
"Cat, this is a bad time and place. Do your business outside, you idiot creature!"
Her voice led me to rooms that had to be the ones shared by Crookshank and his
wife. It looked  as  if she'd  been  searching his papers  and  cupboards.  She  stood  in
the middle of his workroom with a ledger in her hands,  taken from  a table stacked
with them. Pounce stood on the big desk, digging fiercely in a pile of letters.
Goodwin shut the ledger with a snap and put it with the others. "Crone's teeth, if
he ruins anything useful, Cooper – "
"Pounce, stop that," I said, though I could tell he was looking for something. He
knew I wasn't serious. I helped Goodwin pick up some papers that had fallen to the
floor. "It looks as if they've got the fires controlled. Though the smoke's still nasty."
Pounce mrted. With a snap a wooden panel in the desk's  surface  popped  open,
almost smacking him. He jumped back, tail switching, and yowled in triumph.

Goodwin straightened, papers in her hand. "You  pesky  little beast,  how did  you
even  know  that  compartment  was  there?  Cooper,  you  saw  him,  same  as  me.  He
deliberately went after it."
Goodwin went to the desk and checked the compartment for booby traps before
she removed what it held – a small sheaf of notes.
"He does things like that," I told her with a shrug.
Goodwin  set  aside  the other  papers  she'd  gathered.  She  looked  over  the  notes
from the compartment,  swore,  then closed  the lid and  stuffed  the  notes  down  the
front  of  her  tunic.  "Let's  get  out  of  here  before  they  come  looking  for  us."  She
picked up the things that Pounce had scattered and tossed them on the desktop so it
looked like it had never been disturbed.
I followed Goodwin. The fires were almost out. Smoke had ruined Crookshank's
fancy things downstairs, but he could well afford to replace them. Hardly a person in
the crowd that had gathered didn't wish the house had burned to the ground.
I found Tansy on her own, shivering in her wet sheet. The spring night had gotten
chilly. I peeled the sheet off. "You'd think they'd pity him, losing a great-grandbaby,"
I said. I looked around  to  see  if anyone had  fetched  blankets.  Tansy's  belly was  a
mound  against her thin housedress.  At least  she  wasn't  in  bedclothes  at  this  early
hour.
"Why should they?" she asked, hugging the pillow slip with her jewels. "Enough
of them have lost a child lately, and no one's raised a fuss about theirs."
I guided her to a fountain bench, but it wasn't all from the goodness of my heart.
On our way I grabbed a blanket from a maid's hand. She yelped and yanked, then let
go when I glared at her. She wasn't wet and pregnant. I got Tansy wrapped  around
before I made her sit, whispering as I did, "What do you mean?"
She rolled her big blue eyes at me. "Everyone says it's just slave catchers  calling
themselves by a nightmare name. They say little ones always go missing down here.
But some  are different. See  that thin  mot  over  there?  With  the  round  scar  on  her
cheek? Her ma left her a spell book,  onliest  bit  of  value  the  poor  thing  ever  had.
Middle of the night a cove's voice beside her bed tells her where and when to leave it
for the Shadow Snake, elsewise she'll weep for it. Gave her a week. She didn't do it,
not the only thing she had from her ma. After the week, her little girl, only four years
old, vanished. Just like that." Tansy's lips trembled. "The Dogs say little ones vanish
all the time in the Lower City, did she try the slave traders? Of  course  she  tried the
slave traders, for all the good it did. She searched for months. She still looks at girls
that age with white blond hair, just in case. It was fifteen months ago."
"But it could've been anybody," I said. "Just 'cause someone says she'll be sorry
– "
"They  drew  a  snake  in  ash  on  the  little  girl's  apron  and  left  it  hung  on  the
clothesline  for  the  mother  to  take  down,"  Tansy  whispered.  "They  left  it  on  her
pillow inside the house,  too.  When the whisper in the night  came  again,  that  poor
creature thought of her two younger children and left the spell book  where she  was
told."
I clenched my hands. Preying on folk who had so little was more than bad, it was
vicious. "But it's only one time this cove says he's the Shadow Snake, Tansy."
"Watch my finger, Beka. I'm not going to name them for you." She pointed again

and again and again. Twelve times she pointed at different people in the crowd. "It's
been  going  on  almost  three  whole  year.  All  of  them  have  a  piece  of  their  child's
clothing  with  that  Shadow  Snake  on  it.  They  had  something  the  Shadow  Snake
wanted. Them that didn't  give it up  right off,  well, some  of  'em got  their  little  one
back, all right – as a corpse. Some never saw their little one again. Grandpa Ammon
got a bit of paper asking for something. He said no Snake would ever wring him like
a  three-month-old  hen.  Only  they  didn't  wring  him,  Beka."  Tears  rolled  down
Tansy's plump cheeks. "They wrung my little Rolond."
"I pay for protection!" I recognized Crookshank's ragged screech. He was yelling
at my Dogs. "I pay more into that Happy Bag than anyone on this street. For that I
expect protection!" He swayed  on  his steps,  shaking a bony  finger at Tunstall and
Goodwin. Three of his rushers stood  at his back,  hands  on  their weapons.  Smoke
still rolled out of the broken window behind them.
I belonged  up  there with  my  Dogs,  but  I  didn't  want  to  leave  Tansy.  I  looked
around  until I spotted  Annis. She  came over.  "Come  on,  girl," she  said,  gathering
Tansy  up,  blanket and  all. "Let's  stop  Father  from  making even more of  a fool  of
himself."
Tansy yanked free. "Why? I don't owe him. He got Rolond killed."
Annis grabbed her arm. "We're  stuck  with him." She  spoke  in Tansy's  ear. The
words were not meant for me, but I have very good hearing. "And we have more to
lose.  Don't  think we're free just because  Rolond's  gone.  You need  to  think  of  the
babe that's coming. Now be an obedient granddaughter-in-law."
As she  tugged Tansy  over  to  the steps,  I cut  around  them  to  stand  behind  my
Dogs. Tunstall was saying, "You'd have to pay ten times what you do to get enough
Dogs to guard against the Rogue's wrath, my friend. These  lads  know it as  well as
we  do."  He  nodded  to  Crookshank's  rushers.  "Did  you  think  Kayfer  Deerborn
would let your speech last night go unspanked?"
Crookshank stared at him, trembling in fury.
"Why  do  you  think  he  had  a  hand  in  killing  your  great-grandson?"  Goodwin
asked, her arms folded over her chest. "Last night you accused him of it. What have
you got that he might want that bad?"
Crookshank  went dead  white under  the soot  on  his face.  He spun  and  rammed
through the wall of  guards  behind him to  dash  into his house,  smoke  and  all.  The
rushers looked  at each  other,  then followed,  covering their noses  and  mouths  with
their arms.
"Well, that shut  the  old  vulture  up,"  Tunstall  said  cheerfully.  "Where's  Cooper
and the cat?"
"Right in back of us," Goodwin said. "Let's go. I'm past hungry. We'll be lucky if
there's any ham left at the Mantel and Pullet."
I moved so they could pass us and muttered, "They could've waited to  burn  the
place till we had supper."
Both of them turned to face me. Pounce looked up at me and meowed.
"She spoke," Tunstall said. "Goodwin, did you hear? She actually made a joke. It
was practically conversation."
Goodwin  elbowed  him.  "Don't  let  it  go  to  your  head.  Look,  she's  going  shy
again."

It was true. I could feel the ground draw my eyes toward it. Pounce jumped onto
my shoulder and settled across my back,  just behind my neck.  To  console  me for
making idiotic remarks where my Dogs could hear, he began to purr.
We weren't lucky. There was no more ham at the Mantel and Pullet. The chicken
had been  on  the spit  so  long it was  dry.  The  bread,  warming  by  the  hearth  since
before the supper  rush,  was  also  dry.  At least the fried greens  were passable.  The
cook was so heartbroken at putting such a poor meal before longtime customers like
Tunstall and  Goodwin  that she  quickly fried some  almond cakes  and  served  them
drizzled in honey. The ale was free. The cook brewed rose hip tea for me.
Once they had done hovering, Goodwin fetched  the papers  out  of  her tunic. All
four of us, including Pounce, leaned in to look. Goodwin placed each piece side by
side, the back of the note face up. Each was signed with a long double-curved snake
writ in ash.
"'When you grub in the Snake's earth, you owe a payment to the Snake,'" Tunstall
read softly. He pulled a second  note  over  to  read  it. "'Fifteen  stones  to  the Snake,
left in a leather purse behind the Lonely Journey altar, Death's  temple on  Glassman
Square, a week from today, or you will pay with your own kin.'" He whistled. "Not
very nice."
Goodwin  leaned her head  on  her hand.  "I  thought maybe I'd  mistook  it  when  I
glanced at it in the house.  We  were wrong,  my buck.  There  is a Shadow  Snake,  a
real one. We've the evidence right here." She smiled crookedly. "The bogey is real."
"I'd druther he wasn't," I said. "Are the other notes the same?"
"'You think yourself safe,'" Goodwin read from the second one. "'A Snake finds
gaps  in every wall. The  child  is  now  in  the  Snake's  coils.  One  week  from  today,
thirty  stones  in  a  leather  bag,  behind  the  Lonely  Journey  altar,  Death's  temple  on
Glassman Square, or there will be blood.'"
"He didn't pay up the first time, so the Snake doubles the tally, takes Rolond, and
gives him a new week to pay," Tunstall said. "I'm surprised Crookshank didn't have
an apoplexy. He gets half mad when folk give him orders. Arranged for  his rushers
to beat a Captain of the Guard who turned him back from the palace gate. The cove
was crippled when they'd done."
Goodwin read the third note.  "'You  have more to  lose.  Forty  stones,  you  know
where to leave them, the night of the full moon.'" She made a face. This Snake isn't
done with Crookshank, and the old man knows it."
I was cold. I gave Rolond horsey rides in the Daymarket once. I let him chew my
braid when he was teething, the times Tansy escaped Crookshank's watchers. Might
I have put a stop to this, had I known? But I hadn't. While Crookshank was getting
those notes, when Rolond was taken, I was moving into my new home. After, when
I heard, the old  man had  the house  under  such  tight guard  that Tansy  couldn't  get
out, nor I get in. My first real talk with her in three months  was  on  Monday.  Why
didn't she tell me then about the Shadow Snake? I wondered. But I knew the answer
already. Tansy  was  so  much happier,  and  sillier,  before  Rolond  was  killed.  After,
she had learned to keep secrets.
"But I think Crookshank did  know the Snake meant business,"  I said,  clenching
my hands.
"What?" Goodwin asked.

Pounce crawled into my lap and  began to  purr.  I stroked  him as  I told  Tunstall
and Goodwin what Tansy had told me about the missing children and the sign of the
Snake left behind.  Of  the things the Snake had  wanted from  those  parents.  I  even
said, "She told me some of them went to the kennel and reported it, but nothing was
done. Did you know?"
I mustered my courage to look at them. Surely they didn't turn their backs on the
poor of the Lower City, not Tunstall and Goodwin. But Tunstall was carving a piece
from the table as a toothpick.
Goodwin frowned. "What do you  want from  us,  Cooper?"  she  asked.  "Do  you
know  how  many  robberies  there  are  in  a  day  in  the  Lower  City,  how  many
burglaries, how many purse  cuttings,  rapes,  brawls....  Folk  disappear  or  die all the
time, children in particular. We don't have a third of the Dogs we need to cover the
Lower City alone. We do what we can."
I wanted to  ask,  You  didn't  seek  on  any  of  them?  but  the  words  stuck  in  my
throat.  I  know  the  numbers.  We  were  made  to  memorize  them  our  first  day  of
training and to repeat them when asked. We  learned them by  district.  Each  district,
from Palace to Highfields, had a particular place in every Puppy's  memory,  with its
numbers for disorder and crime, its numbers for Dogs and for mages who might be
problems, and its chiefs under the Court of the Rogue. I could say them in my sleep.
"It could have been me that went missing," I said. "My brothers, my sisters. Any
of us. Vanished or dead in a gutter, a snake  on  our  pillows and  Mama heartbroke.
She was so frail. It would've killed her before her time." I looked at them. "It could
still be one of them, if they wasn't safe in my Lord Provost's house."
"Wake up, Cooper." Goodwin said it, but she did not seem angry. "Do you know
how many mothers drown newborns and tots in privies or  rain barrels?  How many
fathers and uncles toss them into the rear yard with broken skulls?"
"Someone  they know or  some  stranger who offers  a solid  meal hurts  them  and
leaves them to  die."  Tunstall's  eyes  were sad.  "And  plenty sell  'em  to  the  slavers.
Instead  of  telling folk and  face  the shame,  they say  the  child  just  vanished.  Savor
your good luck, Cooper. Savor it for you and  your  family. If we catch  this Snake,
we'll catch  him. But there aren't  enough of  us  to  chase  every vanished  cove,  mot,
and child. Not near enough."
Goodwin  rubbed  the  scar  on  her  cheek.  "Tunstall  says  you've  word  of  seven
missing mots  and  coves.  We  haven't heard  anyone hunting for  them,  let  alone  the
odd vanished child. Let's get moving. And toughen up,  Cooper,  that's  my advice."
She got to her feet. "Before you jump into the Olorun or slice your wrists. We lose
five Dogs a year to the Black God's Option. Don't you be one."
"We look around on patrol, Cooper," Tunstall said as  he stood.  "But it's  harder
once it gets dark. Not many littles around, and their faces aren't  clear. And it hurts.
You find enough dead ones, you don't want to know, after a while. The older ones,
they went looking for it most of the time. Not the dead children."
In the Lower City we're supposed to give up pretty ideas and dreams. I'm vexed
with myself, to find I've  nursed  some  about  these  two.  They are only human. And
their  people  aren't  from  here.  Tunstall  is  a  barbarian  from  the  eastern  hills.
Goodwin's family are respectable members of the Carpenters' Guild. My Dogs don't
know what it's  like to  have no  one  fighting  for  them.  They  do  their  jobs  and  that

gives them plenty of work, looking out for them that fill the Happy Bags.
I won't content myself with filling the Happy  Bags.  Not  ever. The  Lower City is
mine. Its people are mine – its children are mine. If I find them that's  doing  all this
kidnapping and murdering, they'd best pray for mercy. Because once I get my teeth
in 'em, I will never let them go. And I start with the Shadow Snake.
 
We washed  up  from  supper  and  left for  the last two  hours  of  our  watch.  I had
plenty to think on. Luckily we returned to the Nightmarket, where it was too busy to
give  me  time  to  think.  I  was  taken  up  learning  to  tell  the  differences  between
minnows and pikes, and learning how to spot the best of the Nightmarket foists and
sutlers.  I came home with eyeballs that jumped  from  trying  to  look  everywhere  at
once, to write in this journal.
I have  only  been  a  Puppy  three  days,  yet  it  feels  like  three  year.  I  feel  I  have
changed so much from the mot who wrote her account of that first day. Who will I
be by week's end?
 
 
Saturday, April 4, 246
Afternoon, before training.
What woke me this morning wasn't Pounce's washing, but  a pigeon's  good  hard
peck on my cheekbone. I yelped and threw the beast off. Back he came, landing on
my crown and digging his claws into my hair.
Pounce  had  opened  my  shutters.  I  forgot  my  gratitude.  "Y'  mangy  fleabag!"  I
yelled through a mouthful of cover. "Y' want us murdered in our sleep?"
"She'll think I run off," a cove whispered. "She'll think I di'n't love 'er an' the girls.
She'll think I got a decent job an' pay an' run off with it."
Goose  bumps  raced  over  my flesh. I reached  up  slow  with  both  my  hands.  A
hard beak fastened in the tender skin between my thumb and forefinger and twisted.
I closed  my fingers around  the bird,  growling from  pain, and  brought  him  around
where I could look at him.
Slapper.
I worked his beak free of me and tried to shift my hold  so  we were both  easier.
For my trouble he got a wing free and smacked me full in the face. It was a pigeon's
punch. He clipped me on the nose as the spirit that rode him said, "She'll think I run
off."
"I heard you." I took hold of Slapper's wing and tried to  wipe my watering eyes
on my shoulder.  That  blow hurt.  "Tell me where I'll find your  corpse.  Then she'll
know you're dead and can't go to her."
"She'll think I run off," the ghost moaned. "I'm dead in the ground."
Slapper turned his head and bit my cheek. I yelped and let go. The curst bird took
off out my window.
He would be back. Or I would find him, and his rider, with other pigeons. Should
I feed them? Or try to find the murdered folk the dust spinners spoke of? I checked
for my clothes.  I looked  out  the window.  From  the sun's  angle, it wasn't  quite yet
nine in the morning. I had time, and I needed to do chores.
I had to wash a uniform today.  At least I had  a clean one  ready  now,  thanks to

Goodwin. I would soak the soiled one free of wrinkles, then hang it with weights on
overnight. If I mucked up today's uniform, I would have a clean one for the morrow.
I was pulling on breeches when I heard a mot's shriek. Something crashed on my
stairs. I beat Pounce to the door and pulled it open. The door to the rooms opposite
mine was wide open: moving day for a new neighbor.  Someone  came up  the stairs
backward and half bent over, carrying a wooden table legs up.  Atop  the table were
some packs and a small trunk. Another person down below supported the other end
of the table as it bobbed and swayed.
The bearer who was almost to my level looked over her shoulder and  grinned. It
was the swordswoman Aniki, wearing breeches and shirt, her sleeves rolled up. She
looked back at the other end of the table. "Rosto, leave that box!  Kora  can  get the
curst thing. If you try to grab  it, you'll dump  everything else down  the stairs!"  She
told me, "I think we overloaded it." She backed up again. Here came the rest of the
table, with Rosto the Piper holding up the wobbling end.
"Told you I liked the look  of  the street,"  he said  to  me. "And  here's  this place,
with three sets of rooms nice and empty, for cheap. I rented 'em last night – me and
Kora have the two just downstairs, and you've got Aniki for a neighbor."
I blinked at Rosto.  Trouble  has  just moved  in, I thought.  Then I remembered  I
stood there in no more than breastband  and  breeches.  I shrieked and  slammed my
door. I cleaned up for the day and put my uniform to  soak  in a washtub,  my poor
brain racing. Aniki and Kora seemed  like good  sorts,  for  mots  clearly on  the other
side of the law. Truth to tell, it would be nice to have friendly folk here. But Rosto...
"Aren't there other lodgings?" I asked Pounce as I felt my hair. It was all tangles. I
brushed it out, then wet my comb and worked to make a smooth braid. By the time I
was done, the moving noises  had  ended  with a clattering of  feet down  the stairs.  I
can't say how I might avoid Rosto after him seeing me half naked if he is to live here,
but knowing he wasn't right outside my door was a start.
Someone  knocked.  I  peered  through  the  eye  cheat  to  see  that  Kora  and  Aniki
were  outside.  My  nose  twitched.  I  smelled  spiced  turnovers.  I  opened  the  door.
Kora,  neat and  tidy in a green cotton  gown fit snug  to  her  hips,  held  the  covered
basket that gave off the wonderful smells. Aniki stood behind her, two flasks in her
hands.
"We  fetched  breakfast  to  begin  well  as  your  neighbors,"  Kora  told  me  with  a
wicked smile. "The turnovers come from a baker named Mistress Noll. They say at
the Court  of  the Rogue  she's  the best.  And I warmed  up  everything  with  a  bit  of
magicking."
My belly growled. It had been a very long time since last night's dry chicken. Both
of them laughed.
I ducked my head and let them in. It felt like they brought  sun  and  fresh  air with
them. Aniki set  aside  her flasks  and  lay down  a cloth  on  my floor.  I fetched  three
cups and plates from my shelf and set them down  at the cloth's  center  whilst Kora
whisked  the  napkin  away  from  her  basket.  We  sat  cross-legged,  spearing  pasties
with our belt knives.
"It's partly our own celebration," Aniki explained with her mouth half full. "Me'n
Rosto have work. Me with Dawull – "
I nodded. Dawull was the redheaded chief of Waterfront District. It ran from  the

South Gate to the North Gate along both sides of the river.
Kora took a gulp of barley water. "And Rosto with Ulsa, who runs the Prettybone
District."  She  gave  Aniki  a  pert  smile.  "You  owe  Cooper's  tall  Dog  two  silver
nobles. You bet him Rosto would hire on with Dawull."
"I know, I know," Aniki said, grabbing another pasty. "And now I can  afford  to
pay him."
I looked from one to the other. Kora and Aniki are so relaxed and friendly that it
doesn't seem to matter if I talk or no. They act as if we've known each other all our
lives. I know there are Dogs who are friends with folk on the far side  of  the law. It
can  be  done,  so  long  as  everyone  observes  the  rules.  If  they  do  not  give  me
knowledge of acts against the King's peace, so long as I do not catch them breaking
it, we can do this.
"You're wondering how Aniki can work for one chief and Rosto  another?"  Kora
asked. In a way I was, since my problem was similar. She offered a scrap  of  pasty
to Pounce. "We've never turned against one another. Masters come and go. Friends
remain always."
"Besides, where's the problem?" Aniki stretched her long body and leaned against
my wall as  if she  sat  in the most  comfortable  of  chairs.  I  tossed  her  a  couple  of
pillows. "Thanks." She stuffed them in around her back.  "Kayfer's  chiefs  spend  all
their time protecting Kayfer. They don't battle each other." She grinned, but it was a
wolf's grin, showing teeth. "So me'n Rosto don't have to worry about  fighting. Not
that we would. So what's your Dog's name, Cooper? The one I owe money to?"
"Tunstall," I replied, watching her hands as she flexed them. She didn't even look
like she  noticed  she  did  them, the exercises  swordfolk  were always about  to  keep
their  hands  limber.  "Matthias  Tunstall.  The  other  one's  Clara  Goodwin.  And  I'm
Beka."
Aniki  wove  the  fingers  of  both  hands  together,  turned  her  palms  out,  and
stretched her arms as far as she could. I gave it a try. "Easy," she warned me. "Push
too  hard  and  you  hurt  yourself  fairly  bad.  I'm  Aniki  Forfrysning.  That's  Koramin
Ingensra. You heard Rosto say we've all moved in."
"And you are a very fine fellow," Kora told Pounce, gathering him up in her arms.
"Aniki, feel his coat! It's like velvet!" She looked at me. "I've never felt a cat's  coat
so clean and so soft. How do you do it, when he runs in the street?"
Pounce looked at me. Make her stop, he said in cat.
I looked back, telling him silently, She's a mage. You make her stop.
Kora had just found his favorite place to be scratched, right under the point of his
jaw. Fickle Pounce began to purr instead. Aniki scooted over to scratch him herself.
"We've been on the road too long," she announced with a sigh. "I'd like to settle
here and have a cat. Maybe I'll steal this one."
"Pounce  doesn't  take  to  being  stole.  I  should  just  mention  it,"  I  explained.
Shadows broke up the light from the window. All three of us looked up. Kora freed
a hand. I could see a pale green-blue gleam around her fingertips. I shook my head at
her. Pigeons lined up on my sill. There were three, Slapper, Pinky, and White Spice.
Slapper, with no more sense than the average cracknob, hopped onto my floor  and
limped to our cloth. He glared at us all like some prophet out of legend.
"Friends of yours?" Aniki asked mockingly.

I shrugged.
Slapper  began to  peck  at our  crumbs.  Seeing  their  flockmate  was  getting  away
with something, the other two flew over to us.
"Look at this," Kora whispered. "He's not so much as twitching."
Pounce sat in her lap, purring away. He wasn't about to give up being petted.
Since they weren't crying out and demanding the dirty birds be chased  off  –  like
my sisters, Diona and Lorine, often did – I crumbled some of my pasty and held out
my crumbs. White Spice came over.
"My little boy's lame," his man ghost mourned. "Who will look after 'im? Slavers
took 'is ma. She was so beautiful I knew we wouldn't be let keep 'er, but we did our
best. Who'll look after 'im now?"
"This wasn't s'posed to happen," cried Pinky's ghost. "We was supposed to dig
a well, that's all, just a well, and we dug it – "
"Beka! Beka!"
That living cove's yell jerked me from my listening. I spilled what was  left of  my
palmful of  crumbs.  My pigeons  took  flight, leaving droppings  on  my  floor  before
they fled through the open window. Aniki and Kora both grabbed their daggers.
"Beka, you  are not hiding in your  rooms  all day!  You are having fun  with  your
friends! You know, friends?"
"Ersken," I said with a sigh. My head ached as he pounded up my stairs. He had
others  with  him,  too,  unless  he  had  brought  a  herd  of  horses.  "It's  my  friend
Ersken,"  I  explained  to  Aniki  and  Kora.  "He's  another  Puppy.  And  one,  mayhap
two, of the others."
"This could be interesting," Kora murmured.
"Beka, they's  more to  life than sleepin' an'  walkin' your  watch!"  Verene  is  from
Blue Harbor and still has the accent to show for it.
Pounce  muttered in cat.  At least, Aniki  and  Kora  heard  it  so.  Aniki  petted  and
admired him for being "such a talky little pippin." I heard, Humans. Always getting
good ideas and interrupting important business with them at the stupidest times.
I would  have  said  he  had  a  poor  idea  of  them  who  fed  him,  but  Ersken  was
almost up the stairs.
"Beka, I mean it! You will open this door and – " He halted in my open doorway,
blinking. Verene and Phelan collided with his back.  Phelan was  a second-year  Dog
who'd  befriended  us  Puppies.  "You're  –  Hello,"  Ersken  said  to  Kora  and  Aniki.
"Bek, you – um..."
Kora looked at him sidelong and smiled. That was it for Ersken. He turns as  shy
as me when a pretty girl bats her lashes at him. Then Aniki got to her feet. She is half
a head taller than Ersken, more woman than he knows what to do with.
Verene started to giggle. She came in and offered a hand to Aniki. "We're Beka's
friends.  We  came  to  keep  her  from  turnin'  into  a  mushroom.  I'm  Verene,  tha's
Phelan, and th' spaniel Pup is Ersken. He's sweet. Don't bruise him." Ersken turned
beet color.
"We're moving in, so we invited Beka to breakfast," Aniki explained as she shook
Verene's hand. "That's my friend Kora on the floor. She's living downstairs now. I'm
Aniki. We met Beka at the Rogue's Court."
"You were there when Crookshank pitched his fit?" asked Phelan, his eyes bright

with  interest.  "The  word  is  he  tried  to  kill  the  Rogue.  Some  Scanran  pretty  boy
saved ol' Kayfer's life."
"That 'pretty boy' would be me," said a slow voice from my doorway, behind the
group.
My friends turned. Pounce gave the mrt that served him for a laugh.
"I brought fresh food," Rosto said. He eased his way in. The next thing I knew, I
had six guests  on  my floor  splitting up  fresh-baked  oatmeal and  rye  bread.  Rosto
had bought soft cheese to put  on  the bread,  which made him a good  fellow in my
friends' eyes.
"So why do  they call you  the Piper?"  Verene asked  when he'd  been  introduced
around.  She'd  taken  care  to  get  the  seat  beside  his.  Verene  had  an  eye  for  a
good-looking cove.
"I  play  well  enough,  don't  I,  girls?"  he  asked.  Aniki  and  Kora  nodded.  Rosto
smiled. It was a razor  blade  of  a smile that made me wonder  if he was  thinking of
Kayfer  Deerborn.  I  was  sure  Rosto  and  his  mots  had  come  to  take  the  Rogue's
throne. They couldn't do  it alone. Three  young rushers  new to  Corus  would stand
on that platform for less time than it would take to mop away the old Rogue's blood
before they'd be overwhelmed by his followers. But being new, they didn't have the
old  feuds  and  hates  built  up  among  the  folk  in  the  present  court.  If  they  made
friends, Rosto might well be on the way to a kingship.
To make his point, Rosto took a flute from his tunic and began to  play. He was
very  good.  Then  Verene  recognized  one  of  his  tunes  and  sang  it.  She  had  the
prettiest voice  in all  the  Provost's  Guard.  Kora  danced  for  us.  Rosto  and  Phelan
discovered they had met the same old wandering mage in different towns. Finally we
decided  someone  had  to  go  for  lunch  before  all  of  us  but  Kora  went  on  duty.
Everyone  put  in  some  coppers.  Me  and  Ersken  went  out  to  get  sausages,  more
cheese, and some spinach tarts.
"Be a shame to hobble any of them," he said after we'd walked in silence for a bit.
I nodded.
"You think that Rosto likes you?"
I gave him a shove.
"He moved into your lodging house, didn't he?"
"He said he liked the location. And he's got Aniki or Kora."
"I'd say both."
"That's his business, Ersken."
"What if he's looking to add you, Beka?"
"That's  my  business."  I  kicked  a  rotting  vegetable  away  from  me  to  hide  my
blushes. "Besides," I said, keeping my eyes down, "he's got to be twenty-two if he's
a day."
"Oh, ancient," Ersken said,  scoffing.  "Handsome  as  the sunrise,  if you  like that
sort of cove. Don't look at me," he said when I stared at him. "Well, look at me, but
not that way. I have older sisters, remember? If I don't know what makes girls wiggle
their toes, I've had my head in the Olorun for seventeen years."
To distract him, because  I didn't  want the talk to  come  round  to  whether I saw
Rosto that way or  he saw  me the same,  I asked,  "Have you  heard  of  the Shadow
Snake?"

Ersken frowned. "Shadow Snake? You mean, what they say Crookshank and the
Rogue were talking about that night you were there?"
"The  same,  but  before  then. Stealing children from  the Lower City. Threatening
folk who had  something of  value and  taking a  little  one  if  they  didn't  pay  it  over.
Have you  heard  aught?"  I  never  had  trouble  talking  with  Ersken.  He  made  it  that
easy. The other girls said he was too nice, but what was wrong with that? Better that
than Rosto's sword-edge self.
"Me? Heard anything?"  Ersken  began  to  laugh.  "Beka,  we've  only  been  on  the
prowl three days! I'm new in the Lower City, remember? I've not got my ear to  the
walls like you!"
If I had my ear to the walls like you think, I'd've known about the Snake when he
took  Rolond,  or  a  year  ago,  or  two.  I  thought  it,  but  did  not  say  it.  I  was  too
ashamed.
I stopped  dead  in the street  to  glare  at  him.  "Your  Dogs  mayhap  said  sommat
when you heard about Crookshank."
He made himself stop  laughing. "They  did  not.  Come  on.  Tell  me  what  you've
heard, and I'll see what I turn up."
And so I told him. Now two of us will be seeking this snake.
 
After my watch.
It was a beautiful spring evening. I felt a bit of a twinge when Tunstall greeted me
at  muster  with  "We're  back  to  the  Cesspool  tonight,  Cooper."  Not  even  spring
improves the Cesspool much, though the weather was perfect. Not too cold, not too
hot.
An hour in, we raided an illegal slave auction. One of Goodwin's Birdies brought
the word  to  her  and  carried  away  her  coppers  for  thanks.  It  was  being  held  in  a
ramshackle barn. As big as the place was, my Dogs had no choice but to post me at
the side door, since they had to go in at the front and the back.
Lucky for me I had my baton out and was ready for trouble. A Rat came dashing
through my door. He was a giant fellow a head taller than me. When I called, "In the
King's  name!"  and  grappled  with  him,  he  turned  and  caught  me  one  on  the
cheekbone  with his elbow.  For  all that, I hung on  and  got  my baton  placed  so  he
went quiet and gave me his full attention. I got the hobbles on his wrists, then made
him kneel so I could get his ankles.
Goodwin came out the door to see what had become of me. Seeing us, she gave
me a nod  and  a quarter  smile. It turned  out  my Rat  was  the ringleader, a  crooked
cove who'd tried to sell a dozen slaves without paying the King's tax. Even with the
knot on my cheekbone, I felt as good at dropping him as I had Orva Ashmiller.
Around nine we took supper in an eating house by North Gate. For the rest of our
watch we worked that part of the Cesspool. It was quiet.
"Such  nights happen,"  Tunstall said  as  we trudged  down  Rovers  Street  on  our
way back to the kennel. "I like to give Mithros a bit of an offering before I go home,
to show him I'm proper grateful – "
We were passing the Barrel's Bottom. It was one of the worst riverfront taverns. It
proved  its  reputation  now  as  the  double  front  doors  blew  open  and  a  knot  of
brawlers fell into the street.

"You  had  to  tempt  the  Crone,"  Goodwin  muttered.  We  drew  our  batons.
"Cooper, just keep anyone we pull out from piling back in."
They were splendid to watch, my Dogs. To  dishearten the brawlers they yanked
from  the  knot,  they  hit  them  neatly  with  the  fist  end  of  their  batons.  The  blows
caused so much pain even these drunken swine felt it.
The problem began when the river dodgers  fighting inside learned someone  was
pounding their friends outside. Bees hummed in my belly as they came stumbling out
of the tavern. I knew my Dogs were tough, but this looked like a lot of scuts and not
enough batons. My mouth went wool dry.
When one  mot  whose  arm muscles  were double  mine  seized  Goodwin,  I  don't
even remember deciding to  disobey  my orders.  I  smashed  her  aside  like  Sergeant
Ahuda taught us to do. That brought me to the river dodgers' attention. I got caught
up in a tide of bodies. Somehow we were pulled inside with the fight. I laid about me
as my Dogs  did,  feeling my baton  hit. I remember trying to  get  my  whistle  to  my
mouth to call for other Dogs. Someone cut the cord from my belt and sliced my arm
in the doing. I was scared. Sooner or later I was going to fall and be  trampled.  Try
as I did, I couldn't get close to Goodwin or Tunstall.
I don't think Tunstall remembered he even had a whistle. He pounded heads with
his baton, roaring. Goodwin blew her whistle even as  she  laid out  coves  and  mots
alike. Sometime in that fight, I decided  I wanted to  be  Clara Goodwin  if I lived.  I
don't know if that was afore or after someone laid a very hard fist in my left eye.
I kicked up as I was taught. My reward was  a yell of  pain. Then I heard  a cat's
battle  scream.  Pounce  landed  on  the  head  of  a  cove  who'd  drawn  a  blade  on
Tunstall.  My  cat  blinded  the  knife  wielder  with  scratches  that  bled  into  his  eyes.
Then Pounce was on to his next Rat before that one could grab him.
Curse all Dogs who can't hear a whistle! he yowled.
Someone  pushed  me against a table. I smashed  him across  the head  hard,  then
shoved him behind me. I heard him smack into furniture. Somewhere in the corner at
my back I heard a woman's voice, a low and pleasant one.
"All I want is to  get peacefully drunk after eating hill dirt in my ale  for  months.
Goddess, was it too much to ask?"
I didn't  think  the  Goddess  was  anywhere  present.  I  glanced  back,  in  case  the
woman who was getting up from her table might need  a baton  smash  on  her head.
She  was  near  as  tall  as  Tunstall,  brown-haired,  brown-eyed,  long-nosed,
broad-shouldered, slim enough for her height. She  wore  a brown  leather jerkin and
breeches  and  a  shirt  that  mayhap  once  was  white.  The  leather  scabbards  of  her
dagger and sword were just as beat up as her clothes and boots.
The tall mot battered her way to the bar. She dragged the barkeep up by the shirt,
seized the well-polished club he clutched, and shoved him back into his hiding spot.
Hands  grabbed  me. I was  busy  again. I did  my  best,  but  I  was  getting  tired.  I
finally remembered  Ahuda's  teaching and  fought my way  to  a  wall.  I  put  it  at  my
back so no  one  else might grab  me from  behind.  Taking care,  I got  into a corner,
with a wall on the side of my black eye. I didn't like having my arm restricted, but it
beat fighting on my blind side.
Goodwin  was  backing up  to  me, using a lull in the fight. The  woman  in  brown
wielded the club like a blade. Behind her lay a trail of collapsed river dodgers. Some

even decided they'd had enough fun. They were sneaking out the side  doors.  More
crawled through the doors in front.
By the time the lady and  Tunstall met at the  center  of  the  room,  Goodwin  had
reached me. She leaned against the wall, panting. "You're a mess," she said. "You're
bleeding where?"
I showed  her my arm. She  cut  a strip  from  the shirt of  a cove  I'd  downed  and
bound  my cut  with that. "Carry  spare  handkerchiefs  and  strips  of  linen. Bind  cuts
right off,"  Goodwin  told  me as  she  knotted  the bandage.  "Elsewise you'll as  soon
die of  blood  loss  as  someone's  shiv  in  your  ribs."  She  grabbed  a  pitcher  from  a
table that had survived the jostling and  took  a huge gulp of  the contents.  Then she
made me take a few swallows.  It was  ale.  For  a  moment  we  watched  as  Tunstall
traded blows with a nimble, fat cove.
"Cooper, nice baton work. Very nice." Goodwin took a deep breath, then looked
away.  Finally  she  leaned  in  and  spoke  quietly.  "Me'n  Tunstall  got  lucky  here,
Cooper. You're good in a fight, thank the Goddess. We didn't  look  out  for  you  as
we should have done. Most Puppies would be dead right now, understand? Because
this isn't the kind of fight Puppies survive without their Dogs watching out for them.
We'll look out for you better in future."
"I was doing the job," I said.
"Shut  up.  We weren't doing  ours,  me and  Tunstall.  We  were  doing  the  job  we
used to have, just breaking heads. We can't do that anymore. Now we have you  to
look after." Goodwin nodded.  "We're  learning this teaching Dog business  same as
you're learning a Dog's work,  but  that's  no  excuse.  Older  Dogs  look  after younger
ones, that's the rule. Now, who do you suppose our lady knight is?"
"That's a knight? How can you tell?"
I was glad to see Goodwin's hooked half smile. "I saw her and four other knights
riding down  Messinger on  my way to  the kennel this  afternoon.  I  didn't  see  more
than the shape of the shield, but she had the armor and trappings. And knights have
a way about them, chin so high in the air they're just begging for you to give them the
nap tap."
I grinned. All of us love that hammer blow of baton against jaw, even if it doesn't
always knock  a Rat  out.  Goodwin  has  the city's  record  for  the highest number  of
perfectly delivered nap taps that end with a Rat carried away, stone unconscious.
The scrape of wood got our attention. A mot with one  eye picked  up  a wooden
bench, meaning to throw it at the lady knight. Goodwin started forward to help, but
the lady turned and caught sight of her danger, and Tunstall's. She didn't even waste
the breath to shout. She  slung her free arm around  Tunstall's  neck,  hooked  one  of
his legs from under him, and dragged him down and to the side. They fell as the mot
hurled the heavy bench.  It went over  their  heads  and  smashed  into  the  three  river
dodgers  who'd  been  moving in on  Tunstall. As  he  and  the  lady  struggled  to  their
feet, Goodwin returned to lean against the wall.
"They're all right," she said. "They don't need me."
Pounce wandered over to us. Sitting on  the floor,  he began to  wash his paws.  I
bent over  to  pet  him, only  to  see  the  floor  yaw  away  from  me.  "Pox,"  Goodwin
whispered as she grabbed me.
I straightened with her help and  let her get me to  a bench.  "Sorry,"  I  muttered,

feeling miserable.
Pounce jumped on my lap and began to talk to me. Cheer up, you're doing fine.
Learning hurts.
"It's the blood loss." Goodwin half sat  on  the table next to  me and  crossed  her
arms over her chest. "It makes a girl feel giddy, and no mistake. The  healer will set
you right, Cooper."
Tunstall and the lady knight had come to the last pair of foes. Neither Rat looked
sharp, but seemingly they were clever enough. With no friends left, they ran.
The lady looked  at Tunstall, then at Goodwin  and  me, and  leaned  on  her  club.
"Well," she said, a little winded. "This was refreshing. That's a fighting Pup you have
there, but she nearly got killed. I know better than to take a squire into a fight where
I'm outnumbered seven to one. It's one thing to dice with your own life and another
to dice with that of someone you're training, Master Dog."
Tunstall scowled at her. "Cooper can take care of herself, and if she can't, we can
take care  of  her, whatever your  name is."  Then he took  a look  at  me  and  cursed.
"Ox's eggs."
I swear it was  the blood  loss  that made me say,  "I  am  fine,"  loud  enough  that
even the lady heard me. As a lie it was pitiful. My head spun in the speaking of it.
The  lady  threw  back  her  head  and  laughed.  It  was  no  well-bred  laugh,  but  a
full-throated  guffaw.  "A  fighting  Pup  indeed."  She  strolled  over  to  Goodwin  and
smiled. "I am Sabine of Macayhill, lady knight."
"Clara Goodwin of the Provost's Guard. My partner is Matthias Tunstall, and this
is Rebakah Cooper." Goodwin smiled up at the lady. "Thank you for helping us deal
with this lot. I'm curst if I know why no one responded to my whistle – "
Four Dogs walked in the front  door,  none  of  them people  I knew well. Tunstall
was coming toward us, so I could hear his mutter of "Pig scummer."
"Some 'un said they heard a Dog whistle a-blowin' down  this way. We  come  as
fast  as  we  could,"  the  biggest  of  the  four  said,  looking  around.  "Seemingly  you
didn't need us, then."
"Change of the watch," Goodwin said, and sighed.
Now it made sense. It must  have been  later than we thought.  The  fellows of  the
Evening Watch were on their way to the kennel or already there when Goodwin blew
her whistle. Night Watch is made up of the district's dregs, the slow and the sullen or
the plain lazy. Someone carried the word of our alarm to the kennel because they got
a copper for doing it, and the Dogs of the Night Watch took their time in coming.
For a moment the anger rose up so bad it choked me. I didn't know about dying,
but these  scummernobs  could  have saved  me  a  beating.  If  I'd  had  the  strength,  I
don't  know  but  I  would  have  flown  at  these  four  lazy  scuts  and  tried  some  nap
tapping of my own.
Pounce fluffed his fur out until he looked three times as big as normal. He jumped
at the lummox Dog's  chest.  He howled like something from  the Realms of  Chaos,
scaring the Dog and his friends so bad they went scrambling to get away from him.
They tripped and fell over the river dodgers on the floor. Sadly for them, those folk
were waking up, and they were vexed.
"Quick," whispered Lady Sabine. She pointed to a side door.
Before  I  knew  what  happened,  Tunstall  had  scooped  me  up  in  his  arms.  He,

Goodwin,  and  Lady Sabine ran out  into the alley. Behind us  we could  hear a new
fight break out.
Pounce caught up with us on Rovers Street. He took  the lead, his tail a flag. He
was very pleased with himself.
Once the healer had seen to me, Goodwin, Tunstall, and Lady Sabine walked me
back  to  Nipcopper  Close,  Pounce  riding  on  either  Goodwin's  or  Lady  Sabine's
shoulders.  The  three of  them wandered  off  to  find a meal. It seemed  that  Tunstall
had forgiven the lady her disapproval, at least enough to eat with her. My cat  and  I
went in search of my bed.
 
 
Sunday, April 5, 246
This  morning  I  opened  my  door  to  Kora,  Aniki,  and  the  wonderful  scent  of
heated pasties from the basket on Kora's arm. Despite my weariness and the pain of
my half-healed bruises,  I smiled  to  see  them.  They  looked  full  of  mischief,  and  I
have a sad liking for mischief. Why else would I prefer to live in the Lower City? My
lord says that the best Dogs are half crooked at heart.
"Breakfast?"  Aniki asked.  "We  heard  you  were  dancing  with  river  dodgers  last
night. You will need to build your strength back up."
"That's a splendid black eye," Kora said. "I like the cheekbone bruise, too. Before
or after healing?"
"After,"  I said.  My belly growled.  I was  always starved  for  a  day  after  healing.
Kora handed me a mutton pasty. I ate it then and there, standing aside to let them in.
"How did you hear?" I asked them as Aniki put down the cloth and Kora laid out my
plates.
"I  was  at  Dawull's,"  Aniki  said.  "We  got  the  news  straight  off.  Some  of  our
rushers wanted to go help the river dodgers, but Dawull wouldn't allow it. He won't
let his people take on your Dogs if he knows  about  it beforehand,  I found  out.  He
says they're too tough."
I confess it, I was flattered. Aniki and Kora have plainly lived a hard life. To have
them speak of my bruises and my Dogs as if I belong to that world – it seems as if I
am accepted into it. As  if I wear a Puppy's  trim but  have a Dog's  standing.  And I
have paid a hard  price  for  those  bruises.  Even with healing, they will linger on  my
face for days. It's good to get respect for them in the wake of the pain.
I found  the  bottles  of  twilsey  and  barley  water  from  yesterday  and  put  them
down,  then opened  my shutters.  The  pigeons  with the ghosts  of  the  dead  diggers
waited for me. I fed them their corn as Rosto arrived with more food.
"I'll kiss them and make them better," he said when he saw my bruises.
I slid  one  foot  back  to  balance  myself  and  raised  my  arms,  hands  fisted,  into
blocking positions. "Try and I'll bruise you." I actually said it out loud. "Then Aniki
and Kora can kiss you better."
Kora smiled. "Aniki can do the kisses. Rosto, don't  pull Beka's  tail. She  doesn't
like it."
Pounce  wandered  over  to  Rosto  and  stood,  reaching  up  delicately  between  his
legs. He said,  "Mrt?" just loud  enough to  make Rosto  look  down,  then patted  the
inside of Rosto's knee.

Rosto  sighed.  "I  was  being  friendly,"  he  complained.  "Modern  times  are  cruel
when a cove can't be friendly." He stepped around Pounce and settled on the floor
cloth. "See if I bring you  a treat tomorrow,  Master Cat."  He looked  up  at me. "Is
there a tomorrow? I think this little breakfast idea is quite nice, even with threats and
the nasty birds coming and going."
The "nasty birds" ignored him, being too busy fighting over the corn on my ledge.
I eased off my fighting pose, dizzy from healing, and sat on my stool.
"Not  tomorrow,  Tuesday's  my day  off.  I leave early to  visit my family," I said.
"And tomorrow is our day in Magistrate's Court. It starts the hour after sunrise."
"Ugh!" Rosto said, grimacing. "They don't pay you enough, sweetheart."
I scowled at him. I'll never tell him that I like his company. The extra food is nice,
of course, particularly at the start of the day. I'd bite my tongue off before I said it,
but Rosto is funny.
Very well. The truth, since I am the only one who reads this.
He makes my skin, my peaches,  and  my other  parts  tingle in an agreeable  way.
Naught will come of it. He's clearly meant to be more than an ordinary rusher, which
means that one day he and I will be on the wrong sides of an argument. Besides, he's
got Aniki and Kora. I'd druther be their friend than their rival.
But it's  good,  after the dark  and  the scares  of  night duty,  to  sit in daylight with
food and interesting folk. Clever folk, who know how to laugh. Who  know how to
make me laugh, when doing so doesn't make my cheek hurt.
Ersken and Verene came not long after Rosto with sausage rolls and gossip. One
of the barons in Unicorn found out his lady wife was canoodling with an Earl. Rank
or  no,  a  challenge  had  been  issued.  Mistress  Bircher,  wife  of  the  head  of  the
Silversmiths'  Guild,  presented  her  man  with  twins.  That  was  Flash  District.  Flash
Dogs would have the joy of guarding that celebration when it happened.  We  would
have a quiet night, as many of our foists and thieves went to help themselves there.
"Remember Alacia?" Verene asked me. To our crooked  friends  she  said,  "She's
another Puppy, named in tribute to His Majesty's first Queen. Well, till yesterday she
was on  Day Watch  in Unicorn.  Then my lord  of  Olau got  word  that his  youngest
and only son has been flirtin' with a pretty Puppy."
"Fast  work,"  Aniki  said  with  respect.  "You  lot  have  been  on  duty,  what,  five
days?"
"Four, not counting today," Ersken said. He's a stickler for numbers.
"Anyway," Verene said. She hates it when wonderful gossip is interrupted. I never
interrupt, because she has better gossip than most Dogs. Her mother is a barmaid at
Naxen's Fancy, where they hear everything as soon as it happens. "Anyway, the lad's
noble  father  pitched  a  fit  at  the  Unicorn  kennel,  and  they  switched  Alacia  with
Clarke. He was on Night Watch at Prettybone. So now she's on Night Watch."
Rosto rubbed his chin. "So this Alacia's a sweet armful? I'll look out for her, Dog
or not."
Aniki  gave  him  a  hard  elbow.  "Don't  you  have  enough  women  in  your  life,
Rosto?"
Rosto gave me what he thought was a sober look. "Not without Cooper, I don't."
"Cooper will never go with anyone crooked," Ersken said. "A rusher was mean to
her mother. She's never forgiven them."

I could pretend not to hear what he said, because Slapper was making way for  a
new pigeon, one I'd  never seen.  This  one  was  a sad  case.  He was  a caked-feather
fellow I instantly named Mumper. Mayhap he was gray under the dirt and grease on
his wings and belly. His ghost, like those of the other murdered diggers, complained
about being buried whilst his people believed he'd run off.
Once I'd gathered aught new he had to  say,  I heard  Verene call my name. "You
remember that Dog who taught us to tell dice that have been meddled with? He was
on Night Watch?"
I knew him well. I remembered the sight of  his fingers, handling the sets  of  dice
he'd used to teach us. He could hold five in one hand and throw them so  they'd  all
land in one circle drawn in the dirt.
Verene drew her finger over her throat.
My chest went tight. "Dead?" I whispered.
Ersken nodded,  his  face  grim.  "And  we're  not  to  go  to  the  burying.  There's  a
notice up on the kennel gate. We saw  it on  the way here. They found  him with his
dice in his mouth –  all rigged. All crooked.  My lord's  order,  under  his seal: "Bury
him with the Dogs, but not as a Dog."
We all made the sign against evil on our chests. Pounce came over and sat on my
crossed  legs  to  purr  at  me.  Of  course  there  are  crooked  Dogs.  I  can  name  two
handfuls myself. But this is the first Dog to  die since  I entered the ranks.  That  is a
sad thing.
I will buy prayers for him. I do not like that he was crooked. But he'd still been a
Dog.
We sat and talked of other things as the sun rose higher and the room got warm. I
wanted to get out and feed more pigeons. There might be  others  who'd  been  killed
along with the ghosts who rode poor Mumper and  Slapper.  Mayhap once  I had  all
of the murdered ones together,  they could  lead me to  where they were buried.  But
healing had left me dozy, as it often does the day after, especially when I lose blood.
"You  need  a nap,"  Kora  said  when she  saw  my  eyes  start  to  flutter.  "And  I'm
taking your clothes to wash. You can pay me three coppers for each wash I do."
"Wash?" I asked.
Kora had picked up my basket. "The herb women aren't hiring as yet. I have my
charms to get clothes clean faster than most."
"You'll charge three coppers?" Verene asked.
Kora looked at her. "Five for those who don't live in my house."
"How about mine?" Ersken asked. "I'll pay five and pay it more than gladly."
Kora smiled at them. "Hurry and get your things."
Ersken and Verene ran to fetch their wash.
"It doesn't seem right," I said. I didn't have the strength to argue much, I was so
tired.
"I do a bit of magic with the soap and they're clean, a bit more and they're dry. I
could  make a fortune  as  a washerwoman,"  Kora  said.  "The  worst  part  is  carrying
wet things."
Aniki and Rosto were clearing up the remains of breakfast.
"Get some street children to help,"  Aniki said.  "A copper  each  and  they'd  wash
the things themselves."

"I  can  imagine,"  Kora  said.  She  looked  at  me.  "Tell  me  you  could  do  better
yourself."
I yawned. "I can't."
"Then hush. Sleep till it's time for your watch."
I wrote this morning up during the afternoon, now I've woke up. When I opened
my door, my clean wash was there in a basket, neatly folded. On my way to training,
I will put three coppers under Kora's door.
 
After my watch.
Tonight  Tunstall,  Goodwin,  and  me  were  back  in  the  streets  around  the
Nightmarket. And I will write details now, truly. There were tavern fights, robberies.
We broke  up  a fight among gamblers as  a man claimed a mot  had  cheated  him.  I
stopped  five  cutpurses  and  three  foists  on  my  own,  but  they  were  not  stealing
anything worth the trouble to hobble them.
We caught a cove trying to sell children who were not his to sell and fetched him
and the slaver who was  about  to  pay  him  back  to  the  kennel.  We  took  the  three
nearly sold children home. One mot didn't even know yet her little boy was missing.
She had been sewing on a fancy gown for a fine lady that had  to  be  finished in the
morning. She thought her neighbor still had charge of her son.
I think that is all the work we did. I obeyed my orders and came home as soon as
we mustered out, to write this little bit. I am bone weary with the work of this week,
and  there  is  Magistrate's  Court  yet  tomorrow.  So  much  for  good  intentions  and
keeping a record of everything from my first week on duty.
 
 
Monday, April 6, 246
Court Day!!
This last day before our day off, I had no time for breakfast. I gobbled stale rolls
and cheese, then reported at seven in the morning to  the Magistrate's  Court  for  the
Lower City. On  Monday  the Dogs  of  the  Evening  Watch  account  for  those  Rats
they've bagged that week. They say what the Rats have done to warrant bagging and
defend  their actions  in the bagging if need  be.  Tunstall and  Goodwin  will  give  the
reports  at the bidding of  the Provost's  Advocate  and  answer  the  questions  of  the
King's Magistrate. The  way  it  should  work,  the  Puppies  have  little  to  do  but  pay
attention against the day  when they have to  do  the same.  It's  up  to  the Dogs  who
write the reports and who are there as each case unfolds to present  the whole thing
before the court.
I had most of the long day to see that all I'd heard was true. Magistrate's Court is
simple enough. Some Rats with a little coin or patrons have advocates to speak  for
them. These lawyers sometimes persuade the Magistrate (Sir Tullus of King's Reach
covers Evening Watch's arrests) to order fines, lashes, time in the stocks or Outwalls
Prison,  or  work  inside  Corus  or  on  a  farm  instead  of  something  worse.  Hard
sentences go from labor on the realm's roads, mines, docks, or quarries to death for
the murderers and arsonists.
I was familiar enough with the Jane Street court, having run messages there before
I started my training. Still, it was odd, sitting in the Dogs' benches with Tunstall and

Goodwin, my fellow Puppies, and their Dogs. Ersken had  managed to  slip into the
seat next to me. Together we read what bored Dogs had carved into the low backs
of the benches in front of us.
Not that we spent all of our time hearing reports and admiring the history. Behind
the Dogs'  seats  was  the wall of  bars  that separated  the business  side  of  the  court
from the visitors' side. Plenty was going on back there. Some of the folk on that side
were family, friends, and sweethearts of the Rats who took their sentences that day.
They had all matter of things to say, whether we were the Dogs who had vexed them
or  no.  Then  there  were  those  who'd  come  for  amusement's  sake.  Along  the  wall
behind the bars stood the Dogs whose work it was to keep order.
When I got bored with the crowd, I watched the court officials. They were set up
in front of the Dogs' benches. There was a table for the Provost's Advocate, where
he kept his many lists and notes, and another for any advocate hired by the Rats. We
saw few advocates that day. The mages who served to keep order against any other
mages sat on benches at the front of the room. The  Magistrate's  Herald sat  next to
just such  a mage, his list in one  hand  and  his staff  in  the  other,  when  he  was  not
reading out the name of the Rat, the names of  the Dogs  involved, and  the charges.
And at the great desk, higher than the rest of us, flanked by two uniformed soldiers
to represent the King's authority, was the Magistrate himself. Sir Tullus had ruled on
Evening Watch cases for six years. My lord said he was fair and knew more law than
most. The Dogs said he was a bit impatient with dithering.
Around  three  in  the  afternoon  they  brought  Orva  Ashmiller  up.  She  was  a
sorry-looking mess in the light of day, with cage muck on her. And she was chained,
which was a puzzler. She was so skinny the shackles seemed like to  drop  from  her
wrists. If not for the memory of that big knife, I almost pitied her. Then she  caught
sight of me.
"You  bitch!"  She  threw  herself  at  me.  She'd  caught  the  cage  Dogs  napping.
Before  the  lackwits  collected  themselves,  Orva  fell  headlong,  her  ankle  chains
tripping her. She scrabbled to her hands and knees to shriek, "You took my children
from me! You turned my man agin' me, you puttock, you trollop, you trull –  "  She
lunged and  fell again. Now I knew why they'd  chained her. "I'll cut  your  liver out,
you poxied leech! Why wouldn't you let me go! You ruined my life!"
The crowd  who  had  come  for  entertainment  hooted  and  whistled.  I  wanted  to
vanish. I didn't feel even a little sorry for Orva anymore.
"Steady," whispered Tunstall.
I looked into the air over Sir Tullus's shoulder. What a splendid omen for my very
first day in the court. A drunkard who blamed me for the mess she'd  gotten  herself
into was making a spectacle of me.
The dozy Dogs who'd let her escape ambled up to her, grabbing her arms to haul
her to her feet. I just kept telling myself that with no coin and no advocate, the best
she could  hope  for  was  a couple  of  years  on  a farm for  striking a Dog.  She'd  be
gone a long time, and maybe she'd get the hotblood wine out of her veins.
"Mama!"
I closed my eyes then, wishing I could trickle through the cracks in the floor. Why
had the children come?  I glanced back,  where the crowd  was.  Of  course  her man
had brought them, all three. Master Ashmiller wouldn't look at me as  he carried  the

little lad up to the bars. What had he been thinking? Why would he want them to see
their mama like this? She was still screaming, spittle flying from  her lips, calling me
every vile name there was, not once looking at the little ones calling for her.
The herald banged  his staff  on  the floor  without  it  doing  any  good.  At  last  Sir
Tullus ordered the cage Dogs to gag Orva and the court Dogs to take the screaming
children out of the room. I finally drew a breath. Folk  were yelling at the court  and
cage Dogs, their attention taken away from  me at last. The  two  loobies  who'd  lost
control of Orva in the first place silenced her.
I began to relax.
"The  case  of  Mistress  Orva  Ashmiller,  resident  of  Mulberry  Way."  The  herald
had a fine, ringing voice that bounced from the worn, smooth wood of the floor and
walls.  "Charges  –  striking  Provost's  Guardswoman  Clara  Goodwin  while
Guardswoman Goodwin acted to uphold the King's law together with fellow Guard
Matthias Tunstall and trainee Guard Rebakah Cooper."
Sir Tullus scowled. "Struck a Guard? Report."
Tunstall nudged me with his elbow. "Cooper."
I must have stared up at him like a snared rabbit. "None of the other trainees had
to." I think I whined.
"Cooper, he hates Dogs that waste time," Goodwin said. "Report.  The  Dog that
was there for the whole thing does the report. That would be you."
Ersken actually tried to push me to my feet. "You can do it, Beka!"
Some  nightmares do  not  end.  I peered  at the Magistrate through my  bangs  and
dug my feet in against Ersken's  push.  To  my  scrambling  brain  Sir  Tullus  seemed
very like the smoked boar face the butchers hang before their shops to advertise. His
face was that beet-like red, his jowls dark  with beard-shadow.  I believe he had  but
one very long eyebrow.
His mouth gave the oddest of twitches. By then I was in a complete, blind panic. I
couldn't  speak  before  all  these  people.  I  didn't  care  if  most  were  behind  the
onlookers' bars!
"This day comes to all trainee Guards, Rebakah Cooper," Sir Tullus said. "Your
day has only come earlier than most. Speak up. The sooner you begin the telling, the
sooner you may go."
"We  were walking  the  rounds  when  we  heard  the  sound  of  violence,"  Tunstall
said quietly. It was one of the beginnings we committed to memory in training. Now
Goodwin had a grip on my other arm, far more painful than Ersken's.
"Stand  up  or  I'll poke  your  wound,"  she  muttered.  "Do  not  embarrass  Tunstall
and me in front of the Magistrate."
I stumbled to my feet with that, but my knees wobbled. "I – We were w-walking
the – the rounds when we, um, we heard violence. Milord."
"Look up, Guardswoman, and speak up." For a man supposed to be peppery, he
sounded almost kind. "Just tell it. What happened?"
How  could  I  say  I  could  not  speak  before  this  whole  hooting  chamber?  I
stumbled  and  stammered  and  got  no  more  along  than  explaining  the  mess  Orva's
man was when Sir Tullus took pity on me. "Enough. Tunstall, continue."
I dropped  onto  the bench  and  put  my face  in my hands,  feeling the heat of  my
shame against my palms. Why must I be unable to speak before strangers? It is my

biggest  fault  as  a  Dog,  and  I  must  find  a  way  to  fix  it,  but  how?  They  were  all
laughing at me. Who  could  blame them? From  fish guts  to  drooling cracknob,  I'd
had a glorious week.
Nor was it done. I heard Tunstall say, "Orva escaped through the open window."
He stopped then and cleared his throat.
"She knew there were stairs without? Go on," Sir Tullus urged Tunstall. "I assume
you captured her outside."
"No,  Sir Knight," Tunstall replied. He cleared  his throat  again. I saw  where  this
was headed. My tripes clenched. For a moment I thought I might throw up.
"But you have said that Goodwin was unable to give chase," Sir Tullus reminded
Tunstall.
"I did,  Sir Knight."  Tunstall  started  to  rub  his  beard,  as  he  often  did  when  he
wasn't sure what to say.
"Ah." To my sorrow, Sir Tullus was a quick-witted man. "Stand up and try again,
Cooper."
I actually heard a moan from the onlookers.
I stood.
I was  dizzily trying to  remember my own name when someone  walked  between
my trembling legs.
Pounce.
He curled up  on  the toes  of  my boots.  I could  feel his purr  rumble through the
leather.
"Sir Knight, I went after her," I told the floor.
"Louder," Ersken whispered.
"Sir Knight, I went after her," I repeated, as loud as I could manage. "She would
not halt when I bade her to, so I gave chase. I caught her."
"Where, Cooper?" The Magistrate sounded very patient.
I swallowed. "At the Sheepmire Tavern, Sir Knight."
"He won't  know where that is!"  Ersken whispered.  So  eager he was  to  help me
that his voice was just a bit too loud. Folk heard and laughed.
Goodwin took out her baton, went back  to  the bars,  and  walked along, banging
them hard. The ones hanging on to the bars had to jump away to keep from getting
their fingers smacked. Of course  they hit those  crowding  behind them. Some  went
down in a heap.
"Silence!" she cried  in her crowd  voice.  "I  don't  know what manner of  Players'
jollity you thought you came here for, you scuts, but you were dead wrong! This is a
court of the realm's law. Shut your gobs or I'll come back there and crack skulls!"
Goddess,  how I want to  be  Clary Goodwin  when  I  get  to  be  a  proper  Dog,  I
thought with envy.
The court Dogs, them as were supposed to keep order, stirred. It had dawned on
them that they ought to do some work.  They moved  out  into the crowd,  hands  on
their own batons. Goodwin thrust hers back  into its straps  and  came to  sit next to
Tunstall and me.
"Thank  you,  Guardswoman  Goodwin."  Sir  Tullus's  voice  was  as  dry  as
Crookshank's  heart.  "It  is  a  pleasure  to  watch  you  restore  quiet  in  my  court.
Continue, Guardswoman Cooper. The Sheepmire Tavern...?"

For  a  moment  I'd  forgotten  my  own  pain.  I  ground  my  teeth  and  tried  to
remember where the curst place was. "Spindle Lane, Sir Knight," I said at last.
"I have no idea where that is," the Magistrate said.
Tunstall stood.  "It's  but  a short  walk from  the North  Gate,  Sir  Knight."  He  sat
down, giving me a pat on the shoulder as he did so.
I tried to forgive him for handing me to Sir Tullus. I knew nearly as well as he did
that it was the Dog who stayed with the Rat who did the report. It was only because
I was so curst tongue-tied before folk that he'd had to speak at all.
Sir  Tullus's  eyebrow  shot  toward  his  forehead.  "From  Mulberry  Way  to  the
North Gate?"
My tongue felt too big for my mouth. Ersken kicked me to make me speak. "I – I
– Forgive me, milord, sorry, Sir Knight, but  we went by  back  ways and  through a
few..." I clenched my fists and kept on going. "There was alleys and between houses
and she went through a couple  of  drinking dens  and  I caught her by  going around
one, Sir Knight, then I hobbled her and we got a cart ride back  to  the kennel and  I
know I wasn't s'posed to arrest her but I had her and so I told her she was arrested
and then my Dogs – 'scuze me, my Guards – they done it proper when I got her to
the guardhouse." My mouth kept going as I said, "I'm sorry for her children and her
man, but they're cracknobs for wanting someone who breaks crockery on their faces
and tries to cut them with a dreadful big knife, with apologies,  Sir Knight." Then I
clapped my hands  over  my traitor mouth.  It was  a heady thing, reporting like that,
with my heart pounding and my cheeks burning like one of Crookshank's  houses.  I
think I went a little mad for just a moment.
Someone poked me from behind. It was Verene. She  gave me a flask. I sniffed,
but  it  was  just  warm  raspberry  twilsey,  naught  that  would  make  me  giddy.  The
tartness washed the dry coat from my mouth and made it tingle. I reminded myself
to do something nice for Verene one day soon.
I looked at Sir Tullus through my bangs. His mouth was twitching, more this time
than  it  had  before.  Then  it  steadied  out.  He  scratched  his  head.  "Better,
Guardswoman?"
I nodded.  This  time  it  was  Tunstall  who  kicked  me.  "Yes,  sir,  thank  you,  Sir
Knight," I said, thinking that between Tunstall and  Ersken,  my legs would look  like
eggplants in the morning.
"Perhaps you would be so good  as  to  explain why  you  went to  such  trouble,  if
you please,"  Sir Tullus said.  "You  show  a  degree  of...enthusiasm  that  is  unusual,
even for a trainee Guard."
"Sir?" I asked. Now that the worst of it was done, I could meet his eyes, as long
as he didn't want to be chattering until midnight.
"Why did you not let her go? You could have returned for  her another day,"  Sir
Tullus explained.
Perhaps  it was  Sir Tullus who'd  run mad,  not  me. Except  he seemed  to  be  the
same as  when the day  had  started.  Still,  it  was  a  crackbrained  question,  though  I
could not say as much to him.
"Sir Knight, she  struck Guardswoman  Goodwin,"  I said,  wondering  if  I  should
talk slow,  like a person  did  with the simple and  the young.  "With a knife. Not  the
sharp end, but it might've been. Orva couldn't be let get away with it, sir."

"And why not?" he asked, prodding again.
I wished I could scratch my head or sew or whittle to help myself think. Trying to
explain with my hands hanging useless was like being schooled by the law masters in
training or my teachers in Lord Gershom's home. Surely any Dog in this room could
explain this to him better than me.
"Sir Knight, striking a Dog with a knife – it's a serious thing. A Dog is the face –
we're the face of..." My thoughts scattered. I found them again. "The  Dogs  are the
face of the law. We're so few. Nobody wants the work. So the realm says, We value
Dogs.  We  set  the  price  high  for  them  as  turn  a  blade  on  a  Dog."  I'd  had  about
enough  explaining.  I  looked  at  the  floor  again.  "If  the  realm  values  us  enough  to
make the law and the penalties like we have, I must value us  Dogs  enough to  catch
them as breaks the law. Mustn't I, Sir Knight?"
No one said anything, or laughed, or hooted. I think they were trying to work out
what I'd said and if it made sense. I wasn't even certain of the sense of what I'd said.
At  last  Sir  Tullus  told  me,  "Guardswoman  Cooper,  Corporal  Guardswoman
Goodwin is a true hero in the Provost's Guard. She has recovered large amounts of
property, brought hundreds to justice, and saved countless lives. You are right. Her
life and work are valuable to this court. You may be seated."
As I gratefully planted my bum on  the  bench,  I  heard  Goodwin  mutter,  "Don't
even think this makes me sweet on you, Cooper."
Hiding behind my bangs, I grinned.
"Orva Ashmiller, have you an advocate to speak for you?" asked the Magistrate.
"She does not," said the Provost's Advocate. "Her husband, Jack Ashmiller, begs
the  mercy  of  this  court.  He  asks  that  his  wife  be  granted  a  fine  or  work  and
imprisonment  within  the  city.  I  have  also  gathered  the  complaints  of  Mistress
Ashmiller's  neighbors.  They  state  that  she  has  repeatedly  given  her  husband  and
children bleeding injuries, bruises, and broken bones. They ask for the peace of their
homes that Mistress Ashmiller receive a sentence to prison or to exile from  the city
of Corus." He walked up to the Magistrate and presented him with a paper.
Sir Tullus read the paper over. He looked at Orva. Did I see disgust on his face? I
disliked anyone who mauled children so, but most folk thought that children grew up
unruly,  even  wrong,  without  some  touch  of  the  strap  or  the  slap.  As  for  Jack
Ashmiller, why had he not fought her when she got to breaking things on  his head?
Usually Lower City men gave as good as they got, or worse.
"Your  neighbors  should  have come  to  this court  long ago,  Mistress  Ashmiller,"
Sir Tullus said.  Orva  started  to  fight  the  cage  Dogs'  grip  on  her  arms  again.  She
knew she would not like what came next. Sir Tullus continued, "Orva Ashmiller, it is
the  judgment  of  this  court  that  you  go  to  the  royal  work  farm  in  the  town  of
Whitethorn. You will labor there for five years for disturbing your neighbors' peace,
for  violence  to  your  family,  and  for  the  crime  of  wielding  a  blade  against  a
representative of the King's peace. Should you try to escape the farm and  return to
Corus, you will be branded and sold into slavery."
He struck the bronze sun disk on his desk with his polished granite ball, the sign
that judgment had  been  made.  The  Dogs  carried  Orva  off  to  the cages  to  wait for
transport. She had a long journey ahead.
I thought I would feel better about it. More victorious. Instead I just felt sad.

"Next case," Sir Tullus told the herald.
They'd  lit  the  court's  lamps  well  before  all  of  those  hobbled  that  week  on  the
Evening  Watch  came  before  the  Magistrate.  Despite  the  food  all  the  Dogs  had
known to bring, things like sausage rolls that they shared with the Puppies, my belly
was growling like a four-footed  dog  by  the end  of  it. I could  hear everyone  else's
belly making the same complaints. Finally Sir Tullus struck the sun disk on the day's
last judgment.
And thus went my first Court Day.
I think I am going to puke.
 
 
Tuesday, April 7, 246
At day's end.
I think even if I'd come home late last night, I'd have been up with the dawn, but
I'd  been  to  bed  at a good  hour.  Today  was  my  free  day.  I  was  going  to  see  my
family at Provost's House. I took my blue dress from my clothespress yesterday and
let it air out, along with my underdress and a veil for my hair. Lord Gershom would
only laugh if I wore lads' garb as I did most days, but Lady Teodorie would smile in
that thin, ice on the puddles at dawn way. I would give her no  extra cause  to  level
that smile at me. The bruises that had gone purple-green on my face would be more
than enough problem in that regard.
Each time I walk up Gold Street to Provost's House, I remember coming this way
with Mama that first time.  She  rode  in  the  cart  with  our  few  things,  trying  not  to
cough.  I  remember  the  roses  bloomed  on  her  cheeks.  My  lord's  healer  said  later
those were a cruel joke of the sickness. The sun struck red lights in Mama's  brown
curls,  too,  making them shine. She  was  so  happy.  "Had  I  prayed  the  Goddess,  I
would never have dreamed such a chance for us, Beka." She knew I was angry that
my lord had tracked me home and waited until I was  out  to  persuade  Mama. "You
cannot spit on the lady's gift, you  mule-headed gixie! This  is not  only for  you,  but
your sisters and brothers. You'll never grow old in the Cesspool – you're meant for
better things!"
The servants' gate was open and Jakorn was on duty today, as he was then. There
had  been  more  black  in  his  long  hair  then,  which  was  almost  all  gray  now.  This
morning he grinned, showing the gaps  where he'd  lost  teeth over  the years.  "Beka.
Not wearin' yer uniform?" Jakorn came from the north. When he was angry, his burr
was so thick it was that hard to understand his speech at all.
"I don't want to wear the same thing every day," I said, and kissed his cheek.
From the glint in Jakorn's eye, he knew very well I'd worn a dress to stay on  my
lady's good side. "And yer face, mistress?"
I hung my head before my first teacher in fighting. "You  was  a street  Dog once,
Jakorn."
He clapped me on the shoulder.  "Di'n't  I tell ye, th'  idea be,  yer foe walks away
lookin' mauled?" he asked,  but  it was  all teasing. "Run  on  in  t'  Cook.  She's  been
worritin' about ye leavin' yer insides in some privy from  the dreadful food  down  in
th' Lower City."
I grinned at him and passed on through the gate. The servants were already at their

work, of course. They smiled and called greetings but did no  more.  They had  their
duties, and my lady expected those  to  come  before  all else. My sisters,  Diona and
Lorine, just about worship my lady, and I dare say no word against her before them.
I feel sometimes like my lady means more to Diona than I do. My sisters are turning
into proper young mots, neat in their appearance and correct  in their speaking.  The
days when we giggled together over Pounce's kitten antics  seem to  fade  with every
month since Mama's death.
I want them to do well in life. My lady is seeing to that. She is training Diona as a
lady's maid, which had been the dream of  Mama's  heart. She  has  promised  to  find
Diona a very good  place  when she  thinks Diona  is  ready,  and  my  lady  keeps  her
promises.  Lorine, though only twelve,  bids  fair  to  be  an  excellent  seamstress  one
day.  Already  she  does  much  of  my  lady's  fine  sewing,  which  suits  my  lady's
personal  seamstress  well.  She's  getting  old,  and  her  eyes  are  not  what  they  once
were.  She  looks  on  Lorine  as  a  daughter  and  teaches  her  those  tricks  of  good
stitchery my lady does not know.
Two of the dairymaids passed me in giggles. I wished just once that I could say,
"You don't snicker when the lads come home for their day off!" Plenty of servants'
sons have gone to be Dogs. It was only the girls who are given the raised brow.
The door  to  the kitchen wing was  open.  Only in the coldest  winter is it closed,
along  with  the  door  on  the  end  of  the  hall  that  opens  onto  the  kitchen  proper.  I
walked in. A boy  scrubbed  tableware from  the  household's  breakfast.  Cookmaids
sat at the chopping  table, preparing vegetables.  Cook  stood  with  her  back  to  me,
tasting several different cheeses. She saw the boy grin at me and turned.
"Oh, my dear, what happened to your face?" she asked in her soft, kind way. She
opened her arms, and I stepped into her warm hold. Mya had looked after our family
from the moment our  cart  rolled  through  the  servants'  gate.  She  made  soups  that
Mama kept  down  despite  the  cough  that  so  often  made  her  bring  up  other  food.
When Mama found the Black God's peace at last, it was Mya who held me. She was
a tiny dumpling of a mot, rounded and sweet, her eyes up-tipped at the corners. So,
too, was her nose  tipped  at the end.  Kindness  was  what she  gave as  easily as  she
breathed,  but  she  ruled the kitchen, and  the children of  the  house,  firmly.  No  one
fooled her.
I put my hand  to  my healing eye and  shrugged.  "Doing work on  Rovers  Street,
Mya."
She cocked her head to one side. "I thought your job was to duck," she said.
I  giggled,  because  of  course  she  was  right.  "I'll  do  better  another  time,"  I
promised.
She sat me down and fed me. I couldn't escape that, no more did I want to.  My
belly had started growling on Gold Street.
"Now,"  Mya said  once  she'd  put  some  food  before  me,  "my  lord  says  Kebibi
Ahuda got  you  assigned  to  Goodwin  and  Tunstall. Is  it true? If Clary Goodwin  is
giving you a bad time, tell her I will be coming to have a word with her."
The thought of my kind friend scolding Goodwin made me grin.
Mya saw it. "You may think me a silly little cook, but Clary and I attend the same
temple. We have been friends for twenty years.  She  is good  at what she  does,  but
she does not know how to handle young folk."

I swallowed  my  bite  of  cheese  tart  and  said,  "We  do  well  enough.  She's  my
training Dog, not my friend."
Mya sighed. "I'm sure you're right. You can't be in better hands.  Mattes Tunstall
is a feckless, overgrown lad, but no one argues that he's one of the best Dogs in the
city."
Feckless? I thought, putting sliced  ham on  my plate. And how would she  know
that? Then a dreadful idea dawned and  I stared  at Mya. "Auntie." I swallowed,  the
pictures in my head making my belly lurch. "You – you and Tunstall."
She suddenly  smoothed  her apron  over  her lap.  "I  was  once  accounted  a  very
pretty girl. We had so  much fun together –  but  I wanted marriage and  babies,  and
Mattes just wanted fun." She smiled at me. "Ulfrec has made me happy these fifteen
years."
"My  lady  says  Rebakah  may  visit  her  now."  All  unknown  to  us,  my  lady's
personal maid had walked into the kitchen. The maids hurriedly began to chop again.
The boy splashed as he scrubbed like a madman. I half tripped over my bench as I
tried to jump to my feet and brush the front of my dress at the same time.
The walk through the house felt strange. I'd made it only three weeks ago  on  my
last visit, and yet the place  seemed  different. Smaller. No  less  elegant or  well kept,
but not the same.
I understood the difference as  we passed  through the door  to  my lady's  part  of
the house. It was less important. Provost's House had not changed, but I had.
As if she'd  heard  my thinking and  meant to  say  that  I  did  not  matter,  the  maid
pointed to the workroom. "Wait in there," she ordered.
I walked inside. My sisters were there with the other  mots  of  the house  who did
sewing. Diona had an embroidery frame set up before her. Lorine worked  on  a silk
underdress  so  fine it was  almost sheer.  Both  of  them looked  like tidy strangers  to
me.
Everyone looked up when I came in. The room went very quiet.
My sisters stiffened. I did not mistake it. I knew them like I knew myself.
"Goddess  bless  us,  Beka,  were  you  drinking?  Or  brawling  with  your  Dog
friends?"  asked  one  of  the  older  maids.  She  was  favored  by  my  lady  for  her
embroidery.  It  meant  that  she  gave  herself  airs.  She  made  a  game  of  saying
something cruel to me, then claiming it was a joke when Lorine took her to task  for
it. "You  might have covered  those  with face  paint, you  know."  Most  of  the  other
maids giggled. Diona went red.
I let my gaze fall to the worn floorboards, then stiffened. Why did I let her speak
so to me? What would this empty-headed mot have done on Rovers Street?
"I might have been mistaken for a doxie, too," I told the floor. The gigglers went
silent. Then I looked up and held her eyes. Everyone else says  that my gaze makes
folk nervous. They tell me it's like being touched with ice. Let me see if I scare her, I
thought.
She tried to  stare  me down.  I made myself think of  old  Slapper  and  his  crazed
glare. She held firm a moment,  then blinked and  looked  away. I waited. When she
looked up again, I was still there, still staring. She got up. "Some females have gutter
mouths!" she mumbled, and skittered out of the room.
I looked at each of them to see if anyone else wished to sharpen her wits on me.

None would meet my eyes, not even my sisters.  I went to  kiss  them on  the cheek.
Diona pulled away rather than let me actually touch her. Lorine held rock still. They
spoke no word to me. I stepped back, not sure what to say.
"My lady will see you now." The maid had returned for me. It was the only time I
was glad to be on my way to  Lady Teodorie.  I could  think of  nothing more to  do
with so many looking on.
Of course my lady's lips went tight when she set eyes on me. I'd known as much
that morning when I'd looked in my bit of mirror and seen my bruises were still plain
on my face.
I made my curtsy to her.
"And  so  you  have begun work as  a  Guardswoman,  Rebakah.  Plainly  you  have
found it invigorating."
I didn't reply. She  didn't  expect  me to  answer.  Unlike Goodwin,  neither did  she
expect me to look her in the eyes.
"Dare I hope that you have come to your senses? Your mother wished for you to
better  yourself."  She  took  up  the  needlework  that  lay  in  her  lap.  She  always  had
some about her. She had taught my sisters their first stitches, sewing and embroidery
alike.
I never know what Lady Teodorie  wants from  me. My sisters  and  brothers  are
bettering themselves.  Why does  it matter to  her if I  am  not  what  she  thinks  a  girl
should be?
She pursed  her lips. "Tongue-tied  as  usual. Your performance  yesterday  before
the Magistrate did my lord and me no credit."
I felt my shoulders twitch. So word of that had come here already. Splendid.
"Have you anything to say for yourself?"
I knew my duty. "Forgive me for disappointing you, my lady," I said.
"Your seeming meekness would serve you so much better as  a maidservant than
as an enforcer of the King's law," she remarked. "When you recover from your folly
in your choice of livelihood, of course  I will do  my best  for  you.  I promised  your
poor mother I would do my best for all of her children. You are dismissed."
I curtsied again. Why does she take it so personal that of all five of  us,  I am the
only one who don't want the life she picked out for me? I can't understand why she
hates the world of the Provost's Guard, either, but that's my lady. My lord has lived
with it these many years. Maybe that's why my being a Dog is so vexing for her – of
all the lads and gixies of this house who have gone into the Provost's Guard, I'm the
only one who my lord shares it with, who he's raised to it. Who loves it as he loves
it.
Feeling small and  dirty, I  returned  to  the  kitchen.  I  certainly  didn't  want  to  see
Lorine and Diona. The other maids would have been talking at them about me all this
time, how low I'd seemed. Mayhap when we met in the afternoon, with none but our
brothers there, my sisters wouldn't find me so common.
The kitchen was busy. Vendors awaited Mya's attention. There were geese  to  be
put on  the spit.  The  undercooks  made  plenty  of  noise  as  they  put  together  other
dishes for the noon meal. Mya, tending a weeping stable girl, thrust  a basket  full of
bread odds and ends at me. I took it with thanks and fled.
This time of year the orchard is quiet. The trees are in bloom. They're pretty, but

they're of  use  only to  bees.  They stand  behind the hay barn,  which  is  also  left  to
itself so early in the year. No one sat on  the bench  behind the barn.  I settled  there,
put my basket on the ground, and enjoyed the warm sun for a moment.
 
A thought: Did I know, when I lived here, how often I dodged folk I might offend
with what I said? Or did I just not notice because mostly I didn't talk?
Breakfasts these days  will be  the ruin of  me. First  I start  talking to  Kora,  Aniki,
Ersken, and  the rest.  Who  knows  where it will  end?  A  party?  A  feast?  Chattering
with strangers?
Tansy might like breakfast with us sometime. If I can  pry  her out  so  early in the
day, she might like to meet my friends. Mayhap Annis will help.
 
But I was writing of my visit and of sitting behind the barn.  I ended  my sunbath
when a shadow passed over my face. I opened my eyes. Of course it was Slapper.
It  was  here  that  I'd  met  him  two  years  back.  Since  then  he's  carried  at  least  ten
ghosts that I know of. A busy bird.
For the moment he was actually alone, no other birds at hand. Was this a pigeon
miracle, a bird  without a flock?  He landed on  my shoulder  and  pecked  my temple
hard.
"Pox  and  murrain!" I cried,  and  grabbed  him.  In  my  lap,  he  glared  at  me  with
poison-yellow eyes, fighting to free his wings. Pigeons  are stronger  than they look,
even one whose back  is twisted like Slapper's.  I held him gentle, second  and  third
finger around his right wing, first finger along his neck, thumb around  his left wing.
With my free hand I dug out some of the cracked corn in my belt purse. I showed it
to Slapper, and he went quiet. I settled him with a care to his clubfoot (I always fear
it aches) and let him go. Instead of flying off, he began to eat the corn.
"Now listen," I told his ghost, "you got to give me more than you done. My Dogs
need sommat real, not gossip pulled from the air." I spoke  like Lower City folk so
the soul he carried  just now might trust  me. "I  been  listenin' to  you  lot, but  it ain't
enough.  Can't  you  name  the  street?  Is  there  a  stream  nearby,  or  a  drinkin'  den?
Sommat I can seek and find?" I didn't say  that I'd  never been  able to  get a pigeon
and  its  ghost  to  lead  me  anywhere.  Maybe  these  dead  would  be  different,  they
wanted to be found so bad.
A new  pigeon  came.  It  looked  as  if  it  had  been  sprinkled  in  ashes  and  its  tail
dipped in them. "Th' wagon was covered, an' it were night." It spoke  to  me,  or  its
ghost did! I found more corn  and  laid it down  close  to  me so  Ashes  would come
near. It waddled over to eat. "They put scarves on our glims so we mayn't see where
they took us. We was led downstairs,  t'  the cellar. They took  the scarves  off.  Our
orders was, dig against the wall, down an' down. We thought 'twas a well, but 'twas
too big. We was diggin' pick an' shovel through the pinky rock."
"The pinky city rock." White Spice's ghost whispered it as the bird  glided down
to sit with Ashes.
"Pinky city rock," Mumper's ghost said, landing on the dirt.
Slapper finished the corn. He jumped up, smacking me in the face with his wings,
then landed beside his friends. "Ungrateful filcher," I mumbled.
"I was hired to dig a well," Slapper's ghost  told  me. "We  was  all hired to  dig a

well. There was a real well partway dug, but no water."
"They  never  let  us  out,"  said  the  ghost  that  rode  a  fresh  arrival.  That  was  the
pigeon I'd named Fog. "Never once. They brung us food and drink and clothes, but
we never left the cellar."
"The mage drove off the water in the well. The rusher with the bullwhip said so."
White Spice's ghost didn't seem to mind that the bird  preened  while she  talked. "It
was dry, the hole where we dug. No water, but there was pieces that glittered in the
torchlight."
"It sparkles,  the rock,  like nowheres  else."  The  bird  I'd  named Pinky landed on
my knee and left a large, warm present there. I swore, but I dared not shoo him off. I
had no idea why they were talking so sensible,  unless  they'd  reached  some  magical
number (six of the same group of murdered folk) that let them speak  more clear to
me. "They have parts like glass as big as your  thumbnail, bigger, that glow like fire
with all manner of color. Beautiful."
"Beauty in th'  Cesspool,  what a joke."  Mayhap the  magical  number  was  seven.
Here  was  a  seventh  bird,  spangled  in  blue,  green,  and  violet  on  white.  Spangle's
ghost  was  a woman who sounded  as  tough  as  any of  the river dodgers  I'd  faced.
"But when we'd spilled some of our water on the rocks – Mithros!"
"Mithros," the other birds said. The ghosts sighed. Two more arrived to  sit with
them.  One  was  dark  gray  about  the  head  and  tail  and  pale  gray  in  body,  the
commonest coloring of all the city's pigeons. The other had a purplish gray head,  a
white bib, and purplish gray shoulders on a gray body. So there were nine in all.
Pinky  bit  my  hand  and  jumped  down  to  be  with  the  others.  Now  they  were
cooing,  pecking  the  dirt,  looking  for  food.  I  grabbed  the  basket  and  started
crumbling the bread for them.
"Where are you?" I asked. I was certain now that these were the ghosts  of  them
who  had  dug  Crookshank's  fire  opals  for  him.  He'd  had  them  killed  to  keep  the
stones' location a secret. I'd wager the cellar where they'd dug was in a house of his,
but which? We'd need the army to search them all. And every mot, cove, and child
in them would be doing their best to put a stop to it, for sheer contrariness. "You'd
think you'd want your grave found!"
Well,  I'd  offended  them  then.  Off  they  flew,  leaving  me  to  try  to  get  pigeon
scummer off my dress. Then other pigeons came,  the flock  that lives here and  any
pigeons  who'd  been  drawn  to  them  or  to  me.  I  forgot  my  clothes  and  crumbled
bread fast. I put  the diggers from  my thoughts  and  listened to  what all these  birds
had to say. There was always something going on, something I could piece together
for my lord or the kennels.
When I'd finished with the pile of bread ends Mya gave me, I propped my chin on
my hands and watched the birds. They'd quieted, but few had left, despite the food
being nearly gone. They eyed me. I think they knew I liked them even if I didn't hear
their ghosts. They were beautiful, when they weren't dirty. And whose dirt was it but
the human folk of the city's?
They have such silly faces, pigeons.
I held out my hand. One of them landed on  it. When I put  up  the fingers of  my
free hand, the cracked bird tried to eat the tips.
"I don't suppose any of you are here because the Shadow Snake doused you?" I

asked, keeping my voice quiet. "Kidnapped you and killed you?"
The bird on my hand took off.  More of  the flock  left –  most  of  it. Nearly three
dozen remained, all staring at me. One that was white but  for  drips  of  black  on  the
ends of his wings and tail came toward me. "Mama? I'm lost, Mama."
I leaned forward.  "Rolond?"  I asked.  "You  know me. I've  held you  sometimes,
lad. Your mama is my friend Tansy."  My eyes  were stinging, but  I kept  my voice
calm. Spirits  are  all  emotion.  I  get  upset  and  they  take  off.  "Your  papa  is  Herun
Lofts. And I know your grandmama, too, Annis."
I didn't know if he understood me, but I had to try. Mayhap today was a day  of
miracles.
Mayhap  it  wasn't.  "Mama,  it's  dark  and  I'm  lost,"  he  said,  deaf  to  my  words.
"They took me away. Where are you?"
"Mama?"  That  was  a  little  gixie's  voice.  "The  mot  said  yez  wouldn't  give  the
Shadow Snake what the Snake wanted. Yer lily necklace was more important – tha's
what the mot said."
"Da, the Shadow Snake said ye wouldna give o'er what ye won at the gamblin', so
he took me...."
"It was just a poxy book you can't e'en read, you stupid puttock!" That  girl was
older and furious.
"I don't understand. Why does someun called a Snake want yer brass  box,  Ma?
Ye said it only had writin' from some noble ye danced fer oncet."
I finally put my face in my hands. Mama had always said there'd be a day  I'd  be
sorry I asked so many questions. This was that day.
When I couldn't  bear  it no  more,  I  jumped  to  my  feet  and  threw  up  my  arms.
They all took off in a cloud of feathers and a clap of wings.
Goddess, let me make something good of so much that is bad. Let me take from
these birds some piece of knowledge. Something that will help me seek the Rats that
killed those diggers, or the Shadow Snake. The feeling I'd had that day I led my lord
to the Bold Brass gang would be naught compared to hobbling them. Knowing that
two killers ran free in the Lower City was an itch I couldn't scratch.
I rubbed my hands on my thighs and felt a lump in the pocket of my underdress. I
had the fire opal still. I fetched it out and turned it over. It was so lovely as it was, I
had to wonder what it looked like all polished and clean. Probably the nobles and the
rich would want it more so, with no hint that it had come from the rock of the Lower
City. I grinned. I liked the pinkish stone  that cropped  up  everywhere, in  our  walls
and walkways and little gardens.
Berryman had called them "fascinators." Folk with gold in their purses  would be
fascinated with those bits of cherry and blue fire, the blaze of  green....  I turned  the
stone  now and  then, shifting to  new bits  of  color,  and  let the moments  of  the  last
week  drift  in  my  head.  I  let  my  questions  come  to  the  surface  of  my  thoughts,
bubbles in a well. Who would notice nine healthy mots  and  coves  all gone  missing
together? Who would notice the vanishment of one child here, one child there, gone
seemingly by magic from bed or street or plain daylight?
I had all manner of thoughts while I sat there. One of them was something Tunstall
had said to Mistress Noll on my very first night of  duty  –  "You  sharp  old  folk are
everywhere, aren't you? You're everywhere, and you see and hear everything."

I came alert with the sun  in my eyes.  I know old  folk. Mistress  Noll herself, for
one.  Granny Fern,  for  another.  And there were others  throughout  the  Lower  City,
beggar women who sat their corners like my dust  spinner friends,  laundresses  who
used  the  same  fountain  squares,  doxies  who  spent  all  their  working  nights  in  the
same part of Corus. Folk talked in front of them like they was sculptures.
"I knew I'd find you here."
I  scrambled  to  my  feet.  So  lost  in  thought  was  I  that  I  hadn't  heard  Lord
Gershom's  steps  in the grass.  I bobbed  my curtsy  too  fast  and  almost  fell,  which
would have earned me my lady's iciest gaze. My lord only chuckled  and  seized  my
elbow to steady me. "Beka, I hope the other fellows look far worse." He waved his
free hand to show he meant my eye and cheekbone.
I looked down and stammered, "I – I wish I could s-say as much, milord. I g-got
the worst of it."
"But I hear you did well. You and your Dogs were outnumbered  nearly seven  to
one even after Lady Sabine stepped in, yet here you are." He was dressed for a day
at  home,  his  steel-colored  hair  combed  back  in  a  horse  tail,  his  clothes  an
embroidered short tunic (my lady's work) over loose leggings tied around his calves.
"I wish I'd seen it. You did well – a brawl in a place  like that would have been  the
death of  most  trainees. So  tell me, what happened  that first  night?"  He  sat  on  the
bench  and  drew  me  down  next  to  him.  "How'd  you  miss  the  lookout?  I  know  I
taught you better, and I'm sure Ahuda did."
I hung my head. "My lord, I got excited."
"Ah," he said, crossing his legs at the ankle and leaning back. "It's to be expected,
when you're starting out. I warned you it would take time to season. All the talent in
the world doesn't take the place of good, solid experience, Beka."
I nodded. It just seems to take so long to get experience when I need it now.
"You  know what happened  to  Tunstall,  even  after  he  was  voted  a  Dog  by  his
kennel?"
I shook my head, but my ears perked up.
"He fell off  a roof.  He was  chasing a Rat  who'd  gone  and  killed a man over  in
Prettybone, where they have houses  built next to  each  other,  except  there was  one
that was two stories higher, with a steeper roof. Tunstall made the climb and had the
cove by the ankle when the cove scraped his hand in the chimney and threw soot in
Tunstall's face. Off the roof Tunstall went. Straight into a pile of dung, three stories
down."
"Ouch," I whispered.
"Other Dogs have made mistakes, Beka. It's what you learn." He patted me on the
shoulder. "So what do you make of our Rogue?"
I told him everything. I knew I could trust him with the information about the fire
opals,  how Goodwin  and  Tunstall were looking into them, and  about  the  Shadow
Snake. I knew  he  would  leave  those  things  to  my  Dogs  and  not  interfere  himself
unless he felt there was a need. He was famous for that.
When it was noon and the bell was ringing for the house's big meal of the day,  I
also knew that I felt better. In telling him how I had fallen in fish, sought Orva in the
Cesspool, fought to keep my feet among river dodgers, and faced Sir Tullus and the
Magistrate's  Court,  I  saw  my  days  for  what  they  were,  my  first  week.  I  had  not

shackled the worst foist in the Nightmarket nor caught Kayfer Deerborn himself with
the crown's  jewels in his pocket,  it was  true. I had  not  rescued  the  Queen  from  a
pack of robbing coves or caught the slavers trying to pass off some Sirajit princess
as a kitchen slave. But I was alive, and hungry.
My lord got to his feet and I scrambled to mine. As we walked toward the house,
he said, "There is one thing in which you did not obey the letter of my instructions,
Beka."
"My lord?" I asked, dazed. Whenever did I not follow his rules and orders as he
gave them?
"I said to outfit yourself properly from our gear room," he told me as we stopped
near the kitchen door. The servants streamed by, bowing and murmuring greetings. I
looked into his face. His brows were drawn down  over  his nose,  but  there was  no
vexation in his eyes, only a bit of  fun. He knew me proper,  did  my lord  Gershom.
"Whether you didn't do as you were bid from pride or from a desire to go easy  on
my purse, you were in error. You left us without enough gear. Before you go back to
your lodgings, I want you to draw three more items. And I want you to think about
the week you've had as you do it. Now, you mind me, Beka Cooper."
I bowed my head. He was right, about everything. "Yes, my lord."
He clasped my hands in his. "Mithros and the Crone watch over you."
I curtsied as he went inside. "Gods all bless and keep you, my lord," I whispered.
He is the best man I know.  I felt that way when I was  eight and  he had  chosen  to
listen to me in the street. My feelings now only go deeper, not different.
I wondered  if I should  stop  first  in  the  gear  room,  but  then  my  belly  growled.
Wonderful smells drifted my way. Mya's cooking was calling to me.
 
Noon  dinner  is  the  big  meal  of  the  house.  Everyone  eats  together,  even  the
servers, once the food is set out. My lord and lady sit with their children and guests
on the dais.  They had  noble  friends  with them today,  four  of  the  haMinch  family,
that has more branches than most trees, and a mage in the royal service.  The  mage
and my lord had their heads together: business, then.
My friends among the dairymaids and laundresses made a place for me. That put
me across the room from the stable hands. Most of them grinned or gave me a tiny
wave. I didn't see my brother Will. He might have been off riding errands. I thought
my younger brother, Nilo, might bounce clean from his seat, he was  so  glad to  see
me. He put a finger to  his eye and  mouthed,  "What  happened?"  I frowned  at him,
not that it managed to cow him any. When we were dismissed for our noon rest, at
least he waited until we were outside and beyond my lady's view before he seized me
around the waist and spun me sunwise.
"Beka, lookit you!  Black eye, who done  it! And your  whole  cheek  gone  green!
Did you kill anyone? Did you hobble anyone? Did you miss me? I learned to drive a
pair, well, around  the courtyard,  anyways!"  Nilo  is  the  picture  of  Mama,  with  her
brown curls and snapping brown eyes, and her dimples. He is only ten, but his head
clears my shoulder. "Will was sent clean on up to the palace with a message, he said
not to let you go back 'thout he saw you. Do you like being a Dog?"
The only way to silence him was to put him in a headlock. "Listen to you,  you'd
think you was brought up in a chicken coop," I scolded. "Let a person talk! I'm not

a Dog, I'm a trainee, a Puppy, you empty-headed looby! I don't know who blacked
my eye. There was too many of 'em. Of course I missed you." And I threw him over
my hip into the courtyard dust.
He went with a whoop, little mumper that he is. Him and three other stable folk –
two lads  and  a gixie –  begged  me  to  teach  them  the  headlock  and  the  throw.  Of
course they were thinking about  training as  Dogs  one  day.  I'd  thought maybe Nilo
might follow  me  to  Puppy  training,  until  I  saw  how  much  he  loves  to  work  with
horses. I hadn't even time to daydream about Will. He'd taken to hanging about  the
stable  as  soon  as  he  was  big  enough  and  rides  like  he  was  born  on  horseback.
There's naught magical about it. The stable master is a fine teacher, and my brothers
love horses as my mother loved other animals.
Once the youngsters were covered in dust and exhausted from  my quick  lesson,
they scattered. Nilo and  me went to  the stable  to  wait for  Will. We  had  no  private
place of our own to sit. My sisters slept with my lady's maids. The boys went to the
stable quarters. Mya gave me a place with the cookmaids and stable girls until I went
to live in the Puppy training barracks.
Now,  listening  to  Nilo  chatter  about  all  that  had  gone  on  since  I  had  taken
lodgings in the Lower City, I was  glad to  have my  own  home.  I  can  move  about
without waking someone, and no one objects to Pounce. I tried to bring him today,
but he flat-out refused.  He crawled back  under  my blankets after I  made  my  bed.
Nilo grumbled over my cat staying away, so I made him laugh over tales of Pounce
on duty in the Lower City.
"Nilo, Nilo, guess who I met!" Will came in, leading a sweating horse. He and the
mount were covered  with road  dust,  but  Will grinned ear to  ear.  He  showed  us  a
silver noble. "The King gave me this! King Roger himself! I took a message from my
lord to the Lord High Magistrate. Then my Lord Magistrate has me take a message
behind  the  palace  to  King  Roger  himself,  because  the  King  has  taken  the  Queen
riding! The King gave me this, and the Queen smiled at me." Will was giddy. "Beka,
you look  like you've  been  in a  war."  He  kissed  me,  sprinkling  dust  on  my  dress.
"She's so beautiful, the Queen, so much younger than His Majesty, with hair like dark
clouds...."
"Bleah," Nilo said, rolling his eyes.
"What do  you know?"  Will shoved  him. "Let me care  for  Ladslove,  and  then  I
can  sit.  Nilo,  will  you  beg  something  for  me  from  Mya?  His  Majesty  and  the
Magistrate had me go back and forth twice." He wandered  off,  the horse  following
him patiently.
I looked  at Nilo, who pretended  to  puke.  "I'd  get  him  some  food.  I  think  he's
addled," I said.
"I'm  going.  'The  Queen's  sooo  beautiful,'"  Nilo  said  with  mockery,  twirling
around.  "'She  has  teeth  like  stars  and  hair  like  sheep  fuzz,  the  Queen  is  sooo
beautiful!'" Half singing it, he went to get food for Will. I tried not to laugh.
The boys and I were playing mumblety-peg with our belt knives when my sisters
found  us.  They came through the stable  door  like great  ladies  and  frowned  at  the
three of us on our knees in the dirt.
I gazed at them and  felt strange.  When we were young,  the little ones,  including
these two gixies in their neat dresses, wore patched shirts only and no shoes.  I had

but one thin dress. I went barefoot like them, trying to mind all four when Mama was
busy. There was always a baby or two in hand, a basket of mending, rag toys,  and
the streets when we annoyed Mama's herb  customers  or  her latest man. Our  noses
ran and our bottoms, too, when the meat was bad, if we had meat.
Now  we  wore  clothes  with  mends  not  even  showing,  though  Nilo's  and  Will's
breeches had been  let down  three times apiece.  The  boys  had  good,  sturdy  tunics
that would take horse dirt and wash up without going to pieces. Our feet were shod
against all but the deepest street mud.
Our  sisters  were  dressed  a  world  away  in  respectable  wool  dresses  with
embroidery  for  decoration.  They  wore  round  caps  on  their  heads  with  more
embroidery still. Unlike the lads and me, they were so clean they shone, their skin fair
and soft-looking.
The silence between us got uncomfortable, but I didn't know how to break it. The
boys scowled and sheathed their knives, our game of mumblety-peg plainly done.  I
picked up my knife. Feeling that if I sheathed it right off, it would look as if I'd been
ashamed of our game, I spun it on my fingertip. Sadly, I fumbled the catch  when I
popped the knife in the air. I dropped the blade before it cut me.
Lorine made a face. "Now you are dirty as well as bruised."
I looked at my dress. It was streaked with grime. Good, I thought, it will cover the
pigeon mess. I looked at Lorine. "I did the pretty for my lord and my lady," I said,
deliberately talking Lower City to  their Patten  District. "I  had  dinner in the hall and
didna slurp my soup. I won't be stayin' t' supper, so it's pigeon feed to a starvin' bull
what my dress looks like."
"You  like  doing  this,  don't  you?"  asked  Diona.  Her  cheeks  were  turning  red.
"Shaming us before our friends. Turning Will and Nilo into street urchins when they
know how to behave themselves, like young men moving up in the world!"
Will got to his feet. "Lucky  for  me royal messengers  can  act  like real folk when
they're not  before  the nobility," he said,  his green eyes  flashing. He takes  after  his
papa in looks. One day the gixies will all dance to his tune. "They're not silly enough
to pretend the nobility rubs off on them – "
Diona went to slap him. I realized that after I'd moved, coming off the ground to
grab her wrist as I rose. I held on to her as I stood  between them. "You're  not  my
lady," I told  her, keeping my voice  down  so  no  one  else  might  hear  if  they  were
close by. "You don't go slapping people's faces. Shame on you!"
"She don't mean nothin', Beka, don't hurt her." Nilo sounded like he might cry in a
moment.
I let Diona go  and  hugged him. "I  didn't  hurt  her.  I  remember  who  I'm  dealing
with, even if she don't."
Lorine  sighed.  "Diona,  Beka's  right.  Don't  think  I  haven't  seen  you  push  Nilo
when no one's about. You get above yourself, girl."
Diona rubbed her wrist. I hadn't even grabbed it hard enough to make it red. "My
lady's maid is right! You're trash, Beka! Look at us! We've been fine ever since you
left. You're not back half a day and the boys are filthy and  ill-mannered and  you've
turned  them  and  Lorine  against  me."  Anger  made  her  pretty  face  ugly.  "My  lady
gives us a chance for a decent life and you throw it back in her face – "
"Who  keeps  your  decent  life decent?"  I asked,  losing my temper.  "Who  makes

sure you hardworking folk stay safe, Diona? Not a lot of maids and footmen. River
dodgers would kill the lot of you for a pair of weighted dice! Who puts murderers in
cages and keeps your necklaces on your necks, eh? Who – "
"Enough!" The head hostler had heard us  and  was  standing in the open  door,  a
carriage whip in his  hands.  "You'd  think  it  was  noon  in  Rivermarket  and  the  fish
startin' t'  go  off!  Where did  the lot o'  you  learn  to  make  such  a  noise  in  a  lord's
house?"
My brothers and sisters looked at each  other.  And then they all did  a sad  thing,
even Nilo. They edged  just the  tiniest  bit  from  me.  Of  course,  mayhap  it  was  on
account of me being the one to get caught. Or mayhap it was me being so ill-kempt,
with  the  dirt  and  the  pigeon  stain  and  all.  But  they  were  of  a  set,  four
servants-in-training. I was the one what didn't match.
I curtsied and mumbled apologies as they did. After a last frown,  the hostler  left
us. Diona and Lorine followed him, their hems and veils fluttering. To give them their
due,  they  probably  thought  they'd  see  me  later,  at  supper.  The  boys  hesitated,
shifting on their feet.
"I must visit the gear room and then go home," I told them. "You'll be working till
supper, so we won't have time to talk. And I must return to my lodgings before then.
It'll be drawing down dark in the Lower City. I shouldn't walk the streets alone with
no weaponry."
"But it isn't dark when it's suppertime!" said Will, confused.
"You're up on the hill below Palace Ridge," I explained. "The Lower City's at the
bottom of the rise. The wall's higher than anything down there. It shuts  out  the sun
early."
"Oh," Nilo said. "When will we see you next?"
"I'll  try  for  my  next  day  off.  Now  go  clean  up.  I'll  say  farewell  here."  They
hesitated  again,  and  I  took  the  burden  from  them.  "No  hugging.  You  don't  want
those nice shirts wrinkled more than they are. Just a kiss on the cheek, one each." I
gave and got them. "I love you both. I even love our sisters."
Like boys,  they grumbled and  walked away. I went  over  to  the  stable  wall  and
rested my face against its rough boards, having a care  for  splinters.  I have a bit of
sense,  so  I didn't  think it was  my family that changed  so  much in the three weeks
since I'd moved to Nipcopper Close. Was it?
I took  a  breath  of  stable  smell:  horse  dung,  hay,  dirt,  leather,  polish,  the  oils
needed  to  keep  the leather smooth  and  limber. It  smelled  clean.  Empty  clean.  So,
too, did the big house smell, with its added scents of flowers and soap and cooking,
though without horse dung or horse. No  rotting vegetables or  animal carcasses,  no
frying turnovers and heaps of fresh-cut flowers. No herds being driven to market or
crates of birds and rabbits. No slop pots emptied into the gutter and flowing into the
soup of mud that is the Lower City.
The clean, tidy folk who live and work at Provost's House don't smell so good to
me as the dark streets where I live now. I put my thumb on  what I'd  felt all day.  It
was distance.  I'd  been  glad to  see  Mya and  my lord.  I am hurt by  my sisters  and
some by Will. Nilo is still a little boy. Besides, I remember that greeting he gave me.
But I'm  no  part  of  their household.  I am a Puppy,  one  who belongs  in the  Lower
City. It was time to go home.

I chose my three extra items of gear, then set out. Of course, I didn't go back the
way I had come. I never do. It's boring. I also remembered that tomorrow  morning
comes  and  breakfast  with it. For  once  I  might  supply  more  than  coppers  for  our
gathering.  It  was  too  early  for  the  Nightmarket,  but  the  Daymarket  was  open.
Mistress Noll's shop there would be a good place to buy some breakfast bread.
I walked down broad Palace Way, with its flat white cobbles. My clogs clattered
like  the  hooves  of  the  horses  that  rode  by.  Like  my  brothers,  I  could  admire  a
good-looking  animal. Some  of  these  were  bound  for  the  palace  rising  behind  me,
atop the ridge. Others paced like I did, down north toward the river.
Despite the goldsmiths' banks and expensive shops between Provost's House and
the  Daymarket,  no  one  blinked  at  my  wrinkled  dress.  I  walked  with  servants,
message runners, soldiers, and merchants and their families. Mithran priests  in their
orange or yellow robes passed Daughters of the Goddess in white, brown, or black.
Now and  then I'd  see  Wave Walker priests  in blue  robes  or  the  Smith's  servants,
their leather aprons stamped with holy signs.  Bazhir in their burnooses  walked with
hands  on  weapon  hilts. The  folk of  Carthak,  Galla, Tusaine,  and  the Copper  Isles
simply tried to pretend they were not staring.
This was more of the Corus I love, prettily dressed. A mix of  high and  low folk
came this way to do business or to see the King and his new Queen. They'll hold the
first festival for  the young prince  next year.  Then  neighboring  kingdoms  will  send
their  finest  to  greet  the  babe,  and  to  get  plucked  in  the  Lower  City.  We  all  look
forward to having the world salute our young heir.
One thing I didn't see today was the usual number of mumpers. The Palace Way
Dogs, who answer to the Patten and Flash District kennels, must have cleared  them
out. Fine ladies sometimes complain if there are too  many cripples  to  ruin the view
on  the  main  road  to  the  palace.  By  my  guess,  the  clearing  out  happened  around
noon. One mumper had already come back to take a place on the edge of the street
near Provost's House. She was fearfully thin, with a babe  at her empty breast.  The
child was crying.
I walked by.  She'll seek  help at one  of  the Goddess's  temples  if  she  is  serious
about  feeding  the  babe,  I  told  myself.  Despite  my  common  sense,  I  added  and
re-added my budget of coin for the week to see if I could spare aught. Behind me I
heard a passing rider tell her she'd earn more on her back  than by  putting her hand
out.
I halted, angry, and took a copper in my hand. Then I saw a newly come beggar
grab a richly dressed nobleman's jeweled horse by its tack. The old mot gabbled  at
the man, offering to tell his fortune. He kicked her away.
I ran forward, cursing him in Cesspool talk as I tossed  my copper  to  the skinny
beggar with the child. She grabbed it and fled. I forgot her and spat at the rich man,
who rode off, ignoring me. "Pig scummer," I muttered, grabbing the old mumper to
help her up. She was annoying, but kicking a granny was the act of a beast.
To my surprise,  she  fought me. She  was  strong  for  one  that was  just skin over
bone.  There was  no  bruise  on  her face  from  the noble's  kick,  she  had  no  bloody
nose. She'd dodged him.
She also had three of the gems that had been sewn onto  the horse's  trappings  in
one hand, and a sharp-looking blade in the other.  I snatched  the blade  and  stuck  it

into the sheath behind my own belt knife. It wedged tight there. Even she would need
a moment or two to winkle it loose.
I looked to see if the noble had noticed his missing gems. He was turning onto a
side street, cursing a priest who crossed in front  of  him. No,  he was  too  stupid  to
spot the theft. I disliked him too much to tell him.
I looked at her. She was lean and  weathered,  but  sharp-eyed,  to  bag  three gems
with that little knife. I was  sure  I'd  seen  her around  the Lower City, begging in the
markets and temples. Her name came to me. Mother Cantwell.
I could turn her in for the stupid noble's vengeance,  or  I could  make use  of  this
opportunity.
I rolled the gems in my hand, letting her hear them clink. "Mother  Cantwell. This
here is a caging offense. Mayhap that fat lordling back there will reward a good Dog
like me for giving him his sparklers. Or I could reward myself."
"You  talk  like  a  Dog  as  wants  sommat,  and  you  only  a  Puppy,"  she  said,
watching me with sharp old eyes. "It's shockin', how young folk grow up too quick
anymore."
I felt a quiver around  my belt knife. I gave the wrist I  clung  to  a  slight  turn  so
she'd know I was paying attention. Then I looked down. She took her hand from my
belt.  That  was  the  trouble  with  talking  close  together.  Still,  I  had  to  admire  how
limber she was, especially at her age.
"I'm  a  Puppy  as  wants  sommat.  I'm  willing  to  be  forgiving  in  return,"  I  said.
Where had all my shyness gone? Was it that she reminded me of Granny Fern, and
that gave me comfort?
No,  it  was  that  I  felt  so  comfortable  doing  a  true  Dog's  work.  For  I'd  never
worried  about  shyness  hobbling  Orva  and  getting  her  knife  back  or  fighting  river
dodgers.
Now  Mother  Cantwell's  eyes  were  on  my  free  hand,  the  one  with  the  gems.
"Forgivin'? You mentioned forgiveness. I'm old, but I have my hearin' yet."
I thrust the gems into my belt purse and twisted my belt to  put  the purse  behind
my back. "Not that forgiving, Mother. Besides, you'd  just sell them to  Crookshank
for not  even a quarter  of  the value. Trust  me,  he's  rich  enough.  He  don't  deserve
your custom."
"You'll keep 'em for yourself. There's wickedness! Stealing from  the Happy  Bag
already!" She shook her head in disgust.
I tried my best not to grin. Being schooled in morality by this old mumper was the
funniest thing to happen to me all day.  "Mother,  if you  strive not  to  vex me, you'll
not spend the next six days in the cages or however many years you've left working
for the King. May we get to business?"
She cocked  a knowing dark  eye at me and  waited, like street  sparrows  wait for
crumbs.
"Nine men and  women got  a digging  job  in  the  Cesspool,  Mother,"  I  told  her,
keeping  my  voice  down.  The  street  wasn't  busy,  but  I  wanted  no  passerby  to
overhear me. I drew her partway into Meadowsweet Alley. "They were told it was a
well, but  it wasn't.  They were killed maybe a week ago.  They've  families that  only
know they vanished. Have you heard aught of them?"
Mother Cantwell curled her lip, disgusted with me. "Gixie, your nob is cracked up

and down and side to side. Folk – "
I cut  her  off.  "I  know  folk  vanish  all  the  time  in  the  Lower  City!  But  this  is
different. Nine at once, all together. Even for the Cesspool that's a clutch. If you've
heard naught now,  that doesn't  mean you  won't  hear it later,  if  you  keep  your  ear
flaps clean and turned."
She smacked her lips like she was thinking.
"Listen, Mother. They dug in a building somewhere. Think on the sparklers I took
from you. A mage can put a truth spell on me to know I didn't  take them, and  you
did. When that happens, you are on  your  way to  royal justice."  I smiled. "And  I'd
hate that. We could help each other."
"Seemingly it's more me helpin' you," she said.
"I'll  have  the  odd  present  for  you  now  and  then."  I'd  have  to  manage  extra
sweetening somehow  down  the road,  when  her  gratitude  ran  cold.  "I'm  not  some
Dog as will ask you to cough up for love of me."
She grinned, showing naked gums.  She'd  been  afraid she'd  have to  do  it all for
free. "You'd get spittle if you did, Fishpuppy."
I do  not  want folk calling me that forever.  "There's  one  more  thing,  Mother,"  I
said as she tried to shake my hand off her arm. "The Shadow Snake."
She drew  the sign against evil, the light that  drives  back  the  shadows.  I  almost
copied it but tightened my grip on her instead.
"You  don't  know  what  you're  askin'  for,  Puppy  Cooper,"  she  said,  all  serious
now. "I know naught. I'll ask no questions as will get me floatin' bum up in the river.
I've nothin' the Shadow Snake wants. Long as I keep from his business, we needn't
even bow in the street. Not that anyone knows who to bow to." She turned sideways
and spat.
The Crone Goddess lit the tiniest witch light of a thought in my brain. "I can  see
not going to  the kennel with this,"  I began slowly, choosing  my words.  "But what
about the Rogue? Surely this Snake is poaching on the Rogue's ground, on the folk
the Rogue is supposed to look after."
The old mot actually smirked at me. "In long-ago tales, mayhap.  You truly think
Rogue Kayfer and his chiefs care for little bits of things like spell books and jewelry?
He's booted so many poor folk from the Court they don't even go to him no more.
His chiefs are the same. The last cove whose babe was took that went to Dawull got
tossed  in the river for  a swim. Folk  were laughin' and  kickin' 'im back  in when  he
tried to  climb out.  Long as  the Snake don't  go  slitherin'  around  no  big  score,  the
Rogue and his chiefs will leave us low folk to manage as best we may."
There is knowing and then there is knowing. "Folk went to Kayfer?"
"More'n one, girl. Now d'you see? There's no tellin' who's the Snake, and none to
care if I'm doused for nosin'  about  the Snake's  business!"  The  mot  yanked on  my
grip, and yanked hard.
"But you can listen, can't you? You older folk are everywhere and hear everything.
Listen and  ask  about  the nine that went all at once.  Mayhap someone's  looking  to
hire more diggers. I'll need to know of that, too, soonest. I'll see to it you're paid."
"Not much, I'll wager," Mother Cantwell said.
I smiled. "I can give those gems to our mage. He'll find you and the owner."
"Of course, I'll be happy to listen as I may," she told me, and sighed.

"I'd  appreciate  your  courtesy,  Mother,"  I replied. "I'm  hopeful  you  won't  make
yourself hard to find." I was  certain any Dog at Jane Street  could  tell me where to
meet her.
"Of course I won't, for so sharp a wench as you," she said, her voice sour. With
that I let her go.
She went her way and I went mine, turning my belt to set my purse where I could
see it. The Crone had put Mother Cantwell in my path, I was sure. I went straight to
the Crone's shrine on Healall Close. There I left Mother Cantwell's sharp blade as a
thank-you offering. The gems would go  into the kennel's Happy  Bag when no  one
was  looking.  It  happened  that  way  all  the  time  when  no  one  wanted  to  hobble  a
personal Birdie.
Then I went in search of Mistress Noll's Daymarket stall.
I didn't expect to see her there. Not when she  worked  at the Nightmarket all last
week. Her children minded the Daymarket place. The stall was new, and easy enough
to find, since it was on Bakers' Row. I was impressed when I saw it. This was a true
building, no three-sided shed with room only for warming ovens and braziers. There
were shelves with pasties, buns, and pies on display, with muslin over them to keep
off the flies.
Mistress Noll's youngest daughter, Gemma, was working the big paddles, pulling
finished round loaves from the ovens and putting fresh ones in to bake. Her brother
Yates leaned against the counter, talking to a blond  cove  and  a brunette one  who'd
just placed sacks of flour on the floor. My hackles stiffened. I didn't like Yates.  He
was a bad Rat, in and out of the cages for brawling and  theft. The  other  Noll sons
were well enough, but Yates was trouble.
I made choices for breakfast, small fruit loaves that could be split, depending  on
how  many  of  us  gathered  at  Nipcopper  Close.  I  made  sure  to  get  spice  buns,
favored by Kora and Rosto, and the ones with plenty of raisins for Verene and me.
Then I waited for those who were ahead of  me to  put  down  their coin.  They were
servants in good houses from their talk, who treated Yates like he was hardly there.
He smiled like a sick fish at them and spat on the floor when they turned away.
One of Yates's friends who had been with him and his mother at the Court of the
Rogue  made some  whispered  joke that set  the three coves  laughing. Mistress  Noll
hired hard men to make her deliveries.
"Gemma, 'member me?" I asked, quiet enough that she would be the only one to
hear. "Beka Cooper."
She smiled. "Everyone  knows  'bout  you.  Livin'  up  in  Provost's  House  and  all.
Lookit you, dressed all nice, like you wasn't from Mutt Piddle Lane."
I looked down at my wrinkled and stained dress. "Mayhap you could say that," I
said, watching her from the corners of my eyes. She had a bruise on her forehead, a
healing cut on her lip. There were bruises on her arms, left bare when she'd  pushed
up her sleeves to work. Was her man knocking her about? Did she have a man? She
was forty or so, old enough to be a grandmother at least, with plenty of gray in her
brown hair.
"If you're buyin', you're buyin'." Yates smashed a fist down on the counter. "You
don't need to be botherin' my sister, wench."
Gemma's eyes went from him to me and back like we both  of  us  was  monsters.

"Yates, don't! You remember Ma tellin' us 'bout Beka Cooper – this's her!"
"I don't care if she's a knight in armor. We're workin' folk here, and my sister's a
respectable  mot,  not  some  Rovers  Street  trull."  Yates  smirked  at  his  friends.  He
thought he'd become a wit. "Buy or shake your wares someplace else, wench."
I set my loaves on the counter and my coins beside them. "Gemma, have I got the
right change?" I asked. I began to tuck the loaves  into a pack  I'd  got  at the house,
settling them careful so they wouldn't be crushed.
She counted and gave back a copper. Her hand was shaking. "Don't mind Yates,
he's got a rough manner," she whispered. "He don't – "
He knocked her sideways, sending her sprawling on the floor. Now I knew where
her bruises came from. "Shut yer gob," he ordered her. He turned to me and raised
his hand.
I blocked his swing with my forearm, though it jarred my teeth. While he gaped, I
grabbed  that  wrist  with  my  free  left  hand  and  yanked  him  toward  me  over  the
counter, jamming my right hip into it to steady myself. When he grabbed at me with
his free hand, I seized it and twisted so he'd stop thrashing. Then I rested my weight
on my left hand, using it like a lever. The problem for him was, it was his elbow on
the edge of the counter at the end of my lever. If he moved, I could throw all of my
weight on his wrist and see what happened to that elbow,  or  keep  turning his other
hand. If he behaved, all that he got was cramps in his wrists and his right elbow, and
some  shame  before  those  looking  on.  If  he  misbehaved,  he  would  suffer  the
consequences.
His friends seemed to think he ought to do something. "I've not hurt Yates yet," I
said  to  them.  I  felt  that  same  clear-headed  bravery  that  had  come  on  me  as  I'd
chased Orva and fought the river dodgers. "I will if you hurry me. I'm surprised this
place  gets  any  custom  whatever,  with  Yates  and  you  being  so  friendly  with
customers."
Just then I heard a familiar woman's voice say, "I have to say, I'm not impressed."
Sabine of  Macayhill walked to  the counter,  putting herself between Yates's  friends
and me. "I was told I might buy Corus's best apple-raisin patties at Mistress Noll's.
Nobody warned me about the service."  She  looked  at me. "Maybe  you  should  kill
him. I would."
"It's against the law," I said, keeping the pressure on Yates. I wasn't at all sure  if
she was joking.
"Oh, I forgot – I'm in Corus  again. People  care  about  things like that here. You
being a Dog, I suppose you care more than most." Lady Sabine smiled crookedly at
me and looked down at Yates. "She's a Provost's Dog, you know."
I let him go as I said, "Trainee. I'm only a trainee, excuse me, my lady. But he's a
full-blooded Rat, and no mistake."
Yates scrambled away from the counter and us, so fast that he fetched up against
the  ovens.  He  yelped  and  jerked  away,  rubbing  first  one  arm,  then  the  other.  He
threw himself toward  his friends.  They  left  through  the  side  door,  glaring  back  at
Sabine.
"Please,  you  don't  know  what  you've  done."  Gemma  was  still  on  the  floor.
"They'll pay you back one night, Beka. Yates, his friends – they be hard coves."
Sabine leaned on her elbows. "I told you we should  have killed him." I saw  that

her brown eyes were just – interested, as if she talked about cropping her hair. "Have
you got apple-raisin patties, mistress?"
"Still warm, my lady," Gemma told her.
Sabine laid out her handkerchief. "I'll take four, if you please."
As  Gemma  opened  an  oven  and  laid  four  patties  on  the  lady  knight's
handkerchief, she told me, "I'll keep tellin' him you're with the Dogs now, Beka, but
you want to watch for him. And I'll tell Ma. He listens to  Ma."  She  curtsied.  "Two
coppers, my lady."
Lady Sabine gave her three. "An unusual sort of baker's assistant they're hiring in
Corus nowadays," she remarked. "Very tidy work on the wrist grabs, Cooper. Nice,
using the counter to anchor yourself and compensate for your weight difference."
I looked down, not knowing what to say. The feeling of doing Dog work had left
me in a rush, and I was shy again.
"I was impressed in that hole on Rovers Street, too. I just think you'll regret only
holding this Yates fellow instead of breaking a joint or  three,"  she  added.  "It  rarely
pays  to  be  easy  on  that  sort."  She  pointed  a  finger  at  Gemma.  "You,  mistress,
should throw yourself on the mercy of the Goddess's  temple. No  woman needs  to
let a man knock her about as you have done. They will protect you, hide you, even,
if need be." She waited, watching Gemma.
"You don't understand, my lady," Gemma said at last. "I have no choice."
Sabine rolled her eyes. "So they all say." She scooped up her handkerchief and its
contents,  then took  a patty  out  and  bit into it. "Gods,  this is good!"  she  said,  her
mouth full. She handed me one, and when her mouth was  empty,  told  me, "Mattes
was right about this place. So maybe I'll be back." She gave me the tiniest of smiles.
"And  maybe  I'll  follow  Master  Lout  to  his  lair.  Dispose  of  him  without  your
disapproving  eyes  looking  on,  Cooper.  In  the  interest  of  the  public  good,  of
course."
She left before I thought to curtsy.
"Lady knights." Gemma shook her head.
I looked at her. "What?"
"They  think the river will part  for  them."  Gemma  was  rubbing  her  arms  as  she
looked at the floor. I think she'd forgotten I was there. "She doesn't know, the men
always get their way in the end. That's why I never married. I see what my sisters get
every day."
I sighed. I wanted to go home and cuddle my cat. Today suddenly felt longer than
all last week. "Would you tell Mistress Noll I said hello?" I asked.
Gemma looked at me, then turned  and  opened  the oven.  "If  Yates  doesn't  do  it
first, of course. Good day to you, Beka."
I shouldered  my pack  and  left that odd  little shop,  eating the patty.  It  was  very
good. As I finished it, my mind kept circling back to Yates. Does it prosper Mistress
Noll to hire the likes of Yates and take delivery from men who look like veterans of
the cages?
 
 
Wednesday, April 8, 246
I was  putting  the  cloth  on  the  floor  this  morning  when  I  thought,  What  if  the

others  tire of  breakfast?  They keep  later nights even than I do.  What if the  fun  of
eating pasties with Puppy Dogs and the odd older Dog like Phelan is not as good as
an hour  or  two  more of  sleep?  Then Kora,  Aniki,  Ersken,  and  Phelan  came  all  at
once,  and  I  knew  I  was  a  fool.  We  had  barely  filled  the  cups  when  Verene  and
Rosto  walked through the door,  Verene with a basket  of  extras  from  her mother's
workplace and Rosto with pickled eggs.
"I missed breakfast these last two days," Rosto said, once we were settled. "It's a
nice start to things. Quiet-like."
Everyone nodded, mouths full. Even I had to agree. I felt easier here, with half of
our number on the other side of the law, than I'd felt at Provost's House.
"Did they admire your bruises?" Verene asked me. "Did they want all the details
of the fight? Because you ne'er told us. You were too giddy with the healin'."
"You had a lady knight," Aniki said, feeding sausage to Pounce. "Lady Sabine. A
bunch of the bully boys who came by Dawull's court last night and the night before
looked like they'd been mule-kicked. They said her and a bunch of her friends  who
just came back from the east bailed out you and your Dogs."
I snorted and almost choked. "It was just my lady on her own, and my Dogs, and
me. They wished it had  taken more than the four  of  us,"  I replied. As  Aniki  lifted
Pounce in the air, my own curst honesty made me add, "Actually, mostly it was her
and Tunstall and Goodwin. I did a bit, but they did the true damage."
"Don't go all modest," Ersken said as Aniki kissed my poor cat's head. "By rights
all of  you  should  have been  killed. My Dogs  say  someone  ought  to  do  the  city  a
favor and  burn  the Barrel's Bottom  down,  there's  so  many fights there.  The  Night
Watch calls it 'the Barrel of Blood.'"
"My Dogs say your Dogs allus do stupid things like that, to  make the rest  of  us
look bad,"  Verene said.  I glared at her. She  held  up  both  of  her  hands.  "I'm  just
tellin' you what they said."
Phelan  slung  an  arm  around  Verene's  shoulders  and  kissed  her  temple.  "Your
Dogs  are worthless  scuts,  sweeting. Don't  listen when they talk scummer  like  that.
Study the good pairs, like Beka's Dogs."
Verene batted her eyes at Phelan. "That bein' you and your partner?"
Phelan laughed. "We aren't even nearly so good."
"Why try, when it's such an uphill battle?" Rosto asked, and yawned. "When you
get in trouble  someplace  like the Barrel's  Bottom,  and  other  Dogs  take  forever  to
come to lend a hand?"
I nudged  him with my foot.  "Why  take the trouble  to  serve  any of  the  Rogue's
chiefs when they won't fight to move up at the Court?" I asked him. "Because you're
a rusher. Because we're Dogs."
"You speak of bein' a Dog like it's somethin' that's in the blood," Verene said with
a laugh. "I just didn't want t' fish!"
"It's in Beka's  blood,"  Ersken said.  "And  I have to  tell you,  I get to  meet more
interesting people this way."
"And Beka will never change her mind?" Rosto asked, trying to hold my eyes with
his dark ones. "Never, ever?"
I looked  back,  even though his way of  looking at me makes my skin prickle all
over. I've had a sweetheart or two, but none of them gave me the tingles like Rosto.

He's bad for you, I keep telling myself. Bad, bad, bad.
From somewhere I sucked the words  out  of  my gut to  tell him, "The  only ones
who  fitly  punished  a  cove  who  treated  all  my  family  like  garbage  was  the  Dogs,
Rosto the Piper. Did you know folk have gone  to  the Rogue  for  justice when their
children were kidnapped, and he's done nothing?"
"Nor  did  the  Dogs,"  Phelan  said.  "I'd've  heard  if  we  sought  kidnappers  in  the
Lower City."
I looked  at  Phelan.  We're  going  to,"  I  promised  him.  "That's  what  makes  us
different. We're outnumbered, and not all of us care. But eventually some of us will
do what's right."
Aniki smirked. "That's sweet, Beka."
Rosto nodded. "I'll believe it when I see it."
Verene yawned. "Too serious. Let's feed the nasty birds afore  they come  in and
swipe  our  food."  She  pointed  to  the  windowsill.  Pigeons  were  lined  up  there,
waiting.
I looked  at Ersken and  Kora.  There  was  no  reading Kora's  eyes  as  she  studied
me, and Ersken was tearing up a roll to feed the pigeons. I shrugged and stood. The
others  would learn or  not.  I already know the  Dogs  will  take  care  of  the  Shadow
Snake, sooner  or  later. It was  the same way with the Bold  Brass  gang  eight  years
ago. The Dogs just need a bit of help sometimes.
Pounce  trotted  over  to  my side.  They'll  see, he told  me. They  don't  know  how
mule-headed you are.
It's not just me, I replied silently, sprinkling corn. There are Dogs who only need
an extra bit of help to get started. A little more information in their hands, and they'll
be after the Shadow Snake like lice on hens. And the one who killed those diggers. If
I can get that information, so much the better.
I faced them. "I've  heard  sommat  –  mentioned it to  Ersken,  but  you  all need  to
know. It's important." I said it fast. They were friends, but they might decide  I was
cracked  when  I  finished  talking  about  this.  "Rolond  Lofts,  Crookshank's
great-grandson,  that was  kidnapped  and  killed?  He  was  taken  by  someone  calling
himself the Shadow Snake."
Phelan snorted.
I glared at him. "I've  seen  proof,  all right? And there's  more.  Folk  in the Lower
City have lost children to the Snake for years – and sometimes got them back. Near
three dozen families, mayhap more. The Snake takes the little one and leaves orders
to pay up sommat of value or  the child dies.  They get a week. Them as  pays  gets
their little one back. Them as don't...Either they see the body, or they never see  the
little one again. Ever. Up till now it was the poor  folk, them who couldn't  bribe  the
Dogs  or  the  Rogue.  But  Crookshank  –  the  Snake  found  out  Crookshank  has
something that would make the Snake really, really rich." The fire opals, I thought. It
can only be the fire opals. If the Snake gets fistfuls of fire opals now, before they're
common  on  the  market,  he'll  never  have  to  kidnap  poor  children  again.  But
Crookshank refused to pay, and Rolond's dead. The Snake is still about. What if he
goes for Tansy?
"Will  you  ask  about?  Find  out  who  fell  victim  to  this  piece  of  pig  scummer?
Mayhap someone knows sommat, or saw someone. Even if we only know who lost

a child, or what the Snake wanted – any knowledge is better than none. I can pass it
on to my Dogs." I swallowed and said  something I'd  hoped  I'd  never have to  say.
"Or to my Lord Provost. Either way, if we hobble the Shadow Snake, whether we're
Dogs or crooked, folk will think well of us for it."
There was a very bad moment when I thought they might laugh. When they'd call
me troublemaker. When they'd say who did I think I was, me being just a Puppy.
Kora looked fierce as she turned to Rosto. "I'll do it. I'll do whatever it takes."
Rosto  leaned over  and  stroked  her  cheek.  "You  know  we'd  help  just  for  your
sake, love."
Aniki nodded.  "We  have our  reasons.  Beyond  ambition, that is.  We'll  keep  our
ears open."
Phelan rubbed  his temples.  "Pox,  Beka, I  just  thought  it  was  wild  stories.  You
have proof?"
I nodded. "My Dogs have proof."
Phelan looked  down,  grim-faced.  "I'll  remember  where  I  heard  those  tales.  I'm
sorry. I thought...Never mind."
Ersken nodded to me. "You already told me about the Snake. Of course I'll listen
and ask."
Verene's eyes blazed. "When we catch this Snake, I'll make me a belt of his hide.
Child killers – it's sad the Black God shows mercy. They deserve none."
My chest felt warm, warm like those times that Pounce comforted me.
I like having friends.
 
After my watch.
When we mustered for watch this evening, I presented my new gear to my Dogs
for inspection. "Very nice," Tunstall said as he eyed the arm guards  I had  found  in
the Provost's  House  gear  room.  They  fit  from  my  wrist  to  my  shoulder  and  had
tongues  that  sat  over  my  palm.  Some  of  the  metal  ribs  that  fit  in  sleeves  in  the
padded leather were thin knives. They might come in handy. Better still, a slash  like
I'd  taken in the fight with the river drovers  would glance off  those  guards,  cutting
only the leather, not my flesh. I'd found  a leather sap,  too.  The  pack  was  my third
piece from Provost's House.
"There's another piece of gear you need, particularly for  the Cesspool,"  Tunstall
said as  Goodwin  checked  my sap.  He reached  in his pack  and  fished  out  a  metal
gorget like him and Goodwin wore. "There's a cloth pad on the inside, see, to keep it
from chafing. You'll need to wash that now and then. Try it on."
Goodwin and the Dogs watched as I tied the curved metal piece around my neck.
It was meant to stop a throat cut. I looked from Tunstall to Goodwin. "I can't – "
"I said I'd get one," Tunstall said. "You need it."
I opened my mouth to argue again.
"Shut it," Goodwin ordered. I did. "You're our Puppy. That means your  neck  is
our responsibility. Besides, it's used. Don't go getting sentimental."
"Are you  going  to  admire  the  jewelry,  or  are  you  ready  to  catch  some  Rats?"
Ahuda yelled. We lined up for muster, even Pounce. He had decided he was part of
the Evening Watch.
We were on  our  way to  the Nightmarket when Goodwin  said,  "Rosto  the Piper

killed a cove last night in Prettybone. It was a stupid thing. Looby said Rosto had no
right, taking work from Ulsa when there were blades right here in Corus  who could
do it. Rosto tried to get out of it, my Birdie told me. He asked Ulsa to rule on it, but
Ulsa said it had nothing to do with her."
"Woman's responsible for more bloodletting than all Scanra," grumbled Tunstall.
"She could have put a stop to it."
"So Ulsa dodged it. Then the cracknob drew his blade. My Birdie says  he never
even saw Rosto draw his." Goodwin looked up at Tunstall as our  partner  began to
sniff the air. "Why do you even bother to pretend you don't want to go straight for
the raisin patties? Let's just visit her booth."
I thought of Rosto, flirting over breakfast after killing a man. Even for a rusher, he
was a cold one. I am used to thinking of my Cesspool years as hard. Now I begin to
wonder what his were like, that even a fresh  murder would leave no  clear mark on
him.
On the way to  Mistress  Noll's,  I asked  Goodwin,  "But he  was  storying,  wasn't
he? Your Birdie? Or  someone  blocked  his view. Saying he never saw  Rosto  draw
his blade is just storying. No one's so fast for real."
Goodwin  glanced back  at me. "You  live in  the  same  house  as  Rosto,  Cooper.
You let us know."
"Or  we'll  find  out  ourselves,"  Tunstall  said.  "He's  not  going  to  stay  in  the
shadows long, not that one."
Mistress Noll was at her stall, kneading bread.  She  has  strong  arms.  I could  see
the muscles stand out as she mauled it. "There's my three favorite Dogs," she said as
Tunstall laid down  his handkerchief.  "And  a  lively  week  you  had  of  it,  by  what  I
hear. That  Ashmiller mot,  the one  as  struck  you,  Mistress  Clary.  What  a  dreadful
thing, to attack your own man and children!"
"Yet it happens all the time, Mistress Deirdry," Goodwin said. She leaned on one
elbow at the counter,  turned  so  she  might watch the  passersby.  "You  know  it  far
better than I. There are all manner of sad tales hereabouts."
Tunstall laid down some coppers. "I'm paying this time, Mistress Deirdry. I won't
hear 'no' if it comes from your mouth."
Mistress Noll smiled at him. "Then I mustn't say it, must  I?"  She  was  just frying
the patties, as if she knew we were on our way. "I owe young Beka an apology,  or
rather, my son Yates does."
Tunstall raised his brows at me. "Cooper?"
I glanced at him, then returned to my own watch of Spicers' Row. "I saw him and
Mistress  Gemma  when  I  stopped  by  Mistress  Noll's  Daymarket  shop  yesterday,
Guardsman," I replied, being formal before the outsider.  "We  had  a talk." It was  a
Dog's way of saying I'd had to get stern, but not rough. "My lady Sabine can vouch
for me."
Both Tunstall and Goodwin looked at Mistress Noll. "Yates  should  apologize to
Cooper?" Tunstall asked, his voice gentle.
"I  need  strong  men  to  haul  the  flour  and  suchlike  about.  Their  manners,  his
manners, are not  what a mother could  like,"  Mistress  Noll  said,  meeting  his  eyes.
"There's not many places as will hire him and his friends."
"With reason," Goodwin said. Her eyes were cold.

"But coves must work or they're idle, and they're back doing the things that bring
them before the Magistrates."  Mistress  Noll's soft  face  turned  hard,  as  hard  as  the
face of any Cesspool mot who lived to be her age. "I'd as soon not die with my son
in the quarries." She  gave me the eye. "I  apologize for  him, Beka. He was  rude  to
you."
"Cooper?" Tunstall asked me again.
Pounce meowed, as if he ordered me to say sommat. "Better if he gave his sorries
to Mistress Gemma. It was her he knocked down."  I wanted the subject  to  change
away  from  me,  so  I  told  Mistress  Noll,  "Lady  Sabine  enjoyed  your  patties  very
much."
"It's the spices," Mistress Noll said. "Most think the fruits is enough, but they lose
taste so  close  to  summer.  I thank you  for  your  care  for  Gemma, Beka. I'll have  a
word with my son." She  set  out  a thin cloth  and  put  turnovers  on  it, then bundled
them up and gave them to me. "For breakfast. No charge."
I hesitated all the same,  until Goodwin  muttered in my ear, "You're  so  rich you
can  pass  up  free  food?"  Pounce  hooked  my  boot  and  made  a  loud  noise  that
sounded like agreement. I mumbled my thanks and settled the turnovers in my pack.
Goodwin  waited for  Mistress  Noll to  serve  a gaggle of  merchant  lads  and  their
sweethearts.  Then  she  leaned  on  the  counter  and  said,  "Who's  been  calling
themselves the  Shadow  Snake,  mistress?  Who's  been  stealing  children  and  giving
them back, some dead, some alive?"
Mistress Noll snorted. "Mistress Clary, the Snake's a tale! I told my little ones the
Snake would get them if they didn't eat their kidney stew and do their chores!"
"But someone's been dressing in the tale. You know it and we know it," Goodwin
said.  "Preying  on  the  Lower  City  like  a  taxman  wearing  bearskin.  He  steals  their
children and gives them back when they've surrendered what's valuable. And if they
don't, he leaves the children dead."
Mistress Noll fluttered around the stall, poking up the fire, checking dough  she'd
set over a small oven to rise. She sold  buns  to  an off-duty  armsman and  his doxie
and a loaf of bread to a weary-looking cove with ink stains on his fingers. At last she
said,  "Nobody  cares  about  missing children  hereabouts.  Their  parents  can  always
make  more."  She  said  it  with  an  angry  twist  to  her  mouth,  as  if  she  quoted
somebody.
"We're asking," Goodwin said. "Do you know aught? Who's been seen where the
children vanish, or  where they've been  found?  Mistress,  you're  in  the  Nightmarket
and the Daymarket."
"What I know is that no one knows,"  Mistress  Noll replied, her voice  very soft.
"No one  knows,  no  one  sees,  no  one  hears.  Maybe a monster  from  tales does do
this, Mistress Clary."
Goodwin straightened and gave the counter a rap with her fingers. "I don't believe
in monsters, not in the Lower City. If there is one, Mistress Deirdry, someone made
him. But I'm more likely to believe it's a man, or a gang. I want whoever it is. I want
him to dance on Execution Hill for the folk he's terrorized."
Tunstall tied up  his handkerchief after setting  a  patty  aside.  "We've  let  him  run
wild in the Lower City. It's a disgrace to our name. We mean to clean it up."
"Welladay," a man said nearby, "lookit who's come out of Crookshank's burrow.

I'd thought mayhap she was dead along with her son."
I'd  almost  forgot  the  Nightmarket,  so  hard  was  I  listening  to  my  Dogs  and
Mistress Noll. Now I looked around. Here came Tansy all in black, with a black cap
covered with a veil for her gold curls. She had a basket over her arm.
A maid walked beside her, one I hadn't seen before. She  was  odd-looking,  forty
or so,  hair combed  back  in a sleek black  and  gray  braid,  black  eyes,  short  nose,
mouth wide with frown lines that drew the corners down. She'd  plucked  her brows
clean off  and  drawn perfect  black  arches  in their place.  She  had  a  black  teardrop
tattooed on her chin and two  more at the corners  of  her eyes.  She  looked  like she
could tangle with Goodwin and fight for every inch she was forced to give up.
Her underdress  was  a  finer  cotton  than  I'd  look  to  see  on  a  maid,  though  her
overdress  was  plain enough.  She  wore  jet earrings and  a necklace  with  a  tiger-eye
pendant. The metal of the necklace could have been brass, but it looked gold to me.
"Beka!" Tansy cried. "Look at us, out and about!" She smiled at me, the corners
of her mouth trembling. She looked at Goodwin and far up at Tunstall.
"Cooper?" Goodwin asked. "You need to do a mannerly thing here."
"Oh." I opened my mouth, but Tansy interrupted.
"If  we  wait  for  Beka  to  introduce  us,  it  will  be  dawn.  She's  shyer  than
moonflowers. You must  be  Guardswoman  Goodwin  and  Guardsman  Tunstall. I'm
Tansy  Lofts  –  Beka's  been  my friend since  we were..."  Her  smile  failed,  then  she
forced it back onto her mouth. "Since we were small. My husband is Herun Lofts."
She  extended  her  hand.  They  must  have  taught  her  that  in  Crookshank's  house,
because she never knew about it in Mutt Piddle Lane.
Tunstall took her hand and kissed it. "Our  sympathies,  Mistress  Lofts,"  he said,
his voice kind. "We are doing all we can to find and hobble the Rat who took your
child from you."
Tansy gave his hand a squeeze. "I've heard you two are the best in all Corus," she
said. "I know you will do all you can." Not realizing that she'd just set up the hackles
on  both  my  Dogs,  implying  they  might  fail,  Tansy  cried,  "Pounce,  you  wicked
creature! No greeting for me?"
Pounce said several things to her, all sounding happy, then leaped into her basket.
Tansy laughed and braced herself against his weight.
"Mistress,  we don't  want this dirty animal's hair in  the  food  we  buy,"  the  maid
said. Her voice was smooth and cold. "He's been on the streets – "
"Nonsense," Tansy informed her. "If you're going to fuss, go back to the house. I
said I didn't want my own maid, let alone you."  Her eyes  were too  bright; her lips
trembled a little. She was on the edge of her temper. Did this mot see that and  hear
the  grief  talking?  Tansy  rubbed  Pounce's  head.  "I  can  take  Pounce  as  my
companion, can't I, boy? You must be bored if Beka is working." She turned to the
counter and saw Mistress Noll looking at her. "Grannylady, why is it every time I see
you, you're frowning at me?"
Mistress Noll smiled. "You're mistaken, Mistress Lofts. My heart goes out to you
in your  loss.  I too  have babes  who  died,  mine  when  they  were  newborn.  I  know
what you feel, losing your Rolond."
Tansy looked away, her eyes overfull. Goodwin wandered across the row to talk
with  a  vendor.  Tunstall  sniffed  a  citron  bun  as  he  looked  down  the  way.  Where

Spicers' Row crossed with the fruit sellers', Ulsa of Prettybone District walked. She
was flashy in a red shirt and black breeches, both  Carthaki silk. She  even carried  a
curved Carthaki-style sword. Rumor said  she  could  use  it. Three  of  her handsome
guards  walked behind her. One  of  her women guards  was  on  her far side,  but  the
guard on her left, closest to  us,  was  Rosto.  He was  all in black  and  more graceful
even than Pounce. Tunstall watched them.
"I am sorry that you lost any children, Grannylady," Tansy whispered. "Whatever
their  age.  I  –  I  said  something  bad  to  you  about  that  once.  I  think  the  Goddess
punished me for it, taking my son."
"Child,  that's  water  sunk  in  the  ground,"  Mistress  Noll  said.  My  memory  is
bothering me about that now. What did Tansy  say  to  Mistress  Noll that has  Tansy
thinking the Goddess has punished her?
"You must give over  your  sorrow  now for  the child on  the way,"  Mistress  Noll
said to  Tansy.  "And  you  must  eat. I  have  some  fine  rastons  here,  fresh  from  the
oven." She offered a big loaf for Tansy's inspection.
I heard the familiar creaking of pigeon wings overhead. Splendid, I thought. They
find me, and now they think Mistress Noll is offering a meal.
"I think we'd  best  go  about  our  watch,"  Goodwin  said,  returning. "Cooper,  say
good night to Mistress Lofts and Mistress Noll – "
The dead  clamored  in my ears  as  the  pigeons  descended  into  the  torchlit  row.
Customers and vendors moved away as the birds flapped between the torches. The
ghosts cried out, dozens of them telling me their complaints.
"Maiden's mercy, what are they doing?" Tansy whispered.
Mistress  Noll  picked  up  a  frying  spoon.  She  poked  the  awning  of  her  booth,
cursing the birds that had landed there. "Send them away, Beka!" she ordered.
"I didn't  call them!" I said.  Tunstall set  a copper  on  the counter,  breaking up  a
bun. He held out his hand, crumbs falling from his palm.
"Oh, you would," Goodwin complained as  five pigeons  descended  to  sit on  his
arm and fingers.
"Mama?" The young white bird with black-dripped feathers flew in circles around
Tansy's  head,  then tried to  land. She  shrieked and  threw up  her arms,  knocking  it
away. The ghost cried, "Mama, take me home! Mama, I'm frightened!"
I froze. In four years I had never seen a ghost seize its messenger bird before.
"Mama,  Mama,  I'm  lost!  Someone  took  me.  He  said  Grandpapa  doesn't  love
me!" The pigeon who carried Rolond's spirit tangled his claws in Tansy's curls. Her
maid unsheathed her belt knife.
"No, you looby!" I shoved the mot out of the way. "Tansy, hold still!"
"Beka, get it off, get it off!" Tansy shrieked.
I couldn't blame her. The bird was in a panic now, whirling as  it tried to  escape,
smacking Tansy  with its wings. Pigeon slaps  hurt. And this one  was  mad  not  just
with panic, but with the ghost that rode it, who was so certain Tansy could hear him.
"Mama,  take  me  home,  please!  I'll  be  good!"  Rolond  screamed  as  the  pigeon
dodged my hands.
I stumbled against Tansy. We both fell against Mistress Noll's booth.
"The man said there was a parrot, but he lied – "
Tansy  let  out  a  shriek  that  made  my  ear  stop  working.  "Rolond!  Rolond,

Goddess preserve me, sweeting, where are you?"
Dear Goddess. She heard him. She was pressed  against me, and  she  could  hear
her dead son's ghost.
"Mama, I'm sorry I was bad!" Rolond was weeping when I got my hands on the
pigeon.  It  was  a  young  bird,  not  even  feathered  all  the  way  up  to  the  plate  that
formed around its nose holes. "Mama, the cove  put  me in a bad  place,  and  then it
was dark. I don't like it in the dark!"
Tansy hit me. She punched my face and my shoulders. "Where is he, Beka! Take
me to him, pox rot your  womb!  I want my child! He's  alive! You know where my
babe is!"
Now the pigeon, still tangled in her hair, flew at me, hitting me, too.  "Don't  you
make my mama cry!" Rolond yelled. "You're bad! Mama said the folk in black help
and you don't, so you're bad!"
Tunstall  pulled  Tansy  off  of  me.  I  shifted  to  untangle  the  bird's  feet.  Tansy
wrenched  around  to  attack  Tunstall.  Once  I  had  the  pigeon  free  and  his  wings
pinned, I looked up at my partner. He made Tansy face me, though he kept her in his
grip. She kept struggling. "Let me go!" Tansy cried. "I want my son!"
"Stop  it, Tansy,"  I said  coldly.  "Stop  it  right  now.  You  act  like  a  Mutt  Piddle
trull."
That caught her attention. She quieted, her eyes streaming tears, her chest heaving.
"Look at me," I said quietly. I held her eyes with mine until I was certain I had her
attention. Then I showed her the young bird in my hands. Somehow he'd kept clean.
His white feathers  shone  in the  torchlight.  His  black  ones  really  did  look  like  ink.
"They  carry  unhappy  spirits.  Understand?  This  poor  creature  carries  Rolond  until
Rolond  decides  to  go  to  the  Peaceful  Realms.  But  Rolond  doesn't  know  what's
happened, Tansy." My mouth was dry.  I licked my lips and  told  my oldest  friend,
"You have to tell him he's dead."
I cradled the pigeon against my chest so I could keep his wings pinned with one
hand. Then I grabbed her with the other. "Tell him. Elsewise he'll wander in that dark
he keeps talking about."
"Tell a pigeon he's dead?" Tansy asked.
Someone nearby tittered.
"Mama, why would  you  tell  a  bird  it's  dead?"  Rolond  asked  her.  "Birds  don't
have ghosts, do they? Are there birds in the Black God's land?"
Tansy sobbed. Her knees gave way. I hauled her up.  I knew that if I let go,  she
couldn't hear him anymore or he hear her. "Tansy, do it!"
"Lambkin –  sweetheart,  of  course  the Black God  has  birds,"  Tansy  whispered,
straightening. "Beautiful ones.  But you  won't  see  them if you  stay  where  it's  dark.
You have to go to the Peaceful Realms."
"But I don't want to go, Mama," Rolond complained. "I want to come home with
you."
"Oh,  Rolond,  you  can't."  Tansy  reached  out  her  free  hand.  It  shook  as  she
stroked the pigeon I held. "Rolond, you died. The man – the man killed you. That's
why you're lost."
"No," he whispered. "No. I'm just in a dark place. When they stole me, I was in a
dark place." His voice broke. "There was  cloth  on  my head,  and  then the girl who

was with me took it off. And then the man came back and put it on again. He carried
me away."
"And he killed you," I said, since Tansy couldn't. "There's no hood now, Rolond.
You need to say goodbye to your mama and go see the Black God."
"I'll come to you," Tansy whispered. "One day, in the Peaceful Realms, I'll come
to you there."
His voice was fading. He believed her. "Promise, Mama?"
"Promise, my baby. I love you."
But he was gone.
All around us the market was silent. Tansy made no  sound.  I think we all forgot
where we were until the city's clocks began to chime seven. That broke the spell on
the crowd that had gathered. Tunstall helped Tansy to her feet.
"You  need  to  get  Mistress  Lofts  home,"  Goodwin  told  the  maid.  "Now."  The
maid glared at her. Goodwin  stopped  and  looked  the mot  over,  memorizing  every
inch of her. "What's your name, wench?"
The maid bridled. "Vrinday Kayu."
"Kayu.  Copper  Isles  name,  Carthaki  tattoos.  I  don't  like  you.  I'm  going  to
remember  your  face.  All  three  of  us  are."  Goodwin's  jerk  of  the  head  took  in
Tunstall  and  me.  "You'd  best  keep  your  fingers  clean  when  you  venture  out  of
Crookshank's house. Now be on about your work."
I thought for a moment Kayu might hiss and scratch Goodwin. I saw shimmering
around  her  hands.  Then  she  put  an  arm  around  Tansy  and  led  her  back  to
Crookshank's house. She didn't glance at us again, but from the too-careful way she
handled my friend, I'd say she knew we were watching.
"Maid, my left nostril," Tunstall murmured. "Mage. You saw that bit of magic?"
"Later."  Goodwin  said  it  very  quiet-like.  She  looked  around  at  me.  "Can  you
loose your little pigeon friend now, or will he attack Master Pounce?" She  glared at
my cat, who sat at her feet. "And where were you when the bird was going mad on
that poor girl's head?" she asked Pounce.
Pounce stared up at her, then said, "Manh!"
Whatever that meant.
I  already  looked  a  cracknob  and  a  half  to  the  crowd  that  had  seen  our
performance. It couldn't matter what I said or did anymore. I lifted up my head and
called, "Slapper!  You need  to  teach  this one  how to  keep  control!"  I  held  up  the
young pigeon in my hand. I didn't even know if it would work. I'd  never gotten  the
birds to take orders, but no ghost had ever grabbed hold of his bird, either.
I hadn't noticed the pigeons overhead had  been  silent for  some  time. I did  now,
because I could hear only one bird flapping toward us. Slapper landed on the dirt of
the row. He began the growling coo that was the pigeon anger noise.
"None of that," I said. "He's just a youngling. It's not his fault."
Tunstall  crouched  before  Slapper.  "Who's  this  one?"  he  asked.  "Slapper,  you
called him?" He was breaking up another bun. He put the pieces down in front of the
pigeon.
"They should  be  smaller," I said.  I couldn't  help correcting  him, even if he was
my  training  Dog.  I  worried  about  the  silly  feathered  nuisances,  and  so  few  folk
seemed  to  care  about  them.  "If  pieces  are  big  –  if  they  can't  break  them  up,  the

loobies try to swallow them whole. Often they can get stuck in the pigeon's throat."
"Mithros's teeth," Goodwin muttered.
Tunstall crumbled the roll into pigeon-sized bites.  Slapper  was  already shaking a
big one, breaking off a smaller bite for himself. Tunstall hurried to crumble the rest.
Gently I placed Inky down in front of Slapper. The young bird went after the bread,
eagerly pecking. Slapper instantly smacked him with a wing, then began to limp and
dance around him, talking in pigeon.
"Slapper,  eh?"  Tunstall  asked  again  as  he  straightened.  He  was  grinning.  "He
looks cracked, with those yellow eyes."
"Unless you're going to put  some  coppers  in a hat, our  play is over,"  Goodwin
told the crowd. "Move along. There's naught to gawp at."
"The pigeons could fight," someone called. "My money's on the black one."
Other birds came down to eat. The crowd  was  still arguing if, as  young as  Inky
was, he couldn't take crippled  old  Slapper  when the birds  finished the last crumbs
and flew off into the dark. Then the people really did move on.
"Let's go," Tunstall said. "We'll talk about pigeons and ghosts over  supper.  Can
folk always hear them when you touch them, Cooper?"
We said  goodbye  to  Mistress  Noll  and  walked  on  down  the  row.  "No,  sir,"  I
replied  to  Tunstall.  "No,  because  my  brothers  and  sisters  would  lean  against  me
when I fed  'em,  and  they never heard  nothing. Maybe it's  the ghost  wanting  to  be
heard so bad, or it being a ghost related by blood...."
"We  really  do  need  to  pay  mind  to  our  work,"  Goodwin  said.  She  sounded
apologetic, which was a strange thing in itself. "Much as I want to hear this, attention
unpaid – "
" – is a grave that's made." I knew the saying. "Sorry, Goodwin."
"No,"  Tunstall  said.  "We  should  have  gotten  you  to  tell  us  more  about  the
pigeons afore now."
Goodwin halted to stare at a sutler who lingered over a table of  spices.  The  mot
glanced at us  and  moved  on.  Goodwin  spoke  as  we  kept  walking.  "And  the  dust
spinner thing. Though  truthfully, Cooper,  that one  makes my skin prickle. At  least
pigeons are birds. They're part of creation. Stands to reason  they'd  be  the servants
of the gods. But spinners are just sticks and dust and air."
Tunstall reached out to grab a gixie's wrist. She was moving into the row, having
spotted a fine lady on a man's arm coming her way. Behind them was a foist  about
my age. The  little  gixie  was  the  decoy,  the  doll  she  held  her  lure.  The  game  was
played  when  she  dropped  the  doll  right  before  the  lady  and  her  cove.  The  child
would scramble to get the toy. Whilst they were distracted,  the girl's partner  would
foist at least the lady's coin, if not the man's, too.
My own eye was caught by a man asking a vendor  to  change three silver nobles
for coppers. Something about it struck me odd. It was too early in the night for the
gambling to have started. That was when coves dressed like this one was might need
coppers or have silver to change. He'd bought sticks of cinnamon from  the vendor
for his trouble, but from the vendor's scowl, he'd not purchased enough. Or mayhap
it was the sweat on the cove's brow when he put his silver coins on the counter.
I took  out  my baton  and  went to  stand  next to  him.  "Greetings  to  you,  Master
Spicer,"  I told  the spice  seller as  he placed  copper  after copper  on  the  counter.  I

picked up the silver noble. "Good evening, Master – "
He didn't answer but turned to run just as I saw the King's profile pointed  to  the
left, not to the right. The  cove  might have escaped  had  I not  already set  my baton
right behind his knee. He stumbled, enough for Goodwin to cut in and twist his arm
behind him. I took out my dagger and drew it across the face of  the coin.  The  thin
silver curled up to show lead beneath. I held it up for Goodwin's inspection.
She thrust the captive against the plank counter.  "Cooper,  empty his purse.  You
coves  are lower than maggots,  you  know that?" she  asked  him.  "Enough  of  these
false coins get out there and instead of regular folk paying a few coppers for a meal,
we must pay a handful of silvers, and whole families get sold as slaves so one or two
might eat."
The spice vendor spat on the ground. "I hope they sell yours to  south  Carthak,"
he said to the cove with real hate. "Leave 'em with the snakes  an'  the fevers  an'  the
great farms where they work to death." He swept his coppers away.
Tunstall searched  the Rat  whilst Goodwin  tied his hands.  "Let's  hope  you  have
the names of  whoever gave you  these,  my friend,"  he advised  in his pleasant way.
"Elsewise you have a nasty death on Execution Hill to look forward to."
The Nightmarket kept us busy until suppertime. At the Mantel and Pullet, Tunstall
ordered a bountiful meal to repay us for all that work. I thought I might drool when
the smells met my nose:  spiced  pork  pie with anise, herbs  in beef  broth,  a raston,
and a Tyran custard. To make my happiness complete, the barmaid came over with
our jacks, ale for the Dogs and barley water for me.
We  ate  in  silence  while  the  house  roared  with  talk  around  us.  Then,  as  I  was
beginning to think I would not die of starvation, Goodwin put her hand on my wrist
and bore it down to the table. I met her eyes and swallowed my mouthful.
"Explain the comedy with the pigeon and  Mistress  Tansy  now.  I think I've  been
patient. Mistress Noll said it, that first night, it was magic in your  father's  line. Well
and good. You have it. You speak to dust spinners, too. I don't understand that, but
I'm  prepared  to  exist  with  it.  We  live  in  a  world  of  magics,  after  all.  But  that  at
Mistress Deirdry's stall – those things don't happen, Cooper." She speared  a bit of
pork with her knife and put it in her mouth.
I took my chunk of fire opal from my pocket and turned it in my fingers. I didn't
look  at  it,  but  just  feeling  its  roughness  against  my  skin  helped  me  to  order  my
thoughts. "Truth to tell, I was as scared as Tansy."
Tunstall grunted. "You hid it well. Good for you."
I heard a thud under the table. He yelped. She  had  kicked him. "You  spoil  her,"
she said.
I waited until they were watching me. Then I went on, "It never happened before.
Not to  me.  But...see,  I  don't  think  most  folk  should  know  pigeons  are  the  Black
God's  messengers,  or  that  they  carry  the  ghosts  of  them  that's  uneasy  and  dead.
They wouldn't leave the poor birds alone. But I've known that Rolond Lofts was still
about, riding a Lower City bird, since the day after I started my training with you.  I
just couldn't find out which bird at first. He was still with a big flock."
"Why not  ask  your  friend Slapper?"  Tunstall asked.  He grinned at Goodwin.  "I
like Slapper. Now there's a pigeon a Dog can relate to."
She kicked him again.

He glared at her. "Are you and your man fighting? Is that your problem?"
"No, you great lummox. I want to hear Cooper," she said, her voice flat. "Go on,
girl."
"Slapper  and  I don't  talk," I explained. I was  trying  not  to  smile.  "At  least,  we
never  did  before  tonight.  He's  popular  with  the  ghosts,  but  see,  the  ghosts  don't
control the birds, and the birds don't control the ghosts. They just...fly around."
Goodwin scowled. "That's not very efficient, you ask me."
"They're  dead.  I don't  think time means  the  same.  Only  tonight,  tonight  I  think
Rolond  wanted  his  mama  so  bad,  he  –  broke  through,  somehow,  and  made  his
pigeon go to her. The bird was young. And...I'd like to see the Shadow Snake drawn
and quartered." There were drops falling on my plate. I was crying, curse it. "He was
only three."  They knew I didn't  mean the Shadow  Snake.  I wiped my eyes  on  my
sleeve. "I talked to the birds whilst I was home yesterday." I wasn't  going to  speak
of what had happened tonight if it made me act like a looby.  "They  understood  me
then, too.  I talked with the ghosts  who were killed, the ones  murdered  all together
that the spinners told me about." I glanced at them through my bangs. Tunstall was
steadily  eating.  I  don't  think  an  earthquake  would  stop  Tunstall  working  his  way
through  a  plate  of  food.  He  was  on  his  third  helping  of  the  pie.  Goodwin  was
drinking her ale and watching me. "There are nine of them. They were hired to dig a
well and taken there blindfolded. Whoever had them there kept them captive in some
building. They just dug in the pink city rock and found the gems. They didn't know
the rightful name for fire opals. That's what they told me yesterday."
For  a  long  while,  seemingly  forever  when  there  was  sweat  crawling  down  my
sides,  my Dogs  said  nothing. I thought they would decide  to  lock  me up  with  the
truly  mad,  them  as  scream  and  talk  nonsense  with  themselves.  Then  Goodwin
looked at Tunstall.
"They were digging for Crookshank. He's the one with the fire opals."
Tunstall  ran  his  fingers  through  his  hair.  "If  Crookshank  meant  to  kill  them  all
along, he wouldn't let anyone that could be connected to him do the hiring. He's too
canny a bird. Whoever hired them, could be it's someone we haven't connected with
Crookshank's businesses."
Goodwin looked at me. "They never left that building?"
She asked it like my ghosts were real human Birdies, singing the songs Dogs liked
to hear. "They said they never did. I think they're buried there."
Goodwin wrinkled her nose. "Nasty smell for whoever might want to  dig on  that
spot again. So he's done at that location – "
"Crookshank won't stop at one building. Not when the pink rock passes all under
the Lower City." Tunstall signaled the barmaid to refill our jacks.
Goodwin grinned. My skin began to  prickle with excitement. She  said,  "He'll be
hiring more workers. Maybe his folk will tell the new diggers not  to  say  they've got
work, but  these  days?  With  jobs  trickling  out  of  Corus  like  water  from  a  busted
bucket?"
"They'll talk." Tunstall nodded.  "Someone  will tell a sweetheart,  a rival, the  one
they owe money to."
"He won't hire a lot of  diggers,"  I said.  "He won't  want folk noticing. And they
dig in cellars. Not so much room in those."

"But he'll be hiring," Goodwin explained. "Too many other businesses hereabouts
have been  letting folk go.  It's  a ripple, Cooper.  You learn to  feel for  ripples."  She
climbed onto  her  bench.  Taking  her  whistle,  she  blew  a  sharp  blast  on  it.  Heads
turned everywhere inside the room. "Harken, you Dogs!" she cried, her voice cutting
through the last noise  as  the room  went quiet.  "Me'n  Tunstall  and  Cooper  have  a
scent. We'd like you to get it in your noses. Someone hired nine diggers, telling each
one they were being hired to  dig a well. Each  one  alone, not  all  nine,  understand?
Hired for  a  one-digger  job,  but  it  was  nine  all  told.  They're  all  missing,  probably
dead. Now the Rats that did it either hired more in the last week or they're hiring right
now. A sniff, the tiniest sniff, and you bring it to  one  of  us.  Whatever's  in it at the
end, you'll share. If there's naught in it, we'll remember what we owe."
Tunstall didn't stand on the bench, but he did rise. "Some  Rat  went and  doused
nine folk. Now he means to do it twice, under our very sniffers. We can't allow such
goings-on, not on our watch."
Them that were Dogs answered him with growls. I could see Ersken and Verene. I
think their eyes were as wide as mine. I'd  heard  of  a Growl,  when Dogs  took  up  a
challenge. It meant ill for the Rats  that made them voice  it. But it was  one  thing to
hear of it, another to sit in the Mantel and  Pullet and  hear that rumbling snarl come
from dozens  of  throats.  The  army folk  and  off-duty  Palace  Guards  shifted  where
they sat.  The  maids  and  the  barkeep  had  retreated  to  the  kitchen  when  Goodwin
stood on the bench. Seemingly they knew what was coming.
I had what I wanted for  the nine dead  whose  cries  the spinners  had  first picked
up. The Dogs would seek them. I'd never even thought that it might be easier to find
whoever it was that hired them. But Goodwin  was  right. These  days  plenty of  folk
were  out  of  work.  No  matter  how  they  were  sworn  to  say  nothing  of  someone
looking to hire, word would leak out. Soon enough, a Dog would hear.
Goodwin stood down, but she did not sit. Instead  she  checked  her belt, making
sure her weapons and purse were placed as she needed them. It was time to go back
to the street. Tunstall emptied his tankard and counted out the coins for our barmaid.
When he finished, he looked at Goodwin. I was already up, still trembling from  the
Growl. I wanted to find a Rat and shake him till he was senseless.
"Well?" Tunstall asked. "Have you a plan? Because I do."
She actually raised her hand and beckoned to him with those two fingers.
"Let's  visit Dawull," Tunstall said,  and  put  a toothpick  in his  mouth.  "Let's  ask
him  if  he's  been  dancing  for  Crookshank.  Maybe  Dawull's  folk  don't  know
Crookshank is killing folk just for digging for him."
"You're a bad lad," Goodwin said, her eyes alight. "Let's go see Dawull."
Dawull held court  at the Fog  Lantern, near Kingsbridge. It was  actually in Flash
kennel's  territory,  since  Jane  Street's  ended  at  Justice  Way.  The  rules  were,  Jane
Street Dogs could visit district chiefs without asking leave of other kennels, since we
had the Court of the Rogue in our territory. How well that worked usually depended
on the Dogs involved. In this case, Flash kennel didn't care what we did.
Tunstall  and  Goodwin  saluted  Dawull's  sentries  on  the  approach  to  the  Fog
Lantern. The  rushers  looked  like they'd  swallowed sommat  nasty,  but  none  would
say anything to  my Dogs'  faces.  In the shadows  I saw  runners head  off  down  the
alleys  to  warn  Dawull.  Maybe  they  went  to  tell  Kayfer  and  other  folk  as  well.  I

wished my Dogs had brought some of the packmates who'd been at the Mantel and
Pullet. What if Goodwin  and  Tunstall had  given in to  the kind of  carelessness  that
got us in trouble at the Barrel's Bottom? I'd hoped to lose the last bruise on my face
before I got new ones.
We were almost there when someone gave a two-fingered whistle that almost blew
apart the fog that was coming up off the Olorun. One of Dawull's lookouts grabbed
his club.  Another one,  standing in a second-floor  window across  the rutted  street,
waved him off.
Three people  came toward  us  from  the Kingsbridge  end  of  Rovers  Street,  two
men and a woman. Lady Sabine wore a long tunic in the men's  fashion,  her sword
and dagger sheaths and belt well polished,  and  slippers  on  her feet. Her cloak  was
fastened over one shoulder, leaving her sword arm bare. She'd bound her hair up in
a net with small  pearls  stitched  on  it.  She  looked...nice.  Ladylike.  She  even  wore
rings on two fingers of each hand, though none of them were big.
The men who walked with her were knights. They plainly expected  everyone  to
know that, though they wore no armor. They wore long tunics and cloaks like Lady
Sabine.  There  was  more  gold  and  gems  on  their  sheaths  and  belts,  but  they  had
weathered faces, and the weapons' hilts were plain. They moved  like fighters. They
also had that air most nobles have, the one Lady Sabine doesn't. It's the air that says
normal folk must  drop  what they do  and  wait to  see  if  they  have  to  attend  to  the
nobles.
Lady Sabine walked forward a few steps. "You three –  four,  excuse  me, Master
Pounce – blend in so well," she said as my cat patted her shoe.
I squinted  through  the  fog.  I  hadn't  even  known  Pounce  had  arrived  until  that
moment.
"I find you in the most dreadful places. Didn't you have enough of Rovers Street
last week?" the lady asked.
"It's not given to us to choose where we must walk, milady," Goodwin told her.
"Oh, aye, it is," grumbled the lookout closest to us.
"Silence, lout,"  commanded  one  of  the knights, who'd  come  nearer. "You  were
not addressed."
Sabine rolled her eyes.
"We're on  Dog business,  Lady"  Tunstall explained. He reached  out,  casual-like,
and cuffed the lookout on the ear. "We're paying a visit to Dawull."
"Chief of Waterfront," Goodwin explained. "It's one of the Rogue's districts. We
mean to rattle his trap."
"That sounds amusing," Lady Sabine remarked.  "Lads,  I have an idea. Let's  go
watch my Dog friends annoy this criminal. We don't really want to go to my Lord of
Naxen's party. You know it will be  boring to  madness.  All kinds  of  noble  maidens
will simper at you, and their mothers will scowl at me."
Goodwin  looked  at  Tunstall,  who  shrugged.  The  two  men  talked  it  out  in
whispers.  Finally we walked on,  with the two  noblemen  beside  Tunstall  and  Lady
Sabine with Goodwin, Pounce, and me.
"We  had  an invitation to  supper  at  my  Lady  of  Hollyrose's  in  Highfields,"  she
explained to my Dogs. "She's elderly, so it ended not too long ago. We decided  to
walk to my Lord of Naxen's party. The three of us served out in the hill country this

last year, so we're used to more exercise than we've been getting of late."
"But  at  least  we  had  a  choice  about  being  in  the  hills,  Sabine,"  joked  the
redheaded knight. "We could have gone home as we liked. You had to wait until His
Majesty pardoned you."
That made Goodwin look at her as  we halted in front  of  the Fog  Lantern. "You
needed a pardon to come home?" she asked.
"We had a misunderstanding," the lady said, her deep voice quiet. "It's  over  and
done with." She walked through the open door of the tavern. "I  wonder  if the ale's
any good."
Her knight friends followed.
Tunstall waited until they were well inside before  he whispered,  "Those  two  had
better not be interested in her." He walked in, leaving Goodwin, Pounce, and me to
follow.
"The big looby," I heard Goodwin mutter. "Never get involved with the nobility.
Everyone knows that. Everyone."
I remembered the rumble in his voice when he'd said that about the knights being
interested in her. "I think he forgot."
Into the common  room  we went, following the nobles.  Dawull and  his favorites
held the far corner.  Dawull's rushers  and  their mots,  and  his thieves,  robbers,  and
lickboots sat everywhere else, along with Players and gamesters hoping to win some
coin from the regular customers. Dogs and children played on the floor whilst maids
tried to serve everyone.
At  just  this  moment,  though,  all  was  silent.  Lady  Sabine  and  her  two  friends
surveyed  the room.  They looked  as  out  of  place  as  I  would  have  looked  at  their
supper in Highfields. I had a mad wish to giggle and bit my lip.
The blond  knight  looked  at  three  river  dodgers  who  held  the  nearest  table.  He
didn't  even bother  to  speak.  He simply snapped  his fingers at them and  jerked his
thumb. Surely, I thought, they'll throw the table at him.
But  meek  as  priests'  finches,  they  went  to  another  table.  That  same  knight
beckoned to a serving maid as the two noblemen seated  themselves.  She  thrust  the
neck of her dress lower, when it already did little enough to cover her peaches, and
came to see what they would have. When Lady Sabine took her seat with them, the
wench actually glared at my lady.
Dawull saw us on the stair and got to his feet with a grin. "Heads high, my pets!"
he  bellowed.  "I  smell"  –  he  swung  that  great  red  head  around,  sniffing  loudly  –
"dank fur. Piddle. Scummer. Dogs."
Some  laughed. I  saw  movement  in  a  hall  to  one  side  that  I'd  wager  led  to  the
privy, since  Aniki came  out  adjusting  her  belt.  She  noticed  us  and  waved.  I  only
nodded, since waving back was not something dignified and Dog-like. Pounce didn't
worry  himself  with  such  things.  He  bounded  across  the  floor,  jumping  onto  a
four-legged cur's  back  and  up  into Aniki's arms.  She  smiled and  gave him a good
scratch, but her wary eyes were on the three of us as we walked toward Dawull.
His  rushers  had  their  swords  half  drawn  when  we  stopped  ten  feet  from  him.
Goodwin put her hands on her hips. Tunstall scratched the back of his neck, as if he
did nothing in particular. I clasped my hands  before  me and  set  my feet in the rest
position. I wished I had my baton out, but drawing it now would put Dawull's back

up.  I  stayed  alert  for  movement  on  my  sides.  I  was  very  glad  Lady  Sabine  had
decided to come with us  rather than go  to  a stupid  party.  I couldn't  be  sure  if her
friends would help us, but  I knew she  would.  And she  was  behind me. I need  not
fear with Lady Sabine present.
"We're looking for Crookshank," Goodwin said. "Tell him to stand forth."
For  a moment all was  still. Then the laughter began.  My Dogs'  shoulders  didn't
even twitch, so I held steady and kept my face still.
When the laughter had quieted some, Dawull bellowed, "Crookshank! I think they
stopped watering the ale at the Mantel and Pullet, woman! We have no scales tucked
under the tables, have we, friends?"
"No," came the replies. The comic Players, or those who pretended to be, made a
game of looking under tables, benches, and the mots' skirts. More than a few earned
cuffs and boxed ears from the mots who objected.
Goodwin waited for quiet to return. Then she said, "But we were certain we'd find
him with you, Dawull. You have become his back scratcher. Clever trick, to act like
you  hustled  the  old  man  out  of  the  Court.  You  saved  your  friend  before  Kayfer
decided to carve him. Too bad riches alone can't buy you the Rogue's crown."
"Is this a jest?" roared Dawull.
"Do  I smile?" Goodwin  asked,  quick  as  a  snake.  "How  does  Crookshank  buy
you, Dawull? Where does he get coin enough to buy a chief of the Rogue?"
One cove  seated  near Dawull lunged to  his feet and  cleared  his sword  from  his
sheath. "Mangy bitch," he said. "You'll eat your lies."
I heard  another  sword  clear  its  sheath.  This  blade  was  in  Aniki's  hand,  resting
there like a natural part  of  her arm. She  could  have  drawn  it  to  back  up  Dawull's
man, to help us, or to be ready for a fight.
"Hold!" yelled Dawull, to  them and  to  the others  who were getting to  their feet,
weapons in hand. "Hold, curse you, or you'll tangle with me."
"But  sayin'  you  was  bought,  Dawull,  sayin'  you  was  in  the  service  of  that
bloodsucker," complained his guard. His sword hung from his hand, useless.  "Dog
or no, she's got to be taught!"
"What do  I care  what some  fleabit gutter crawler says?"  Dawull asked.  "Unless
you believe her?" He glared at his man.
The killer shrank under Dawull's glare. If he had an imagination, he was imagining
his bones were cracking. "No, no. That's why I was going to – "
"Kill a Dog and  a thousand  Dogs  have their teeth  in  your  neck,  ducknob!  And
you'd  have to  kill all three, besides  them loaners  back  there."  He  pointed  to  Lady
Sabine and her two friends. "That's why you need me to run this lot." He glared now
at all of his cronies. "I'm the only one  of  you  with this."  He tapped  himself on  the
head with a finger the thickness of my baton.
"A head?" I heard Tunstall murmur for Goodwin and me alone. Goodwin shifted
slightly on her legs. I knew she wanted to kick him to silence him. Some  folk show
that they laugh in the oddest ways.
"Now sheathe that bread knife of your'n,"  Dawull ordered  his man, not  knowing
Tunstall had  even squeaked.  "You  too,  girl. Good  that you're  eager,  but  whatever
they do in Scanra, we don't go dousing Dogs just because they've no manners."
It was  only after the man put  away his sword  that I heard  the  music  of  Aniki's

blade sliding back into its sheath.
"Crookshank  was  a  mad  old  man  that  night.  Kayfer  remembered  it  when  he
cooled  off  –  that's  why I got  Crookshank  out  of  there. We  need  the  bloodsucker
and them like him. But me being bought?"  Dawull laughed, though not  well.  "You
Dogs  shouldn't  drink hotblood  wine during  your  watch.  It  makes  you  think  crazy
things. There isn't a cove or mot in Corus as could buy me, unless it was old Roger
himself with the crown's jewels."
I heard the scrape of wood as the knights started to rise.
Dawull bowed toward them. "Gods save His Royal Majesty and his lovely Queen.
I meant no disrespect," he told them, oil nearabout dripping from his lips. I glanced
back.  Slowly  –  very  slowly  –  the  two  men  sat,  their  hands  on  their  sword  hilts.
Knights could be touchy about respecting the King. Still, Lady Sabine had her head
propped on her hand. If she'd made a move to get up, she had settled again quickly.
Goodwin looked around the room. "Just remember, when it's Crookshank you're
taking orders from, we warned you." She turned to Tunstall and me. "Let's sit for a
time." As we wandered back to the knights' table, she muttered, "That's why he has
a head. Lout."
Lady Sabine grinned as we came near. "I thought we might have to fight our way
out again. Have a seat.  These  two  don't  mind. They diced  with the soldiers  under
their command for the last year. Those people barely bathed."
"But it's different in Corus," protested the blond one, though he waved Goodwin
onto the bench next to him. He was already giving Pounce a scratch, so I decided he
couldn't be too bad, for a knight. "Our families are sticklers."
"Never mind your families," Sabine told them. "I want to know who Crookshank
is."
"Who  cares  about  a  cityman?"  the  redheaded  knight  asked.  "He's  not  a  real
problem, is he? Not like the hill raiders."
Tunstall raised an eyebrow. "Anyone I might know?"
The redheaded knight leaned forward. "We had this one clan – "
The blond knight got to his feet. "Excuse  me. I didn't  come  home to  talk about
the hills. A green-eyed wench over there wants to fall in love with me."
"For now," Sabine murmured as he crossed the room.  The  wench who'd  gotten
his attention was one of the higher-priced doxies there, wearing a dress and earrings
that did not come from Cheappretty Row.
Pounce  grumbled and  walked over  to  me.  "I  hope  he's  got  coin  in  his  purse,"
Goodwin told Sabine. "Elsewise he'll turn up missing his gems and gold."
"Don't worry about him," Sabine told her as Aniki slid into the seat the knight had
left. "None of the hill doxies could pluck him, and they use clubs. Besides, Joreth is
all kinds  of  fat  in  the  purse,  and  he  loves  to  pay  double  when  he's  happy."  She
turned. "Are you sure it's wise to sit here?" she asked Aniki, who had come over to
us.
"I can always tell him I was  sounding  you  out  for  possible  robbing  later," Aniki
said with her  usual  cheerful  grin.  "Besides,  he  knows  me'n  Beka  live  in  the  same
lodging house. Or he will later, because I'll tell him. Or did I tell him last night?" She
laughed. "I'm Aniki Forfrysning." She  smiled at Goodwin.  "Hullo, Guardswoman."
She leaned down and kissed Pounce on the head. He glared up at her and said, Stop

that! in cat. Aniki glanced at Tunstall, but he and the redheaded knight were deep in
talk concerning hill people they both knew.
"Actually, I'm  glad you  came over,"  Sabine told  Aniki. "I  wanted a look  at that
blade of yours, if you don't mind. It sounds like an Anjel sword."
Aniki nodded. Standing, she removed her sheathed blade from her belt and laid it
before Lady Sabine. "One of Master Watson's own forging," she said with pride. "I
won't tell you who I had to kill to be able to afford this."
I think she was joking.
When Pounce,  Goodwin,  Tunstall, and  I  left,  Aniki  and  Lady  Sabine  were  still
talking swords.  Moreover,  Tunstall had  promised  to  return  for  drinking  and  more
conversation about what was going on in the eastern hills of Tortall.
"Is that why you're going back?" Goodwin asked. "Just catching up on the other
barbarians  that survived  their  yearly  bath?  I'm  not  going  with  you,  Mattes.  And  I
won't like it if one of Dawull's idiots decides to kill a Dog anyway, even an off-watch
Dog."
We walked out into mist so thick we could barely see.  Pounce  grumbled that he
hated this kind of weather.
"I'll be  with two  knights, Clary,"  Tunstall said.  "And  I'll take  a  sword  from  the
armory after we muster off watch."
It did  seem that  Tunstall  with  a  sword  was  more  comforting  to  Goodwin  than
Tunstall  on  the  street  without  her.  "Just  don't  get  hurt,"  she  warned  him  as  we
walked along. "Me and Cooper aren't going to  shake  the trees  for  whoever's  hiring
diggers all by ourselves."
You're not, Pounce said. You'll have me. He looked at me, his strange purple eyes
gleaming. Of course, they don't know that. And don't you tell them.
I wouldn't dream of it, I said as we wandered down the street to the kennel.
 
 
Thursday, April 9, 246
Before training, afternoon.
When I opened the door this morning, before  I even had  my hair braided,  Kora
stood  there with a jar of  pears  pickled  with  currants  and  almonds.  Her  long  eyes
were flashing with anger. I could swear I saw blue-green sparks stuck in her lashes.
"A lily pendant on a gold chain," she told me. "Enamel on gold.  Maybe so  big."
She  held  a  thumb  up,  bending  the  first  joint.  "There  was  a  mot  at  the  Glassman
Square fountain who was trying to get bacon grease from her man's shirt. We got to
talking  of  the  Shadow  Snake.  She  said  her  neighbor's  girl  was  taken.  The  lass's
father gave up the necklace he bought his wife to the Shadow Snake."
I took the jar. "And the little girl?"
Kora picked up my cat and cuddled him as if she needed to touch something soft.
"The  Snake  gave  her  back.  She  wet  the  pallet  she  slept  on  after,  though.  And  it
wasn't  two  moons  later,  my  Birdie  told  me,  before  the  whole  family  packed  their
things  and  moved  from  Corus  altogether.  They  said  they  were  going  to  Barzun,
where the only snakes could be killed with a spade." I think I heard her sniff. "He did
that to a little girl for a necklace."
"But that's why no one's cared about this Snake, love." Rosto leaned against my

door frame. He could be so quiet on my creaky stairs.
I nodded. "Because he goes after folk whose lives are so small no one else thinks
they have aught of value," I said. Like herb women with lung rot and five little ones
who live on Mutt Piddle Lane. Mama's last man had been kin to the Shadow Snake,
thinking no one would take vengeance for her. And just as he did, the Shadow Snake
would learn how wrong he was.
"I like Lady Sabine, Beka," Aniki said, coming over from her rooms with a cheese
and bread  halves from  yesterday's  breakfast.  "You  should  have come  back  to  the
tavern after your shift last night. She and Tunstall were doing sword dances like they
have in the eastern hills. It was fun."
I shivered.  The  thought of  Tunstall throwing his long legs about  in  any  kind  of
dance is fearsome. Still, it makes me wonder if Goodwin shouldn't  maybe get used
to the idea of  him and  Lady  Sabine  being  friendly,  or  more  than  friendly.  Tavern
dancing usually leads to dancing at home, Mama always said.
I  opened  the  shutters.  The  pigeons  fluttered  down,  just  a  handful  so  early  –
Slapper, White Spice, Pinky, Mumper, Ashes. None of them said more that was new
as  I  gave  them  the  last  of  my  cracked  corn  and  some  bread.  They  mourned  the
loved ones who thought they had been left behind. They whispered of the pink city
rock. They fought each other over space on my ledge and strutted, cooing as if they
had naught in their minds but eggs and feathers.
Of  my  other,  human  friends,  Verene  and  Phelan  arrived  holding  hands  and
carrying hot fritters. Ersken brought half a ham and a cheese tart. We'd invited some
of our  fellow  Puppies,  but  none  of  them  lived  as  close  as  Verene  or  Ersken  nor
wanted to roll out of bed so early.
Rosto  not  only  brought  more  twilsey  and  raspberry  jam,  but  he  gave  me  a
good-sized bag of cracked corn for the silly birds. If he'd given me aught for myself,
I could have said no, but corn for the idiot pigeons I'd never turn down.
He didn't try to take advantage, either. In fact, he was the first to go, saying he'd
errands  to  run.  The  others,  too,  scattered  early.  Kora  was  the  last  to  stand.  She
lingered, helping me to finish the straightening up.
"Would you remember the mot  who told  you  about  that pendant?"  I asked  her.
"Might she be at the fountain again soon?"
Kora gave me her tricky, sidelong smile. "I  can  do  better.  I can  take you  to  her
home."
"How do you know where she lives? Did you follow her?"
Kora picked up Pounce and laid him across  the back  of  her shoulders.  "I  put  a
spot on her, that I might find her again at need."  She  raised  a fingertip. A circle of
green-blue light appeared there. It vanished. "I can always find my spots again."
I hardly knew what to say, but I knew I should tell her something. Finally I said,
"That is a good idea."
Kora scratched  Pounce's  chin,  not  looking  at  me.  "A  child  killer  got  my  older
sister. Not a cold Rat  like the Snake,  who kills for  gain. A mad one.  But I hate all
child killers, whatever their reasons." She took a breath. "You'll need to dress like a
gixie. In plain breeches you give off a whiff of Dog."
I put my hand on her arm for  a moment.  Quietly I told  her, "I  have two  sisters.
Whenever I pass the Goddess's shrines, I thank the Lady they live safe in Provost's

House."
Kora nodded.
I went to my clothespress and took out a gown.
 
Kora's  glowing spot  led us  into the  streets  beyond  Glassman  Square.  The  mot
she'd spoken to yesterday had a small house of her own, on an alley lined with them.
I heard children in the back and the thump of a butter churn. A woman spun flax on
the stone path to the side yard. A big, short-haired dog slept on the doorstep. When
we walked through the gate, the dog rose and growled, hackles rising. I reached for a
baton I did not carry. Kora's magic glowed around her fingers.
Pounce  walked  forward  and  meowed  forcefully.  The  dog  looked  at  him  and
whuffed. Pounce called him what sounded to me like a name. The dog's tail began to
wag. Mayhap Pounce just had to prove he was a Lower City cat. I was not sure.
The mot halted her spinning. "My Brute hates cats." She watched Pounce and the
dog, a strange expression in her eyes. She then inspected Kora and me. To Kora she
said, "I know you. You are the laundress and herb girl. You gave me the salve that
healed those burns of mine." She pursed her lips. "And you asked me about  stolen
children."
"I  did,"  Kora  said.  "This  is  my  friend  Beka.  She,  too,  is  interested  in  stolen
children."
"She is a Dog," said the woman. "Dress or no, she stands like a Dog."
"Work on that, perhaps," Kora murmured to me.
"Beka?"  the  woman  asked  suddenly.  "Cooper?  As  works  with  Tunstall  and
Goodwin? The terrier Puppy, that chased Orva Ashmiller to Northgate?"
I looked at the four-legged dog. I did not  want to  talk about  Mistress  Ashmiller.
"Is  he  friendly,  your  Brute?"  I  stepped  forward,  my  palm  held  up.  Kora  took  a
breath,  but  seemingly Pounce  had  opened  the way for  us.  Brute  came  up,  his  tail
wagging slowly. He smelled my hand,  then let me scratch  his  ears.  "You're  a  fine
boy," I told him.
"I have children of my own,"  the woman whispered,  to  me or  to  Kora,  I wasn't
certain. "They could be taken from me."
I scratched  Brute  on  the  rump.  "There  are  plenty  of  folk  with  children  in  the
Lower City, mistress." I kept my voice low. "Many of them already lost children to
the  Snake  who  took  your  neighbors'  girl.  Too  many  of  those  did  not  see  their
children come home alive again. When the Snake frightens more of you into silence,
you make it possible for him to do it again. And again." I met her eyes with mine this
time. "Right now all anyone can  see  is that you  have friends  to  visit, the laundress
from the square and one other. They must  be  friends,  because  this fine, handsome
guard of your house is wagging his tail. What they think elsewise depends on you."
The woman ladled water onto her flax to  moisten it, taking time to  think. At last
she said,  "Come  around  here. There  is a bench."  It was  placed  so  she  could  talk
with us  as  she  spun.  Once  we were  settled,  she  began  to  work  again,  though  her
thread was uneven. She was frightened. I understood that.
Brute followed us. I scratched his ears and rump. Kora talked about people from
the fountain square until the mot was calmer. When Kora nudged me lightly, I leaned
forward over Brute's heavy shoulders.

"Has  anyone you  can  name given you  cause  to  fear since  your  neighbors'  child
was  taken?"  I  asked,  keeping  my  voice  soft.  Only  two  of  the  children  I'd  heard
outside had come to peer at us through the house's  open  door.  They ran away the
moment I looked at them. Their mother had trained them to be wary of  strangers.  I
suspected the wall out back was high and mayhap covered with thorny vines.
The woman shook her head. "Brute was a year old then. He guards us well."
I nodded. "Mistress, you told my friend about a necklace."
She halted her spinning. In the distance, we all heard thunder's distant boom. We
looked  up.  There was  a thin arm of  black  clouds  reaching  over  the  wall.  Mayhap
there would be a good spring rain later.
"We  were all jealous of  it, we mots,"  she  whispered.  "Such  a  pretty  thing.  Her
man had a second job for weeks to pay for it. She thought he was helping a friend to
build his house for naught. He give it to her for her birthday, the same day as they'd
been married five year. Enamel work and gold. She wore it everywhere. 'Fine work is
meant  to  be  seen,'  she  told  us,  which  scorched  our  feathers,  didn't  it?  Then  the
Shadow Snake took her little girl and demanded the necklace."
So quiet were we that I could hear Brute's tail stir the dust as he leaned against my
knees. Behind the house I heard the children squabble.
Gently I moved Brute and went to stand next to the mot. "Mistress, what did the
pendant  look  like?" I asked  her. "So  pretty  a thing, you  must  remember.  Can  you
draw it for me?" I picked up a stick and handed it to her.
"I'm no hand at picturing," she whispered, but she took the stick. She didn't need
to be  the greatest  hand  at drawing.  The  design  was  simple,  the  kind  of  thing  that
stayed before the eye in a person's mind. Curved lines turned up, like cupped hands.
I would remember it if I saw it again.
I thought of something. We'd been taught what questions to put when a crime had
been done recently. No Dogs had asked about this crime. No one  had  reported  the
child's kidnapping to Jane Street. Still, why not ask? "Did you see anyone, the days
before the child was taken, or the days  before  she  was  returned? Anyone as  didn't
live here? Folk delivering aught, lazing about? Folk talking with the children?"
"It was  forever  ago,"  she  whispered.  "No.  I  am  a  liar.  It  were  two  year,  three
months, eighteen days. I was so afeared. I've never been not afeared ever since, but
I've no coin to go to Barzun, nor family to help me get a new start there."
"You remember it to  the day,"  I said.  "You  remember the necklace.  And this is
the Lower City. We always watch down here. Especially folk with comely children."
The two little ones who'd come to peer at us had been golden-haired and blue-eyed,
slavers' meat.
"Why ask?" she whined. "What difference does it make? The family is gone. The
Shadow Snake chews on Crookshank now, gods' blight to them both."
"You might have seen the Snake or the Snake's rushers," I said. Ahuda had taught
us that cityfolk always squirmed like fishes on hooks. Patience got us farther than a
box on the ear with them that weren't lifetime Rats. "Because this is how Dogs do it,
mistress. We ask who was here. Who was strange? Who  asked  about  the little one
or her family? The Snake didn't just walk into that house. The Snake knew where the
child slept. He knew when that household went to bed. He had to, if he was to take
her with the family sleeping. He had to know if there was someone like this fine Brute

in the house, or even my Pounce. Cats have inconvenient tails for the stepping. Who
did you see?"
She gave me three names at the last. I set them in my memory. When we said our
farewells, the sky was darker, Brute had gone to sleep across the doorstep, and the
mot was trembling. I fear we ruined her spinning, but I had three names for it.
We'd gone halfway down the block before Kora got my attention. "What now?"
I stopped and took a deep breath. I was trembling. I looked at her. "I think I need
a map."
She went on to run her errands, and I ran mine before the rain began. My lord had
shown me a trick he used when some complicated Rat hunt took place in any part of
the realm. I would follow his lead and use a map. I had some already. My lord  had
noticed  my love of  his  and  given  me  a  packet  of  them  for  my  fifteenth  birthday.
They were a costly gift, showing different parts of the realm, various cities, and, best
of all, the different sections  of  Corus.  I had  one  map alone of  the Lower City,  as
complete as any in the palace.
I went to  the Daymarket and  haggled mightily for  pins  and  sealing  wax.  Then  I
trotted  home and  took  out  my map of  the Lower City. Carefully  I  nailed  it  to  the
wall. I marked the head of one pin with a ball of  blue sealing wax and  thrust  it into
the spot where Crookshank's house would be, on Stuvek Street. That was Rolond's
marker – blue would be the color for the dead children. Next I marked another pin in
red for the gixie who'd been returned to her family. I set it on the alley that Kora and
I had just visited.
When  I  have  more  pins,  more  real  news,  I  will  bring  it  to  my  Dogs.  If  I  find
anything new on Rolond, I will take it to Jewel, since  he and  his partner,  Yoav,  are
supposed  to  be  searching  for  Rolond's  killer.  But  this  is  for  me,  to  help  me  to
remember.
Very well. And  to  paint  a  better  picture  of  the  Snake.  I  have  heard  of  no  one
doing such a picture, and I believe one is needed. Mayhap I am only a Puppy, but I
have seen how well this works for my lord. If I can show my Dogs a picture of what
the Shadow Snake has  done,  mayhap they will not  mind that the picture  has  come
from a Puppy.
Please, Goddess and Mithros.
Please.
At night's end.
Tonight was the night of the Happy Bag. After muster we went up to the Court of
the Rogue again. I could not relax and look about me there as I did last time. I could
not amuse myself thinking of the mots who sighed over how handsome Kayfer was
in his younger days.  All I could  think  on  was  the  mothers  and  fathers  who  came
here, hoping that he would find their little ones or give them justice for  the Shadow
Snake. How he and his chiefs had seen how poor they were and sent them away.
Rosto should have let Crookshank stab the Rogue. Except then Rosto would not
be standing with Ulsa now, coming to  power  here. Aniki would not  have her place
among the rushers who waited at Dawull's back.
After we handed the Happy Bags over to the horsemen for transport back to  the
kennel, Tunstall, Goodwin, and I headed on up into the Cesspool.

"Findlay Close?"  Tunstall asked  Goodwin.  To  me  he  said,  "Crookshank  owns
every house there."
Goodwin nodded. "Worth a look," she said.
On  the  street  that  lay  between  Stormwing  and  Mulberry,  Tunstall  took  out  the
small, magical pearl light he'd used on the fire opals. Keeping it mostly covered from
the view of the families that lived thereabouts, we looked around the outsides of the
rough houses. In spots the pink city rock broke through the surface, gray in the lamp
glow. Folk  used  it here as  foundation  stone,  doorsteps,  and  parts  of  the  walls.  It
gave no  hint of  the treasures  to  be  found  in it  somewhere  below,  not  here  on  the
street.
We saw no heaps of dirt or rock dumped outside those houses  to  show  digging
went on inside. Some of them were collapsing. Their doors and shutters were nailed
shut to keep the little ones or mumpers from getting in. Folk could be digging inside
those and we'd have no way of telling. We didn't get to talk to the handful of folk we
saw. They fled the sight of us.
On we moved to Mulberry Street and straight into a bare-knuckles fight. We even
got to watch some  of  it. The  first match was  between two  coves  I knew from  my
runner days.  I  would  have  bet  on  Drew  if  I  hadn't  been  watching  my  coppers.  I
would have won money, too. Then I saw the pickpocket. I grabbed him by the collar
before  he saw  me. I heard  curses.  Goodwin  and  Tunstall each  had  their own  little
quick fingers.
That's  when  the  fight  turned  into  a  brawl.  The  moment  a  mot  saw  we  had
pickpockets  in  hand,  she  spotted  a  fourth.  Seemingly  a  gang  of  them  has  been
working on  Mulberry Street  of  late.  They've  been  finding  dice  games,  cockfights,
and fistfights. They strike all four at once and escape before anyone guesses they've
been picked.
The crowd  turned  on  the  pickpockets,  which  left  us  with  no  choice.  We  were
forced to let the light fingers go whilst we held off near thirty vexed mots and coves.
I closed up with Goodwin and Tunstall, blowing my whistle as ordered.  Two  more
pairs of Dogs got there to help us break up the crowd. We never even got to see the
last two fights.
I'm impressed by that pickpocket gang, though. Someone there has wits.
We had  some  robberies,  some  tavern fights, a cove  smacking  his  wife.  Then  a
lucky  chance.  Stout  Robin,  wanted  by  the  Magistrates  for  three  killings  in  Port
Legann, was  drinking in the Gray  Goose.  A  cattle  drover  who  was  drinking  there
recognized  him  and  went  for  the  first  Dogs  he  could  find  –  us.  That's  a
ten-silver-noble reward to  the cattle drover,  paid  when we brought  Stout  Robin  in.
Tunstall showed the drover  another way out  of  the kennel, so  with luck he'll reach
his lodging with the coin still in his pockets. Ahuda says it's another ten silver nobles
to us  when we're paid,  and  Goodwin  says  two  of  those  are  mine,  because  Stout
Robin was a handful in the hobbling.
Not a bad night for the Cesspool, not at all.
 
 
Friday, April 10, 246
At day's end.

After so good a night in the Cesspool, I opened my shutters to a spring storm. I
woke also to the sneezes and a cough. All I wanted was for the pigeons to talk to me
before  I crawled back  into my bed.  Surely they would  tell  me  where  their  ghosts'
bodies were buried. Or give me their living names, at least.
They came to tell me again only what they'd said before. Each  time I sneezed  or
coughed, the loobies would flap off all at once. Then they would return until the next
time.
I hate pigeons.
All nine of the diggers came for a time. For all they said, I told Pounce they could
have just sent one. And they left feathers on my floor.
Rosto wouldn't even come in my rooms, not that I opened the door wide enough.
Aniki wrote down names and the locations of two visits by  the Shadow  Snake and
returned later with a crock of hot soup. She is a good friend.
Kora brought  potions  for  me, which have made  me  feel  better,  or  at  least  they
make me spit disgusting slime. Ersken fetched tea. Verene sang  songs  to  me whilst
they, Aniki, and Kora had breakfast on the landing outside the door.
How did I do without friends?
Pounce curled up with me as I slept the morning away and part of the afternoon. I
cannot tell if it was the soup, the tea, or the potions, but I was well enough for duty.
Nightmarket work was exhausting.
Kora was home when I came home. She had more potions.
I am going to  bed.  Curse  all colds.  Curse  spring.  Curse  rain. No,  no  curses  on
rain or spring, only colds.
Good night.
 
 
Saturday, April 11, 246
I hate pigeons with nothing new.
I hate the Cesspool.
I hate festering, ranky, puling, gob-clogging, sarden colds.
I hate dragging my sorry sniffling hacking bum through duty.
I love my warm soft cat.
I have good friends who bring me things.
I love my bed.
 
 
Sunday, April 12, 246
In the morning.
Kora:
one gixie – Dragon Mews – December 5, 245 – price 8 silver nobles inheritance
not paid – found dead in mother's garden
 
one  lad  –  Festivity  Lane  –  August  31,  244  –  price  sandalwood  box  with
mother-of-pearl inlay
not paid – found dead in own bed
brother taken two nights later

price paid – brother found alive on doorstep morning after payment
 
one gixie – Mulberry Street – February 13, 246 – price 20 silver nobles in savings
paid – child found in shrine where payment was left two days before
 
Aniki:
one lad – Rovers Street – May 8, 245 – price 3 Yamani silver coins
not paid – found dead on doorstep
sister taken one week later
not paid – sister never found
 
Pox  and  murrain  on  the  Shadow  Snake.  Mithros  burn  his  eyes  in  his  sockets,
Goddess wither his eggs and the eggs of all his children, or her children.
 
At night's end.
As  healers  go,  it  is  a  good  thing  Kora  has  other  talents.  I  still  blow  fearsome
amounts of slime from my nose and throat. Goodwin tells me it is also a good thing
we are not  required to  watch  a  Rat  in  silence,  for  she  fears  my  breathing  can  be
heard at the palace. She has given me a potion from a mage friend of her own, which
she says will help. I pray it will, for we are in the Magistrate's Court  tomorrow.  If I
must snuffle and whuffle through the day's worth of cases, I fear I shall put my head
through the floor.
At least I know I will not be called upon to speak before Sir Tullus. There was no
Rat we hobbled this week who was in my sight alone for so much as a sneeze. I can
hide behind my Dogs.
We have had  no  word  on  the diggers,  not  even a  whisper.  Or  that  is,  we  have
whispers of all manner of folk who are missing. Tunstall and Goodwin have a list of
names other Dogs brought to them after they checked to see if the missing folk are
truly missing. It is a long list. The time to check each name is scarce. Dogs are rarely
allowed to do anything that is not part of regular patrols, because there are so few of
us to keep the peace. Chasing missing coves and mots just because they are missing
isn't  a  good  enough  reason  to  take  time  from  stopping  folk  from  breaking  each
other's heads or robbing each other blind.
Worse, the spring storms continue. It means no fleets are coming to  port,  which
means no work. If Crookshank has hired anyone to dig his fire opals in secret, they
won't speak of it. They know them as are desperate for any kind of work at all could
well beat them up to take their place on the digging crew.
Crookshank,  or  whoever  hires  the  diggers  for  Crookshank,  will  count  on  that.
They'll hire a new crew of diggers and make them swear to hold their tongues.
And then they'll kill them to keep them quiet, like the last nine.
Being sick makes me gloomsome. I'm taking Goodwin's potion and going to bed.
 
 
Tuesday, April 14, 246
At nine in the morning.
I can't bring myself to go back to Provost's House this week, for all that I bear no

bruises. I even feel better,  after Goodwin's  potion.  But I can't  face  my sisters  and
brothers  again  after  that  farewell  last  week.  They  seemed  shamed.  I  will  let  the
memory fade for them.
Besides, Granny Fern says we never spend enough time at her place. I can have a
nice visit with her. At breakfast Kora said she would be finished with her washing by
noon, if I cared to talk to some of the Shadow Snake folk she had met.
So Granny's it is.
 
At day's end.
Granny was glad to see me this morning, and glad, too, for the coppers I gave her
to help with housekeeping  expenses.  "The  birds  follow you  as  much as  ever,"  she
said as we hung out her wash. "Do they help in your work?"
Mayhap it was because Granny taught me how to  hear the pigeons  and  the dust
spinners. I told her about the diggers and Rolond. I had the sense to keep my voice
low, and to have her swear by the Crone never to tell a soul what I had said. It was
Dog business. But I can trust Granny. I told her all I'd heard before I was a trainee,
all the bits and pieces I would pass on to my lord or the kennels.
I just feel I must be extra careful to act like a real Dog now that I am almost one.
Granny was bad troubled about the Snake and the diggers. "What have you done
about this?" she asked.
I told  her. She  was  pleased  to  hear  that  Goodwin  and  Tunstall  are  seeking  the
diggers. She  liked the tale of  my map and  told  me three Snake cases  she  knew of
herself.
She did  not  like it that I had  not  told  my  Dogs  about  the  map.  "You  say  they
know better. Either they know better about everything you do, or they do not," she
told me. And she cuffed me on the side of my head for my trouble.
She's right, you know, Pounce said. He lay in the sun, glaring at Granny's tomcat.
Sometimes I wish my granny Fern was not so tough a mot.  But I knew she  was
right. Just because I feared they would mock my idea for the map –  and  that when
I'd only done as  my lord  did  –  was  no  excuse  not  to  tell them. So  I will tell them
tomorrow.
 
Kora returned an hour  after I got  home from  Granny's.  She  roused  Aniki,  who
had gone back to bed for a nap. The three of us went out into the city, to the house
of someone Granny had named.
The lad's da had woke one autumn night last year to find him gone, a snake drawn
in ashes  in his crib.  His  ma  worked  all  night  in  a  tavern  down  by  North  Gate.  A
customer had gifted her just two weeks before with a pair of garnet earrings.
"We had to get a priest to read us the note," she said as her man watched us. By
rights he should  have been  on  the docks,  loading and  unloading barges  from  Port
Caynn. The only trouble was, with the storms, he had no  work just now.  He could
only whittle and pray and stay away from drinking and gambling dens. "It said I was
to leave the earrings in a pouch at the shrine of  the Carthaki Graveyard  Hag, at the
burying ground on Stormwing, a week from the day," she told us. "If we did as we
was bid, we'd have our lad back with no harm done."
Her lad did not come out from behind his da the whole time we were there. When

I smiled at him, he began to  suck  his thumb.  I felt like I'd  turned  into one  of  them
giant spiders with human heads Mama always said would eat us if we wasn't good.
Next we went to a woman who told Aniki the Shadow  Snake had  taken her little
girl. She was shifty-eyed. Two nights ago I'd seen Goodwin talk with a cove who'd
acted much like this. I looked at Kora  and  Aniki. Something in the way they stood
told me they smelled bad meat in the pot, too.
I tried to think what Goodwin might say. "So it was nighttime?" I asked the mot.
She nodded.
"Before the  midnight  bell,  would  you  say,  or  after?"  I  stood  as  Goodwin  did,
arms crossed, weight on one hip. I kept my eyes steady on the mot's face.
"A-after, I think."
"And she was a pretty gixie, was she? Like you?"
"Oh,  well enough.  Folk  gave  me  compliments.  I  was  a  pretty  little  thing  at  her
age."
"Before the midnight bell, you said?" I looked around the little room. "Did you go
out, at all?"
"I might have done." The mot  was  looking down  now.  "You  know,  to  talk with
friends."
"So they were outside, your friends. With their little ones?"
"The older ones were up."
"There was some light in the sky, then." I could see a little sweat on her face now.
There was no sign anywhere of a child's toys or bed, though the gixie was gone just
recent.  A  near-new  coverlet  lay  on  the  bed,  and  the  mot  wore  a  necklace  with
earrings that matched. "Around twilight, not later. She might have wandered off."
"No, I took her – "
The mot covered her mouth with her hands.
I finished what she'd  been  about  to  say,  because  now I was  certain. "You  took
her and you sold her. The Snake didn't make the profit, mistress. You did."
She slapped me.
I slapped her back.
Aniki said, "Don't hit her again, Beka. Let me do it next time."
"Get out of my house!" the mot screamed. "Get out, you dirty trulls!"
Kora leaned toward her. "We didn't sell our child, mistress. And if I hear you have
another, my eye will be on you."
Aniki smiled at her. "So will mine."
I just spat at her feet.
We talked with five other folk who'd said they'd been bit by the Snake. One cove
threw us out of his house when Kora mentioned the slave market. He was  red  with
shame. The rest did  see  that snake  figure writ in ashes  on  a sheet,  on  a pillow, on
their floors. Three whose children were taken in the last fifteen months  had  all paid
up. They knew the Snake meant what he said. They'd heard about the others.
We had supper together at a cheap eating house. For once I had a tankard of ale
to wash the taste of the work from my mouth.
"You'll catch 'im, Beka," Aniki told me. "We'll help you."
"That was a pleasure, watching you break that mot down," Kora said.
I shook my head. "I was just being Goodwin."

"If you're  going to  be  someone  else, you  should  be  the  best,"  Aniki  said.  "I'm
going to be Lady Sabine."
"Is any of you goin' t' be generous?" Mother Cantwell had  found  us.  She  shook
her begging bowl under our noses. "I have somethin' for the Puppy here if she'd like
to share her crumbs."
In the end I bought her two meat pasties. She gave me six more pins for the map.
I was  so  maddened  once  I added  Mother Cantwell's  Snake  attacks  to  my  map
that I did  not  wish to  write tonight up  at all. This  journal  keeping  is  harder  than  I
expected.  Mastering  my  thoughts  demands  time.  There  is  always  mending  or
cleaning to be done. I feel like my walls grow mold with all the pigeon scummer that
collects around my window. And the mice will move in if I do not sweep up all the
corn and bread crumbs and breakfast leavings every day.
Pounce  will not  lower himself to  catch  mice. He calls them "little brothers"  and
says he will not take other creatures' lives when he is so well fed. I threaten to starve
him. I tell him this is why his mother cat threw him from her litter when he was but a
kitten, because she knew he was unnatural.
All he has to do is walk forward with his whiskers pointed to me and jump on my
shoulders and purr like thunder in my ear. I forgive him and find a treat for him.
Enough. I came home to  put  Mother Cantwell's six on  my map,  though I broke
one of the pins when I struck it too hard out of fury. Two children returned to their
families  alive.  One  was  in  her  teens,  the  oldest  so  far,  but  her  mama  had  a  gold
brooch and no other children to take. The gixie had been hooded the whole time and
never saw the Snake or his helpers.
"So it's that he takes the easiest, or the most  lovable, or  one  so  young the slave
sellers won't buy 'em so the family wants to keep them for a time at least." I said it to
Pounce and to  the pigeons  and  their moaning ghosts  on  my sill, since  no  one  else
was about. Despite the dark I had my shutters open to air the smell of  strong  soap
from  my  rooms.  "Mayhap  the  Snake  prefers  children  because  he  knows  folk  are
likely to  still care  about  their  little  ones.  Even  if  they  just  mean  to  sell  them  later,
they'll care about any coin they might bring in."
Sensible, Pounce said. Not at all pleasant, but most sensible.
"I don't think the Snake can even spell the word 'pleasant,'" I said.
Two children were returned alive, then, because their families believed the Snake's
notes. Three children of Mother's reported six were found dead. As near as I could
tell, they were taken in that first year when no one believed the Snake was real. And
one child was still missing.
I drew  up  a list  of  what  I  had  on  a  precious  sheet  of  paper.  I  can't  show  my
journal to Tunstall and Goodwin tomorrow. They will want a written account of the
names of  them that was  taken, the prices  asked  and  paid  for  them, the home  they
came from, and where the child was found, if ever. I've added green wax to the pins
that mark what turned out to be false reports. I made certain I wrote them down, too.
Once that was done, I settled to sewing. Aniki and Kora aren't very good at it. I'm
not Diona or Lorine, but no girl raised by my lady Teodorie is bad with a needle. To
thank my new friends for helping me when I was sick, I've taken over their mending.
I'd begun work on  my third of  Aniki's shirts  –  does  she  gnaw the shoulder  seams
with her teeth? – when Ersken and Verene ran up my stairs.

"Dormice have a better time than you!" I heard Verene cry from below.  "It's  our
lone day f'r fun, you're not sick, and the fan makers are havin' a dance! They love it
when Dogs come!"
Ersken banged on my door. "Let's go, Beka," he called. "All the off-duty Puppies
from our class will be there. You can hide behind us and still get a look  at the new
summer fans."
I  hadn't  seen  most  of  our  class  since  the  day  we  ended  training.  We'd  all
promised to stay friends and talk often, but I'll wager that they're near as tired as we
are when their watches are done. I wanted to see them and hear what their first two
weeks were like.
Besides, maybe they'd heard of the Snake.
"Let me put on a dress," I yelled.
When I got to my feet, Pounce curled up on the mending and went to sleep.
 
 
Wednesday, April 15, 246
At day's end.
When I told  my Dogs  about  Snake seeking, after muster,  and  showed  them my
list, they demanded to see the map on my wall. Goodwin stared at it for the longest
time, while Tunstall read the list. I had made some changes to  it after breakfast  this
morning. Phelan gave me three more additions,  Rosto  two.  It's  getting so  my belly
knots with each new pin.
I opened my shutters to let in as much of what remained of the sun as possible, as
well as lit my lamps. Of  course  the pigeons  came to  see  if I had  aught for  them. I
swear they keep a watch on my place. I laid out bread for them but kept  an eye on
my Dogs.
"What's this scratched out?" Tunstall asked, pointing to the list.
"Kora  found  out  last night the lad  was  taken,  but  it  was  his  father's  people,"  I
said. "He and his papa are with the Bazhir. Seemingly they want none of their blood
raised outside their tents. So I crossed him off."
"Ah." Tunstall passed the paper to Goodwin.
She asked, "What are these red spirals on the map?"
"Dust  spinners,"  I  said.  My  hands  were  damp  with  sweat.  "I  thought  I  should
mark them down."
Goodwin  stood  aside  to  let  Tunstall  look  closer  at  the  map.  She  read  my  list.
Behind me a pigeon cried  of  her wedding day  being near. She  didn't  see  how  she
could  have gone  walking home one  night and  never  got  there.  My  guess  was  that
whoever killed her caught her from behind.
Go away, I thought to her as I watched my Dogs. I can only think of one or two
things at a time. Crookshank's  people  are out  there to  hire more diggers,  if they're
not hired already. That's one thing. The Shadow Snake is two.
When I dreamed of being a Dog, I never believed this would be my fate. I never
believed there might just be too many hurt by bad folk for me to seek.
"One at a time, Beka," my lord told me once. "We hobble them one at a time, like
all mortals do."
"My lord  does  it this way for  cases  that reach  across  the realm," Tunstall  said,

poking the map with his thumb. "We've seen these  maps  in his study,  right, Clary?
And we told Ahuda we could use maps like this. We're all taught the memory tricks,
to keep news straight in our own minds." He was thinking aloud. "But for something
as twisty as the Snake case, going back three years with no one keeping track...This
could show a pattern. Mayhap use pins to mark where the payment is left. He likes
shrines. Plenty of folk coming in and out, priests serving from the temples, not living
there. He knows the shrines well, the Snake."
I can  get  white  wax  to  mark  the  shrines.  I  never  realized  the  places  where  the
Snake collected the payment might be important. I've just been looking at who gets
taken and where they're taken from.
"Cooper, did you ever think this might offend  us?"  Goodwin  asked.  "That  we'd
think you are trying to teach us our jobs?"
My tripes  turned  to  water. It was  one  of  those  gooseflesh  moments.  I'd  feared
only that they might laugh at my map. I never meant to anger them!
I stammered a lot of things. I think I mentioned seeing maps  at my lord's  house.
Mayhap I said my friends go everywhere. I'm sure I said I never meant it to look like
I thought I knew better than the likes of Goodwin and Tunstall.
Goodwin  sighed.  "Cooper,  you're  eager,  and  you're  quick-witted.  You  did  this
because my lord does it. We've been in his house, so we know that. And it's as well
for you that you told us  about  this. But it's  one  thing to  know aught in your  head,
and another to know it from the street. There's Dogs with clouds for brains that can
sniff out a robber because they learned to on the street. And they're the ones as will
bite your  arm off  if  you  go  poking  around  –  as  they  would  see  it  –  behind  their
backs."
"But  it's  a  fine  idea,"  Tunstall  said.  "And  you  do  have  Birdies,  feathered  and
human. Most  Puppies  don't.  Most  Puppies  don't  live with three young folk on  the
rise in the Court of the Rogue, either."
"Do  us  paper  sketches  of  the  map,"  Goodwin  said.  "With  the  markings."  She
gave me a silver noble. "That should pay for paper for a while. Let me know when
you run out. Report  to  us  each  day.  For  your  day  off  we'll give you  our  maps  so
you can mark them current. And remember, you're a Puppy. Gather word  only. All
information comes to us."
I was so relieved I could but nod. The hardest part of Dog work for  me –  apart
from not  getting my  head  kicked  in  –  is  knowing  how  folk  will  bounce.  I  wish  I
could see or hear what people  think. Mayhap then I'd  never step  wrong.  This  time
I'd got lucky, thank the Goddess. Next time, maybe not.
"Now, these dust spinners of yours. Tunstall saw you talk to one," Goodwin said.
"I  want  to  see  it,  too.  Is  there  anything  that  prevents  you  from  taking  us  to  one
now?"
Of course there wasn't. I rushed to close the shutters and to  collect  some  of  the
street dirt I brought to my spinners as presents.
"But we're on Nightmarket, Clary," Tunstall said.
"Nightmarket can wait for an hour," she told him.
I blessed Granny Fern. I'd stepped on the edge of thin ice. Gods alone knew how
deep  I  might've  sunk  if  I'd  put  off  telling  my  Dogs  what  I  was  doing  for  much
longer. It really would have looked like I meant to go behind their backs if I'd  done

so in a couple of weeks or a month.
Off we went to visit Hasfush. Without the burden of nine dead people screaming
within him, he had  shrunk to  just five feet tall. As  the sun  faded,  there  was  barely
enough light to show him up. My Dogs didn't see him until I pointed  out  the small,
upside-down  cone  of  stirred  air that was  his foot  at the  corner  of  Stormwing  and
Charry Orchard.
I  stepped  inside  his  circle  and  released  the  gift  of  dirt  I'd  brought  for  him.
Instantly Hasfush filled my ears with several days'  worth of  gabble.  I apologized  in
whispers for not coming around sooner. It's hard to explain work to a creature  that
just exists without needing coin to live on or aught to do with himself.
When he'd  forgiven me, he  let  go  of  all  he'd  picked  up.  I  heard  songs,  fights,
whingeing,  laughter,  baby  wails  and  giggles,  whispers.  Somehow  bird  and  dog
noises and the clop of horses' hooves never stick to spinners.  Nature's  sounds  just
fall away from their winds. I hear every bit of human cackle, though. I sorted it as I
always had,  ignoring what was  too  blurred  or  nonsensical  to  work  through.  There
was  nothing  about  the  Shadow  Snake  there,  nothing.  And  nothing  about  fresh
diggers hired for wells in the Lower City.
There was something of importance, though. I walked out of Hasfush to say, "A
dancer was murdered just a bit ago on Emerald Street, over in Flash District. Him as
did it still has got her blood on him and her bells in his pocket.  From  what he told
his friends in the Daymarket, he's coming this way. He's bound for the Court of the
Rogue."
Tunstall and Goodwin hesitated, looking at each other.
Pounce, on patrol with us as ever, scolded, You either  believe  her  or you  don't.
Decide!
I don't know if they understood him. But Tunstall put  his whistle to  his lips. He
blew the call for  two  more pairs  of  Dogs  and  one  of  the four-legged kind.  Phelan
and his partner  were the soonest  to  arrive,  with  their  scent  hound  Achoo.  They'd
named  her  for  her  habit  of  sneezing  when  she  got  a  scent.  Achoo  was  a  pert,
medium  height  mongrel  with  tight-curled  fur,  amber  in  color.  It  was  said  that
button-eyed Achoo's nose was so keen she could track a mouse in a flooded sewer.
Achoo backed up when she saw Pounce. My cat just blinked at her, waiting. Bit
by bit Achoo  crept  up  until they touched  noses.  Then she  sneezed,  twice. Her tail
began to wag. Pounce jumped back when his new friend tried to wash him.
"I've  never seen  the like," Phelan's  partner  muttered.  "She  ran from  the last five
cats she met. Since that ragged-ear tom clawed her on the nose..."
Phelan  shrugged.  "Pounce  isn't  every  other  cat,"  he  said,  hands  dug  in  his
breeches pockets.
"We're  not  even sure  he's  a  cat,"  Tunstall  muttered  to  Goodwin.  "I  say  he's  a
god, shape-changed."
Pounce meowed, Do I look as stupid as a god to you?
Tunstall turned his head to give Pounce an owl-like blink. For a moment I feared
Tunstall had understood my dreadful cat.
"This is sweet,  but  Springbrook  and  Evermore had  best  arrive soon,"  Goodwin
said, her voice  cold.  "If  they're canoodling  on  watch again, Ahuda's  going to  hear
about it. They should have come before Achoo, shouldn't they, girl? Since you and

your handlers came from farther off?"
Achoo, knowing Goodwin liked her, wagged her tail and barked.
The two remaining Dogs  arrived at the trot,  looking winded.  "Delivering Rats  to
the  collector,"  Evermore  said,  panting.  Springbrook  shared  her  flask  with  him.
"Sorry." He gulped from the flask, spilling water over his chin.
"Come on, Achoo," Phelan said. He let out  the lead so  the scent  dog  could  put
her nose to the ground. "What have you got? She'll scent the worst thing," he said,
looking at me. "If  your  Birdie was  right and  someone  tracked  blood  through here,
she'll – ah!"
Achoo sneezed over and over, then growled.  She  had  something she  didn't  like.
Off she  went, straight into an alley. She  took  us  up  through  the  very  gates  of  the
Court of the Rogue. Goodwin and Tunstall didn't hesitate, even though the tradition
was that Dogs  shouldn't  hobble  Rats  inside the  Court.  They  just  followed  Achoo
and Phelan through the gate. The rest of us went in after them, our batons ready.
The guards stood aside. They would not interfere with Dogs on a hunt, even here.
They would not risk blood with us.
We  followed  Achoo  straight  into  Kayfer's  throne  room.  There  he  sat  with  his
chiefs  and  his  foot  kissers.  A  cove  knelt  before  Kayfer,  sobbing.  Achoo  raced
straight up to him and barked furiously.
Tunstall hauled the weeping cove  to  his feet. We  all could  see  the blood  on  his
tunic. "I didn't mean to kill Esseny," the killer cried, his nose running. "I didn't mean
it!"
"Esseny the Lily?" Goodwin asked. "That's who you murdered?"
"You  know  her,  then.  You  know  how  beautiful  she  is."  The  cove  fumbled  at
Goodwin's shoulders. "But she didn't love me anymore," he said. "She told me she
would love me forever, but – she didn't."
"She was fifteen, you scummer," Goodwin told him, grabbing one  of  his wrists.
She twisted it up behind him, using the leverage to force him to his knees. "Forever
is eight months long when you're fifteen."
Tunstall looked at Kayfer on his barrel and crate throne.  "Will you  interfere?" he
asked the Rogue. The other  four  Dogs  and  I formed  a half circle facing the court,
our batons at the ready. Goodwin had the killer in one hand, her baton in the other.
"Is this mumper worth a fight?"
With my back to the throne, I couldn't see the Rogue. I heard the chill in his voice
when he spoke at last. "He's not one of my sworn people. An eighth off this week's
Happy Bag and I'll even have my rushers help you cart him out."
The killer wailed.
"We'll cart him," I heard Tunstall reply. "You've got your eighth off, but we'll do
the calculations. Your people can watch."
I heard steps and the spitting that meant they'd struck the bargain. Then there were
more steps and the scraping sound of boots on the floor. While I listened to that, I
kept my eyes on Dawull's table.
Dawull spun a dagger on his fingertip. He didn't seem to care that the Rogue had
just turned a cove over to the Dogs. I saw other folk of the Rogue  stir,  but  no  one
would speak against Kayfer, not for someone who didn't belong to the Court.
Just  so  had  Kayfer  ignored  the  pleas  of  the  folk  who'd  lost  children  to  the

Shadow  Snake  when  they  came  to  him  for  help.  Aniki  glanced  at  me.  Then  she
turned to whisper to the cove who'd drawn his sword on us at the Fog  Lantern the
week before.  That  fellow  sat  with  his  fists  clenched  on  the  table,  a  look  of  plain
disgust on his face. Because  we were there? Or  because  Kayfer had  surrendered  a
man who'd asked his help and Dawull had said nothing?
I spat on the floor on the way out. It didn't take the bad taste from my mouth. I'm
glad we took the murdering scut without a fight, but  did  Kayfer care  about  nothing
but coin? The Rogue is supposed to look after the folk of his Court at the very least.
You're counting the price of a free meal, I keep telling myself. Be sensible!
Off we all went, back to  the Lower City. The  other  Dogs  took  our  killer in to  a
collection cage, and we went on to the Nightmarket.
Now  that  I  am  home,  I  have  swollen  feet  and  a  sore  back  from  chasing  after
minnows and forcing them to hand over their thievings. Tomorrow I must start work
on copies of the maps for Goodwin and Tunstall.
 
 
Friday, April 17, 246
Maps are harder than they look.  I wasted  three pieces  of  paper  before  I figured
out I should try first on a slate. That is what I have done yesterday and today, apart
from my watches. My fingers cramp when I so much as grasp a pen.
 
 
Sunday, April 19, 246
After my watch.
Now I have the trick of drawing so I can get the whole map in the right amount of
space. It took a lot of chalk and erasing. I am still working on the maps. It is why I
have not written in my journal. I believe tomorrow I can risk working on paper again.
I have spent more coin on colored inks.
This afternoon  a  mot  came  into  the  kennel  as  we  arrived  for  training.  I  lagged
behind because I'd seen her yesterday morning. She'd  talked to  Kora  on  Glassman
Square over the laundry tubs. I might never have noticed them, except I passed them
on my way to visit my Cesspool dust spinners. She and Kora had been sitting there,
heads together like sisters.
Mayhap I was jealous. Me and Kora have been going out  a lot of  late, talking to
folk  that  have  been  bit  by  the  Shadow  Snake.  So  I  remembered  this  mot.  Her
walking into the kennel, her eyes glassy, was a shock.
She went straight up to the Day Watch Sergeant's desk. "I done it," she said, her
voice loud. "I had a man in my eye, a new fellow, fine and handsome, only he never
wanted no children, and I had me a little lad. I tried to get my man to move in, sent
the lad out to play when he'd  visit me, but  he wouldn't  allow for  it. Said  he wasn't
meant to  live with little ones.  So  one  night I took  the blanket and  I put  it over  my
boy's face until he stopped breathin'. Then I snuck  'im to  the river in a basket  and
slid 'im in for the god Olorun to take to the sea for the Wave Walker's mercy. I told
the  neighbors  the  Shadow  Snake  had  'im.  I  wept  and  wept  and  wept  because  I
knowed I done a terrible thing, but my man is livin' with me now."
There was no sound in the kennel, not a one.  Everyone there looked  at her. She

stood, swaying. Suddenly she stumbled against the Sergeant's desk. A Dog standing
nearby grabbed her by the arm.
She began to scream. "What've I done, what've I done?" she cried. "It's a lie, all
lies! I was magicked! I was magicked for the lie!"
Fulk came out of his room when she began to scream. He walked over  to  her, a
crystal held in his fingers, and held it before her eyes. "Did you kill your  child?" he
asked. The crystal gleamed.
"No!" she screamed.
The crystal shone out red.
"Liar," Fulk said.  He  smiled.  "You  did  kill  him.  Were  you  magicked  to  tell  us
this?"
"Yes,  yes!"  She  tried to  yank free of  the  Dog  who  still  held  on  to  her.  "I  was
magicked to lie."
The crystal  shone  out  green.  "You  were  magicked  to  tell  the  truth,"  Fulk  said.
"Who cast the spell?"
The mot stared at him, her eyes huge. She opened her mouth several times. At last
she said, "I do not remember."
The  crystal  shone  out  green.  "Pity,"  Fulk  said.  "Magicking  someone  to  speak
against her will is as  great a  crime  as  that  of  murder.  The  mage  would  have  died
beside  you,  had  you  been  able  to  remember  his  name."  He  shrugged  and  walked
back  into  his  room.  The  mot  began  to  scream  again  until  the  Dog  who  held  her
slapped her silent.
When I came in from duty tonight, I rapped on Kora's door. As it happened, she
was home.
I told her about the mot and her confession as she made us tea. "I'd hate to think
you had cast truth spells or compelling spells," I said. "Any Dog who knew you did
such things would have to bring you in."
Kora gave me a cup of mint tea with the sweetest of smiles. "I would never work
such naughty magic,"  she  said,  giving Pounce  a scratch.  "Not  even on  a mot  who
killed her child to please a man."
"That's  the trouble  with you  northerners,"  I said.  I  couldn't  even  pretend  to  be
angry. With a choice between Kora and that foul woman, I knew who was  the Rat.
"At least Corus Rogues fake proper regret."
"I'll try harder," Kora said as she picked up her cup. "Truly, I will."
 
 
Monday, April 20, 246
Night time.
I hate missing breakfast. It isn't even that I want the food, because I always bring
sommat  to  eat  at  home  the  night  before  the  Magistrate's  Court.  I  just  miss  the
gathering of  our  flock  or  covey  or  whatever we are. I miss  having  the  surprise  of
whoever new comes that day, be it from the Rogue's side or from the Dogs' side. I
miss Aniki telling jokes. Mayhap, too, I miss the chance that I'll hear the right name
that will connect me to the Shadow Snake. Yesterday Phelan brought Achoo to play
with Pounce.  That  was  a morning's  worth of  laugh in itself, with  Achoo  bouncing
around the room, flirting with my cat, and Pounce jumping over Achoo just to make

the dog addled. It distracted me from my gloom over no word on the diggers.
But there's no breakfast gathering on court days. The others are still abed when I
leave for a day on my bum. I did have the finished maps, which I gave to my Dogs
as soon as I got there, as well as copies of the lists of the Snake's crimes and victims
through yesterday. Tunstall and Goodwin looked them over through the morning and
told me at last I'd done well.
"You should've seen her workin' on 'em all week," Verene whispered to Tunstall.
She was  too  far off  for  me to  kick her. "She  wasn't  satisfied  till they was  just so.
She's picky, Beka is."
Tunstall smiled back at her. "She also has good friends."
Verene actually blushed. I didn't know she could do that.
Today  again I had  no  need  to  talk.  We  had  hobbled  killers,  robbers,  brawlers,
illegal slave sellers, thieves, and burglars aplenty all week, but Tunstall and Goodwin
had been in view the whole time.
When Sir Tullus took a break from his chair about noon, I got up  and  looked  at
the  crowd  behind  the  bars.  Tansy  and  Annis  were  there.  I  asked  my  Dogs  for
permission to have a quick word with them.
"Don't  you  look  all official,  on  the  Dogs'  side!"  Tansy  teased  when  I  came  to
them. "Do you report to the Lord High Magistrate today?"
I shivered. "What brings you here?" I asked her.
"Day  Watch  caught  some  rushers  who  robbed  one  of  Father's  shops,"  Annis
said.  She  nodded  to  the  other  side  of  the  room.  Crookshank  stood  there,  burly
rushers  at  his  back,  talking  with  the  Provost's  Advocate.  "He's  here  for  justice.
We're  here to  get out  of  the house.  It still reeks  of  smoke,  for  all the  airing  we've
done."
I looked  back  over  my  shoulder.  Sir  Tullus  had  yet  to  return.  "Tansy,  if  ever
you're up and about come eight of the morning and you'd like a change, some of us
gather for  breakfast  at Mistress  Trout's  lodgings on  Nipcopper  Close,"  I told  her.
"You're welcome there any day but Monday. It's me, some  of  my Puppy  and  Dog
friends, and others we know."
"Father  Ammon keeps  me on  a tight leash,"  Tansy  said.  She  smoothed  a  hand
over the bulge of her belly. "I'm carrying another Lofts,  after all. And he sends  me
out with that mage, Vrinday Kayu. You saw her, pretending to be my maid."
"Hush,"  Annis  whispered.  "This  crowd  has  ears."  She  put  her  arm  around
Tansy's shoulders. Tansy looks too thin for a mot  that's  carrying a babe  under  her
heart.  "It  would  do  you  good  to  get  out  with  some  young  folk,  not  that  I'm
promising." She nodded to me. "You're a good soul, Beka."
"What of the birds?" Tansy asked. "Do you still hear the ghosts  of  little ones  in
the birds?"
Sir Tullus was returning. "You know I do," I said. "Some  go  on  to  the Peaceful
Realms, but the others are taken unawares." I started to go.
"Beka!" Tansy grabbed my arm through the bars. "Herun gave me another,"  she
whispered so even Annis couldn't hear. "Do something with it – give it to a temple or
something." She shoved a lump into my hand and freed me.
I rushed back to my bench. At least I'd finally made my invite to Tansy.
Settled next  to  Tunstall,  I  looked  around  for  Crookshank.  He  stood  where  I'd

seen him last, lean  face  pressed  to  the  bars.  He  watched  the  Provost's  Advocate
walk back to his desk. What kind of "justice" had  he bought  for  the poor  scuts  as
had tried to rob someone who worked for him?
I  put  my  hand  between  my  knees  and  opened  it.  She'd  given  me  a  knotted
handkerchief.  Carefully  I  untied  the  knot  and  peeked  inside.  An  orange  fire  opal
bedded in pink stone blazed there, glinting with lilac, green, and red lights. This one
was clear all the way through at the center.
Pox take the mot! I thought. Doesn't she understand how noisy these curst rocks
are? I can't sell it. The whole town will know I have one. Folk will think I stole it, or I
know where there's more.
And curse Herun for not telling her what it is he's giving her.
"Pretty," Tunstall whispered in my ear. "What will you do with it?"
I tied it back up in the handkerchief and gave it to him. That's what a Senior Dog
is for, right? To make the choices I'm too green to make?
Let it be his headache.
He showed it to Goodwin at the end of the day. Goodwin only sighed.  "Doesn't
the girl understand the value of the things?"
"Herun told her they'd make their fortune," I said. "She believes Rolond's life was
worth more. She thinks they're connected, and she's right, after all."
"Too  bad  Crookshank  didn't  care  they were connected,"  Tunstall  muttered.  He
looked up and his face lit. Lady Sabine lingered by  the gate to  the court.  Goodwin
rolled her eyes.
I left to meet Kora and Aniki at the Nightmarket. We  bought  ribbons  so  I could
trim a bodice  for  Aniki, then had  a cheap  supper  on  the riverfront. A nasty  storm
sent us home early, but it was still fun.
If only I could get better news of the Shadow Snake or of where the diggers were
buried,  I would be  well pleased  with my life. Twice this  week  Goodwin,  Tunstall,
and me checked Crookshank's houses in the Cesspool but found no sign of mining.
And we have names of missing folk but no way to tell if they are alive or dead, in a
pit under  one  of  Crookshank's  places,  downstream  in the river, buried  somewhere
else by someone else, or living happily in another town entirely.
I'm surprised more Dogs don't crack down the middle.
 
 
Tuesday, April 21, 246
Five of the afternoon.
Granny Fern gave me four more names.
 
FOUR.
 
Six silver nobles. A gold ring left by a cousin. A charm guaranteed to cause a wife
to birth sons. Three magical curses done up as pendants and ready for use. That is
the value the Snake places on the little ones.
 
Two children came home alive. Two came home dead.
 

Affter midnight.
Rosto, Aniki, and Kora awaited me wehn I came home and  took  me to  teh Fog
Lanterun. I fere I broke my rule and dranke more wine thann I shuld.
 
 
Wednesday, April 22, 246
Noon.
This morning when I let the pigeons in, I found two I had not seen before. One of
them, mixed  brown,  white,  and  gray,  lunged  for  the  bread  I'd  put  out,  whilst  the
other, blue-gray and white, slapped him, knocking him from the sill. As he began to
eat, the brown, white, and gray bird flew in to land on top of him.
"Slap me, will you!" his ghost cried. "When 'twas your idea to jump Rosto in the
first place!"
The blue-gray and white bird spun on the sill, trying to get the other off him. "My
idea?" his ghost said. "Ulsa's idea!"
"Right." The brown, white, and gray bird jumped to the sill and smacked the other
with a wing. "'Here,  brother,'  says  you,  'we  can  make us  a bit of  coin.  Teach  that
upstart Scanran pretty boy a lesson.'"
"Who do you think gave me the coin, cracknob?" the blue-gray pigeon asked.
"And  Rosto  killed  us!  Did  you  think  he  might  be  quicker  than  us,  you  sarden
looby?" his brother's ghost asked.
I smacked  them both  off  my  sill.  Did  Rosto  know  Ulsa  had  paid  to  have  him
attacked?
When he came to breakfast, he sported a long scar down one cheek.
"Don't  look  at  me,"  Kora  said  when  she  saw  me  notice  the  cut.  "He  went  to
somebody who's better at healing than I am. Two brothers jumped him last night in
Prettybone. Rosto won, of course." She nudged him with her foot as we sat around
our cloth.  Outside,  the rain poured  down.  None  of  us  can  wait  for  real  spring  to
come so we might eat outside.
I watched  Rosto  through  my  bangs  as  I  sewed.  Should  I  tell  him  about  Ulsa?
Chances  are,  he's  already  guessed  or  even  knows  Ulsa  was  behind  the  attack,  I
figured. By passing  on  this  news,  I'd  be  putting  my  Puppy  paw  in  a  foggy  area.
What is good Dog work? What is helping a Rat?
Yet if I do give a useful tidbit to Rosto, he'll owe me, I thought. If my instinct is
right and  Rosto  is  going  to  rise  in  the  Court  of  the  Rogue,  that  would  be  worth
something.
I finished the seam I stitched, anchored the thread, and cut it off.  "What  do  you
think, Pounce?" I asked it as if I wanted Pounce's  opinion of  my sewing, though I
meant, What should I say to Rosto?
Pounce knocked my spool over and rolled it to  Rosto,  who smiled and  threw it
lightly  back  to  me.  I  caught  the  spool  and  put  it  away  before  my  cat  could  try
anything else inventive. I still decided  to  buy  Pounce  fish for  supper  for  answering
my question.
"Only you'd ask a cat what he thinks of sewin'," Verene said.
"I think it's the first time I've ever seen Pounce act like a cat,"  Ersken told  us  as
Rosto lifted Pounce into the crook of his arm and scratched my animal's chin.

"If  he  is  a  cat,"  Kora  said.  "Did  you  know  mages  have  named  certain
constellations 'wanderers,' because they appear and disappear for decades at a time?
One of those is the Cat. At present, the Cat is missing from the night sky."
"Star  pictures  go  missin'  all  the  time,  season  by  season,"  Verene  said,  and
laughed.
"You're telling us a tale, Kora!" Phelan said.
Kora had a lady's shrug, one that made her dress ripple. She  would never argue.
And she had not said the constellations named by the mages vanished for  seasons.
She had said they vanished for decades.
I looked  at  my  cat.  He'd  rolled  over  on  his  back  and  was  batting  at  Rosto's
fingers.
Folk began to leave soon after. Ersken offered to  help Kora  take her washing to
her  favored  place.  Verene  and  Phelan  went  next,  hands  linked.  Aniki  took  her
mended shirts to her room and closed the door.
"Rosto?" I called before he reached the stair.
There was  a loud  thud  from  Aniki's room.  She  had  begun her sword  exercises.
Rosto turned back to face me, his face hard.
"Look,  Beka,  I  don't  want  a  lecture.  For  one  thing,  you're  too  young  to  be
lecturing me. For another, it was a clean fight, understand?" He was angry, but not at
me. At the men who'd attacked him, I guessed. "I've  witnesses  who saw  the whole
thing," he went on, "two of them the Dogs that did  up  the report.  They're  going to
tell the Magistrate I was challenged by these spintries and I defended myself."
With the noise that came from  Aniki's room  as  she  stamped  and  yelled her way
through her practice, I knew no one else could hear me. "Ulsa paid them to do it," I
told him when he took a breath.
For a moment he said nothing. Finally he asked, "How did you come  by  that bit
of news?"
I jammed my hands into my pockets.  "Birdies told  me."  My hands  were sweaty
fists.  He couldn't  see  that, with my big loose  shirt  and  breeches  to  cover  them.  I
didn't want him knowing that I was nervous to talk so bold as I looked into his black
eyes.
"But your information is sure?"
I thought of  the two  dead  brothers,  smacking each  other  on  my  windowsill.  "It
doesn't get any surer."
Rosto grimaced. "Ulsa. Normally I wouldn't  be  so  trusting, you  understand,  but
added to  other  things that have come  to  my ears,  well...You are so  positive  about
your source. I don't  suppose  you'd  give up  the name for  a gold  noble?"  He made
one appear in his fingers. It wasn't magic, but a quick-hands trick I'd seen him show
Verene.
I think I surprised him when I grinned. That's when he blinked. "Ask  me naught,
I'll cheat you not," I said, and grabbed my door. "If you'll excuse me, I'm off to visit
some friends." With that I closed it in his face. I couldn't be certain, but I believe he
was smiling. And I was off to feed my other pigeons, in case they had anything new
for me.
I was leaving the house for my watch when I heard a loud whistle. Rosto loped up
to me like a Scanran greyhound.

"I'll walk with you," he said. "Training, right? You let that stumpy little Ahuda kick
the feathers out of you, and then you go on watch. I'm amazed any of  you  live out
the night."
Pounce chattered at him as we turned onto Jane Street. "Shows what you know,"
I replied. "It's because of Ahuda we're alive."
"Ow. Lovey's got a bite." He was  holding a red  gillyflower behind his back.  He
offered it to me with a bow.
I faced him. "I'm not your 'lovey.' I'm not your doxie. You're six years older than
me, Rosto.  There's  mots  your  age more than willing to  be  your  flirts! And  you've
Aniki and  Kora  besides.  You've  white hair, you  great looby!"  I turned  and  walked
off, keeping my head down so he wouldn't see my grin. I knew what he would say.
"I'm blond!" he shouted. "My hair isn't white, it's blond! Corn silk! Sun-colored!
Gold! That Ahuda's knocked you on the head too many times!"
Rosto is vain. If he starts that nonsense with me again, I know a way to  distract
him now.  I've  no  patience for  that kind  of  flirting  game.  For  one  thing,  Kora  and
Aniki are my friends.
Mayhap they're used to sharing a man, but I'm not. And he's a rusher. I'll never go
with a rusher. Not even one so handsome as Rosto. As well end up like Mama that
day when I was eight, both eyes blacked and mouth bleeding.
"I was trying to thank you!" Rosto yelled.
Pounce,  trotting beside  me, said,  "Mah,  mah,  mah."  To  me  it  sounded  like  he
said, Bad, bad, bad, in the most approving way.
"Thanks,"  I told  my cat.  "We'll teach  him  not  to  treat  me  like  one  of  his  gixie
toys."
 
After watch.
We heard more tonight at the Mantel and Pullet. Ulsa denied any plotting against
Rosto, who was popular  for  all he was  new. Since  the word  had  somehow  leaked
out all over the city, she knew she had to do something. She had to make it right with
Rosto  and  with the rest  of  her people,  who'd  worry which one  of  them she  might
want to have doused  next. She  made Rosto  one  of  her gang chiefs.  In Prettybone
the Happy Bags were filled by small thievings, doxies and spintries who hired out to
the nobles, and most of all by  gambling. Ulsa gave Rosto  the command  of  a gang
that controlled a fat chunk of gambling to show him she would never pay anyone off
to kill him.
"Will it work, Cooper?" one of Verene's Dogs, Otelia, asked me. "Will that satisfy
him? Verene says you know him best. He lives in the same lodging house as you."
I shook my head. I didn't like so many Dogs looking at me as they did when they
heard that. I didn't  like them thinking I might be  sliding to  the crooked  side  of  the
fence.
"She can't stop folk from living where they like." I also wished Ersken didn't feel
he had to stand up for me. I had to find the courage to do it for myself. How could I
manage if Ersken didn't even wait for me to try?
"Otelia wasn't saying that," Tunstall said. "Were you?" He looked at her.
She swallowed hard. "Never, Tunstall. But she runs into him, doesn't she?"
"Me too," said Verene from her seat  next to  Otelia. "So  does  Ersken.  But Beka

does know 'im and his mots best."
"Rosto will do what pleases him," I said loudly to our table.
"If you're so curious, put  yourselves  in the way of  meeting him," Goodwin  told
the rest who were listening. "Rely on your own gut. That's the best way to be sure."
When  Otelia,  Verene,  and  their  male  partner,  Rollo,  left,  Goodwin  muttered,
"Bugnob. Otelia wants a Puppy to do a Dog's work."
When I came home, a cracked pottery vase with a bunch of red gillyflowers in it
sat in front of my door. In spite of myself, I smiled. Rosto, seemingly, doesn't hold
a grudge. And the flowers give a nice, spicy scent to my room.
 
 
Thursday, April 23, 246
We had just handed off the Rogue's Happy Bag tonight when we got  word  of  a
brawl at the Doxie's Skirt. We hobbled ten loobies and my nose was broken. It was
healed at the kennel. I'm in no mood to write of my day – I'm going to bed.
 
 
Saturday, April 25, 246
Day.
No more word on the Shadow Snake since the 21st. Kora and I have talked with
seven families. I have talked with three. All are true victims of the Snake.
 
After watch.
No more word on diggers. If anyone is hiring them, they are keeping it quiet. Last
night  Tunstall  said  over  supper,  "Sad  thing  for  us,  we  got  us  some  smart  Rats.
Stupid  ones  would have talked. They'd  let word  get out  that  they  wanted  diggers.
Mayhap  Crookshank  has  hired  a  crew  already  and  he's  got  them  locked  away,
mining his fire opals under guard. And mayhap Crookshank knows  we're watching.
If he checked his desk, he knows someone took those Shadow Snake notes. So he's
bound to be extra careful. But he'll slip. Or  them that does  his dirty work will slip.
We'll have him then."
I have to believe Tunstall. He's been doing this for years. He knows best.
I just fear that each morning I'll open  my shutters  and  there will be  new pigeons
there with new ghosts, whispering about the pink city rock.
 
 
Tuesday, April 28, 246
Nothing. Nothing.
 
NOTHING!!!!!
 
Pox and murrain on  the Snake,  on  Crookshank,  on  this curst  city that keeps  its
secrets so close! Not another word will I write until I have SOMETHING!
 
 
Wednesday, April 29, 246

Dawn.
The funniest thing happened  last night, though I was  too  sour  to  write it then. I
came  home  from  Granny's  early  and  knocked  on  Kora's  door  to  see  if  she  was
about and wanted to put together some kind of supper. She answered it in only her
shift, though  the  day  was  cool  and  rainy.  Moreover,  I  saw  Ersken  pulling  on  his
breeches behind her.
"Come back in a little bit," she said with a bashful smile. "We'll be able to  come
up with a decent supper between the three of  us.  Aniki's got  something doing  with
Dawull and his people, so she's not home."
I looked past her at Ersken and wiggled my eyebrows. He blushed! Kora,  seeing
what I did, laughed and gave me a shove.
"Rosto?"  I  asked  softly.  I  didn't  want  Ersken  ending  up  on  the  wrong  end  of
Rosto the Piper's blades.
"I'm  my  own  mot  and  can  say  who  shares  my  bed,"  Kora  told  me.  "Rosto
knows." She smiled. "We're still friends, just not bed friends. I've someone cuddlier
now."
That was more than I needed to know, in truth. I backed up and let Kora shut the
door.
 
Noon.
When we had breakfast this morning, Rosto presented Ersken with a sausage and
bowed. I got the giggles whilst Verene stared at me.
"Would  you  like one?"  Rosto  asked  me,  holding  up  the  sausage.  I  could  only
shake my head no whilst Ersken blushed.
It was nice to have aught to giggle about after having no news from Granny at all
yesterday.
I am glad for Ersken and Kora both, particularly if Rosto's nose isn't out of joint.
I don't know if it will last, but Kora will treat Ersken well. And I think if she ends it,
she will be kind.
I feel a bit lonely, seeing them together, but not so lonely as to tell Rosto I'll be his
second mot. Aniki seems happy to have him to herself, and I'm not so  lonely as  to
start canoodling with a rusher.
 
 
Thursday, April 30, 246 Beltane
I must write about today, because so much has happened. I think the only way I
can write it is to write of my watch, and do so as I lived it, without knowing how it
will end. Elsewise, I'll be unable to put it down sensibly, and there are things I want
to remember.
We were out in force tonight. For Beltane, with the bonfires  at sunset,  a third of
the Day and Night Watches are added to the Evening Watch. That's when the most
folk are out and about. Everyone who celebrates the day wants a chance to leap over
the embers in hopes of a fruitful harvest of some kind. After the embers  comes  the
fire, as the saying goes,  whether folk are a pair before  they came to  the bonfire  or
just for  the night. Even if people  don't  want  more  children,  they  hope  fertility  will
mean coin in their pockets and good fortune in the coming year.

With so many couples occupied and so many priests and priestesses to bless the
goings-on,  the  robbers,  foists,  and  cutpurses  were  also  out.  Beltane  is  a  thieves'
holiday.
I was happy to be on duty with my Dogs. Canoodling is one of those things that's
more  fun  in  the  doing.  I've  done  it  once  and  kissed  a  bit,  but  never  in  public.
Bagging  Rats  for  Beltane  was  more  to  my  taste.  Besides,  I've  no  one  I  wish  to
canoodle with.
Goodwin,  Tunstall,  Pounce,  and  me  were  on  Koskynen  Street  when  we  heard
noise in an alley leading off to Pottage Lane. The flicker of light told us whoever was
in there had a torch. Tunstall put out a hand to warn us to wait. Pounce ran forward
to the alley's opening. He howled as  if he was  in battle with other  cats  and  dashed
back.
"On'y cats fightin'," someone in the alley muttered.  "Git 'er  earrings!" Thanks  to
Pounce, we knew we had found robbers.
Goodwin nodded. We all took our batons in one hand and our saps in the other. I
was nervous. I hate it when I can't see what we're getting into. I quickly checked my
gorget to make sure  it was  firmly tied. The  thing bothered  me, but  suddenly  I was
glad for it.
Goodwin whispered, "Cooper, stay back unless it looks like one of us is about to
get killed." She strode forward as if she owned that alley. "In the King's name!" she
cried.
Tunstall was at weapon's  length to  her side.  I moved  off  to  her right so  no  one
could dodge around her. I hated keeping back, but I knew my orders.
There were four rushers. I knew them all from the Court of the Rogue. They were
Kayfer's  men. They had  planted a torch  in the ground,  the better  to  see  what they
did. A man dressed as richly as a noble lay on the ground, a big purple knot on the
side of  his head.  They had  stripped  him of  his weapons,  his belt, even  his  boots.
One  of  them  held  a  well-dressed  lady  from  behind,  one  hand  over  her  mouth,
another around her waist. Two more Rats were stripping off her rings, bracelets, and
necklace. The fourth was cutting away the embroidered strips on her dress.
The fourth Rat was the first to drop what he did and unsheathe his sword. He was
too slow to turn as Goodwin darted by him. She struck the back of his neck with her
sap.  He folded  like wet cloth  onto  the  muddy  ground.  The  next  Rat  dropped  the
lady's left arm and drew his sword. Goodwin raised her baton to block him.
The one who had been stripping the lady's  remaining arm of  jewelry dropped  it,
leaving both  her  arms  free.  Now  he  drew  his  blade,  dodging  Tunstall  as  Tunstall
struck  with his  baton.  Tunstall  turned  as  the  Rat  went  into  open  ground  to  fight,
keeping his baton between him and the sword.
The lady, her hands now loose, sank her nails into the hand over her mouth. The
Rat who still held her grabbed one of her arms, but  he couldn't  hold  both  and  grip
her waist. He lifted her off the ground, his mistake. Now she could kick back at him
with both feet, and she did.  A pity she  wasn't  wearing clogs  or  pattens.  She  might
have hurt him bad if she'd worn those instead of her pretty leather slippers.
The one Goodwin had struck  down  tried to  stand.  He fell sideways  against her,
knocking her aside. She stumbled and dropped to one knee, getting her baton up as
she braced for a hit from the attacker.  He saw  his chance  and  lunged at her, blade

raised.
I know it was  cracknobbed,  but  I wasn't  close  enough to  use  my  baton,  and  I
could see her baton was at the wrong angle. He'd have her.
I threw my sap  at his head.  He was  moving, and  I'm  not  that good  at throwing
small things. Of course I missed. He did swerve to dodge my sap. He looked about
him. Tunstall folded his man over his baton and struck him on the head with his sap.
The Rat hanging on to the lady must not have been a thinker. He'd not yet seen it
was time to kill her or dump her and run. He was still trying to get control of her. She
finally got her teeth into the hand over her mouth. He grunted with pain and tried to
shake her teeth loose, but she would not let go.
Goodwin put her whistle to her mouth and blew the call for help from Dogs.
The man I'd distracted with my sap saw he and his Rats were beaten. He cursed
and ran.
"Puppy,"  Goodwin  said.  She  was  getting  to  her  feet  to  take  the  Rat  who  still
clutched the lady, unless it was the lady clutching him with her teeth.
Goodwin  didn't  have  to  say  "fetch."  I  grabbed  my  sap  and  took  off  after  the
fleeing  Rat.  I  think  I'd  been  hoping  for  a  chance  like  this  since  I'd  fetched  Orva
Ashmiller.  For  all  the  annoyance  she'd  given  me,  there  was  something  clean  in
chasing  a  Rat.  I'd  naught  else  to  think  on,  no  birds  or  spinners  to  work  out,  no
people to try to understand, no officials to talk to.  It was  just me, the Rat,  and  the
alleys of the Lower City.
He tried to ditch me. He wasn't as good at it as Orva, and he didn't have hotblood
wine to keep him going. He didn't know the back ways so well, for  all he belonged
to the Court of the Rogue.
One of Kayfer's lapdogs, I thought as I gained on him block by block. Not used
to any real need to run or hide. Just serve the Rogue and  be  safe.  Well, here's  safe
for you, my buck, I told myself as  I chased  him straight into Whippoorwill Mews.
Now you're in a corner.
That's when it occurred to us both that he had a sword and I a baton.
I grabbed my whistle and blew the call for help. I got it out once. Then he was on
me,  his  sword  coming  down  like  a  scythe.  I  gripped  my  baton  at  each  end  and
swung it up  to  block.  The  sword  bit into the wood,  struck  the lead core,  and  got
stuck. The rusher cursed and kicked at me. I turned, taking his kick on my hip as  I
twisted my baton. I hoped to yank the sword from his grip but he pulled it free.
He cut sidelong at me. Still holding my baton at each end, I blocked him a second
time. He yanked the blade back, taking a chip out of my wood. I scooped my own
kick forward and up, between his legs, and slammed a metal codpiece with my foot.
Had it been solid metal, not pieces, I might've hurt myself. Instead it gave way under
my kick. The rusher groaned, his eyes rolling up in his head.
I hadn't seen him draw a dagger with his free hand. It slid just past my right side,
slicing my loose tunic and shirt.
I leaped back. We'd both made mistakes. I hadn't minded what he was doing with
his left hand.  He'd  not  guarded  himself against  my  feet,  thinking  me  a  green  Pup.
Now we'd both learned sommat. He thrust his dagger back into its sheath  and  kept
his sword on guard before him, steadied with both hands. I went from side to side,
looking for an opening.

"Don't  be  a looby,"  I told  him, panting. "Give up  now or  when the other  Dogs
come, it's up to you. You're cornered here."
You're really cornered, I heard Pounce say.
"Lay  down  your  sword,  in  the  King's  name,"  Tunstall  ordered.  He'd  come  up
close behind me. "You are under arrest."
The rusher  spat  on  the ground.  Then he  placed  his  long  blade  gently  on  a  dry
patch of stone. "Wasn't about to surrender to no pimple-faced puttock," he said. He
spat again, aiming for my boots.
"The dagger, too," I said. I didn't want to pick up the sword until I was sure he'd
no more blades.
"You  heard  her."  Goodwin  had  come  along  with  Tunstall.  "Stop  wasting  time.
Your friends will go to the cages without you. You don't want to miss that."
"We'll be out before dawn," he told us. "Th' Rogue'll see to 't."
My tripes clenched. I knew he spoke the truth. "Dagger," I said, my hand sweaty
on my baton's grip. "Don't make me kick you twice."
Tunstall and Goodwin moved to stand on either side  of  me, their batons  in their
hands. I heard other Dogs behind us. They'd been called by my whistle.
"Where'd she kick you?" Tunstall asked him, as if to pass the time.
The rusher cursed me. Then he fumbled for his dagger and lurched forward to put
it by the sword.
"I'll wager I know,"  Goodwin  said.  The  torchlight  gleamed  on  her  teeth  as  she
grinned. "Thought  our  little terrier was  wore  out  from  the chase,  did  you?  I  guess
she taught you. Cooper, get his weapons."
I picked them up, handing them hilt first to Goodwin. Tunstall grabbed the rusher
and shoved  him against a nearby house,  bringing out  a  thong  to  bind  the  rusher's
hands. I stepped in to search the man. I found boot knives and a knife for the back
of his neck. I moved off with a nod to show I'd found the last of his arms.
"Not  so  fast."  Goodwin  came  close.  She  spoke  quiet,  so  the  two  Dogs  who
watched  us  couldn't  hear.  "These  liars'  fanfares  do  more  than  protect  a  man's
treasure in a fight." She reached around the rusher and grabbed his metal codpiece.
"Oh, sweet one," the cove said with a moan, "my lovey, my – "
"Shut up." Goodwin yanked the codpiece  hard.  Buttons  popped  as  it came off.
The rusher choked on a yell, his eyes rolling. "What kind of scut chafes a Dog who
holds his treasures? See, Cooper?" She held it up  and  slid a coil of  wire out  of  an
inner pocket of the piece. Rawhide loops were secured to its ends.
I drooped. I know I drooped. I'd been thinking so well of myself till that moment.
"You missed one, Cooper," Tunstall said, his voice soft. "But you didn't  let him
kill you with that knife, eh?" He shoved  the rusher  to  the Dogs  who waited behind
us. "Will you take this one along to the collectors? Don't feel you have to be tender
with him."
"Cut-coin looby, not having a solid metal scoop like the knights wear," Goodwin
remarked, watching the cove  waddle off  with the Dogs.  "Cheap  and  very stupid  –
though  you  don't  see  the  strangling  cord  in  the  cod  trick  that  often.  Maybe  his
mother taught it to him. Cooper,  everyone makes mistakes.  You just try not  to  die
from them. Let's see your baton."
I handed  it  over,  feeling  a  touch  better.  I  reminded  myself  to  tell  Verene  and

Ersken about the strangling cord. Our teachers hadn't mentioned that one. Mayhap it
wasn't  that  popular.  They'd  mentioned  rushers  keeping  wire  and  rope  cords  in  a
dozen other odd places.
Pounce wound between my feet. I brought Goodwin and Tunstall, he told me. I
knew you'd catch that idiot.
Goodwin returned my baton to me. "Not bad for a sword fight. Get the chunk he
took out of it fixed before training tomorrow. Come on, Cooper. The night isn't over
yet." Goodwin steered me out of the mews. Tunstall kept step with us.
"That's  low,"  he  said  as  we  set  off  toward  our  assigned  part  of  town  again.
"Setting on  a couple  at  Beltane."  He  must  have  known  what  I  was  about  to  ask,
because he said, "The young lord's  got  a dented  head.  There  was  a healer coming
when we left to catch up with you. Maybe he'll be an idiot, maybe not, but that's up
to the healers his da  can  afford.  The  lady's  shaken,  but  she's  not  hurt.  And  your
clever  cat  brought  us  straight  to  you."  He  leaned  down  and  picked  up  Pounce.
"Otherwise  some  other  Dogs  might  have  been  the  ones  to  teach  you  about  the
strangling cord."
"The lordling's an idiot already," Goodwin said. She still had her baton out. Now
she set it to spinning, casual-like. "Coming into the Lower City with all that flash. Her
too. Is it real, do you suppose?"
Tunstall scratched  Pounce's  ears.  "As  real as  it  gets.  You  know  how  it  is  with
these  moneyed  types,  Clary.  They  think  the  Common  instead  of  Palace  Hill  is
exciting. Wicked, even."
"Dangerous, even," Goodwin replied, her voice mocking. They continued to talk
like that, back and forth,  gentle-like. That  lasted  until we ran into the brawl outside
the Merry Mead.
The evening continued busy, with no time for supper. Our assigned patrol took us
up to the Common. That was luck for hungry Dogs. Each Beltane, Mistress Noll set
up a little tent there to sell ready-baked treats. Goodwin sent me over with our coin.
The only maggot in the pasty was Yates. He waited on folk alongside his mother.
When I stepped up to the counter, he gave me the ugly eye but  dared  to  say  not  a
word about our last meeting in the Daymarket. I filled my handkerchief and thanked
Mistress Noll as I handed over our coin. When I went to give our quick meal to my
Dogs, I saw they had found Yates's two friends, the ones I'd seen that afternoon at
the Daymarket. Tunstall had  placed  one  of  them against a tree. Goodwin  used  her
baton  to  keep  the  other  at  a  respectful  distance.  Seemingly  they'd  been  making
deliveries to Mistress Noll's tent here, too.
"I just don't see you scuts helping an old lady from  the goodness  of  your  heart,
Gunnar,"  Tunstall  was  telling  his  Rat.  Tunstall's  baton  tip  was  pressed  under
Gunnar's  chin, where it made a deep  dimple.  "You're  rough  work.  You've  always
been rough work. So if I hear of you harming a hair on Deirdry Noll's nob, I'll break
yours, understand?"
"You got it wrong, Dog." Gunnar was the blond cove I'd seen at Yates's counter
in the Daymarket. "Yates'd kill us for it, wouldn't he?" He looked  at the other  cove
who'd carried flour that day.
"Cut  us  twelve ways from  midnight," the other  Rat  told  us.  "We'd  never  cross
'im. Never."

"Good," Tunstall said, and lowered his baton. After a moment, so did Goodwin.
The two Rats didn't waste time in getting clear of us.
I offered my Dogs their pasties.
"Funny," Tunstall said, taking one. "I never found Yates Noll so fearsome."
"No more I," replied Goodwin. "And if we'd time to dig deeper, we might, but we
need to get down to the Nightmarket. Things are cooling down here."
It was  true. The  priests  were letting the fires go  out.  More  and  more  folk  were
rising from the grass. They would be  bound  for  the taverns  and  the market to  buy
trinkets and memories of the night.
By the time our  watch was  done,  my  knees  felt  like  jelly,  I  was  so  weary.  My
baton seemed to be triple its weight. My arm throbbed. Pounce, who'd  left us  after
the tavern fight, appeared out of nowhere. He near-about  tripped  me as  we entered
the courtyard of the kennel. I was too tired even to scold.
"Where have you been?" Goodwin asked Pounce. Even spent, she still noticed a
black cat  in the shadows.  "Wooing  yet another  lady  cat  for  Beltane?  Blessing  the
world with your kittens?"
We walked into the kennel to find that things were not right. Ahuda sat at her tall
desk, her head in her hands. Most of our  watch had  come  in already. Some  of  the
mots were weeping. Coves looked at the floor or leaned their foreheads  against the
wall so none could see their faces. Others sat in small knots on the benches, talking
softly.  Phelan  got  up  from  one  such  group  and  walked  into  the  chapel,  to  my
confusion. Did he forget we weren't mustered out yet?
No one who was not a Dog was  in sight. No  Rats,  no  visitors  for  the Rats.  No
onlookers,  no  beggars.  Of  my fellow Puppies,  Hilyard leaned  with  his  face  to  the
wall. Another sat on the floor, her head bowed on her knees. The rest huddled near
the healers' room on two benches. Ersken had an arm around two girls. He looked at
me with eyes that were red and puffy.
Verene's  Dog  Otelia  stood  by  the  healers'  door.  There  was  blood  dotting  her
cheek. Her tunic sleeve was ripped. Her arms hung down limp before her. I saw no
sign of her baton and remember being as shocked as if she was naked.
Inside the healers'  open  door,  two  people  lay  on  the  beds.  Their  faces  –  their
whole bodies – were covered by sheets. I saw bloodstains there, too.
Otelia looked up and saw us. "They blindsided us, Clary," she said. "Verene got
in the way of the biggest one. Rollo thought – Mattes, you know he always thought
he was  quicker than he was.  Poor  Verene never had  a chance.  Rollo  died  coming
here." Otelia slid to the floor, tears rolling down her face.
My hands went numb, then my arms,  and  my belly, and  the rest  of  me. I didn't
believe I heard  aright. Then  I  looked  at  Ersken.  I  knew  I'd  heard  proper  enough.
Otelia had  told  us  Verene was  dead.  Verene, and  Verene's  male Dog,  Rollo,  were
both dead. On Beltane.
I looked up at Tunstall. "We had breakfast this morning." I told  Goodwin,  "Just
this morning."
Pounce  stood  on  his  hind  feet  and  put  his  forepaws  on  my  thigh.  Obedient,  I
picked him up. He stood in the circle of my arms and purred in my ear, as if trying
to make this easier, as he did the day Mama died. My friend Verene lay in that room
with an old cloth over her. I'd split the last piece of cheese with her just today.

And Rollo. He was a veteran. He'd  lived on  the streets  for  seven  years.  He was
just as dead.
I carried  Pounce  over  to  the  benches  and  sat  with  the  other  Puppies.  The  girl
between Ersken and me left the shelter of his arm so I could  slide in next to  him. I
kept one arm around my cat and put the other around my friend.
I hope  I have written the  worst  of  this.  It  is  strange  to  say,  when  I  fought  the
writing lessons so hard, but it soothes me some, to put this on  paper.  It makes me
weep, too, but it means I won't make less of this night in my mind now. If it fades in
my memory, I can see it afresh on this paper. I can value my friend's death and not
let it vanish from my remembering.
 
 
Friday, May 1, 246
After the buryings.
Ersken didn't want to face his family last night, so I told him he could stay at my
place.  Kora  wasn't  in  –  she'd  gone  to  Prettybone,  for  fun,  she'd  told  us  over
breakfast  yesterday.  We  all  knew  it  was  to  watch  Rosto's  back.  She  still  hadn't
returned when we arrived. I made up  a  pallet  for  Ersken  in  my  room.  It  took  me
forever to get to  sleep,  even after writing in my journal. I don't  know about  him. I
kept thinking, It could have been me. That night at the Barrel's Bottom, it could have
been me brought back to lie in the healers' room under a bloody sheet. It could have
been me tonight if I hadn't gotten my baton up between that rusher's sword and my
skin. It could be me any night of the week.
I don't remember when I slept. I remember my dreams. They were all of pigeons
and their ghosts.
Ersken and me woke empty-eyed. We cleaned up in silence. What would we do
with ourselves on such a day? Then Kora  knocked  on  the door.  So  she  had  to  be
told, then Aniki and Rosto.
The  five  of  us  were  feeding  bread  to  my  pigeons  when  Phelan  walked  in.  He
looked like he hadn't slept. He hadn't shaved. Nor did he seem like he knew where he
was.
We mots  fussed  over  him.  It  helped  us  as  much  as  Phelan.  I  made  him  drink
some raspberry twilsey to clear his head. Aniki ordered him to eat two chicken-raisin
turnovers when he said he couldn't remember his last meal. Kora opened  a tiny vial
under  his  nose.  He  sniffed,  shuddered,  and  came  around  a  bit.  Ersken  inspected
Phelan's dagger and sharpened it before he slid it gently into its sheath.  Pounce  ran
the pigeons out of the room, then leaned against Phelan as he ate.
Rosto said nothing, only looked on. At last Phelan got to his feet. "I'm sorry –  I
can't stay. I don't know what to do now, but I can't seem to keep still."
Rosto stirred. "Come on, lad," he told Phelan. "Let's go for a walk."
"Don't you think he's done enough walking?" Ersken wanted to  know.  "He's  got
the shakes."
I thought Rosto would be impatient, but he was only cool. "It's not sitting that will
cure his shakes. Come on, Phelan. We'll go look at trees or sommat."
The  rest  of  us  cleaned  up  the  breakfast  leavings,  then  went  to  the  Jane  Street
baths. We had to look proper for the funerals that afternoon.

Rollo was  buried  at noon.  My lord  came there to  speak.  He  did  that  for  every
Dog who was buried. Other Dogs had a word for Rollo, too. My lord told me once
that folk got friendlier with a Dog for each year that Dog lived in the King's service.
It stood to reason that a six-year Dog had plenty of folk to talk about their memories
and how much he'd be missed.
After  Rollo's  burying  came  Verene's.  Making  the  arrangements  last  night,  we
Evening Watch Puppies had voted for Ersken to do our talking at her burial after my
lord and her family spoke. They drew off, leaving us time alone with her plain coffin.
"We'll miss you at Beka's breakfast," Ersken said to it. "Well, not just you. Your
coin, too. I guess we'll have less sausages, or eggs." Aniki, Kora, and I giggled. We
couldn't help it. Even some of the others, who knew of our  mornings,  smiled. "But
it's not just the coin, really, Verene," Ersken went on.  "It's  the bad  jokes,  and  your
telling us about your night's patrol. It's training with you. It's the times you helped us
with the memorizing studies. You were always good with the ones that needed such
help. And we remember your singing. We think you should sing for the Black God,
who makes a peaceful place for us all to come to. Everyone in the Peaceful Realms
is safe from Rats. I know the kind God of Death has to  treasure  the ones  like you,
Verene, that fell while making the mortal realm a safer place."
He bowed his head. A tear dripped from his cheek to the ground.
I went over to wrap my arm around Ersken's shoulders. I pressed my face to his.
"Good Dog," I said softly.
"Don't say that!" someone whispered.
"'Good Dog'? Cut your tongue! Bein' a good Dog's what got Verene killed!" The
jackass bray came from Hilyard. I'd scarce been able to look at him. He came to our
graveyard in  a  cityman's  tunic  and  leggings.  He  pointed  at  Ersken  with  a  shaking
hand.  "Good  Dog,  yes,  to  say  nice things about  dying in this  stupid  work!  Good
cur! Good – "
I couldn't  bear  it.  I  grabbed  Hilyard's  ears,  forcing  him  to  meet  my  eyes.  He
scrabbled at my wrists with his nails. I wouldn't let go. I wouldn't let him look away.
I held him with my eyes.
"Enough, scummernob," I said, quiet. Aniki told me later my eyes  and  my voice
were as cold as smoking ice. I know I felt numb. "Think shame to you, disrespectin'
Verene so. Comin' here dressed common when she died in uniform. Think shame to
you,  disrespectin'  the  words  of  Ersken's  heart,  and  my  Lord  Provost's  presence.
Now shut your sarden gob, or get out." I let him go with a shove. He staggered away
from me.
I walked back to my friends before I could  give way to  anger and  kick his bum
clean out the gate. Mother's mercy on me, for a moment I'd wanted to kill him.
"I'm  out!"  he yelled at more of  a distance.  I turned.  He was  walking backward,
toward the gate. Whatever madness seized him, he'd forgot my lord Gershom stood
right there. "You ought to get out, too, the rest  of  you,  if you're  not  as  cracked  as
she is.  Look  around  –  those're  the  graves  of  Puppies.  Look  who's  standing  with
you.  Not  real  folk  –  Rats."  Rosto,  Aniki,  and  Kora  looked  at  us  and  shrugged.
Hilyard kept  on  shouting.  "Dogs'  friends  aren't  cityfolk, they're  Rats.  Rats  are  the
only ones who understand the way Dogs talk! Ulp!"
My lord had grabbed Hilyard from behind. "I'm glad you're leavin'," he said in his

slow way. "If there's one thing Dogs must know, it's how to act when we lose one of
our own. Gods forgive you for speakin' so before  Verene's  blood  family. It's  plain
to me you never would have been one of us." He turned. The group of Dogs –  my
two and Ahuda among them – opened up. My lord tossed Hilyard hard and far, out
of our burying ground.
Dusting his hands, my lord nodded to the training Dogs, them who had been our
teachers.  The  parent  Dogs  always  sing  to  show  the  Dogs'  road  to  the  Peaceful
Realms to a Puppy who didn't survive.
As Mother Dog,  Ahuda sang  the first line of  the  song.  She  had  a  warm  voice,
sweet. I never thought mean little Ahuda had such beauty in her. As she  gave voice
to  the  rising  first  line  of  "The  Puppy's  Lullaby,"  my  knees  felt  weak.  The  other
female Dogs chimed in at the second line, the male ones  at the third. I realized that
the regular trainers would have sung this song many times. Two of every ten Puppies
die. The work is that cruel. How can they bear it? I can hardly stand it, and this was
my  first  Puppy  burial.  Trainers  must  teach  for  a  year,  doing  their  best  to  make
certain their Puppies stay alive. How can they bear singing them into the Black God's
care like this?
As they began the second verse, pigeons flew down to light on  the graves.  Only
two of them settled on Verene's. One had a dark pink ruff –  the kind that shone  in
the sun – dark pink bands on its wings, and a pale pink body. Its head was a pinkish
gray. The  other  pigeon was  mostly blue with a mottling of  white on  its  wings  and
gleaming purple feathers on its neck. I knew both, or their twins. They tended to be
the sort of birds who carried spirits only for a short time.
"Farewell,"  I  heard  Verene  whisper.  "Until  we  meet  in  the  Peaceful  Realms,
farewell."
"Gods all bless," said Rollo's ghost.
Pounce  walked over  to  those  two  pigeons.  The  trainers kept  on  singing,  but  all
eyes were on  my cat.  He  sat  before  the  birds  like  a  king,  his  paws  placed  neatly
before him.
They bowed. Later, folk said that pigeons bow all the time. A moment after these
two did  it, the other  pigeons  bowed,  too,  their beaks  almost touching  the  ground.
Then the whole flock  took  off,  heading up  into the sunlight. We  watched  until  we
couldn't see them anymore. By then the song was done.
The Dogs  filed out  of  the graveyard.  We  Puppies  said  our  last  goodbyes,  then
followed our Dogs. It was time for the Evening Watch.
Ersken put  his  arm  around  my  neck  and  kissed  my  cheek.  "I  like  being  called
'good Dog,'" he whispered.
 
After the end of my watch.
When we mustered  for  Evening Watch,  Ahuda told  the rest  of  it. The  five Rats
that had killed Rollo and Verene and roughed up Otelia were a mixed bag, a pair of
Barzun sailors and three of Flash District's rushers.
"Flash District's chief can't disown them fast enough," Ahuda said. Her face was
like  stone.  "He  says  they  were  up  to  something  with  no  orders  from  him.  Night
Watch caught them in Unicorn District, trying to sneak up over Palace Ridge.  They
were still full to  their eyeballs of  hotblood  wine. They've  been  handed  over  to  the

Palace  Guard  until  their  trial.  There  will  be  no...accidents."  Some  of  the  Dogs
growled. "I mean what I say. They'll pay for what they did, under the law."
Tunstall  stopped  her  before  she  could  send  us  onto  the  streets.  Once  he'd
whispered  to  her,  Ahuda  called  up  another  Dog  pair  and  announced  a  change  in
patrols.  Goodwin,  Tunstall  and  me  were  supposed  to  be  on  Nightmarket  duty
tonight. Instead  Tunstall got  us  switched  off  with a Cesspool  pair,  one  that  didn't
have a Puppy. He and Goodwin knew I couldn't face the cheer  of  the open  market
or even the noise  around  Rovers  Street.  The  Cesspool  was  better.  Nastier.  There
was more to distract me. More that wouldn't give the lie to  the numb,  dark  feelings
that had settled in my heart.
First  we  went  to  get  the  week's  Happy  Bag  from  the  Rogue,  since  we'd  had
Beltane duty  the night before.  Strange it was,  all those  Court  rushers  and  their like
telling  us  how  sorry  they  were  about  Verene  and  Rollo.  Even  the  chief  of  Flash
District came over  to  say  how bad  he felt that three of  his  own  people  had  killed
Dogs.
My lord Gershom and Lady Sabine found us eating at the Mantel and Pullet. "We
were havin' supper at Naxen's Fancy when a Magistrate's runner brought this to  my
attention," my lord said, putting a paper in front of Goodwin. He beckoned to Nyler
Jewel and Yoav, who ate at the next table. We all had a look.
The paper was an official announcement of  a slave sale on  Skip  Lane, complete
with seals. My lord pointed to the seals. "The year reads one forty six, not two forty
six,"  he  said.  "The  wax  is  solid  red.  The  Ministry  of  Slave  Sales  uses  ebony
shavings in their wax to  mark genuine seals.  The  ribbon's  cotton,  not  silk, and  the
king on this seal is named Roger the Third."
Goodwin sighed. "And scribes at the Ministry put an extra curl on their capital S
's, to make it easier to spot forgeries."
I looked. The S's on this document were plain.
We got up from our table without another word. Together with my lord's personal
bodyguards,  we  headed  for  Skip  Lane.  The  "auction  house"  was  an  abandoned
stable there, set  up  to  look  like a proper  slave market. I watched  from  outside  the
open front doors as the others entered. Lady Sabine had begged my lord like a little
one wanting a treat, so he let her greet the auctioneers. I watched her sweep up to the
sellers' table and place the announcement before them. She pointed to the seal. Then
she drew her sword.
The sellers were loobies. The ones in back of the sellers' table tried to  hustle the
slaves, all gixies, out the back. The ones at the table grabbed their coin.
Lady Sabine dashed for the door at the rear. The  mob  of  buyers  clogged  a side
door. My lord, his bodyguards, Jewel, and Yoav blocked that door  and  two  more.
Goodwin and Tunstall took charge of the sellers with the money.
I ran around to the back, my usual post. I'd seen an old cove in the rear gather up
a ledger and a box the moment he saw  Lady Sabine.  He'd  gone  out  the door  even
before  the others  had  thought  to  escape,  but  he  wasn't  exactly  quick  on  his  feet.
When I grabbed him, he offered me ten gold nobles to let him go.
It was more than I'd make in my Puppy year and my first year as a Dog. I took it.
Then  I  set  aside  his  money  chest  and  account  books  to  hobble  him,  tying  the
rawhide with a care to his old limbs. No rule said I had to do as he'd paid me to, and

I hadn't liked that line of scared gixies, waiting to be sold to a room of greedy-eyed
buyers. Still, it wouldn't be wise to take a bribe and not give value for it too often.
"Better luck next time," I said. "If you get one." We waited there, him cursing me
dreadfully, to see if anyone might join us.
We took a bag of five Rats at the auction. Once our Rats were on their way to the
collection cages and I'd signed book and money box in for evidence and the Happy
Bag, we continued  on  our  rounds.  Lady Sabine wandered  off.  My lord  came with
us,  talking  to  Goodwin  and  Tunstall.  I  remember  guessing  how  many  weeks  he
would spend in a guest room for this. When a Dog was killed, he made it a point to
walk a while with each  team on  that Dog's  watch.  Each  day  he spent  out  with  the
Dogs  was  another week  that  my  lady's  bedchamber  was  locked  to  him.  She  was
terrified that one day he would not come home from such walks.
I said naught to him, nor he to me. When he left, he fell back  for  a moment and
clasped my shoulder. The warmth of his big hand came through my numbness for a
moment. Then he was off to let another Dog team know they weren't just servants to
him.
"He makes me proud to be a Dog," Goodwin said. Then she turned to me. "Did
the bookkeeper try to bribe you? Cough up."
I paid over her and  Tunstall's  half of  my bribe.  That's  when they told  me about
the Happy Bag tax, one-third of my bribes if they were over a silver noble. Since that
went for Dogs' medicines, healers, and burials, I didn't complain. Tunstall made the
change for me. Goodwin ordered me to get a belt with inner compartments  to  hold
big coins like gold pieces.
"Not that you see takings like that more than once a year," Tunstall said. "But it's
good to be prepared."
 
 
Saturday, May 2, 246
After my watch.
This morning I was feeding pigeons, trying to listen to their ghosts, when I heard a
knock on my door. I let Aniki, Kora, and Ersken in. It wasn't our usual happy group,
to say the least.
Pounce made them welcome as they set out the cloth and our meal. I kept feeding
birds.  It was  just the ones  who  carried  the  diggers'  ghosts,  as  if  I  needed  to  feel
more downhearted. They repeated their complaints to me. However many times I tell
them I'm still looking for their graves and even their names, they never seem to hear.
They want to be found right off, as if I'm a god who can see who they are, who their
families are, and where their poor bodies have been hid.
I wish that the dead were more patient, but them that are waiting for justice aren't.
Verene's murderers were taken up right off. I figure that was why she and Rollo only
stayed  long enough to  say  goodbye  at  the  burying,  because  the  one  big  debt  the
living  owed  to  them  was  paid.  The  diggers  are  still  waiting,  just  like  the  Shadow
Snake's victims. Mayhap I wouldn't feel so helpless about their whingeing if I knew
we were getting somewhere.
I was  breaking some  final chunks  of  bread  when Kora  asked,  "May I help feed
them?"

"I don't usually feed them from my hand," I said. She was holding her fingers out
to the birds. Shy ones like Mumper and Inky scuttled away. White Spice and Ashes
tried to bite her fingertips, thinking they might be food. "Here." I put the bread  into
her cupped palm. "Just know that they learn fast. Feed them from your hand once or
twice and they'll come straight to you after that. Do it often enough and they'll climb
on you." Pinky tried to land on my chest, slapped my face with her wings, and took
off. I sighed. "And they'll leave scummer  on  you  and  their feathers  in your  room."
Slapper dropped to my shoulder. He wedged his clubfoot in the hollow between my
shirt  collar  and  neck,  grabbed  my  ear,  and  tugged.  "Curst  things  think  they  own
you!" I pulled Slapper's beak off my ear. He pecked my fingers until I gave him a bit
of bread.
"But they're so beautiful," Kora said. White Spice and Ashes pecked at the bread
in her hand. "Some of them, anyway."
I put bread before Mumper and Inky. "Some are native to the Lower City. Others,
well, folk breed  pigeons  in  colors  for  racing  and  for  messengers.  Some  of  those
birds escape. They bring in the pinks  and  the coppers  and  the whites."  I swore  at
Slapper, who'd bit my ear again.
"You're an ingrate," Rosto said behind me. He pulled Slapper off of my shoulder
and my ear. Slapper  voiced  his pigeon war cry,  a furious  "Croo!" I turned.  Rosto
had the  bird  in  the  right  hold,  wings  pressed  flat  to  his  sides.  "You're  a  warrior,
aren't you,  for  all you're  bent  out  of  true,"  Rosto  was  telling  my  cracked  pigeon.
"Stop attacking the one person who treats you well."
I looked beyond Rosto. Phelan had come. He and Ersken sat cross-legged on the
cloth with Aniki, eating breakfast. They looked as weary and beaten as I felt. Pounce
was leaning against Phelan's side.
Phelan looked  at Kora,  Rosto,  and  me  as  we  finally  sat  and  took  up  our  own
food.
"You need to rest," Kora told Phelan. "Come to my rooms after breakfast and I'll
give you a tea that's good for sleep."
Phelan  nodded.  I  don't  know  if  he  was  agreeing  or  if  he  did  so  just  because
something told him that was what he was supposed to do.
The rest of our meal passed in silence. We were closing up jars and packing odds
and ends away when Phelan cleared  his throat.  "Ersken,  Beka, I quit the Dogs  last
night."
We both looked at him. I couldn't say as I was surprised. If I read Ersken's face
aright, he was no more startled than me.
"Don't  hate  me,"  Phelan  said.  "If  you  don't  want  me  here  come  morning,  I'll
understand." Phelan's eyes filled up but didn't spill over. "It's not the dying. Well, it
is. But that Rollo was stupid and Otelia was drunk."
"Drunk?" Ersken whispered. "On duty?"
My belly felt like it opened up into a huge pit.
"You  think  it  never  happens?"  Phelan  asked.  "Mostly  they  put  the  drunks  on
Night or Day Watch, but Otelia doesn't drink regular. But why'd  they give a Puppy
to those two?" He hung his head.
"Transfer to another district," Ersken said.
Phelan was  shaking his  head.  "I'm  through.  It's  everything.  All  Ahuda  ever  did

was her work. They took her off patrol for just that, put her to marking the roll and
training Puppies. And they send Puppies out to die in the Lower City. The Provost's
Guard is cracked. Don't tell me different, Beka. I'm  going to  do  sommat  sane  with
my life."
Phelan stood and walked out of my room before I could have said a word, could
I have thought of aught. Truth to tell, I couldn't. I felt I should argue. But hearing that
Verene was given to a fool and a drunk had left me flat. I was ready to die in a fight.
Goodwin  and  Tunstall  would  never  use  me  as  stupidly  as  Rollo  and  Otelia  used
Verene. But the thought that I might die for a stupid reason, that Verene died for so
stupid a reason, preyed on my mind.
Phelan  wasn't  the  only  one  to  quit.  Hilyard  was  missing  at  training,  of  course.
Good riddance. One of the other cove Pups left, though, and two of the mots.  For
one bad night, we'd lost nearly half of the Lower City trainees. Only one, the Crone
be  praised,  was  the  Black  God's  prize.  It  was  a  hard  blow  for  those  of  us  who
remained.
 
 
Tuesday, May 5, 246
Around four in the afternoon.
I have had no heart for writing in this journal this week. The weather has been  as
cold  and  gloomsome  as  my  spirit.  I  write  today  only  because  I  must  correct
Goodwin's and Tunstall's maps and lists. All told we now have verified twenty-three
suspected  Shadow  Snake  kidnappings.  In  company  with  Kora,  Aniki,  Mother
Cantwell, and Ersken, I have spoken to nineteen folk who lost children or were close
to them as had children taken by the Snake. I have fifteen yet to check.
Granny had but one new name to give me today. Mother Cantwell had  two.  The
names are drying up. I should be glad, but without more knowledge, I fear the Snake
will escape us. I stare at the map when I come  home at night, thinking, He will get
away with it. He will get away with it all.
The poxy  weather is no  friend to  any of  us.  Because  of  the storms,  the trading
fleets still have not come. There are no cargoes arriving from  Port  Caynn,  which is
to say, no one is getting hired to work the riverfront or the markets. Them that have
jobs  are keeping them, for  fear they won't  get another,  however  bad  their  masters
are.
If anyone is hiring diggers and telling them to keep their gobs shut, they are doing
so. They will not risk losing work when no one else is finding any.
I  know  Crookshank's  people  are  looking  to  hire,  or  they  have  done  so.
Crookshank is greedy. He wants fire opals. He thinks only the Shadow Snake knows
he has them, and  no  one  believes in the Shadow  Snake.  He won't  be  able to  keep
himself from getting more out of the ground, wherever he gets them from.
I must mark up the maps and add to the lists.
 
 
Thursday, May 7, 246
Noon.
Today I woke to pigeons everywhere in my room.

I yelled as Slapper hopped on my head to peck me like the demented cuddy that
he is. "Pounce! I told you, never open the shutters!"
"All I wanted was some work," a mot's ghost said.
"It were strange, that they didn't want me t' say a word, but they was hiring." That
was a cove, not much older than me from the sound of his voice.
"I  did  all  they  said.  Still,  they  poisoned  me  in  me  sleep,"  another  cove
complained.
"We dug wi' picks till we bled," a ghost near my head told me. "Fillin' buckets full
o' rocks with glass in 'em – "
"I tol' you, 'twasn't glass," a new ghost interrupted. He had some kind of Carthaki
accent. "It's fire opal. It's worth plenty of coin. I used to dig it back in the mines of
Carthak. Gods' fire, it's called."
"If you're so clever, scut, why'd they kill you?" a hard-voiced  mot  asked.  "They
buried you deep as us, once we couldn't get no more rock out wi'out diggin' into the
cellar wall an' maybe collapsin' the house."
I sat up careful-like. Seventeen pigeons had raided my room. Nine were from the
first group  of  murdered  diggers.  Eight of  them were  new.  "Pox-rotted  pus-leaking
mumper bags,"  I whispered  as  I got  out  of  bed.  Crookshank's  folk did  it.  They'd
hired fresh diggers right under our noses. They'd killed them there, too.
I got dressed and grabbed my pack. Then I went out. I left my part of everyone's
breakfast at Aniki's door. I needed to get to  the Cesspool  dust  spinners  while their
gleanings from last night were fresh.
Pounce and I headed for Hasfush at the trot. For  the first day  since  her murder,
my grief for Verene was pushed back, eaten up by anger.
How did Crookshank  do  it? I wonder  if Tansy  knows.  Impossible.  She'd  never
have  slept  knowing  nine  people  died  to  put  pretty  clothes  on  her  back,  let  alone
seventeen.  It's  one  thing  to  know  your  grandfather-in-law  got  rich  from  cheating
thieves. It's  another to  know –  to  let yourself know –  he makes money  on  killing.
And any killing he'd done before this was spoke of in whispers or laid at the Rogue's
door.
Hasfush is scarce to be seen in the first light of  most  mornings.  Today,  his foot
was a soft whisper in the grit of the street.  I knew just looking at him that he'd  not
heard  so  much  as  a  scream.  Still,  I  stepped  inside  his  breezy  circle  to  listen.  I
strained to hear any voices he'd caught up, but all I heard was whispers.
What  did  you  expect?  I  asked  myself.  This  lot  said  they'd  been  poisoned.  I
waited longer, grinding my teeth. But I heard naught that sounded like the voices  of
them hired to dig under a house.
At last I walked off. I made it a block down the street when I heard Pounce meow
loudly. I looked back. He stood by Hasfush, violet eyes furious, his tail whacking in
anger. He was vexed with me.
I  knew  why,  too.  I  thought,  Shame  to  you,  Rebakah  Cooper.  Just  because
Hasfush don't have what you want, that's no reason to treat an old friend rude.
I'd given him nothing. No more had I taken away the burden of all the chatter he'd
picked up since my last visit.
I turned around and went back. Pounce looked up at me. About time, he said.
"Don't rub it in," I told him.

From  my  pack  I  got  a  pouch  filled  with  dirt  I'd  gathered  on  Palace  Way.  I
stepped  back  into  Hasfush.  First  I  apologized  for  leaving  him  as  I  had.  Then  I
poured out the grit.
His sides squeezed me, like my ribs squeezed when I took a deep breath. Hasfush
was pleased. When he settled lower to the ground, I opened myself to voices caught
in his breezes. Gossip, quarrels, flirtations, it all poured into my ears as he let it go.
Now a set of whispers caught my attention. "That's  the second  crew.  How long
d'you think they'll keep us guards alive?"
"'s long as  we do  th'  work 'n'  keep  our  gobs  shut.  Don'  be  a fool,  Jens.  We're
mage-marked. Drink up.  Hotblood  wine makes it easier to  stand  what we do.  And
we're paid well enough."
I held still until I heard nothing in Hasfush but the brush of wind and street grit on
stone.  Once  I'd  paid  my  debt  properly,  I  stepped  out  of  his  circle.  Thinking,  I
started brushing dust and trash off of me.
"Jens.  We  have a name,  Pounce,"  I  said.  My  hands  shook.  "Finally  I've  got  a
name. And I wouldn't've had it if you'd not called me back to be polite."
He leaped to my shoulder to purr in my ear. You learn slowly, but you do learn.
I had to fight myself not to run to Tunstall's and Goodwin's places with my news.
Instead I visited all of my Lower City spinners in the hope I might get more. I did get
a hint of an illegal slave sale and a kidnap plan. Those I could pass on to Ahuda.
Then I turned  my attention to  the pigeons.  I  bought  bread  and  fed  them  in  the
fountain squares to glean what I might. At Glassman Square a mumper staggered by,
soused. He asked me for coin, but I shook my head. I was busy.  One  bird's  ghost
was telling me about her son. One day he'd said he couldn't afford a ma that wasn't
able to work and drowned her in a washbasin.
The mumper stomped through my flock just when the ghost was going to tell me
her killer's name. "Hey! Puttock!" the cove yelled. "Wha's yer matter –  y'love them
lousy birds more'n yer own kind?"
It  was  too  much,  knowing  there  were  seven  more  digger  ghosts  today.  He'd
scared the bird and lost me the name of yet another murderer, to boot. So though it
shames  me to  write it, I will be  truthful. I lost  my  temper.  I  grabbed  his  ears  and
stared him full in the face. "Get out before I give you the nap tap." I hardly knew my
own voice. "You're a shame to  the woman who bore  you.  All her blood  and  pain,
for what?" I let him go. "Find sommat of use to do with the life you have."
He fell back two steps and made the sign against evil. "Ye've ghost eyes!"
"You're  drunk  afore  noon,"  a  woman  shouted.  "Begone,  afore  we  stone  you.
You've earned it, spilling yer piss when folk never bothered you."
Others  who stood  about  the square  joined  her  shouts.  Some  even  threw  rocks
from the street  at the  mumper.  Seemingly  I  wasn't  the  only  one  he'd  insulted.  He
stumbled away, chased by their jeers.
I made myself look at them. "Thanks," I said.
"He's a mule's bum,"  said  the mot  who'd  first called out.  "You  was  just feedin'
birds.  It's  a treat, seein'  you  bend  down  like  you  listen  to  'em  talk.  The  cat  there
lookin' like he listens, too."
"Y' talked to th'  tosspot  like you's  a Dog,"  a gixie said,  wringing out  something
gray.

"Ain't  y'  seen  'er  with  Tunstall  an'  Goodwin?  Evenin'  Watch,  she  is.  Cooper,
right?" the first woman asked. "Doin' good work for only a Puppy."
That was enough attention for me. I thanked them again and left. I still had enough
time to give Jens's name to Mother Cantwell and my other Birdies. There could be a
hundred coves with that name in the city, but how many take Crookshank's coin?
 
After watch's end.
As soon  as  we finished muster tonight, I told  my  Dogs  what  I'd  learned  about
Jens.
"Tricky,"  Tunstall said  as  we walked to  the Court  of  the Rogue.  "He's  got  that
mage  mark  on  his  hand.  When  we  do  find  him,  I  don't  know  if  Fulk  is  up  to
countering a death spell."
"And  mayhap it begins to  work when  we  hobble  him,  even  before  he  starts  to
talk," said Goodwin. "We need to know where to lay hands on this Jens first. Then
we'd best give Berryman that walk-along we've promised. If he can  put  a freeze on
one of those mage marks, anyway."
"He should,"  Tunstall said.  "He's  a gem  mage,  isn't  he?  How  many  smugglers,
thieves, and counterfeiters are marked to die before they sing the names of the ones
who hired them? Berryman can  do  it." He looked  at me. "Do  you  know,  Cooper,
those spinner and pigeon informants of yours have their uses. Did you  get anything
else from them today?"
I told  them the other  bits  I'd  already given Ahuda,  keeping watch on  the streets
and buildings in case  someone  felt brave  enough  to  throw  something  at  the  Dogs
passing below. Pounce trotted ahead of us, on the lookout for mice. It was a normal
enough evening. The  only oddity  came when Goodwin  spotted  Yates  Noll and  his
two  friends  down  one  of  the  twisty  lanes  off  Stormwing  Street.  We  stopped  to
watch. When they caught sight of us, they scurried out of view.
"There's sommat I don't understand," I said. "What's in that greasenob  Yates  to
make those two rough lads talk fearful about him? He's no prize bull."
"Good  question,  Cooper,"  Goodwin  said  without  turning  around.  "I  was
wondering about that myself."
"They're hiding something," said Tunstall. "I'll put some seed before my Birdies.
Maybe they've a song about Yates to sing."
The gates  of  the  Court  were  open  wide.  The  guards  were  new  since  the  night
Crookshank had hidden a blade from the old ones. These muttered but let us by as
Goodwin  idly  flipped  her  baton  up  into  her  grip  on  its  thong  and  down  again.
Through the halls we passed, my fifth such walk now.
Kayfer was on his throne. He'd foreigners with him, two Yamanis with their hair in
topknots. With them stood the Carthaki who'd had Kayfer's ear my first night at the
Court. They all looked like dangerous folk. The talk at the Mantel and Pullet was that
the  Carthaki  was  a  gem  seller.  Were  the  Yamanis  the  same,  come  to  wait  for
Crookshank's rumored auction in August? I could  feel my rough fire opal  pressing
against my thigh.
The first thing I saw  when I looked  away  from  Kayfer  was  Ulsa,  seated  at  her
table. As ever, she was dressed to startle. Tonight she wore a silk shirt that clung to
what she had and silk breeches.  Her personal  guard  sat  at her table with her, mots

and coves. Rosto guarded her back.
So did Phelan. He stood beside Rosto, wearing a tunic and breeches and carrying
a sword. He'd gone to serve the enemy. That's why Rosto had spoken to him.
When Phelan saw I was staring at him, he looked away. Well he should.
Kora caught my eye and  shrugged.  She  sat  on  the floor  where  we'd  talked  that
first night, laying out fortune cards.  Already she  had  three coves  waiting for  her to
tell them their futures. A fourth sat cross-legged beside her, watching as she put the
cards down. She winked at me and murmured to her audience.
I continued to eye the room. I was telling myself that Phelan's life was his own. If
my lover got killed through the stupidity of his training Dogs, would I do as he did?
No. I would never do that. But he is angry with the Dogs. Rosto wants someone
he can trust in Ulsa's gang with him. Now he's got Phelan. They say the line between
rushers and Dogs is a thin one. For Phelan, it was thin enough to step over.
I looked for Aniki. She stood at Dawull's back, hand on her sword hilt. With her
stood  the  fellow  who'd  drawn  blade  on  us  when  we'd  visited  Dawull's  court.
Seemingly they had  moved  up  in  Dawull's  regard,  from  extra  swords  to  personal
guard.  I wondered  how  they'd  managed  it,  but  I  wasn't  going  to  ask  Aniki.  I'd  a
feeling I wouldn't like a truthful answer. Nor would I care  for  it if Aniki lied to  me.
Usually such promotions meant blood.
Kayfer kept  us  waiting, as  ever. Mayhap I wouldn't  have minded if it had  come
from a Rogue I respected. Coming from a daisy-livered slack-kneed spintry like him,
it was hard to take. Whilst my Dogs talked to the Rogue's chiefs, I crouched on my
hunkerbones and looked at Kora's  cards,  trying to  see  how fortune-telling worked.
Pounce patted at a card with a smith's anvil painted on it.
"Don't look at 'em, Cooper," protested the cove she read  for.  "You'll curdle  my
future. The purple-eyed cat's bad enough."
"Beka doesn't  curdle  anything," Kora  told  him, her voice  stern.  "Eyes  like hers,
they see clearest of all."
"I don't want that," he said. "No more would any cove wi' sense. We – Tricksters
all, what have you wrought?"
I wondered what cracknob would call on trickster  gods  during a fortune  reading
until  I  realized  he  meant  it  for  what  was  happening  at  the  door.  Goodwin  and
Tunstall moved  together fast,  like they hadn't  been  half a room  apart.  By  the  time
they reached me, I was up with my baton out and ready.
Crookshank  strode  toward  Kayfer Deerborn's  throne,  his eyes  bulging.  His  hair
looked like he'd torn at it with both hands. His velvet coat,  trimmed in ermine, was
half on, half off.
Beside him walked Fulk, who never should have been there. The  Evening Watch
mage wore a chain with a gem that sparked in the torchlight. Its blue and orange fires
rivaled the fever in his eyes. Somehow the greasy cuddy had gotten a fire opal.
Behind  Crookshank  and  Fulk  came  mots  and  coves  armed  with  crossbows,
staves, and swords. These were hard customers. Some I knew from the Mantel and
Pullet and the streets, all soldiers and members of the Palace Guard. With the rest of
their group  having the same look,  I guessed  they were more of  the same,  off-duty
fighters Crookshank had hired. I did a fast count. He'd brought near forty folk with
him. What were they doing? They had no business in the Court of the Rogue!

"Now  it  comes  out!"  Crookshank  screamed,  walking  up  to  Kayfer.  "Now  the
whole  kingdom  will  know  you  for  the  Shadow  Snake!  Where  is  my  grandson?
Where is Herun?"
I couldn't  breathe.  Herun? The  Snake had  Tansy's  husband  now? I'd  feared  for
Tansy, mayhap her babe when it was born – not her man!
Kayfer  stood.  "You  cracknob  old  skinflint,  what  are  you  doing  here  with  this
army?"
The archers  spread  along the wall and  across  the  door,  their  crossbows  ready.
There would be more at the gate, I guessed.  They'd  have been  needed  to  hold  the
guards.
Now the raiders  armed with swords  and  staves  walked through the room.  They
thrust the mots  and  coves  of  the Court  against the wall. More raiders  stripped  the
rogues of their weapons.
"Don't  lie,  Kayfer!"  Crookshank  yelled.  "You're  the  Shadow  Snake!  You  took
Herun to get my treasure! You won't have it, you  scummer-lapping maggot! I'll see
you in the cages! You'll die on Executioner's Hill if you don't give back my boy!"
As easy as if she folded sheets, Kora picked up her cards. "Another time, friend,"
she told her customer.
"I could see it wasn't goin' well anyway." He got up and offered  Kora  a hand  to
help her to her feet. She took it and rose. They both moved to the wall as a soldier
we all knew came toward us to disarm the Rogue's folk nearby.
As the soldier passed us, Tunstall murmured, "What are you doing?"
"Gettin' paid very well," the soldier replied. His lips barely moved.  "Crookshank
said he'd give two gold each t' tweak the Rogue's nose."
Goodwin  whistled.  I  felt  sick.  He  was  paying  eighty  gold  just  to  them  in  this
room. That didn't count the other fighters he had outside. And I'd wager half a year's
earnings he'd gotten Fulk for a fire opal or two.
I looked  at  Kayfer.  Crookshank  was  there,  trading  hot  whispers  with  him.  He
clutched the Rogue with a claw of a hand.
Kayfer shook him off. "You're raving!" he cried. "I'm no child's tale – there's no
Shadow  Snake!  And  you're  cracked  straight  down  the  middle,  to  bring  outsiders
here!"
"You  kidnapped  a  young  man  of  standing,"  Fulk  told  Kayfer.  "On  Master
Ammon Lofts' behalf, as concerned people of the city, these men and women and I
will search for him." Fulk smirked. "I'm sure we'll find something for our trouble."
The soldier turned Kora and the thief to the wall. As he searched them, he said to
Tunstall, "Get out."
Goodwin and Tunstall nodded. We made for the door. The raiders were happy to
let us leave. "More for us," one of them said as we passed them.
Once in the hall outside, Goodwin asked Tunstall, "Now what?"
"Get work as Players?" Tunstall said. He dodged Goodwin's kick. "What can we
do? Crookshank's set the Court of the Rogue on its head.  We  warn the others,  we
collect the Bag  another  day,  and  we  have  extra  time  to  see  if  we  can  find  where
Crookshank does his digging."
Goodwin shook her head. "Bets on how long Fulk lives after this night?"
"No bets," Tunstall said. "He's a mage. He'll use the opal Crookshank gave him to

take the next ship  out  of  Port  Caynn.  Kayfer's  not  Rogue  enough  even  to  douse
Fulk, though I'd pay to watch."
Goodwin looked at me. I shrugged. "I hate Fulk. I hope he dies. But I won't  bet
on a mage," I said.
"So  let's  finish  our  watch,"  Goodwin  said.  "I  hope  we  get  to  collect  that  Bag
soon, or it'll be a lean week for the Dogs with families."
We headed for the meeting place to  give the Happy  Bags to  the Dogs  who take
them to the kennel. We could tell they'd had no whiff of Crookshank's raid. They sat
around a fire, not expecting us for a time.
"Wake up," Tunstall said. "You won't believe what's happened."
They listened to him, jaws agape. I couldn't blame them. I'd never heard of such a
thing happening at the Court. I wondered how many of those off-duty fighters would
live to spend their gold and how many of them we'd be scraping from the gutters.
"So  there's  no  Bag tonight,  but  news  to  spread,"  Goodwin  said  when  Tunstall
was done. "Two more things. We know the Shadow Snake's real. It's not Kayfer. If
Crookshank's not having waking dreams, the Snake's got Herun. He's a nice lad and
doesn't  deserve  to  die.  And  we're  looking  for  Jens.  He's  a  rusher  hired  by
Crookshank  or  one  of  Crookshank's  folk.  If  you  find  Jens,  don't  let  him  know
you're  seeking. Don't  hobble  him. He's  got  a mage mark on  him that'll kill him the
moment he's caught. Just tell us what he looks like and where he may be found."
"Warn all our Dogs," Tunstall said. "It's going to be a strange night."
"Them soldiers  shoulda  took  sick  as  soon  as  they  found  out  where  they  were
goin'," grumbled one of the Dogs. "I woulda done."
"Get moving," Goodwin said. "Spread the news."
"You  know  how  these  skewed  nights  work  –  the  world  goes  mad,  or  it  goes
quiet," Tunstall said. "Our lads and lasses need to be awake for both."
The others took to their horses. We put out their fire. After that, we followed our
regular patrol  route.  Walking  along,  I  found  my  brain  was  abuzz.  The  Snake  had
taken Herun Lofts. "I was wondering...," I mumbled to the road.
"Speak up, Cooper," Goodwin said.
"Crookshank's rushers were with his boughten search party," I said. "So who's at
Crookshank's?  If the Snake took  Herun, mayhap he left some  trace  of  his coming
and going at the house."
For  a  moment  they  were  quiet.  Then  Goodwin  told  Tunstall,  "All  right.  I  was
against having a Puppy. I thought she'd be a lot of work and a lot of  trouble.  But I
have to say, you were right." She  looked  back  at me. "Let's  have a toddle  over  to
Crookshank's house, on advice from the sharpest Puppy in the whole litter."
It felt good to hear that from her.
Crookshank's  house  looked  deserted.  The  front  door  torches  were  out.  The
mourning wreath for Rolond hung off one of its nails, some of its ribbons torn from
their anchors. Pounce trotted around the side of the house. We took the same path,
bound for the kitchen door. The  side  gate was  unlocked  and  open,  which was  not
right. Anyone might come in as we did.
The kitchen door was open, too. All three of us took out our batons.  Inside,  the
room was dark, the inner door shut. Tunstall went through first, noiseless for all his
size. He held the door open and motioned us through.

Two  maids,  the  cook,  and  a  manservant  were  bound  on  the  kitchen  floor.
Goodwin motioned for me to cut the cook's gag. "Soft," I whispered in her ear.
"He's  got  Mistress  Annis and  Mistress  Tansy  in the master's  rooms,"  the  cook
told me. "He come in wi' a knife to Tansy's throat and had me bind the others, then
had  her  bind  me.  Then  he  had  her  call  Mistress  Annis.  He  was  talkin'  about
treasure."
Goodwin knelt beside us. "Just one man?"
The cook said, "Aye."
We left the servants there and trotted up  the back  stair, trying to  keep  our  steps
light. It still smelled of  smoke  from  the  old  fire  the  night  of  our  last  visit.  As  we
reached the rear landing, Goodwin whispered in my ear, "Servants' door."
I remembered it. Crookshank's rooms had another entry. We'd seen it last time. I
watched  her  and  Tunstall  run  behind  Pounce  to  the  main  door  to  Crookshank's
chamber.  Pounce  beat  them  inside.  I  raced  across  the  servants'  landing  to  the
second door and had my hand on the latch when I heard Pounce roar.
At least, I think it was Pounce. It was the most fearful thing I'd ever heard, a roar
that echoed  through the house.  It was  the sound  of  a far bigger creature,  one  that
was mayhap related to a cat. The hairs stood on the back of my neck.
A man shouted in surprise.
A moment later he yanked the servants'  door  open.  I  slammed  him  in  the  belly
with my baton. He stumbled back into Tunstall's grip.
Tunstall wrapped one arm around the Rat's neck  and  used  the other  to  twist the
man's  arm  up  behind  his  back.  Swinging  the  Rat  around,  Tunstall  rammed  him
headfirst into the bedpost,  then dropped  him face-first  onto  the floor.  It was  done
and Tunstall was kneeling beside the Rat before I'd closed the servants' door.
"Well done, Cooper," Goodwin said from the other side of the bedroom.
Tunstall twisted the Rat half to the side to take his dagger and look at his face. He
smiled. "Clary, here we were saying we were getting lonesome for the old faces, and
the gods took pity on us."
Goodwin spotted Tansy and Annis, tied up and left by the hearth. She jerked her
head toward them in a silent order for me to free them, then knelt beside Tunstall and
the  Rat.  "Gunnar  Espeksra,  you  revolting  piece  of  bug  dung.  I  thought  you  and
Yates Noll were joined at the hip."
I glanced at our prize.
"Your friends aren't getting any more comfortable whilst you stare, Cooper," said
Tunstall. "Is he more handsome than Ersken Westover or Rosto the Piper?"
"There's pigs on butchers' meat hooks that's more handsome," I said. "I think he
was with Yates when we saw him earlier tonight."
"What treasure were you looking for, Gunnar?" Tunstall wanted to know. "Only a
looby would think Crookshank kept it here, where anyone might walk in and lift it."
"Pox on yer privates if ye think I've a word for ye," Gunnar said. "An' Yates has
naught t' do wif it." He looked away as he said it, lying through his teeth.
"Maybe Mistress Annis and Mistress Tansy know something," Goodwin said.
I cut Tansy's gag first. She was weeping. "What do I care about what he wants?
Herun's been kidnapped by the Shadow Snake! You're not searching for him!"
I cut the rest of her bonds. "Are you sure it's the Shadow Snake?" I asked. "Not

your  grandfather-in-law  thinking  that's  who's  done  it  now,  after  the  Snake  taking
Rolond?  Because  so  far  as  we  know,  the  Snake  only  takes  little  ones."  I  cut  off
Annis's gag.
"We saw the note, before Father stuffed it in his tunic," said Annis. Her eyes were
puffed from weeping, but she wasn't in Tansy's state, for all Herun was her son. "It's
the same as the ones that came for Rolond. The very same. Herun took  receipts  to
the  Goldsmith's  Bank,  and  he  never  returned.  Father  came  home  to  dress  for  a
merchants' supper, and the note was on his bed. Then...We  were beside  ourselves,
after  Father  ran  screaming  from  the  house.  Tansy  went  to  search  without  telling
anyone. I'd  only  just  noticed  she  was  gone  when  she  came  back  with  him."  She
could only jerk her chin at Gunnar. I was still hacking at her ropes.
"Stupid doxies," he said. "All ye had to do was say where he keeps them sparklin'
stones and I'da been gone!"
Tunstall thumped Gunnar's head on the floor. "How do you know about sparkling
stones, a gutter crawler like you?" he asked.
Gunnar didn't say, though Tunstall bounced his head several times more.
"Save  it," Goodwin  said.  "Let the questioners  get it out  of  Gunnar.  We  already
know he'll lead us to Yates Noll." She put the hobbles on our Rat.
"Bad idea," Gunnar told us. "Ye don't want to go crossin' Yates, not ever."
Tunstall flicked Gunnar's  head  with his finger, using his thumb to  give the small
blow force.  "Nobody  asked  the opinions  of  a fawning scut  like  you,  Gunnar,"  he
said. He sounded outright friendly. "Either tell us  what we're asking for  or  swallow
your tongue. We've no real druthers about which." He got up.
"Mayhap  it's  no  accident  he's  here  tonight,"  I  said.  "Mayhap  he  knew  the
household would be in an uproar or even out searching the streets."
"Hmm."  Goodwin  had  finished  the  hobbles.  Now  she  sat  on  the  backs  of
Gunnar's knees. "And mayhap you and Yates and your other Rat friend took Herun
yourselves.  There's  a  good  trick.  You  lure  the  old  man  out,  not  to  mention  his
household, so  you  can  rob  the place.  Or  did  you  just hear of  the kidnapping,  and
come to help yourself?"
Annis and  Tansy  watched,  their faces  hard.  There's  scant  mercy  in  Lower  City
folk. I would have been  startled  if they had  told  my Dogs  to  stop  hurting  Gunnar
when he'd  kept  his knife to  Tansy's  throat  for  so  long. I could  see  a  red,  swollen
ridge where he'd cut her and the line of dried blood he'd left.
"I'm  on  my own,"  Gunnar cried.  "And  that's  my last word!  Torture  me  all  you
want!"
"Not us," Tunstall said. "We'd stain our uniforms. The cage Dogs, though – they
get leather aprons, special issue. It cuts down on their laundering expenses."
Most street Dogs don't care for torture. The cage Dogs go  in for  that. That  was
partly how they made their extras. We have the Happy Bags to share. Cage dogs get
paid direct, by families and patrons of the Rats, and by the crown for what they can
get from Rats in pain.
Knowing the cage Dogs waited didn't loosen Gunnar's tongue. He kept silent after
that. We took down details of what he'd done as we untied the servants, then found
the cage cart and dropped him off.
Then  we  went  back  to  the  Cesspool  and  our  regular  patrol.  By  then  word  of

Crookshank's raid on the Court of the Rogue had reached the kennel. All around us,
runners slipped by with a wink or a wave. They were lads or gixies like I was once,
picked because they had sense and they knew the Lower City. It was their job to get
the news to the Dogs on watch without being caught by Rats or cracknob cityfolk.
By the time we took supper, the Cesspool was still. The rushers, doxies, spintries,
and drunks had all gone to ground. Everyone wanted to see what the Rogue  would
command  once  the  invaders  had  left  his  Court.  There  were  no  cockfights  or
dogfights,  no  corner  dice  games,  and  scarce  tavern  business.  I'd  never  seen  it  so
unnatural.
We poked around three of Crookshank's  buildings for  signs  of  cellar digging or
the smells of  rotting dead,  without luck. We'd  thought to  look  at  one  more,  since
most  folk  were  off  the  streets.  A  pack  of  pit  dogs  growling  behind  the  place
discouraged us. Perched atop the rear wall to look at them, I could see  their chains
did not  look  securely  fastened  to  stakes  in  the  ground.  We'd  have  to  return  with
sleep dust for these four-legged brothers. Pounce, sitting on the wall beside me, did
not  care  to  get  involved  this  time.  We  gave  up  and  headed  off  down  Charry
Orchard.
"Crookshank's  search  must  still  go  on,"  Goodwin  said  when  we  saw  the  Red
Feather gang wasn't holding their nightly dice game at their usual corner. "That's why
we've seen no one from the Court."
Tunstall listened to a far-off watchman call the quarter hour. "I'd like a word with
Mistress Noll. See if she knows where we might find her boy Yates."
"You  think he'll make a run out  of  Corus?"  Goodwin  asked,  thinking  out  loud.
"To his brother in Port Caynn, or the one in Blue Harbor?"
Tunstall was  shaking his head.  "Not  those  two.  They want  to  look  respectable.
Both of them would send Yates home in a sack."
"So busy working, building it all up, she never noticed  what a Rat  her littlest lad
turned out to be," Goodwin muttered. "There's a mother's lot for you."
Pounce jumped up on my shoulder as we entered the Nightmarket.
"Deirdry Noll's got  five  good  children,  Clary,"  Tunstall  said.  "Every  barrel  has
one rotten one. Yates is hers."
Mistress Noll had plenty of customers. Gemma was there to help. We hung back,
watching as Gemma served while Mistress  Noll cooked.  The  old  mot  worked  fast,
but then she'd been doing this longer than I'd been alive. She was a baker's daughter
who'd married another baker. Watching her, I wondered if she dreamed of flour.
The custom thinned out. My Dogs stepped up to the counter. Gemma said, "Ma."
Mistress  Noll  turned.  "My  favorite  pair."  She  reached  for  the  patties  without
thinking, then stopped  herself. "But somehow  I  think  it's  not  for  our  wares."  She
wiped her  face  and  neck  of  sweat  with  a  cloth  she  kept  over  one  shoulder,  then
leaned on  the counter.  Now she  looked  as  hard  as  her arms.  "What  may I  do  for
you, Guardsman?"
Tunstall  asked  her  about  Yates's  whereabouts.  She  denied  knowledge.  My
attention was  on  her necklaces,  disordered  when  she  wiped  her  neck.  Among  her
beads and brass chains was a thin chain that looked like real gold, with a lily pendant
made of green and white enamel.
What is it about that necklace that seems familiar? I've never seen it before,  I am

certain.
"I  told  Yates  Gunnar  Espeksra  is  worm  scummer."  Mistress  Noll's  voice  was
sharp. "Why do you bother my boy, with Herun Lofts missing and poor Tansy mad
with fear? Such a sweet child. She's had a lifetime of trouble in two scant months."
"Your  boy's  friend put  a knife to  sweet  Tansy's  throat  this  evening,"  Goodwin
said.  "We  think  he  may  have  told  Yates  what  he  was  looking  for.  Surely  that's
harmless enough."
"Nothing's harmless when you hand a cove to the cage Dogs," Mistress Noll said.
"We don't mean to hobble Yates," Goodwin told her. "Unless he's done aught to
be hobbled for?"
"I've  not  seen  him in  five  days,"  Mistress  Noll  said,  her  voice  iron  hard.  "Nor
would I tell you if I had. No mother would."
I looked  around.  My tripes  itched  me  like  fire.  I  know  that  feeling  from  sifting
pigeon and spinner gleanings. Something that matters had crossed  my attention just
recently – two somethings. If I let go,  try not to  think about  them, sometimes  they
become clear.
Tunstall sighed. "Mother, I know you're not thinking kindly of us, but we're only
doing our  work,"  he said,  keeping  his  voice  low.  "And  here's  some  advice  you'll
thank me for.  Close  early. You and  Gemma go  home with  the  crowd.  Better  still,
find a strong fellow to take you home. There may be trouble with the Rogue."
She looked us over. "Is there, now?"
"Some  off-duty  soldiers  raided  the  Court  tonight,"  Goodwin  said.  "They  were
hunting for Herun Lofts. They're still searching the place."
I saw Gemma make the sign against evil on her chest. I could hardly blame her.
"Searching  the  Court.  Kayfer's  own  palace,"  Mistress  Noll  repeated,  as  if  she
couldn't be sure of her own hearing. She  wrapped  her fingers around  her Goddess
charm. "Has  the world run mad?"  She  looked  at  Gemma.  "Start  packing.  No.  I'll
pack up. Find the lads. They'll be at the Sticky Fingers. Run!"
Gemma ran.
Mistress Noll began to place food on the counter. It was a signal to shoppers that
a vendor  was  about  to  close  and  had  reduced  prices.  "Two  patties  or  a  turnover
each to the three of you for the warning, no cost," she said briskly, her hands swift
at their work. "With what cause was this search made?"
"The Rogue will be  upset,  Mother,"  Tunstall told  Mistress  Noll. "That's  enough
of an explanation for now. Tell Yates we want a word, if you see him."
"I'll tell him," the old woman said. "The gods' blessings to you for the warning. I
pray this passes soon, and you find poor Herun Lofts."
It depends  on  whether Crookshank  pays  those  stones  to  the  Shadow  Snake,  I
thought as I followed my Dogs out of the Nightmarket. He won't  find his grandson
at the Court  of  the  Rogue.  Kayfer  Deerborn  is  no  more  the  Snake  than  I  am  the
Queen. The Snake kept his sights low....
The  Snake  kept  his  sights  low  until  Crookshank  found  a  fortune  in  the  Lower
City, I realized. I halted.
"Cooper,  wake  up,"  Goodwin  said.  "Now's  not  the  time  to  be  napping.
Remember your friend Verene."
"I was thinking," I said.

"Then share your thoughts," Tunstall told me.
"Until now the Shadow Snake kept to the shadows," I said. They moved closer to
me. Pounce settled on my feet. I kept  thinking out  loud.  "Then  Crookshank  found
fire opals. Mostly he kept it a secret, and  that's  where he let the Snake in. Because
the  Snake  lives  on  secrets.  He  feeds  on  them.  That's  how  he's  made  his  little
thievings over the years and gotten away with it. Everyone fears to tell, so only a few
know.  Them  as  tell  the  Dogs,  or  the  Rogue,  are  brushed  aside.  So  Crookshank
never heard  the Snake was  there. He didn't  believe in the Snake.  He can't  hurt  the
Snake."
Tunstall rubbed  his beard.  "So  when Crookshank  gets  hurt  by  a  kidnapper,  he
goes to the home of the kidnappers, the Court of the Rogue. He knows Kayfer has
heard of his sudden good fortune. He thinks it's the king of kidnappers who's taken
his great-grandson, and now his grandson. And that he's  just signed  the name of  a
children's bogey."
"Crookshank never gives way to greedy business partners." That was Goodwin's
voice in the dark. "He's famous for it. He didn't pay the Snake for Rolond. He thinks
that now the Snake knows  he won't  pay  what  he  asked,  the  Snake  will  demand  a
lower price for Herun. Crookshank doesn't understand that the Snake is mad –  that
the Snake will keep killing until he gets what he wants."
"We  could  tell him," I suggested.  "Show  him the map,  explain the  Snake  never
backs down."
"Do you believe he'll listen?" Tunstall asked me.
I had to tell the truth. "I just suggested it because anyone who isn't cracked would
believe us."
"Crookshank is more than cracked," Goodwin said. "He's smashed all to pieces."
"He's got to pay this time," Tunstall said.  "He's  running out  of  heirs. Herun's  all
that's left, unless Tansy has a boy. So let's pray the old man comes to his senses."
"And Kayfer doesn't cut his throat," Goodwin added. "No, Kayfer won't do that.
He does  too  much business  with  Crookshank.  But  gods  help  those  folk  who  are
searching the Court."
As we walked on,  Pounce  jumped up  to  my shoulders  and  rode.  "He's  hiring a
third crew, or he's hired them," I said to my Dogs.
"The  one  good  thing  about  a  shake-up  like  tonight,  Cooper,"  Tunstall  said.
"Plenty of people are going to be upset. Upset people are talkative people."
"And maybe we'll get lucky, and there'll be a change in the Court of the Rogue,"
Goodwin said. "There are always opportunities in times like this, for everyone. Your
friends Rosto  and  Aniki could  find themselves  on  the  rise.  And  we  could  hobble
Crookshank and the Snake."
I would like that. It's hard to feel sorry for a cove who orders the murder of folk
in lots of nine and eight. And the Shadow Snake never should  have stepped  out  of
scary stories to become real.
 
 
Friday, May 8, 246
Midafternoon.
This  morning  Pounce  woke  me.  He  was  washing  my  fingers,  then  nuzzling

between them. I clung to something. He meant to have it. He'd get his teeth on it and
pull until his teeth slipped. Feeling muzzy, I brought my hand to my face and opened
it. I held my fire opal. I'd stared at it until I fell asleep. Seemingly I'd hung on to it all
night.
In my dreams, I had played by Mistress Noll's house with my childhood friends.
Mistress Noll chased  Tansy  with a broom  as  Tansy  mocked  her. It had  happened
often when I lived in Mutt Piddle Lane.
"Rocks  aren't  food,  you  coal-colored  mumper,"  I  told  my  cat,  looking  at  the
stone. A ray of sun poked through the shutters and touched it. The glassy bits shone
cherry, green, and yellow.
Now Pounce rubbed against my face, purring like thunder and  getting hair in my
nostrils and on my lips. When he leaned on my nose, I pulled him down, hugging his
silly person in both arms.
You are not respectful! he complained.
"If you want that, get yourself a noble,"  I said.  He smelled like clean cat,  just a
little musky and sweet. "Someone who'll give you a collar with gems and let you ride
on her horse, above all us gutter runners." I kissed his head. "But you have me and a
job with the Provost's Dogs. So very sad."
The shutter gave a thump that brought me bolt upright.
Pounce said, They want in.
"They can't come in," I said, putting him down. "I can't face them." I went to the
crack. "I can't handle seventeen ghosts!" I said. "Today will be bad enough without
me thinking I could've saved eight more of you!" I put the stone on the inside ledge
and skinned out of my nightshirt. "Don't you go a-lettin' them in, Pounce!" I warned
him. "They'll catch me outside anyway!"
I dressed and braided my hair. I was  just finishing when Aniki and  Kora  rapped
on my door.
Aniki smiled. "It's too warm to stay up here. Let's sit in the sun!"
The pigeons will love that, I thought, but after so much rain, I was sick of  eating
on my floor, too. As I packed  up  my share  of  our  settings,  I asked  her and  Kora,
"Did anyone find Herun?"
Kora shook  her head.  "Crookshank's  raiders  found  plenty of  the Rogue's  other
little treasures, but no Herun. Is he as handsome as they say?"
"He's married to my friend," I said, frowning at her. "He's  well enough in looks.
Not that clever."
Aniki swooped  on  Pounce  and  swung him into  the  air.  "Who  needs  handsome
idiots when we can have kitties!" she cried, spinning around with him. Pounce glared
at me as if to say, Stop her!
I shrugged at him. Figuring I'd buy the birds off with food, I grabbed my bag of
pigeon feed, then swiped a fresh cherry from Kora's basket. Aniki freed Pounce and
collected  a  pot  she  had  left  by  her  door.  My  belly  growled.  I'd  had  only  stale
biscuits when I came home last night. Aniki had Tyran custard in that pot.
I stared at her. "Tyran custard's costly."
"It's not so costly.  And I think we deserve  a treat, with all that's  gone  on."  She
lifted the pot to her nose  and  inhaled. "Of  a certainty we deserve  a treat. Pox  take
Crookshank and Deerborn, that's what I say."

"As Mithros wills," I whispered.
"As Mithros wills," they repeated.
We had  almost reached  the ground  floor  when  Ersken  came  to  the  front  door.
"Where were you?" he asked Kora. "I went to the Mermaid like you asked yesterday
morning. You never came. I waited until they closed. Then I went to the Court of the
Rogue.  They  wouldn't  let  me  in.  I  even  checked  the  kennel  in  case  they'd  caged
you." I heard him gulp. "I would have bought you out of the cages," he said. "Then
I thought  maybe  you'd  gone  off  with  Rosto...and  then  I  came  here.  I  brought  a
ham." He held up a small string bag.
Kora  ran  to  him  and  flung  her  arms  around  his  neck.  "My  dearest!  I  had  no
supper at all. Fulk and another mage boxed us Rogue mages in a spell-proof room. I
thought Kayfer at least would put out word.... They kept us until dawn!" She kissed
him. "You sweet, adorable laddie, searching all night!" Then she kissed him again for
a goodly time. I grabbed the ham, as it seemed they would be occupied for a while.
In  the  patch  of  rear  yard  by  the  garden,  Aniki  set  her  pot  on  the  bench  and
scooped  Pounce  up.  "I  like  bad  lads  with  black  hearts,"  she  proclaimed.  Pounce
struggled madly.
This is undignified! he said. I am not a toy!
I watched  the  pigeons  that  settled  on  the  wall  around  the  yard.  All  seventeen
carried the ghosts of the murdered diggers. None of  them flew to  us  as  we set  out
breakfast,  not  even  when  I  put  down  food  for  them.  When  other  pigeons
approached,  the  diggers'  ghosts  uttered  a  storm  of  the  hard  coos  that  were  their
angry cries. The other birds flew off, frightened.
Aniki looked at the pigeons. "What's the matter with them?"
"I wouldn't let them in this morning," I told her as  I sliced  the ham. "Eight more
diggers are dead. That's why I wasn't about yesterday –  I was  trying to  learn more
about it."
"But I didn't hear a word of hiring!" Aniki stared at me, holding a spoon over the
jam jar. "None of us did! Someone would have told me – Fiddlelad, or Reed Katie,
or Lady Mae, or Bold Brian." Those were her best friends among Dawull's rushers.
"Whoever  hires  them  for  Crookshank  does  it  without  word  leaking  out."  I  cut
ham into slivers and looked for Pounce, but he was gone. Silly cat, I thought.  He'd
never fled Aniki's or  Kora's  play before,  just sat  where  they  couldn't  reach  him.  I
poked the ham and said, "Gods curse Crookshank. I'd say it serves him right to lose
Herun, except Tansy is cracking with grief. And Herun's a decent cove. At least he'll
be home safe and sound before much longer. We know the Snake delivers once he's
paid."
"You think he'll get paid?" Aniki asked.
A chill  crept  up  my  back.  "Crookshank  knows  what  happens  if  he  don't.  The
Snake killed Rolond. He must pay." I wasn't believing it, even though I said it.
"Crookshank's  had  seventeen  people  killed  to  keep  the  secret  already,
remember?" Aniki's blue eyes were steady. "Seventeen you know of. And the stories
I hear of the man? Goddess's tears, Beka, even for the Lower City he's a monster."
Kora and  Ersken wandered  up  hand  in hand.  They  sat  and  leaned  against  each
other with idiotic smiles. "Let's eat," Kora said.
"With the Lower City run mad, it's good this is the same."  Rosto  had  come.  He

still wore  last night's clothes.  Phelan  walked  behind  him,  carrying  a  basket  of  hot
breads. Kora and Aniki made room for Rosto, though I think Kora did it as much to
snuggle against Ersken.  Phelan waited until I nodded  to  him,  then  sat  next  to  me.
What was I going to do, tell him no, after so many mornings over  this same cloth?
So he's a rusher now, when he was a Dog. I don't have so  many friends  that I can
afford to turn my back on any of them.
I offered the bottle of twilsey to Rosto. "Here, old man."
"I'm  not  old,"  he said  instantly, though he wasn't  as  vigorous  about  it as  usual.
"And I've mint tea, thanks, you pert gixie. Chilled, no less."
"You're only coming in just now?" Aniki asked them, one eyebrow raised. "I hope
you two spent the night in good company."
"Ulsa wanted guards  in the taverns,"  Phelan said.  "I'm  the new lad, so  I  got  to
stay with her." He yawned.
"I was  in the cages,"  Rosto  said,  grabbing  a  turnover.  "A  cove  tried  to  punch
me."  Aniki  raised  both  eyebrows  at  him.  "I  suggested  that  the  Rogue's  lost  all
respect  in  this  city,  for  Crookshank's  raid  to  happen,"  Rosto  explained.  "He
punched me, and I punched back. Sadly,  some  Dogs  were eating supper  where he
landed. They took offense." He brushed at his sleeves. "I thought about telling them
I was friends with our Beka, but then I remembered she'd as soon tell them to  lock
me away until the Stormwings return."
"Pretty bold, to talk that way about the Rogue," said Ersken with a glance at me. I
wasn't going to say it. I was comfortable with Rosto, but not that comfortable. "He'll
be angry when he hears."
"Someone's got to say sommat." Rosto answered Ersken,  but  he watched  me. I
have no idea why. "Someone's got to tell folk that Kayfer Deerborn is a joke and his
chiefs are a joke for  letting him rule. I don't  care  if old  Crookshank's  as  mad as  a
midden hen. He'd never have raided the Court if Kayfer was feared as a Rogue ought
to be feared. Am I right or no?"
None of us answered. He was dead right.
"Now  Kayfer's  giving  orders  to  have  all  the  raiders  killed,"  Phelan  said  with
disgust.  He passed  me a hot  sausage  roll.  "Not  Crookshank,  mind.  Just  the  poor
cuddies as did his work. Gods help anyone who gets in the way."
Ersken shook his head. "That'll make our jobs so much more interesting."
"Just remember to duck," Kora said. "And I'm making safety charms for you and
Beka alike."
We both stared at her.
Kora turned red. "I'm bad at healing, but I do know my way around a basic safety
charm!"
"Kora?" Three young men stood in the gate to the yard.  One  was  the flirty cove
who'd  had  Kora  reading his fortune  last  night.  "We  heard  you  had  breakfast  with
friends  here  sometimes."  He  held  up  a  string  bag.  "We  brought  strawberries  and
cherries." He looked at Rosto. "Just friends, like."
"Kora?" Rosto asked, watching the newcomers. He wanted her to say if they were
all right or not.
"They're good lads," she murmured. "Beka? Ersken?"
"Your word is good enough for me," Ersken told her with a smile. He squeezed

her hand. I shrugged.
The cove whose fortune-telling got interrupted looked down.  "Is  it movin' day?"
he asked.
For a moment we were confused. Then we saw what was coming into the yard.
"Mithros, Ruler of All," Ersken whispered.
Pounce trotted past the newcomers, carrying a black  kitten with a white bib  and
mittens in his mouth. The small creature hung in Pounce's grip, ears flat, hindquarters
and tail curled up. It seemed as dejected as a body could be at my cat's handling.
The young rushers followed Pounce and took seats, watching him with awe. My
cat  dropped  his  captive  in  Aniki's  lap.  He  then  lectured  her  in  meows,  saying,  I
cannot let you maul me about. Do it to him.
"Look  at  this!"  Aniki  said.  She  lifted  the  kitten  and  checked  between  his  legs.
"Oh, poor little man! I suppose  Pounce  carried  you  off  from  a happy  home!"  She
looked him over. "Though your fur is tatty, and you're thin. Is he a street kitten?" she
asked Pounce.
Pounce nodded. Aniki gulped, then cuddled the kitten.
Kora grabbed Pounce. "Why her?" she asked, holding Pounce  up.  "I'm  a mage.
By rights I should have a cat. You like Aniki more than you like me!"
Pounce wrestled himself free and raced away. Kora watched him go. "Beka,  you
have a very strange cat, there."
"So I've been told," I said.
"He  has  purple  eyes,"  one  of  the  new  coves  said.  He  looked  a  bit  spooked.
"Purple eyes. Is he magic?"
"Aren't all cats?" Ersken asked.
As  Rosto  talked  with  our  guests,  Aniki  offered  her  little  man  some  ham.  He
shrank from it, then sniffed. She shook the piece. He licked it, then bit. With Aniki
offering him meat a piece at a time, he settled down to a meal. We began to eat ours.
Once  he  was  done,  the  kitten  wandered  over  to  eye  a  bug  near  Rosto's  knee.
Rosto offered his fingers for the creature to sniff. The kitten blinked, then swiped at
him with his claws. "Ow!"
"That's my laddybuck!" Aniki said. She laughed. "There's his name, Laddybuck.
You're a ladies' man, aren't you?" She snatched Laddybuck up before Rosto  could
take vengeance on the kitten. Though Rosto was sucking blood off the tiny scratch,
I didn't believe he would hurt the creature.  He seemed  to  reserve  that sort  of  thing
for human beings.
"He's mincemeat if he draws my blood again," Rosto threatened. "I've had a long
night. Those  cages  of  yours  aren't  very safe,"  he told  Ersken  and  me.  "One  poor
mumper got doused in there. Throat cut."
My gut went tight. "Did they give a name?"
"Gunnar," Kora's former customer said. "My ma's cousin – they brung the word
around dawn."
"Our sorrow for your sorrows," Ersken said. He was that sort.
The cove shook his head. "No sorrow. He was a stupid scut, no more brains than
you can blow out your nose. Allus sayin' his friend Yates would make 'im a big man
in the city." He laughed.
"Pox and murrain," I whispered.  No  one  could  question  Gunnar now.  How had

this happened?
Ersken said, "I think Pounce is in a giving mood today."
Here came my cat with a second kitten. This one was a light and dark brown ball
with thin black stripes and spots. Pounce dropped it in front of Kora.
All of us were silent. Kora slowly reached  down  and  picked  up  the ball of  fuzz.
After a moment of  her stroking,  it unrolled. It  had  four  paws,  two  ears,  and  very
green eyes.
Ersken quickly chopped some ham. Kora put the cat  down  in front  of  the meat,
whispering to  it. The  ball wobbled  and  fell on  its bottom,  then  attacked  the  food.
Within moments it had eaten three times what Laddybuck  had.  Kora's  polite check
under its tail told us that this, too, was a boy. Once he was done, her kitten, his belly
now much bigger, hooked his way up onto her lap and stared about him with those
startling eyes. When Kora petted him again, he produced a very big purr.
That made me smile, at least. We finished our breakfast as the two kittens napped.
I excused  myself after a time and  went back  to  my rooms.  I  could  not  get  my
dreams out of my head. Not them, not the sight of the lily pendant  against Mistress
Noll's sweaty throat. I wanted another look at the map.
It was hot and close under the roof.  I had  a choice.  I could  light my lamps and
suffocate, or I could open my shutters. In the end it was no choice. I couldn't  help
but feel I owed  the diggers'  ghosts  and  their birds  an apology  for  my  rudeness.  I
opened my shutters  wide. Since  I faced  the morning sun,  I had  more than enough
light by which to  see  the map and  all its markings. When the birds  came,  at first I
didn't  even  notice.  I  was  too  busy  studying  that  map  with  a  new  eye.  I'd  finally
remembered why Mistress Noll's necklace seemed familiar.
Back when, a neighbor to one of the Snake's victims had drawn his prize for me: a
lily pendant. She'd described it, enamel on gold,  but  it was  her rough sketch  in the
dirt of her yard that'd stuck in my nob. Graceful that pendant was, the kind of thing
any mot would like to have, even me. Even Mistress Noll.
I think Yates Noll gave the lily pendant to his mother. I looked at the map afresh
because I was thinking Yates Noll is connected to the Shadow Snake somehow. He
works for him or is him. If Yates is the Snake, it would explain why his friends  are
afeared of him. Could it be, as Mistress Noll's business grew from Mutt Piddle Lane
to the Daymarket, Yates  was  able to  spread  out  and  hunt? On  his errands  for  her,
working in her stalls, he'd hear who had aught worth taking. From being in the cages
and the court and  Outwalls Prison  he'd  know other  hard  coves,  including some  as
wouldn't balk at kidnapping a little one for coppers.
"Beka? Are you well?"
I'd  left  my  door  open  for  the  air.  Kora  had  come  in.  She  wore  a  cloth  sling
fashioned from a scarf around her chest. Her kitten peered out of  it, his green eyes
fixed on the pigeons on my sill.
"Remember the mot who told us of the lily pendant?" I asked her.
I saw  a muscle jump in Kora's  cheek.  "I  remember them all,"  she  said,  coming
over to me.
"I think I saw the pendant last night, on Mistress Noll's neck. You've met her son
Yates?" Kora shook her head. "He's a hard cove. Not clever enough for the Rogue's
Court, I'd thought," I said. "But mayhap he's learned sommat  in his life, enough to

pick off the minnows. Enough mayhap to come by a pretty now and then to give his
mama for all the times she's paid his fees and given him work."
"So why stare at the map?" Kora asked. Her kitten was struggling to climb out of
the sling.
"I'm  trying to  see  if there's  a  pattern,"  I  said.  "If  the  folk  whose  children  were
stole lived near Mistress Noll's home or near her shops. He lives and works with her,
see. She moved from Mutt Piddle Lane two years back,  and  she  sold  goods  there,
on the Common, in the Nightmarket, and in the Daymarket."
"So he's been everywhere for her," Kora said, putting her kitten on the floor.
"Everywhere," I said,  feeling downhearted.  "Him, his friends,  anyone who came
to her and gossiped with her or Gemma. I could as well be singing to the moon for
all the good this does."
"We'll go out  and  talk to  some  more folk,"  Kora  told  me. "Today  might be  the
day you  learn  the  golden  bit  of  news,  Beka.  So  put  on  your  dress  and  we'll  go.
We've those five folk we wanted to try out toward Charry Orchard, remember."
I remembered her kissing Ersken downstairs. "I, um, thought you and Ersken...,"
I began, and stopped myself. I didn't want to come right out and say I thought they
were going to  go  straight to  her room  and  stay  there till it was  time  for  Ersken  to
leave for training, but that's what I thought.
Kora had that wicked smile on  her face.  "There  is time for  that. He knows  how
important this is to us both. And I've promised him a treat for later."
I was  grateful to  her. So  many good  mots  lose  sight  of  the  other  things  in  life
when they get caught up with a new cove. I think I startled  us  both  when I hugged
her as once I'd hugged my sisters and  kissed  her cheek.  "Thank  you,"  I said.  "I'm
feeling that useless about the Snake."
Kora stared at me. "But you have that map,  and  the Birdies. You're  putting it all
together, Beka!" She kissed my cheek. "You really are a terrier."
Far in the distance,  thunder rolled. The  kitten mewed.  We  looked  and  saw  him
under the window, staring at the pigeons. They stared back at him. I heard the ghost
on one of the new birds say, "She looked like a queen in silk."
"A queen in that bad place," a new cove's ghost said.
"She give a flask t' them guards," a mot's ghost whined. "He put it in soup. I saw
'im."
"The  soup  were good  that night." That  ghost's  voice  was  cracked  and  rasping,
like he'd breathed smoke, mayhap, or had the lung rot. "It were the best we had."
"It were th'  last we had!"  one  of  the  new  mots'  ghosts  snapped.  "Poisoned,  it
were! An' that mot brung it in her flask!"
"Black tears on her face." The raspy-voiced cove sounded weary. "She had black
tears on her face."
My heart banged  against my ribs.  Crookshank's  houseguest,  Vrinday  Kayu,  the
mage who'd  acted  as  Tansy's  maid in the Nightmarket –  she  had  tattoos  of  black
teardrops on her face.
I could be wrong. Others used black drop tattoos, often to show they had taken a
life. But I would tell my Dogs of this tonight. I would bet a month's wage that Kayu
was the poisoner.
The kitten leaped. The pigeons took off. I looked at the small fuzzball and sighed.

He was too tiny even to jump as high as my windowsill. Still, the birds had fled and
were not returning.
 
Before I go to bed.
We  came  back  from  our  talks  about  two,  as  a  true  summer  storm  crashed
overhead. In the oven of my rooms I changed into my Dog's gear. At least it would
be cooler by the time I came off watch. Meanwhile, I had time yet before training. I
wanted to see how Tansy did.
Outside,  lightning  flashed,  Mithros  wielding  his  sword  against  the  monsters  of
Chaos.  Thunder  roared  as  they screamed  their pain over  their wounds.  Rain came
down  in buckets,  racketing on  my wide straw  hat. Pounce  kept  to  the  side  of  the
buildings, staying dry under the eaves. The streets were empty. Everyone was taking
shelter until the downpour slacked.
I went to the kitchen entrance at Crookshank's, not wishing to be turned  away at
the front  door.  The  maid  gawped  for  a  moment,  then  turned  and  said,  "Mistress
Annis, it's  Beka  Cooper!"  She  nearabout  dragged  me  into  the  house  by  the  arm.
"We  never had  a chance  to  thank yez fer savin' us  last night, me'n Zada'n  Cook'n
Otto – "
"Enough." Annis herself was in the kitchen, which smoothed my way. "We're  all
in debt to Beka and her partners." She tried to smile, but her mouth was shaky.
"Mistress Annis, I hope the Goddess brings Herun home safe," I told  her. "And
soon." By the light of day I could see the old smoke streaks  on  the ceiling, leading
from the front of the house.
"My thanks, Beka," Annis said. "D'you want to see Tansy? I'll need to sneak you
up  the  back  stair.  Father  Ammon  isna...well."  I  think  she  meant  he  was  cracked,
plain and true.
"He seemed upset at the Court of the Rogue last night," I told her, as  meek as  a
priest's mouse. Behind me I heard the cook choke.
"This  way,"  Annis  said.  She  led  to  the  servants'  stair  and  up.  "Will  you  tell
Goodwin and Tunstall I'm grateful for what they done, and you, yester e'en? I'm not
even askin' how the three of you came to be here."
I was glad her back was to me, since I think I flinched. I'd wondered if anyone in
this house had  noticed  and  questioned  what had  brought  us  there so  conveniently.
To distract her I said, "A Birdie tells me Gunnar Espeksra is dead."
She looked  at me. I'd  shocked  her. The  confusion  was  plain on  her face  in  the
lamplight. "Dead? Was he in a fight?"
"No, mistress," I said. "He was killed in the cages."
She  walked  onto  the  third  floor  landing  and  waited  for  me.  "In  the  cages?
Goddess's tears. Oh – oh, you think I paid to have it done." Annis shook her head.
"Beka, I was too milled about to buy the murder of anybody." Her lips trembled. "I
just want my boy home and safe."
"The Goddess willing, Mistress Annis," I said. The dreadful idea that Crookshank
won't pay for Herun clung to my mind. I was curst if I'd say it to her, though.
Mistress  Annis  led  me  to  Tansy's  room  and  opened  the  door.  "Tansy,  Beka's
here, to see how you do." She let me go in, then closed the door, leaving Tansy and
me to ourselves.

Tansy  stood  by  the window.  The  shutters  were  wide,  giving  her  a  view  of  the
garden and  the  rain.  Three  pigeons  pecked  at  corn  on  the  broad  sill.  I  heard  the
ghosts whisper, but softly: old ghosts, almost faded clean away.
"Ever since that night," Tansy said, "it don't seem right to watch them without so
much as a greeting and a bit of food. They might carry some other child."
I put my hat on the floor to drip and came over to listen to the ghosts. "No. This
one?"  I pointed  to  one  that was  mostly gray. "This  mumper here carries  a mot  as
was killed by  her man for  cheating on  him." The  black  pigeon had  but  one  toe  to
each foot.
"Poor  thing,"  said  Tansy,  tears  filling  her  eyes.  "Beka,  how  can  you  bear  it?"
Tansy asked. "Knowing their stories?"
"I've been hearing them awhile," I said. "I'm accustomed."
Tansy laughed a little. "So matter of fact. You've always been that way."
"You  need  me to  balance you,"  I  reminded  her.  "If  you  break  your  heart  over
each one of them, you'll go all cracknobbed."
Tansy smiled. "Never mind me, Beka. I cry over wilted flowers, more than I ever
did when we was  small. My son  is dead,  Herun's  gone.  Father  Ammon thinks  the
Rogue  took  him, you  know.  I  believe  I  will  turn  into  tears.  I  thought  I  would  be
safe." She rubbed her arms. "I told myself there'd be no danger when I was free of
Mutt Piddle Lane."
Only  Tansy  would  think  sommat  so  silly.  Even  as  little  gixies  we'd  heard  of
robberies and murders in districts as fine as Highfields and  Unicorn,  let alone here.
"There's  danger everywhere," I replied. I wished I knew  what  I  could  do  for  her.
Telling her Gunnar was  dead  wouldn't  help.  It  would  only  let  her  know  the  Dogs
couldn't keep their captives safe.
"I'm just not good company now, Beka," whispered Tansy.
I hugged her. "I only came to see how you did after last night. I no more expected
to see  you  dancing than I expected  to  fly." Another  pigeon  came  in,  one  with  no
rider. "Don't work yourself up over this one, girl. He carries no ghost  at all." I was
always  glad  when  that  happened.  I  thought  the  birds  deserved  rest.  Unless  they
didn't see  it as  rest,  as  I did  on  my day  off,  but  boredom,  with naught to  occupy
them.  "Don't  forget  the  little  one  that's  coming,"  I  told  her.  "I  pray  the  gods  for
Herun's safe return."
I let myself out. I did it on the quiet, not wanting to break the silence in that tomb
of a house.
Crookshank  and  the woman he spoke  to  in the hall did  not  hear me.  I  stopped
cold when I saw them. She was Vrinday Kayu, the Carthaki who was with Tansy the
night she talked to Rolond's ghost. Then, she'd dressed like a maidservant. Now she
wore a yellow cotton tunic over white cotton, the cloth finer than Annis's or Tansy's
dresses.  Kayu's  head  veil  was  silk.  She  wore  perfume  that  smelled  of  something
foreign, like temple incense. Her eyes, when they flicked to  me, were lined in black
paint.
And there were those black teardrops tattooed at the outside corner of each  eye,
and one at the center of her chin. I was sure of it. Kayu had brought the poison for
the diggers.
Cold sweat covered my skin. I wanted to put the hobbles on  her then and  there.

Writing this, my hand shakes. She is a murderer. Only I cannot prove it. I have but
the word  of  ghosts.  A mage might get the truth, if she  did  not  spell herself  to  die
first. A mage might get the truth from Crookshank. But he has noble friends who will
not let us arrest him without good cause.
She is a poisoner. I will see her in a cage. I will see her on Execution Hill if I can.
Crookshank turned. "You – Dog." His voice was hoarse. I suppose  it was  from
all the  screaming  he  did  at  the  Court  of  the  Rogue.  "What  are  you  doing  in  my
house?"
I tucked  my  hat  under  my  arm  and  stood  with  my  feet  braced.  "I'm  Tansy's
friend."
"My granddaughter-in-law doesn't  have Dogs  for  friends."  He  waved  off  Kayu.
She scuttled down the stairs.
Crookshank advanced on me. He still had not shaved, though he had changed his
clothes  from  last night. "What  good  are you,  eh?" He trembled from  head  to  toe.
"The Rogue steals Herun from under your stupid noses! When I am forced to bribe
amateurs to seek him out, the Rogue  laughs up  his sleeve and  smuggles him away.
Again, under  your  very noses!  What good  are you  cuddies?  Why are we taxed  to
pay for you? Why are we taxed again for your poxy Happy Bags?"
Heat  built  up  behind  my  eyes.  How  dare  this  murdering  old  scut  speak  so  of
Dogs?  Of  them that chase  the Rats  from  his storerooms  so  he  can  get  fat  on  his
gains? Though he is skeleton thin now. When I chanced a look at his face, I saw the
skin hanging in folds on the sides – he used to have more flesh under it.
His voice  got  soft.  "Unless  you  are  working  for  Kayfer.  I  could  afford  you,  I
suppose.  What is the gold  I've  paid  already  compared  to  the  fortune  I  will  have?
You Dogs are always sniffing after coin. It need not even be much. I could have you
for coppers."
Our trainers taught us  to  hit Rats  only when there is aught to  be  gained from  it.
Over and over they had said it, shouted it, yelled it. That order was the one thing that
kept  me  from  slapping  Crookshank.  I  clenched  my  hand  on  my  hat  so  tight  I
crushed the straw brim.
"Are you in this with Kayfer?" Crookshank  reached  for  me. "Where  is Herun? I
will pay you well. More gold than you could dream of. I will buy you a new life in, in
Tusaine, or Maren, or Barzun."
I have a temper. It is not my friends' temper, exploding in flames. Mine is ice that
numbs me all over. I know it is bad when I cannot feel my face. I am told  my eyes
look like death at such times. Crookshank gulped.
"I  wouldn't  take  every  fire  opal  you've  ripped  from  the  earth  of  this  city,  you
bloody handed scut," I told him. He flinched when I said  "fire opal."  He thought a
nothing like me would never know his precious secret. "Any gift from  your  hand  is
bought with death. I will see you tried for your crimes."
He blinked fast, his mouth a-tremble. Then he said, "I will have you killed."
That did it. He threatened me, with no regard  for  my uniform. I told  him, "Then
me  and  the  seventeen  diggers  you've  slaughtered  will  haunt  you.  You'll  see  us  in
every bit of shiny wood and glass, every puddle, every mirror, understand? They're
here, followin' me about the city. I'll make curst sure we follow you. And when you
dance at the rope's end, we'll be waitin' at the gates of the Peaceful Realms. There'll

be no peace for a murderin' pig like you." I shoved him. "Kill me. You'll never sleep
a night through again!"
He went to backhand me across the face. I grabbed his wrist and twisted. I might
have broken it, but a door behind us opened.
"Grandfather?" I heard Tansy ask.
I dropped Crookshank's arm.
"Go to your room!" Crookshank ordered.
"You're fighting with Beka."
"Go to your room!"
"Shall I tell her?" I asked,  keeping my voice  low. I tried to  talk educated  again,
though I was still in a fury. "About you rippin' – ripping seventeen people from their
loved ones to make your fat purse fatter?"
He slapped me. I didn't try to stop him this time. I wasn't sure I would not break
his arm. I had to be better than him.
"No! She's my friend!" Tansy ran up to us.
I smiled at him. From  the way he looked  at me, I'd  not  made him feel  better.  I
didn't mean him to. "I let you have that blow. I won't give you another," I said.
Crookshank cursed me and strode down the hall.
I looked at Tansy. "I'm off. I'll see you another time." I knew she was scared, but
I had no time to ease her mind. I needed to catch up with the old bastard. I had one
more thing to  say,  for  Tansy's  sake  and  Herun's.  I caught up  to  him on  the  stairs
near the second floor.
"Crookshank."
He glared up at me. "You take the servants'  stair, and  you  never call me by  that
name!"
I will never take the servants' stair in that house  again. "I  could  hobble  you  now
for  striking  me.  You  know  it,  and  I  know  it,  you  worthless  pustule.  I'll  let  it  go.
Others will put you in the cages for bigger things."
"You doxie." He put his hand on his belt knife.
He'd let me get too close. I gripped him so he could not draw the knife. "Stop it,
afore I use my baton to make you listen," I said. How did he get so rich if he was so
stupid? "For Tansy's sake,  hear me. For  your  grandchild's  sake.  Your greed  killed
Rolond. It'll kill Herun if you don't mind me."
His eyes bulged. "I'll see you raped and your  body  left in a midden,  your  throat
cut in two."
I struggled to move my mouth. I'd gone numb with rage again. Never have I been
spoken to in so filthy a way. The worst of Mama's men had just knocked me aside.
I'll never forget his words, never, but I could  not  let him stop  me from  speaking.  I
had to remember Tansy, Tansy and her unborn child.
"Pay  the poxy  ransom.  Kayfer  isn't  the  Shadow  Snake.  There's  a  real  Shadow
Snake. He's been working the Lower City for three years. He killed Rolond because
you were too  sarden  mean to  pay.  He'll kill Herun. He's  mad.  You can't  play with
madmen."
Crookshank fought my grip on his hand. "The Shadow Snake is a children's tale.
Kayfer uses him to frighten jinglenobs like you."
"He's real. Ask anyone in the street."

Crookshank  didn't  mean  to  pay.  He  thought  Kayfer  would  make  a  deal  before
he'd  risk  a  second  raid  like  last  night's.  Herun  had  six  days  to  live  if  the  Snake
followed his schedule. If his grandfather thought he could bluff a second time.
I saw  naught but  hate in Crookshank's  eyes.  I  could've  argued  more,  but  what
could I say? I let him go. He ran down the stairs and into a ground floor room.
I cursed him softly and left the house. Mayhap he would think better of what I had
said once he'd cooled down. I prayed he would, for Tansy's sake.
I began  to  shake  as  my  cold  temper  thawed.  I'd  come  close  to  punching  the
second  most  powerful cove  in  the  Lower  City.  I'd  have  to  tell  my  Dogs.  Please,
Goddess,  may  they  understand.  Besides  praying  for  Tansy  and  Herun,  I  need  to
pray Crookshank won't take his revenge on Goodwin and Tunstall as well as on me.
 
Goodwin snagged  my arm as  soon  as  my training class  arrived for  muster.  She
towed me over to a corner. "I've word from the pigeons, the new ones," I told her in
a  whisper  as  we  walked.  "The  poison  they  had  came  from  the  mage  that  was
pretending to be Tansy Lofts' maid, Vrinday Kayu. They didn't know her name, but
they knew the teardrop tattoos."
Goodwin  nodded.  "Now  here's  a tidbit for  you.  A  cage  Dog  was  killed  before
dawn  this  morning,  in  front  of  his  house,"  she  told  me  as  we  crossed  the  floor.
"Knifed in the kidneys.  We  think  he's  the  one  who  killed  Gunnar  Espeksra  in  his
cage last night." She gave me a quick look. "You already heard about Gunnar, didn't
you? I should have guessed. So not only did we lose our Rat, we lost  the cur  Dog
that killed him. And nobody knows who paid him to do it."
I thought  curses  to  myself  as  we  joined  a  knot  of  Dogs  waiting  for  us  in  the
corner. Tunstall was there, along with Jewel, Yoav, Otterkin, and a fistful of the best
Dogs of the Evening Watch.
"Right," Otterkin said. "That Jens you're looking for, the one you think guards the
opal diggers? A cove of that name hires on at the slave markets oftentimes. He gets
work through Inman Poundridge. And we all know Poundridge will work for them as
work for Crookshank, on the side, like."
"We caged  one  of  Poundridge's  helpers  five months  back,"  Jewel said.  "Dream
rose  smuggling.  We  could  never  pin  it  to  Poundridge,  never  mind  Crookshank
himself."
"How  many  folk  does  Poundridge  hire  out  of  the  slave  markets?"  one  of  the
others asked.
"'Bout fifteen regular," Jewel replied. "They've been scarce in sight of late."
"It's  stupid  to  have  only  three  guards  on  eight  or  nine  diggers  all  the  time,"
Tunstall said quietly. "You'd need folk you trust. Folk you used before.  And you'd
use them in shifts."
"There's that mage mark, the one they put on the guards," Goodwin pointed out.
"They'd have showed  the guards  it works.  They'd  have killed someone  in front  of
them."
"Kayu. The mage in Crookshank's house," I said, not thinking. They all stared at
me.
One of the Dogs said, "Puppies don't yap 'less they're smacked."
"No, let Cooper talk." That was Jewel, not one of my Dogs, though they nodded.

"Cooper's one smart Puppy."
"Go  on,  Cooper,"  Goodwin  said,  giving  me  a  sharp  elbow.  "Finish  what  you
started."
I put my hand in my pocket and held my fire opal chunk as I made myself look at
these veteran Dogs. "It's that woman my Dogs think is a mage, Vrinday Kayu. I was
at Crookshank's  today.  Tansy  Lofts,  his granddaughter-in-law –  she's  my friend. I
saw her, Kayu, talking with  Crookshank.  They  saw  me,  too.  Anyway,  I  think  her
room is on the same floor  as  Tansy's.  She's  not  in the attics  like a maid. And she
doesn't dress like one."
Goodwin said, smooth as glass, "One of Cooper's Birdies told  her Kayu maybe
did for these diggers. Eight more are dead, right, Cooper?"
I nodded.
None of them said  a word  at first. I began to  feel like a great ducknob.  I could
hear them shift on their feet. Finally Goodwin spoke. "If we put in for permissions to
sit on  the mage, on  Poundridge,  and  on  Jens  when he checks  in with Poundridge,
would you folk be good for it?"
Yoav  looked  discomfited.  "Mages...and  one  Crookshank  hires?  I  like  my  skin
stuck to my flesh, where it's supposed to be."
Jewel jabbed her with an elbow.  Was  that where Goodwin  learned it? Jewel was
her senior  partner  when  she'd  been  a  Puppy.  "Shut  up,  Yoav."  He  looked  at  us.
"What about Fulk?"
"He'll  run  straight  to  Crookshank,"  Tunstall  said,  his  voice  firm.  "If  he's  alive,
after  helping  with  that  raid  on  the  Court  of  the  Rogue  last  night.  Remember  our
Birdie, the gem mage Berryman?"
One of them whistled. "He's a serious mage, for all he's a looby."
"Berryman will help if it gets ugly," Tunstall said. "If we just watch Kayu, how will
she even know we're there? We  keep  this to  Evening Watch  –  we  can't  trust  Day
Watch or Night Watch. We Dog Kayu. If she makes a foul move, we get Berryman.
But we keep an eye on her, on Poundridge, then on Jens. We know the mage marks
kill them if they talk. Maybe even if they're hobbled.  So  we can't  touch  any of  our
Rats until we know where they go and we're ready to cage the whole foul nest."
Jewel nodded. "We're in. Ain't we, Yoav?"
Yoav grumbled. "'Specially you keep me away from that mage. I'm in."
The others voted to do it. I think Tunstall and  Goodwin  knew they would when
they gathered them together. These were hard Dogs, them that took Lower City duty
serious. I was honored to be asked to stand with them.
I followed Goodwin and Tunstall over  to  the Sergeant's  desk.  "Ahuda,  we need
papers," Goodwin whispered. All eyes were on us.
Ahuda scowled at her. "How many of you?"
"Nine. Two Rats to watch right off, so two sets of papers," Goodwin said.
"Four pairs off patrol?" Ahuda demanded. "For how long?"
Goodwin just looked at her.
Ahuda cursed.  "You  couldn't  have picked  a less  crazy  time? Don't  answer that.
Muster up!" she yelled. "And clear the room! Dogs only!"
All our onlookers left, with plenty of whining. We Dogs fell into our ranks.
When the doors  were closed  and  bolted  and  even the cage  Dogs  had  gone,  the

room  got  quiet. "We're  in  the  cracked  season,  children,"  Ahuda  told  us.  "Master
Fulk has been naughty. He's being sought by the royal mages. Stay  clear of  him. If
he has sense, he's on a ship for Carthak right now."
She took a deep breath. "Kayfer Deerborn has sworn a complaint against Master
Ammon Lofts. He says  Master Lofts  invaded  the Court  of  the Rogue.  Apparently
it's a meeting hall for  craftsmen  as  live between Festive  and  Riverfront  nowadays,
which  came  as  a  great  surprise  to  me  –  "  She  didn't  even  try  to  speak  over  the
bellow of laughter from the Dogs. She simply waited it out. She looked at a paper on
her desk. "Master Crookshank  invaded the craftsmen's  meeting hall with a gang of
toughs recruited from off-duty soldiers." She tapped the paper. "That's what it says.
They wrecked  the hall, including Kayfer's  personal  quarters,  stealing  various  items
and destroying furniture. It was all in the name of  finding Master Herun Lofts,  who
has  been  missing  since  last  night.  Day  Watch  is  investigating  that,  by  the  by.
Crookshank says a note came to the Lofts house from someone  claiming to  be  the
Shadow Snake, demanding ransom for Herun. The ransom is to be delivered a week
from  the  day  Herun  was  taken.  Crookshank  says  Kayfer  had  the  lad  stolen.  Not
unreasonable.  That's  why  Crookshank  and  some,  he  says,  'friends'  exercised
'cityman's privilege' to search the Court of the Rogue."
"Cove wants to die," someone called.
"Plenty of people will." My lord Gershom walked out of the Watch Commander's
office,  the  Watch  Commander  at  his  back.  My  lord  went  over  to  stand  beside
Ahuda's desk. "Three of the off-duty soldiers that Crookshank hired were found  in
the  river  this  mornin'.  They  had  rawhide  strings  with  a  gold  noble  on  them  tied
around  their necks  –  Kayfer's  way of  sayin' this  is  what  takin'  Crookshank's  gold
gets you. Get out on the streets, all of you. Show your faces to the city. Put a stop
to  this.  If  the  Rogue  wants  to  kill  anyone,  let  him  kill  Crookshank,  and  good
riddance. But both of these men had best learn it's not their city, but ours."
We answered him with growls.
He nodded to us and left the kennel. The Watch Commander disappeared into his
office again.
"You heard my lord," Ahuda said.  "In the meantime, Birch and  Vinehall, here is
Kayfer Deerborn's  complaint  against  Crookshank.  You  two  take  four  of  the  cage
Dogs and execute it on  him." She  held up  a parchment  laden with seals.  Grinning,
Birch went to get it from her, Vinehall to call four cage Dogs. Crookshank would be
out of  the cages  soon  after he'd  been  tucked  into  one,  but  it  was  still  worth  it  to
tweak his tail.
"Enough  lollygagging,"  Ahuda  snapped.  "Dismissed."  Goodwin  went  to  the
Sergeant's desk as those of us who wanted to keep watch on Kayu and Jens waited.
Ahuda sighed. "Were  you  listening? My lord  wants you  on  the street,  not  working
some special rig."
"We've  got  something,  Ahuda,"  Goodwin  said.  "Seventeen  dead,  and  more  to
come.  Our  information's  good.  We've  been  chasing  our  tails.  Now  we  have  two
scents, but they're tricky. One  hops  between jobs,  the other's  a mage. Don't  make
me call in your debts to me, gixie."
"You heard my lord," Ahuda told her and us, her eyes  glittering. "And  you  have
debts to me, too, Clary. Seventeen dead? Why haven't I heard about this?"

"Because only the dead are talking, Ahuda," Tunstall told her. "You know Cooper
can hear them."  Ahuda glanced at  me.  I  stiffened.  How  many  people  knew?  And
why didn't I know they knew?
"I  can't  turn  eight  –  nine  –  Dogs  loose  from  patrol  when  times  are  like  this,"
Ahuda said. "You three, and you three alone. If you  want to  start  tonight, go  –  I'll
have the papers for you at muster tomorrow."
"Just one pair and a Puppy?" I couldn't tell who of us said it.
"Ahuda – " Jewel began.
"That's my last word."
They could tell she meant it. We all turned away. The others went outside. When
we left the kennel, they were waiting.
"We talked," Jewel said. "Who are you three watching?"
Goodwin and Tunstall traded looks. "Poundridge," Goodwin said. "He's got Jens
reporting to him. Jens will take us back to the diggers. Right now, they're looking to
hire  more.  Once  they  have  new  folk,  the  mage  will  visit  them,  not  the  other  way
around."
Jewel nodded. "We agree. We're all going to work it out, try to keep a watch on
Crookshank's  and  on  that  mage.  Unofficial-like."  He  winked  at  us.  "Better  than
nothing."
Goodwin walked on out into the street. I think Ahuda telling her only the three of
us could go had hit her hard. Tunstall clapped Jewel and a couple  of  the others  on
the shoulder  in thanks.  I followed him on  the  way  after  Goodwin.  It  made  sense.
Jens was a guard. Sooner or later he'd go to his master, Poundridge, for his pay. We
could follow him back to those he watched over.
Off  we  went  to  the  Market  of  Sorrows.  On  the  way  Tunstall  told  me  about
Poundridge.  From  four  until  midnight,  give  or  take,  he  supervised  guards  from  a
booth set  between the pens  and  the market stage.  From  there he greeted folk who
came to see the slaves waiting to be sold and bossed the guards. That made it easy
for them that worked for him in other parts of the city to report to him for their pay
or to  get more work.  And it made  him  easy  for  us  to  watch.  An  alley  down  and
across the street gave us a place where we could  see  him do  business  without him
seeing us.
We'd  been  there  long  enough  for  me  to  get  bored  when  Goodwin  asked,
"Cooper, what happened when you visited your friend Tansy? You looked  skittish,
talking about it."
"Not skittish. Angry. For you," Tunstall said.
I told them, keeping my voice low. When I was done, Pounce laid a dead mouse
on my boot for some reason. "No, thank you," I said. "You can keep it."
"I'm not  sure  you  should  have let on  you  knew about  the opals.  Not  when he's
trying to keep them secret from the world," Goodwin whispered.
"I lost my head," I said. In the cool summer night, with my temper in my grip, I
felt shamed. "I'm afeared he won't pay up and the Snake will kill Herun."
"Even Crookshank's  not  that mad,"  Goodwin  replied, but  she  didn't  sound  like
she believed it.
"Madder than a snakebit bull," Tunstall said. Then he gave the softest of whistles.
"Who have we here?"

A party of eight nobles had come on horseback, with servants to help them. They
drew up before Poundridge's booth. Most of the nobles dismounted.
A woman said loudly, "Are you joking? Is this the 'diversion' you spoke of?" We
all knew that lady's deep voice well.
Someone  laughed. A man said,  "My dear  Sabine,  you  aren't  a dreary  reformist,
demanding that we do  away with slavery, are you?  If it was  good  enough  for  our
grandfathers – "
"I'm not your dear anything, you louse! Slavery breeds vice – gods curse it, why
do I even talk to you!" A horse turned out of the crowd.  Lady Sabine looked  very
different in a dress.  She  didn't  look  like the friend who'd  fought and  eaten with us
wearing breeches. She looked like a great lady.
"Stop  gawping,  Cooper,"  Goodwin  said.  "She's  the  nobility.  They're  bad  for
you."
"I know I overreach myself," Tunstall said. He scratched  Pounce,  seemingly not
vexed a bit. "Pretending it's Cooper you  give advice  to  doesn't  fool  Cooper  and  it
doesn't fool me. I wish Sabine wasn't noble."
Goodwin rubbed her neck. "So do I, Mattes. But she is."
Thinking  to  stop  a  budding  quarrel,  I  said  quickly,  "Mistress  Noll  wears  a
necklace the Shadow Snake took for ransom. The lily pendant. I think maybe Yates
is the Snake."
They didn't  answer for  a time. Tunstall finally  said,  "A  crew  of  diggers  weighs
more than one kidnap victim, Cooper. We'll have Ahuda put Yates Noll on the watch
list, but  we need  to  keep  on  the diggers before  Crookshank  hires –  and  douses  –
more of them. You know he will as well as we do."
Tunstall's  reasonable  voice  was  like  a  hammer  in  the  shadows.  I  knew  he  was
right, but I had the taste of the Shadow Snake like blood in my mouth.
And yet there were the ghosts, seventeen of them. How many more would come
in the morning? Would it be poison again, or swords like the first time?
It was a long, wearisome watch. The nobles left. Mumpers swarmed around their
horses,  whining  for  coins  and  grabbing  at  their  stirrups.  At  one  noble's  order,  a
servant threw a handful of coppers into the street. The mumpers scrambled for them
as  the  nobles  rode  off.  My  heart  burned  to  see  mumpers  treated  like  pigs  in  the
street, but I had to say it was a good way to clear the road.
Suppertime came. Goodwin and I left through the alley's back exit to fetch some
food.  While we waited for  the  eating  house  to  pack  what  we'd  bought,  Goodwin
showed  me the marks Tunstall would place  on  buildings. That  way, if Poundridge
left his booth, Tunstall could follow him, and we'd  follow Tunstall. So  far, though,
all Poundridge had done was take a nap and entertain a doxie.
Tunstall was still there when we returned. Some merchants came to look at slaves
next. It was common entertainment for them that had coin to bribe the guards. More
mumpers flocked in to wheedle this lot. Instead of  giving a servant  coins  to  throw,
these folk either rode  straight at the beggars  or  kicked them out  of  the way. Three
ladies  gave  coins  to  the  younger  mumpers  and  got  scolded  by  their  men  for
softheartedness.
That was  the excitement for  the rest  of  the watch.  Pounce  gave up  and  left. He
still hadn't come back when we went to the kennel to muster out.

I feel as useless as I have ever done.
 
 
Saturday, May 9, 246
Writ at three in the  afternoon,  in  the  kitchen  garden.  More  younger  folk  of  the
Court of the Rogue came to have a word with Rosto over breakfast. By "younger" I
mean  mots  and  coves  from  our  age  into  their  early  thirties.  Most  brought  food.
Pounce,  Laddybuck,  and  the  kitten  that  Kora  has  named  Fuzzball  ate  well.  The
pigeons did, too, though the seventeen ghost diggers are standoffish around others.
Slapper  perched  on  my head  and  pecked  at  me  until  he  fell  off.  Then  he  left  me
alone. The thieves who saw it left me be, too. Mayhap they thought me cracked for
talking to a pigeon like he knew what I said.
Ersken and  I drew  back  from  Rosto's  guests.  Them as  waited for  a  word  with
him  could  talk  with  Aniki  or  Kora  if  they  wished.  They  were  here  on  Rogue
business, even if it wasn't Kayfer's. Ersken finally whispered he'd see me in training
and took  off.  Kora  noticed  and  made sure  to  kiss  him  goodbye.  Rosto  waved  to
him.  I  was  grateful  for  that.  These  folk  would  notice  that  Rosto  was  friendly  to
Ersken, and they would be friendly to him in their turn.
I waited till Aniki was free, then asked her, "You'll clean up? I've things to do."
She grinned. "Go seek  your  Snake,  Beka,"  she  said.  "I'll handle this. And when
you're ready to kill the Snake? I'll help cut off its head." She patted her dagger hilt.
I raised my brows at her. "I won't kill it unless I must,"  I told  her. "The  Snake'll
stand his trial."
Aniki's friend Reed Katie heard me. "What if he's got a patron?" she asked in her
sweet voice. "So many of them as gets away with everythin' do. What if the Snake's
got a patron as buys 'im out of the Magistrate's Court, Beka?"
"Then I'll Dog him, and I'll catch him, and I'll cage him again," I said. "And again,
and again, and again, until his patron tires of him and the Snake tires of me."
"Or until he kills you," someone else said.
"Nobody's killing Beka," Rosto told them, his eyes turned to black stone.
"Nobody," Phelan said with a nod.
"Nobody," Aniki and Kora added.
"If you folk don't mind, I can protect myself." I tried to say it loud. I felt a blush
creep over my cheeks. "I've no mind to be doused by any Rat nor any Snake."
"It's true." Bold Brian toasted me with a flask of  barley water. "You  really are a
terrier, ain't you, Cooper? Get your teeth in and never let go."
I can't say I ran, because I didn't. I did shake my head and walk out  of  the yard
fast. Didn't these loobies know they might be the next Rats I got my teeth into? Were
I in their shoes,  I might admire the Dog with my prison  shackles  in her teeth a bit
less.
"Psst! Beka!" My landlady hung from her front window, waving to me with both
arms. She gestured madly for me to come into the house. I went, my heart thumping.
Had  Pounce's  mysterious  ways  in  and  out  admitted  less-welcome  guests,  like
four-legged rats? Did she object to our crooked tenants? Did she want me to  move
so she  might have room  for  another rogue? I'd  thought she'd  rented  to  me for  the
safety  of  having  a  Dog  in  her  house,  but  there  was  safety  in  having  rogues  and

mages, too.
She grabbed my hands when I came to her door in the inner hall. "A Birdie told
me ye're talkin' with them as ran afoul of the Shadow Snake." She pulled me into her
rooms.  "Ye've  been  seekin'  all  over  the  Lower  City.  Kora,  Aniki,  even  Rosto  –
they've been  askin' questions  for  ye."  She  didn't  look  angered or  fearful.  Curious,
more like.
"Someone's  got  to  put  a stop  to  it, mistress,"  I said.  "My Dogs,  Goodwin  and
Tunstall, are on it."
She gave me a sly look. "They're fine Dogs,  but  the one  I know  that's  seekin' is
you. And the mot  as  asked  to  talk with ye learned you  was  doin'  it, Beka. I never
even heard the Snake got her little one, never! She told us all it was slave stealers that
sold 'im to the Yamanis, swore it was. O' course we believed her."
I rubbed the back of my neck. "Mistress, if we might get past the riddles?"
"My brother-in-law's sister, Amaya Painter," my landlady told me. "She's a mage.
Three years gone her little boy, done vanished. Now she heard of ye askin' about the
Shadow Snake. She asked if ye'd come see her." The address she  gave was  up  by
Patten District. "Not that she  allus lived there. She  bought  that place  not  long after
the boy was took," my landlady said. "She used to live just two blocks up this lane.
Done well, she has. Mayhap the gods made it up to her for losin' her only child."
If her little one  was  took  that long ago,  she'd  be  one  of  the first Snake victims.
She'd  be  worth  seeing.  I  went  up  to  my  rooms  to  change  into  a  dress.  To  my
startlement, Ersken sat on the landing by my door.
He gave me his shyest smile. "Tell me you're going to talk to people who've seen
the Snake, and I can come with you," he said. "I remembered on my way home that
if I show my face, my sisters will make me run errands with them. It wouldn't be so
bad,  but  of  late they've arranged  it  so  we  'accidentally'  run  into  their  friends  who
aren't spoken for."
I grinned as I took out my key. "You could tell them you are spoke for," I said.
"And I'd have to explain about Kora. Then they'll wail and tell Mama and Papa –
Beka, I'd sooner walk the Cesspool naked. In the dark.  Just  let me come,  so  I can
tell them I was off seeking, will you?"
Of course  I said  yes.  Ersken and  Aniki had  both  gone  to  speak  with the Snake
witnesses on days when Kora couldn't. Mots in general liked Ersken. Today he'd be
more useful still. I didn't like to have Kora along when I talked to other mages. There
was no telling how mages would get on  with one  another.  They were like cats  that
way.
When Ersken,  Pounce,  and  I  saw  Mistress  Painter's  house  in  Patten  District,  I
thought my landlady had  a point  about  the gods  making it up  to  the mage  for  her
child  being  took.  The  house  was  half  stone,  half  timber.  Magical  signs  were  writ
about the windows and set in the flagstone path.
"The Snake must've been mad, to go after a real mage," Ersken said as  I rapped
on the door.
"You'd  think so,"  I said.  My  cat  sniffed  at  a  symbol  painted  on  the  doorstep.
"Pounce, leave that be."
The door opened as sparks and a puff of nasty smoke shot from the symbol.
Pounce looked at the woman who'd opened the door and yowled. Awful work.

The woman looked at him, her face thoughtful. Finally she inspected Ersken, then
me. "Do you know who this creature is?"
"I'd  prefer  not  to  think  on  it  much,"  I  said.  "It  complicates  things.  Mistress
Painter? You asked for me. I'm Beka Cooper."
Mistress Painter turned her eyes to Ersken, narrowing them.
"This is Ersken Westover. He's been plenty of help to me in this," I said.
She stood aside, holding the door open for us. "Come inside. Wipe your feet."
Ersken wiped his boots eagerly. "Do you know what the cat is?"
Mistress Painter looked at me, then at Pounce. "Only that he dwells in the Divine
Realms,"  she  told  Ersken.  "They  glow,  to  them  with  the  power  to  see  it.  But  he
could be anything from there. What he does here..."
She seemed to want an answer. "He eats a fair amount of fish," I told  her. "And
he gives kittens to his friends. Mistress Painter, our  day  is short,  what with training
and the Rogue being in a bad mood and  all. I thought you  wanted speech  with me
for the sake of the child you lost?"
That seemed to wake her up. She remembered  we had  not  come  to  buy  charms
from her. She dropped into a chair. She could afford a sitting room decorated  with
statues, herb wreaths, and hangings. There was a corner shrine to the god Apetekus,
Guardian of Slaves. The braided flower garlands were dried up, the candles unlit. If
she had given offerings to the god, it was some time ago.
"My friend's grumpy," Ersken said to Mistress Painter, his eyes kind. "Her Dogs
are  on  another  case  just  as  frustrating  as  this.  And  the  Rogue's  angry  with
Crookshank. You'll have heard about the murdered guards and soldiers."  He talked
to her as  he would  to  someone  official,  someone  who  read  the  daily  reports  and
knew the city news. She softened, listening to him. It's his boy's face and them blue
eyes. He gives off respect like a pretty smell, too. "Beka lives in the Lower City, so it
upsets  her more than most.  That's  why she  couldn't  let the Shadow  Snake  stories
alone."
Mistress  Painter looked  at  me.  "I  heard.  What  makes  you  think  you  can  catch
him?"
"Because my Dogs are Tunstall and  Goodwin,  and  I report  all I do  to  them."  It
was my turn to build on what Ersken had started with her. "I'm doing the questioning
for now. I tell them all I've gathered. When they know who we're after, we'll hobble
him and his fellow Rats. And Tansy Lofts is my friend. I knew her boy, Rolond." I
held up a hand. I didn't want to hear what she was about to say about Crookshank.
"I don't care about her grandfather-in-law," I said. "Tansy didn't ask to have Rolond
killed no more than you asked to have your lad took."
The mage reached into her tunic for a leather packet. She drew signs on it with her
finger, releasing spells, I supposed.
Pounce  sneezed.  Mistress  Painter  glared  as  if  he'd  made  a  scornful  remark.
"They're good enough for the Lower City, Master Immortal or whatever you are."
"My sweetheart says he's mayhap a constellation," Ersken said, being helpful.
Mistress  Painter  started  to  make  a  magical  sign  on  her  chest,  then  stopped.
"Interesting," she said. Then she coughed and opened the packet.  With fingers that
shook, she took out a sheet of parchment and gave it over to me.
By now I know one of the Snake's notes as well as I know my own name. There

were differences  in this  one.  There  was  a  clumsy  head  on  the  snake.  The  curves
were  more  round,  not  so  long.  The  writing  was  shaky,  as  if  him  that  did  it  was
scared.
"When was this?" I asked Mistress Painter.
"Firefall," she  said.  It was  the mage name for  the  first  of  February,  a  powerful
night for  certain kinds  of  spells.  I had  a  feeling  Mistress  Painter  hadn't  the  power
even to draw the circles that began such spells. "Firefall, 243."
I looked at Ersken.  He blinked. It was  the earliest Snake stealing we'd  heard  of.
Could it be the first?
"You lived here?" I asked, though I knew she hadn't.
Mistress Painter shook her head. "Westberk Street, just off Stuvek," she said. "A
smaller house." Her lips quivered. "Happier...Calum was the most  independent  wee
lad. He'd be out of our loft before my spells  let me know,  out  the door  before  the
bells could ring. He near drove my man and me crazy."  Remembering, she  lost  the
polished talk she'd picked up here in Patten District. "Vonti, my husband,  he doted
on Calum. Always said we should have more little ones, when I could hardly keep an
eye on the baby and sell my potions and charms. Vonti said he made enough for us.
When Calum got taken, Vonti was in the streets for hours,  calling and  calling. He'd
be in the taverns, the markets, bringing back word of this spell and that I could try."
She looked down. Tears dropped in her lap.
"But you got the note," I said when the tears had stopped. I looked at it and read
what the Snake asked for. "You had a – What's this it says? A ruby pen-du-lum?" It
was a word I had read before but never had to say aloud, the name for some  mage
tool that hung from a chain.
The mot wiped her eyes without looking up. "I thought it was a joke." She said it
like we'd  accused  her of  something.  "The  Shadow  Snake?  I'd  told  Calum  t'  mind
hisself or the Snake would have him! Eat his beets and stay in the fence or the Snake
would come! It was a joke, I was sure of it, a cruel joke. The  whole neighborhood
knew I'd a ruby pendulum. I'd bragged of it like a fool, bragged of its powers."
"You didn't pay the Snake," Ersken said to her gently. "Any woman would think
the same."
"And your man?" I asked. I gave no sympathy. Ersken would do that for us both.
I'd learn sommat in the way she acted when I broke  through her gratitude to  him. I
saw something of importance now in the way she drew back from  me. "You  didn't
tell him." I told her, I didn't ask her.
"I said,  I thought it was  a  cruel  joke."  She  looked  away  from  me  again.  "That
anyone might send a note like that was hard. I never even showed it to Vonti. Before,
that note  would have torn  his heart. After –  after Calum didn't  come  home,  it tore
mine." She glared at me. "I cursed them that took my child."
"Did it work?" I asked, not letting her glare frighten me. For one thing, Pounce sat
on my feet. It was good to have Pounce nearby when I vexed a mage. For another,
she had not found her little boy, for all the spells she had tried.
"I need sommat of the one I cursed, and I had naught," she told me. "Naught but
this note, and it's useless. I'd already tried spells on it. Spells to find Calum, to find
his kidnappers, to  find even where he'd  been.  Clever bastards  took  the charms  I'd
put on Calum to bring me to him, and pitched them in a fountain. Without them, my

skills were no good." Her head hung loose, like her neck couldn't hold it up. "I'm fair
enough with healing, desire. Things of the body. Folk think I can see a bit, but it's all
in knowing the neighborhood and the ways of them that live here. I made them think
I was better than I am."
I looked at Apetekus's shrine. "You never got him back?"
Mistress Painter sighed. "Never. I lied. I told folk he'd been taken by slavers, and
they sold him to the Yamani Islands. He was a page in the emperor's palace, wearing
silk all day. I told them – I told Vonti – I could see him, every day. I lied so well that
Vonti left to go there. To buy our son back. That was two years gone, and he's not
returned. His ship went down with all hands off the coast of Scanra."
"Our  sorrow  for  yours,"  Ersken  whispered.  "If  only  you'd  gone  to  the  Dogs,
Mistress Painter. If you'd taken his sheets and blankets, the scent hounds might have
picked something up."
She stared at him. "Are you cracked? What had his bedding to do with it?"
"They took him from bed, right?" Ersken asked it slow, as if he let the words drip
through her brain. "Like the others."
"Calum was took in the Nightmarket," Mistress  Painter said.  From  her look,  she
thought we were mad. "Vonti was done with his work for  the week, so  we thought
we'd have a sweet,  wander about,  see  the sights.  I'd  a little extra from  delivering a
babe, so we bought cinnamon for our porridge and honey fritters for that night. We
were talkin', and...and..." She fell silent, her eyes  on  her lap. She'd  spoken  of  it so
many times she could no longer cry.
My ears  buzzed.  "You  couldn't  see  him.  You  called  for  him  and  he  didn't  call
back," I said. Mistress Painter nodded. I went on, "You were in Spicers' Row. And
everyone  from  the  neighborhood  knew  you  worked  magic  with  a  genuine  ruby
pendulum."
"I wore it for  a necklace,"  the woman mumbled. "I  was  proud  and  foolish,  and
my child paid. I know he is dead, and my husband is dead. Nowadays I do well and
I have the ruby to warm my dead heart."
"Other people didn't show off what was precious to them," Ersken said, his eyes
on me. "The Snake preyed on them, even so." He could tell by the way I rubbed my
nose  that I was  thinking. "If  the Snake  heard  of  it  –  Beka's  found  that  the  Snake
learns about people's treasures – it wouldn't matter if you wore it or no. You could
have buried  it in your  garden  with  no  one  to  see,  and  the  Snake  would  still  have
picked you. The Snake's a greedy pot of puke, Mistress."
The first Snake stealing was a child right out of Spicers'  Row,  I thought.  Ersken
talked on with Mistress Painter. He promised her we'd give the note  back  when we
were done. He told her we'd send word if we found anything out.
I was  thinking, The  Snake  saw  that  pendant  and  wanted  it.  He  grabbed  Calum
then and  there. Of  all the folk on  Spicers'  Row  then and  now,  the one  who keeps
coming under our noses is Yates Noll.
"How did he get so clever after years of small messes?" I asked Pounce as we left
the house.
"Who?" Ersken asked.
I looked  at him. What should  I do?  "I  think I'm  supposed  to  tell Goodwin  and
Tunstall  first,"  I  said  at  last.  "It's  an  idea  confirmed,  but  they  may  still  think  it's

Puppy piddle."
Ersken  halted  me  in  the  middle  of  the  street,  out  in  the  glaring  sun.  "Be  very
careful, Beka," he said, his eyes sober. "If the Snake, or the Snake's gang, starts  to
think you might know enough to have a real name? They might try dousing you and
anyone  else  you've  told.  Nobody  wants  the  death  that  waits  for  a  child  killer  on
Execution Hill."
Sweat was rolling down my back. The day had come on scorching. "We can't go
worrying about what Rats will do to us, Ersken," I told him. "It just gets in the way
of bagging them."
He  smiled  at  me  slowly,  the  corners  of  his  eyes  crinkling  up.  "As  you  say,
Guardswoman Terrier."
"Stop that," I ordered, feeling very, very odd – not  over  the smile, though when
Ersken smiled at someone, he put all his heart into it. "Don't go calling me 'Terrier.'
Names like that belong to them as do  big deeds.  I've  done  none."  I walked off,  as
much to get into the shade as to get away from the idea of having a nickname before
I was even a Dog.
Ersken trotted to catch up with me. The sweat was soaking his brown  curls,  but
elsewise he  didn't  seem  to  mind  the  heat.  He  clapped  me  on  my  shoulder  as  we
turned onto Stormwing Street. "You'll do big deeds, though, Beka. Everyone knows
it. Even your Dogs. The only one who doubts it is you."
"Are you  forgetting 'Fishpuppy'?"  I asked  him. "How  'bout  the fact  I  still  can't
give the Magistrate a report without my tongue going in knots? Or – "
Sommat soft  and  wet plopped  against my back.  I smelled it as  I turned  –  pure
scummer. Ersken scrabbled in his pocket for a handkerchief to wipe it off  before  it
dripped over more of the back of my dress. I passed him mine as I looked for them
as threw it.
They stood at a corner, Orva and Jack Ashmiller's three children. The middle one,
a girl if my memory served, was the one whose hands were brown  with muck.  The
older one was a girl, too. She kept the littlest close to her by a cord tied to her wrist
and his. That one was plainly a boy. He wore no napkin, only a shirt.
I walked up to them, furious. I hate scummer on me, always have. I hate the stink
of it and the feel that I might as well be back on Mutt Piddle Lane. I was so angry I
tripped over their begging bowl. Three whole coppers fell out.
That stopped me. I bent and gathered the coins, tossing them up and down in my
hand. They stared at me, not moving. They feared I would take the money.
"Does your da know you're begging?" I asked the oldest one.
"Who cares if he does?" the middle one said. "He done left us,  and  the landlord
kicked us  out.  And it's  your  fault!" she  yelled, her face  gone  crimson.  "You  great
sarden puttock! You rutting pig! You took our ma, and then Da hunted and  hunted
for  work  and  he  couldn't  get  none!"  She  would  have  thrown  herself  at  me,  but
Ersken got behind her to grab her by the back of her tunic. She fought, trying to get
to me, not even thinking to turn on him.
"Excuse me," he said  at last. "It's  too  hot  for  this."  He gathered her up  with an
arm about her waist. Then he carried  her on  his shoulder  to  a horse  trough across
the street as she screeched. He dumped her in with a great splash. That silenced her.
I looked at the oldest girl. "Did your da say he had work when he left?"

She'd  reeled the boy  tight  up  against  her  side  and  clutched  him  close.  He  was
squirming. "What?"
I repeated  my question.  "Ersken  won't  hurt your  sister,"  I added.  "And  at  least
now  she  don't  have  scummer  on  her  hands.  Did  your  da  say  he  had  work?  It's
important."
"Don't  talk to  her!" screamed  her sister  as  the passersby  laughed or  bustled  on
their way. "She's  a dirty, evil, gods-curst  –  "  Ersken hung her upside  down,  using
one hand to modestly  keep  her skirt around  her knees  as  he held her calves  to  his
chest with the other. She could breathe – just. She could not swear at me or at him.
The older girl just looked at me. She wouldn't  open  her gob  even if Ersken beat
her sister's head against the street. I fished in my belt purse  for  a coin  and  flinched
when I brought it out. It was a silver noble. I started to put it back, then saw the lad's
eyes  on  me.  He  sucked  on  his  fist.  My  brothers  had  done  that  when  they  was
hungry. I put the coin in the begging bowl.
The  older  girl  scooped  all  the  coins  from  the  bowl  before  I  might  change  my
mind. "He said they was digging, but it was secret," she said. "They wasn't to tell a
soul, a'cos there was only a few jobs, and folk would mob 'em, work bein'  hard  to
find."
I whistled. It was a good story and partway true.
"He said he only told me a'cos I had to know he wasn't leavin' us for always. He'd
come home soon with the rent money and more. I was t' keep  the door  bolted  and
pretend we wasn't there, and  make the food  last. But he was  gone  three days,  and
the landlord busted  the door  and  kicked us  out."  She  was  crying. "He give us  the
bowl and said if we got enough, he'd let us back in. An' he laughed."
The little boy  reached  out  with a shriek of  glee. Pounce  trotted  up  to  us  with  a
stick loaded with chunks of grilled meat. It was horse well seasoned with garlic, from
the smell. The older girl took it from my thieving cat with a hand that shook.
Ersken put her sister down. As she ran to us, he said, "There's an idea. I'll be right
back."  By  the  time  the  three  of  them  had  jammed  the  meat  into  their  mouths,  he
returned with more, and three turnovers. They ate those, too, in silence.
I couldn't leave them there. Slavers might bag them, or  worse  than slavers.  They
could disappear.
I had some extra coin, thanks to the slaver bookkeeper's bribe. Now I know why
the Goddess sent such a windfall my way. It wasn't to save against hard times, as I'd
hoped. But how long will it last? How much do napkins cost? There is my landlady
to be thought on. I can bully her for a little while, as long as these three keep quiet.
How much will it cost to feed them?
It can't be helped, I thought. I hobbled Jack Ashmiller's wife. I won't tell him I lost
his children, too.
I got  them past  my  landlady  by  telling  her  that  Mistress  Painter  gave  me  good
information. After that, she  was  so  flattered that she  didn't  argue over  me bringing
three  mumpers  into  the  house,  at  least  not  right  off.  Ersken  helped  me  to  haul
buckets of water upstairs so they could wash.
"You'll stay here for now," I told them as we rearranged things. "I'll find your da."
"Why believe you?" the middle girl asked.
Her sister  smacked  her head.  "Because  we're here an'  off  the  street.  She  didn't

take us to the slavers or the foundling hospital, so shut yer gob." She looked at me.
"Don't make a liar of me, you Puppies." She looked  at Ersken.  "I'll curse  you  with
my every breath."
 
Though they weren't allowed to watch Poundridge, the Dogs that first volunteered
came to  listen when my Dogs  and  I  traded  news  before  muster.  I  guessed  they'd
want to know, so I told everyone about the Ashmiller family's fate. For a moment no
one made a sound. Then I heard some of the best swearing of my life. Seemingly all
of them believed as  I did.  Jack  Ashmiller was  hired by  one  of  Crookshank's  folk.
Now his days were numbered.
"No use beggin' Ahuda or the Commander for more of us to watch Crookshank's
folk," Jewel said, squeezing his hands into fists. "Eight of them Crookshank used to
raid the Court of the Rogue was killed last night, four of 'em right in their barracks.
And  that's  not  countin'  the  usual  murderin'  and  thievin'  in  the  Lower  City.  We're
keepin'  eyes  and  ears  open.  Near  as  we  could  tell,  Kayu's  stickin'  close  to
Crookshank. Mayhap he thinks folk might want him dead." He looked up at Ahuda,
who glared at us. She knew we needed more watchers.  "Eyes  and  ears  open,  mitts
tied, and the Lower City like an upturned  hive." He walked to  his place  like an old
man.
After muster, Goodwin stopped Tunstall, Pounce, and me as we walked into the
outside courtyard. "We need to talk to your houseguests," Goodwin said. "A proper
talk. You're learning, Beka, and I've heard  naught but  good  of  Ersken,  but  mayhap
we can winkle a bit of gold out of them you didn't know they had."
I knew she  was  right, but  my  pride  twitched.  I'd  thought  we'd  done  a  fine  job
talking to  children who'd  as  soon  curse  my  name  as  breathe.  They'd  come  home
with me, hadn't they?
"Good  idea."  Tunstall  thrust  his  slab  of  a  hand  out  to  Goodwin.  "Pony  up,
Clary." She glared at him. "Cooper's housing them on Puppy wages. How long can
she do it? We'll tell Ahuda they're witnesses, and reclaim what all three of us pay out
from the jewel box fund. Some of it, anyway."
A fist under my breastbone relaxed. I could get back a bit of what I'd spent? That
would help. I stopped counting and recounting my store of coins.
Goodwin cursed under her breath as she opened her purse.
Tunstall said, "Don't even think it, Clary. I know every copper you have on  you.
That thing is just to madden thieves."
Goodwin  actually  snarled.  She  thrust  a  hand  inside  her  tunic,  yanking  out  a
second purse. "Lout!"
"Coin cutter," he said.
But  that  settled  the  argument.  With  Pounce  following,  we  went  off  to  the
Nightmarket. Tunstall didn't  spend  only Goodwin's  money.  He  dug  out  five  silver
coins  of  his  own.  We  bought  used  clothes,  with  me  guessing  at  the  right  sizes,
sandals,  food  that would keep,  and  a hot  meal. We  went to  my  lodgings  with  full
packs and baskets.
A surprise waited for me on the landing by my room and Aniki's. Tansy sat there,
dressed for the world I lived in. A fat pack and a leather bag were by her side.
She  looked  at  the  three  of  us,  her  lower  lip  quivering,  and  moved  her  bags.

Goodwin and Tunstall walked around her. Pounce rubbed against one of her hands
and washed it with his tongue.
I stood there. Which god did I vex so badly today?
"I've nowhere else to go," Tansy said. "My family turned me out when I married
Crookshank's grandson. And Beka – Grandfather said  he'll make me lose  the babe
so the Rogue can't use my newborn child against him. I think he's gone mad."
"He's  always  been  mad,"  Tunstall  said,  comforter  that  he  was.  "He's  just
gibbering with it now. Cooper, will you let Mistress Lofts in?"
I began to  see  why Goodwin  kicked him so  much.  He was  not  going to  house
five people in rooms that were comfortable for one.
I unlocked  my  door.  The  three  Ashmillers  were  in  a  corner,  huddled  like  they
expected  a  beating.  The  shutters  were  open.  Pigeons  were  everywhere.  The  little
ones had found my bread scraps.
My head began to ache. I never told them they shouldn't open the shutters.
Slapper flew to me and tried to perch on my head. Of course he slid off. I looked
at the Ashmillers. "My Dogs want a word," I said. "I forgot  to  warn you  about  the
birds."  I looked  behind me. Tansy  was  still  huddled  on  the  stair.  Did  she  think  I
would kick her down them? "My friend Tansy will be staying with us. She'll have the
bed. And you'll be kind to her."
Tunstall and Goodwin unloaded the packs as I talked. I don't know if it was  my
speaking or the smell of hot food that made the Ashmillers nod. When Goodwin set
out pasties and a pot of hot noodles on my table, they edged toward it. I got down
my dishes and cutlery for them. Tunstall made them smile a hair when he perched on
a stool too small by far. Goodwin shooed the birds off, though they went only so far
as the windowsill and the edges of the roof. I could hear them and their ghosts over
the late day breeze.
Tansy  brought  her things in. She  had  a string bag  of  food  that  she  served  out.
She'd remembered my love for fruited honey cake. I watched as it vanished between
the young ones and Tunstall. As Tansy moved about the table, getting a napkin onto
the  boy,  brushing  the  younger  girl's  hair  and  braiding  it,  my  Dogs  asked  their
questions.
I felt a looby when Tunstall and Goodwin sought information I had not.  Had  the
children followed their papa on his search for work? They went with him sometimes,
the oldest girl said. The  places  she  named we had  checked  several times. She  told
Goodwin that in the last two weeks, her papa had gone elsewhere, alone. He'd found
places where not so many others were there for the same jobs he was.
The job he'd got at last was night work. He'd left for it and hadn't come home in
the morning. Three days later, the landlord had come. He had kept all but what was
in  the  small  bundles  he'd  let  the  children  pack.  He'd  watched  them  put  those
together. He didn't want them taking aught of value before he kicked them out.
The older  girl,  who  did  most  of  the  talking,  fell  silent.  Goodwin  drummed  her
fingers on  the table. That's  when the  younger  girl  jerked  her  chin  at  me  and  said,
"She only took us in from a bad conscience. Because it's her fault we've no ma and
no da."
Tansy tugged the little demon's braid. "You hush," she scolded softly.  "It's  rude
to bad-talk them as offers you a roof,  whyever they offer  it." The  polished  speech

she'd learned at Crookshank's vanished when she  talked with the Ashmillers. They,
in turn, softened around a young mother from Mutt Piddle Lane.
"Your ma was a problem," Tunstall told her. The words were hard, but his voice
was kind. "You're  old  enough to  know that. Shall I find a mirror to  show  you  the
scar on your face? We can guess who put it there, and you know. You can see  the
ones on your  hands  yourself."  The  girl looked  down.  "If  not  for  Cooper  here, we
wouldn't even have a place to start seeking your da."
I could feel myself turn red. I hate it when people talk about me whilst I'm  in the
room.
Goodwin stood. "We're off. If you young ones think of anything that your father
let slip about where he was going, about who hired him, tell Cooper. You want him
found, we're the ones to do it. Don't mess about." The  two  girls nodded.  The  boy
was smearing raisins on his face. Tansy began to wipe him clean.
"We'll be about our work, then. Stay inside and lock up," Tunstall said. He even
bowed to Tansy. "Gods keep you safe."
"Gods keep you safe," Tansy said. "All of you. And Beka, thank you."
I just waved at her. "Don't bolt  the door  so  I can't  get in." I followed my Dogs
out of my rooms.
"Well, that was a pot of piddle," Goodwin said as we went downstairs.
"It needn't be," Tunstall said. "Let's go to the house. Mayhap the landlord hasn't
sold Jack Ashmiller's goods. We can put Achoo to sniffing from there."
"Achoo will have trouble tracking a wagon," Goodwin argued. "Cooper's pigeons
say the diggers are carried to the cellars in a wagon. What's this?"
A clump  of  folk  was  coming  in  the  door,  joking.  I  recognized  Aniki  and  four
rushers  from  Dawull's  court.  In  their  turn  they  saw  Dogs  and  went  to  draw  their
swords.
"Hold, right there," Goodwin said, bringing out her baton. "I don't fancy a battle
in these surroundings, and I doubt Cooper wants her stairwell chopped up."
"Throttle it, you loobies, it's Goodwin and Tunstall," Aniki ordered. Her blue eyes
were worried. "Is everything all right?"
"I've  houseguests,"  I  said.  "Orva  Ashmiller's  husband  got  digging  work  and
vanished.  His  children  were  thrown  into  the  street,  so  I  brought  them  here.  And
Tansy left her in-laws' house. She's here, too."
Aniki's mouth twitched, I suppose at all my guests. Then she frowned. "Digging –
and he vanished?"
"Jack's not dead," I said quickly. "The little ones let the pigeons in and fed them.
He's not among them. This crew's still alive."
Aniki was carrying a bag with two wine bottles in it. She held it out to one of her
friends. "Find another place to grumble, lads." She looked up at us. "Tell me where
to look  or  who to  watch.  Beka said  all but  you  three are  on  street  duty,  trying  to
keep the Rogue from killing any more of the ones who helped on the raid. Here I am,
fancy free. Put me to use."
"What about Dawull?" Tunstall asked.
"I quit Dawull." Aniki gave Tunstall her relaxed grin, the one that said she hadn't a
care in the world.  "He  ordered  a  clutch  of  us  to  go  kill  the  Rogue  tonight."  The
coves with her were nodding. "I told him, in Scanra, when a chief wants to become

Rogue,  he challenges the Rogue,  straight  and  honest.  He  told  me  to  do  as  I  was
ordered. I told him to stuff his lousy orders. My friends did likewise. We were going
to come here and drink ourselves silly." She looked at the others. "Sorry. I can't do
that if more Lower City folk are going to die to make Crookshank richer."
"How do  you  know they're  dyin'  an'  it's  Crookshank  as  profits?"  one  of  them
asked. "Folk vanish all the time hereabouts."
"If Goodwin and Tunstall believe it, I believe it," said  one  of  the others.  "That's
why  you  was  lookin'  for  Crookshank  at  Dawull's  tavern,  innit?  Crookshank  buys
Dawull off with stones these poor beggars bought with their blood."
"We can't say Dawull knows Crookshank kills the diggers," Tunstall said gravely.
"Mayhap he thinks Crookshank just bought him to make certain Kayfer behaves."
"Dawull  knows  there's  blood  in  it,"  replied  that  cove.  "No  one  pays  out  the
fortune Dawull's been braggin' of without blood. Dawull's gettin' rich whilst cuddies
like us is dyin'." He shoved  his bottles  at another cove.  "I'm  with Aniki. Show  me
who to watch."
In the end, only the bottles  went to  Aniki's room.  We  had  five new watchers  to
put on the lookout for Jens, none of them Dogs. After talking it out  with Goodwin,
Tunstall  gave  them  the  description  we  had,  then  their  assignments.  They  knew
Crookshank's people, just as they knew the various exits to the Market of Sorrows.
It was the sort of thing any self-respecting thief or  rusher  had  to  know,  once  he or
she made it into a chief's court. Off they went. Aniki winked at me as she left.
"They'll never believe this back at the kennel," Goodwin muttered as we walked to
our  watch  post  at  the  slave  market.  "Pigeons,  dust  spinners  –  and  now  rogues.
Cooper, since you became our Puppy, my Dog work has turned upside down."
"There's  something  more  I  need  to  tell  you,"  I  said.  I  thought  my  gut  would
explode if I waited any longer. "Mayhap me'n Ersken talked to the first mother bit by
the Shadow Snake." I told  them about  Mistress  Painter. "I  think it's  Yates  Noll," I
said as  we came up  on  the market. A cloud  of  slave  stink  washed  over  us.  "The
Painters had just bought from Mistress Noll. Working for her, Yates and Gunnar and
their friend go all over the Lower – "
Goodwin put a hand on my arm. "Eight or nine lives for  one,  Cooper,"  she  said
gently. "Even with your  crooked  friends  to  help,  we  can't  get  distracted  from  the
diggers right now.  First  we nail Crookshank  and  his murderers  to  gravestones  and
give the Ashmiller children back their father. Then we go after the Snake."
"But Herun," I said. I knew she  was  right, but  I had  to  remind her all the same.
"He dies in five days if Crookshank don't pay up, and he won't."
"Jack Ashmiller and whoever's with him against one,  Cooper,"  Tunstall said.  As
we  neared  the  alley  that  was  our  watch  post  for  Poundridge,  he  drew  his  baton.
"Now, what mischief is this?"
Someone crouched in our spot, then rose tall in the shadows.
"You've  been  boring me to  tears  over  our  suppers,  Mattes,"  Lady  Sabine  said.
She  wore  dark  leather  sewn  with  black  metal  rings.  Her  breeches  were  dark,  her
boots  unshined.  She  spoke  just  loud  enough  for  us  to  hear.  "Muttering  about
catching a drop in a net with just three Dogs and one cat to watch the whole Market
of Sorrows. The only way I can get you to pay attention to me is to lend a hand."
Goodwin looked at Tunstall. "'Our suppers'?" she asked in a forbidding tone.

"Relax,  Guardswoman.  It's  just  suppers  –  so  far."  The  lady  looked  from
Goodwin to Tunstall. "Are you actually going to refuse my aid?"
"We're going to sit on the Spidren Walk entrance, Cooper and I," Goodwin  told
them. "That one's been itching me, and now I can scratch it. Since you and my lady
are so  friendly, Mattes,  you  can  tell her about  our  crooked  helpers."  She  marched
back down the street.  Pounce  meowed  a greeting to  Lady Sabine and  trotted  after
Goodwin.
"It's  all right, Cooper,"  Tunstall said  when I hesitated.  "Clary's  just cross  that  I
never asked her permission to go a-courting."
As I hurried after Goodwin, I heard my lady say, "You'd better not be planning to
court me for anything serious, my lad. I like my single state."
And I heard Tunstall's low chuckle.
Thunder rolled far off. A fine rain that was hardly more than a fog began to fall. It
would soak us to the skin in a hurry.
Goodwin and I walked into the alleys behind the Market of Sorrows. We passed
the  watch  posts  of  Aniki  and  her  friends,  pretending  to  ignore  them.  Finally  we
reached the small gate on  Spidren  Way,  the entrance closest  to  Rovers  Street.  It's
not  the  most  used  gate,  which  was  why  my  Dogs  had  sent  our  helpers  to  other
places. It was the only one we'd had no one for, until now.
One of the buildings across the alley was set back from its neighbor. It gave us a
sheltered spot where we could watch the gate without being picked  up  by  the light
from the covered lanterns around it. Our view wasn't as good as at Tunstall's watch
spot, but we could hear every squeak the gate made.
We settled with Pounce between us. I listened to the rain, the laughter of the slave
guards, and the passing of folk in and out. Finally I had to ask.
"Are you that angered at him? At them?"
"Hmm?" I'd startled her. "Mattes? Oh, he's a fool. Getting mixed up with a noble.
It never comes to any good, not with so much distance between them – a lady and a
hillman,  Crone  witness  it!"  I  heard  her  but  doubted  anyone  passing  a  foot  away
would notice. "Still, Lady Sabine...She's not like most of them. She's more my lord
Gershom's sort. Useful." She was silent for a time. Then she said, "Cooper, we do
care about  Herun Lofts.  Tansy  is  a  fine  mot  –  no  one  should  lose  a  child  and  a
husband in the same year. And we want the Shadow  Snake.  If we allow ourselves,
we Dogs, we would go raving over all the crimes that go unpunished  whilst we can
only  follow  one.  It's  maddening  to  have  but  two  Dogs  where  we  need  twelve  or
more. It's so maddening we've jumped to add rogues and a lady knight to our roster,
gods bless them."
I smiled in the dark. I couldn't have put it better.
"But  this  is  the  Dog's  life,  Cooper.  We  seek  and  we  hobble  and  we  cage.
Sometimes we can only do it a little at a time." I nearly missed what she said next –
"And sometimes we lose more than we catch, curse it."
We waited in silence again, watching folk as came and went through the gate in the
rain. It fell harder. Soon enough we were soaked even with our shelter.
We'd been there two hours and my belly was grumbling when a short, plump mot
walked up to the gate. She had three tough-looking coves with her. One of them held
a Yamani parasol over her to keep her dry. Goodwin stiffened.

"Uta  Norwood,"  she  whispered  as  the  guards  let  the  four  of  them  enter.  "She
keeps Crookshank's books. What business has she got here, do you suppose?"
"The old scale was in no mood to buy slaves," I said. "If they need someone for
the house, wouldn't the cook or the footman do the buying during the day?"
"I'd like to get my hobbles on Norwood as bad as Crookshank," Goodwin  said.
"The two of them have beggared more families..." We heard steps in the alley as the
gate closed behind Norwood. Goodwin was up with her baton out. It was just Aniki.
From somewhere my friend had  gotten  a round,  pointed  straw  hat like the farmers
wore. It shed the rain like a little roof.
"Hope you don't mind the company," she said cheerfully. "They're  moving child
slaves in through our  gate. I can't  abide  the sight. There  was  three of  us  watching
that one already, and the other two are used to slaves." She sank to her heels.
"Are there so few child slaves in Scanra?" Goodwin asked.
"Few slaves at all. We can't feed 'em. We can barely feed ourselves – that's why
Rosto said we should  give Tortall a try."  Aniki bounced  on  her heels, hugging her
knees.  "If  I live to  be  old,  not  that I'm  counting on  it,  I'll  never  get  used  to  child
slaves and child-sized shackles. Cooper hates it, too." They both looked back at me.
"I  didn't  say  anything,"  I  said.  On  watch  here,  I  couldn't  get  away  from  the
business. Before my lord had taken us in, any one of my family could have ended up
inside these stinking walls. So could  the Ashmillers. And look  at all the trouble  the
slave sellers make for  my Dogs  and  me, sneaking about,  trying to  dodge  taxes  on
their trade. They're more trouble than they're worth.
Aniki  went  on,  "Listen,  Goodwin,  I  know  if  we  talk  loose  about  this,  if
Crookshank panics, we might get killed the diggers Crookshank has right now. But if
these  diggers  turn  up  riding  pigeons,  too,  we  need  to  shout  the  news  from  the
rooftops. Let folk know the work comes with strings attached."
"There will still be folk stupid enough, or desperate enough, to hire on and tell no
one," Goodwin warned her.
"But not as many," I said.
"Not  as  many."  Goodwin  nodded.  "You're  right,  Aniki.  You're  wasted  as  a
rusher, girl. Come be a Dog."
Aniki's teeth flashed in a grin. "For the splendid wage and respect that you Dogs
get? I think not, Guardswoman Goodwin. I want to rise higher."
"To the Rogue's dais," Goodwin said.
"Only if there's  a proper  Rogue  to  stand  beside,"  Aniki  told  her.  "Here  comes
someone."
Norwood and her guard were leaving the market. Goodwin looked at Aniki. "Can
you manage the streets on your own?"
Aniki  smiled  and  patted  her  sword  hilt.  "As  well  as  anyone  who  serves  the
Crooked  God,"  she  said,  mentioning the thieves' god,  who went without  a  proper
name.
"Then  Dog  Norwood  until  you're  weary  or  attacked.  Report  to  Cooper,"
Goodwin ordered. "Go!"
Aniki left our  nook  like a shadow.  I could  never work it out  how  a  good-sized
mot like her could go unnoticed when she wished.
I couldn't help what I said then. "You never let me watch alone."

"You're my responsibility, and you're not a swordswoman," Goodwin said. "And
I'm teaching you  things I'd  not  want her to  know,  not  so  long  as  she's  crooked."
Goodwin shook her head. "What a waste!"
Pounce had found himself a dry spot and been forgot by us. Now he "manhed"
his agreement, making Goodwin and me jump.
We ate bread  and  cheese  in the cold  rain. Finally it was  time to  go  back  to  the
kennel for  muster.  Then  Goodwin,  Tunstall,  and  my  lady  half  dragged  me  to  the
Mantel  and  Pullet  for  hot  food,  mulled  wine,  and  soup  to  thaw  me  out.  I  didn't
object  to  the  wine,  I  was  that  miserable.  Afterward  Pounce  and  I  slapped  home
through the mud.
I left my clothes hanging over the banisters, my boots and armor on  the landing,
and entered my rooms in breastband and loincloth. Tansy slept on the pallet, her arm
around  the  little  boy,  the  younger  girl  beside  her.  The  older  girl  watched  me
unblinking from her bedroll as I did up all the bolts on my door.
No one  stirred  whilst I put  on  a nightgown and  took  my underclothes  off,  then
undid my hair. Pounce, the cuddy, shook himself off on me. Then he climbed onto
the older girl's blankets. Growling to myself, I went to bed and right to sleep.
It was another dream. I had little Nilo in a sling on my back. Will was tied to  my
wrist by a cord. My other friends were skipping rope. I watched.  I wanted to  play,
but I wasn't yet to the point of untying Will to join in. I already knew that if I did set
him loose, he'd be off after any passing horse in a lightning flash.
"Come back, you little trollop!"
We all turned. Here came Tansy, curls bouncing. She held her skirt up to make a
basket  for  a  bunch  of  small,  fresh-baked  cakes.  Mistress  Noll  chased  her  with  a
broom raised high.
I sat  up,  my  heart  beating.  Why  was  I  scared?  Tansy  escaped  that  day.  We'd
stopped  Mistress  Noll without meaning to,  scrambling for  the  cakes  that  fell  from
Tansy's skirt. We  took  the broom  blows  meant for  Tansy.  I got  two  extra when I
put myself between the angered Mistress Noll and my brothers. It was a small thing
on Mutt Piddle Lane, naught to wake up over.
Tansy  was  awake,  too.  I  heard  her  by  the  shuttered  window  and  smelled  the
rose-scented soap she used. She sniffed, then blew her nose.
"Tansy?" I whispered. "You're crying?"
"I cry over everything, Beka, remember?" She sat on the bed and felt around until
she grabbed my hand. "Promise me you'll do all you can to find Herun."
"I can't do much," I said, keeping quiet. "I'm bound  to  my Dogs  and  the digger
search."
"Just  promise  to  try. That's  enough for  me.  I  can  care  for  these  little  ones  if  I
know you're seeking my man." Her grip tightened.
"Tansy..."
"Everyone  knows  you're  looking  hard,  Beka.  No  one  else  is  even  looking,  let
alone hard.  You  think  I  wouldn't  hear  it?  How  you  had  folk  out  asking?  No  one
expects you to do anything – you, a Puppy! And yet you  went seeking. Talking to
them  the  Dogs  and  the  Rogue  turned  away,  you  and  your  friends.  You'll  find
Herun."
I heard  one  of  the children stir.  "Papa,"  she  whispered  in  her  sleep.  It  was  the

older girl.
"Promise me," Tansy whispered.
"Go  back  to  bed,"  I  told  her.  "Before  they  wake."  I  lay  there,  listening  as  her
wakeful breaths turned to sleeping ones. Then I got up to write in this journal on the
landing of my stairs. Writing helps me think things through. Writing down the dream
just now made me see what about it sat so ill.
Mistress Noll told my Dogs  and  me that Tansy  was  sweet.  She  spoke  highly of
her, said she always liked her. Mayhap she wished only to  speak  well of  a grieving
mother. The truth of it was, Mistress Noll hated Tansy back on Mutt Piddle Lane. I
could not count the times she tried to beat Tansy black and blue. Tansy always stole
her best baking, the kind that customers ordered special. The kind that cost Mistress
Noll her own money to do a second time.
It could be a polite lie, but why, then, had Mistress Noll lied so hard? To protect
Yates? Mayhap he saw a way to get revenge for his mother and to make one last, big
haul. Mayhap his mother knows it.
 
 
Sunday, May 10, 246
Writ about ten in the morning, on the stairs.
I woke  to  the  little  boy's  wail.  It  was  near  dawn.  He  was  screeching,  his  face
scarlet. Tansy and his older  sister  bent  over  him. Tansy  changed  his napkin as  his
sister wriggled a toy before his nose.  The  middle girl curled  in a corner,  her hands
over her ears. Pounce was nowhere to be seen.
The floor shook as someone stomped up the stairs. "Beka!" Rosto yelled outside.
"Beka, what've you got in there, a sarden nursery?"
The oldest  girl  dipped  her  finger  in  the  honey  jar  as  I  pulled  on  my  breeches.
Whilst I undid  the bolts,  she  stuck  her dripping  finger  in  her  brother's  mouth.  He
quieted at once.
I yanked  my  door  open.  "Rosto,  you  savage,  we're  shutting  him  up,"  I  said.
Rosto  wore  only breeches,  showing off  his lean chest.  "What're  you  whining  for?
It's almost time to get up anyway."
But now the younger girl began to cry. She shrieked that she wanted to go home.
Rosto  stalked  into  my  room  and  picked  her  up.  "If  you  could  go  home,  you
wouldn't be here, would you?" he asked, giving her a shake. "Shut your gob. It's too
early for such noise."
She went silent and  stared  at him as  she  hung in his hands.  I glared at her. She
never shut up for me, though to be sure,  I wasn't  the sight that a half-naked Rosto
was. No, she was too young to appreciate him. It wasn't that.
Tansy propped her fists on her hips. "Well, aren't you the man, bullyin' a child as
was beggin' on the streets yesterday." She cuffed Rosto on the head. "Put her down,
you scut."
Slowly Rosto set the girl down. He ran his eyes over Tansy, who wore naught but
a thin nightgown. "Aren't you pretty, even with a pert tongue in your head and a little
one in your belly. Who's your friend, Beka?"
"Married, and none of your business," Tansy snapped. "Out! Out!"
I looked  at Rosto.  "You  heard  her."  I  towed  him  outside.  "She's  Herun  Lofts'

wife Tansy, a friend of mine," I said. "The little ones are Jack Ashmiller's. I hobbled
his wife, Orva. Now he's vanished – got hired for a job and hasn't been home since."
Rosto  was  always  fast  to  catch  on.  He  raised  his  fair  eyebrows.  "And  your
ghosts? The diggers?"
"No  new ones  yet. We're  on  watch.  But, Rosto,  I  need  a  favor."  I  swallowed.
Asking favors of rushers was a chancy business. If I wasn't desperate (if Herun's life
wasn't shorter by another day)  I never would have done  it. "And  don't  ask  me for
murder to pay you back."
If I'd ever needed to be sure that my dealings with him in future would be serious
matters, I knew it now.  The  irritation left  his  face  and  sober  attention  filled  it.  He
crossed  his  arms  over  his  chest.  "What's  the  favor,  then?  Short  of  murder  as
repayment?"
"I need to find Yates Noll, fast," I said. "My Dogs are wrapped up on the streets.
Me and Goodwin and Tunstall are sitting on our best bet to find the diggers. You're
in a better way to find him than us right now." I smiled at him. I did have a possible
bribe to offer. "If we find Herun Lofts, I bet he'll be grateful. And it's his family that
has the fire opals."
"True enough," Rosto said. He yawned and smoothed back his hair. "All right. I
– "
Feet slammed up the stairs. It was Aniki. She looked like she hadn't slept a wink.
She thrust a bag of hot turnovers at Rosto. To me she said, "I got friendly with one
of Norwood's rushers after she turned in for  the night. That  basket  she  had  on  her
arm? She was dropping off Crookshank's pay bags. The folk Poundridge has to pay
start to come around at the beginning of his shift. This afternoon." Aniki stood there
for a moment, panting. She seemed more awake than I'd ever seen her. "Well?" she
asked.
"Thanks,"  I said.  "I'll see  what Goodwin  makes of  it.  Wake  Ersken."  I  dashed
into my room. If Aniki was right, Jens and the other rushers who guarded the diggers
would come for their pay  –  come,  mayhap,  and  be  gone  by  the time we mustered
tonight. I wanted to  give Goodwin  plenty of  warning. If she  and  Tunstall  had  any
miracles in their pockets, miracles that would get more than the three of us to raid the
diggers' prison and free them tonight, they'd need as much time as I could give them
to put their miracles together.
I scrambled into my clothes and barely blessed my teeth with a cleaning. I handed
the turnovers  to  Tansy  and  the  children,  grabbed  my  pack,  and  raced  downstairs
with Pounce at my heels.
The  floor  outside  Kora's  door  was  scorched.  Rosto  leaned  on  the  frame.  He
stepped  aside  to  let me in. Aniki  was  slumped  in  a  chair  with  a  grin.  "Lucky  our
Aniki knows what happens when you wake Kora from a sound  sleep,"  Rosto  said,
pointing  at  the  charred  wood.  "She  stood  out  of  the  way.  Kora  is  good  at  fire
spells."
"Thanks," I told Aniki.
She waved off my gratitude. "It's fun. Kora needed a new door anyway. The old
one was coming apart."
Ersken was trying to dress under the bedclothes. Kora's kitten, Fuzzball, pounced
on him as  he moved  under  the  covers,  which  slowed  him  down  some.  Kora  had

pulled her sheets over her head.
Rosto finally took pity on Ersken and picked up Fuzzball. "Come here, ferocious
hunter," he said. "Leave the lad some dignity."
Ersken popped  out  of  cover  to  glare at Rosto.  "I  can  see  these  two  tormenting
Kora, but why wake me?" he asked. "Breakfast isn't for another hour."
"I need you to fetch Tunstall," I said. "Tell him that Jens gets paid at four.  Aniki
followed their paymaster last night and found it out. Let Tunstall know I've  gone  to
Goodwin's with the same news."
Ersken repeated what I'd said and finished dressing. "D'you think this is it, Beka?"
he asked. "You'll be able to follow Jens to Ashmiller and the other diggers?"
"Please, Mithros and the Goddess." I made sure my clothes were tucked in. "I'm
off."
Rosto put a hand on my arm as I passed him. "I'll find Yates,"  he said.  "Things
will change in the Lower City, Beka Cooper. Between us five and our friends" –  he
looked  at the girls and  Ersken  –  "leeches  like  Crookshank  and  the  Snake  will  get
burned."
I met his black  eyes.  I believe him. If he succeeds,  the thieves will be  harder  to
catch – but the common folk will have someone to turn to. That has to be better.
 
I didn't run to Goodwin's. I did make good time, cutting through the alleys. Even
main  streets  like  Palace  Way  and  Eversoul  Road  in  Flash  District  weren't  too
crowded so early in the day. It was quiet yet, quiet enough that I heard  the clap  of
wings overhead.  Most  of  the city's  birds  were  just  beginning  their  songs.  I  finally
stopped and looked up.
They  stopped,  too,  roosting  on  whatever  perch  was  nearest:  Slapper,  Ashes,
White Spice,  Pinky. Seventeen in all. I saw  no  other  pigeons  anywhere, just these.
Just the ones who carried the ghosts of them Crookshank had murdered to keep the
secret of the fire opals. They knew something was going on.
The sight of  her house  on  Dun Lane drew  me up  short.  I did  not  expect  Clary
Goodwin to live in a pretty stone place with a well-thatched roof and orderly garden.
Chickens  already  pecked  through  the  rows  of  vegetables,  seeking  insects.  Sleepy
goats eyed me over  a wood  fence  to  the back.  The  charms  over  the door  and  the
welcome  wreath  were  fresh  made.  When  did  Goodwin  find  time  to  do  it?  I  felt
slovenly, knowing there was mending undone in my basket at home.
I rapped hard on her door, then harder.
"Enough!" someone finally cried hoarsely. "Will you  rouse  the district?  If this is
not dire..."  Goodwin  yanked the door  open.  Her hair was  tousled.  She  clutched  a
long robe about herself.
Goodwin  took  my  attention  from  her  feet  by  saying,  "Cooper.  And  Master
Pounce. I should have known you'd be  close  behind.  Get  in here –  it's  chilly out."
She closed the door behind us.
There was but one story to the cottage and half of a loft overhead.  A man stuck
his head  over  its edge.  His hair was  gray on  the sides  and  brown  for  the  rest.  He
looked like the cheerful, steady-working coves  from  the country  farms.  I'd  heard  it
somewhere that Goodwin's  husband  was  a  master  carpenter,  as  easygoing  as  she
was not. "Clary?"

"Duty, love," she called, poking up the hearth fire. "Go back to bed."
"So that's Cooper." He could ignore her and live. I was impressed, and unnerved
that he knew who I was. "And that's the god cat? I've never seen a god before." He
winked  at  me  and  vanished  back  into  the  loft.  "I'll  dress  meself  and  cook  up
breakfast."
Goodwin stumbled to a table and ladled water into a basin. She splashed it on her
face. "Report, Cooper."
I told her what Aniki had told me, then waited for her to speak. There was a towel
folded  over  the back  of  a chair near her. She  ignored it. She  just  stood  there  and
stared  into  the  distance,  her  face  dripping.  At  last  I  summoned  my  courage  and
handed her the towel. She rubbed her face, but not like she knew that's what she was
doing.
"Four this afternoon," she said at last, thinking aloud. "I've got to shake that paper
out of  Ahuda,  convince  her we're going to  move tonight."  She  rubbed  her mouth.
"Tunstall and I can do it. My lord will give permission if we can Dog this Rat to his
burrow soon. Ahuda will be  fine if my lord  approves.  Thank the gods  Poundridge
goes on duty same time as we do. Cooper, you think your friend Kora might help?"
"I'm certain of it," I said.
"Get her, too. I want her in this. We'll have Berryman, but two  mages are better.
And I trust her price will be right?"
I thought of the Ashmiller children screaming and thumping over  Kora's  head.  "I
think I can bargain with her," I said.
"Good. Do you know where Nyler Jewel lives?"
I'd carried plenty of messages to him from Lord Gershom. "Yes, Goodwin."
"Fetch him here. Ahuda?" I nodded. "Tell her my man's cooking. And then your
friend Kora. Go. We'll have breakfast when you return."
I looked at her. "You  should  be  Watch  Sergeant,"  I said.  Mayhap it was  seeing
her bare feet that emboldened me, I don't know. "After Ahuda, anyway."
"Scat, Cooper," Goodwin ordered. Pounce and I scatted.
Outside, Pounce halted me with a pat on the ankle. He told me, I will bring Kora.
You get the others.
"Is this it?" I asked him, wanting it to be true. "Do we have them?"
Scat, Pounce told me. He raced down Eversoul Road.
Cats must always be cats, even when they are gods, or constellations.
 
I got Ahuda first. She was up and dressed. I feared she'd bite my head off when I
asked  her  to  Goodwin's  for  breakfast  or,  almost  as  bad,  question  me.  She  only
grimaced. "I knew it would come to this. All right. I'm on my way."
I didn't wait for her to think better of it. I ran to  Nyler Jewel's house.  As  ever, I
had to wade through the grandchildren that lived on the first two floors. Sometimes I
wondered how he slept. Then I had to do it again, because  Mistress  Jewel told  me
he was in the garden, weeding.
On the way to Goodwin's he made me tell him all that took place the night before.
Then he asked sharp questions about Aniki, Kora, and Rosto. I was relieved to see
Goodwin's house. Being questioned by Jewel was like being questioned by my lord,
Ahuda, Goodwin,  and  Tunstall at the same time. No  detail  was  too  small  to  slide

past the old Dog, including the fact that Rosto flirted with me all the time.
I checked  around  once  before  we  went  into  Goodwin's.  Slapper  and  the  other
sixteen  birds  were  still  with  me.  They'd  followed  me  to  Ahuda's,  to  Jewel's,  and
back here.
Tunstall was not there, but Lady Sabine was. She was sharpening her sword with
a little stone whilst she talked with Goodwin's man. Kora and Aniki were there, Aniki
dozing in a corner.
There  was  food  on  the  table  –  fresh-cooked  bacon,  eggs,  cheese,  fresh  milk,
strawberries, day-old raisin buns. Everyone else looked  like they had  made a good
meal. Goodwin pointed Jewel and me to the plates.
"Your  Cooper  told  me what you've  learned,"  Jewel said.  "Where's  Tunstall and
Ahuda?"
"Up at my lord's, asking permission for a Rat catching," Goodwin said. "If we get
it, you  and  I need  to  work out  who we want and  where the crew  must  wait.  It  all
depends on us Dogging Jens back to where the diggers work. Tunstall's going to get
the gem mage Berryman to help. He owes us some debts and we want to cash them
in. We need to be sure we can handle Crookshank's mage, Vrinday Kayu. We think
she's put a death mark on the guards. Those guards have to live long enough to talk,
to give evidence on Crookshank and his people." Goodwin looked at Kora. "We're
hoping you'll be able to help Berryman."
Kora gave her sly smile. "Will he want my help? To him I'm naught but a Scanran
hedgewitch."
"He'll need convincing, then," Lady Sabine murmured, inspecting the edge of her
sword for nicks.
Kora nibbled a fingernail. Then she nodded. "I can do that."
Goodwin sat on  a stool.  "Starting at four,  we watch the Market of  Sorrows  for
the guards to  pick  up  their pay.  We'll know them by  the death  marks.  Figure we'll
need Dogs to follow them to  the burrow.  And then we call the rest  of  the crew  to
move in."
Jewel rubbed his unshaved chin. I could hear the scrape of his whiskers. "Sounds
good. You think my lord will approve it?" he asked.
"Ahuda did when we told her," Goodwin said.
"Then let's send these young folk home for some rest. Are you in this, my lady?"
he asked.
"Wouldn't  miss  a moment,"  replied Lady  Sabine.  She  thrust  her  sword  into  its
sheath. "Besides, Mattes might get his head creased if I don't watch it for him." She
grinned at Goodwin, who actually smiled back.
"We'll muster where?" Jewel asked Goodwin.
"There's a stable with a loft on Spidren Way," Goodwin said. "I'll get the key and
lock up the owner for the time being so he doesn't blab. Three o'clock."
I  didn't  think  I  could  rest  in  my  crowded  rooms,  but  I  knew  I  was  being
dismissed. I decided it was time to go make some offerings to the gods. Just in case.
 
Sometime after dawn on Monday.
The stable  loft was  hot  and  stuffy  by  the  time  we  reached  it  at  mid-afternoon.
Berryman kept sneezing. At least he no longer whined once Goodwin offered to give

him a nap tap. Kora was posted with Tunstall and Lady Sabine on the other side of
the market, holding a spell in her hand that would let her talk to Berryman. Jewel and
the other Dogs who would follow the guards once they'd been paid took the places
of Aniki's friends  from  last  night.  We  couldn't  be  sure  the  diggers'  guards  would
come to the Spidren Way gate to be paid, so Goodwin arranged for all the gates to
be watched. Aniki was with us. She lounged next to the window with Goodwin.
My lord  Gershom  had  given permission  for  everything. He took  but  ten  guards
off Evening Watch, but Ahuda handpicked another ten from the Evening Watches in
Flash  and  Patten  districts,  solid  Dogs  who  could  be  trusted.  Six  of  my  lord's
personal bodyguards joined them and  the Dogs  who handled the cage  wagons.  All
of them waited at the kennel, ready to move as soon as they got word from us. We
just had to follow the mots and coves who took their pay with death-marked hands.
Berryman would make certain we could see that. We'd  have to  follow a number of
them, not  knowing which of  them were on  guard  duty  with the diggers  and  which
were finished with their work for the day.
When Goodwin got us into the loft that had  been  locked  in last night's rain, my
gut cramped.  I didn't  want to  be  kept  to  that hot  box.  I  felt  like  the  terrier  they'd
named me, quivering from  head  to  toe.  I  was  tired  of  waiting.  I  wanted  to  chase
some Rat back to the hole where they'd hidden Jack Ashmiller and the others.
Crookshank's  folk were the worst  kinds  of  lawbreakers.  They  preyed  on  those
whose only value in coin lay in their ability to work. That was wrong. They took the
best  part  of  a  mot  or  cove,  the  one  thing  someone  from  the  Cesspool  could  be
proud of, and they used it to lure that person to an unmourned death.
"Hello," Goodwin said. "Cooper. Who's this? Aniki, you know him?"
I came to the window. Aniki shook her head, but I recognized the cove. "He's one
of  Crookshank's  rushers.  I've  seen  him  about  the  house  months  past,  when  I've
visited Tansy," I said. "He hasn't been with Crookshank at the Court of the Rogue,
though." I looked harder. "Goodwin, his boots."
There was pinkish mud on the heels of his boots,  like he'd  mayhap been  around
pink rock dust.
"Aniki, get Otterkin and  her partner,"  Goodwin  said.  "I  want 'em here to  follow
when this cove comes out."
Aniki was gone in a heartbeat.
"Good catch on the mud, Cooper," Goodwin said.
"You noticed it, too," I replied.
From the corner of my eye I saw her thin smile. "I'd mope if you were better than
me so soon. Berryman, did he have the death mark?"
"I didn't have enough warning," the mage said, and sniffed. "I wasn't ready."
"Dogs  have to  be  ready,"  Goodwin  said.  "I  thought you  were all eager for  true
Dog work."
"Why can't I be on watch with Tunstall?" Berryman asked.
"Because we tossed a coin and I lost. Are you ready to check or not?"
"I'm  ready,"  Berryman  mumbled.  Worked  up  as  I  was,  I  tried  not  to  laugh.
Tunstall was better than Goodwin at making the gem mage feel important.
Slapper fluttered onto the sill of the stable loft.
"Crone shield us, what's he doing here?" Goodwin asked me.

Behind him I saw the pigeons with the other diggers' ghosts settle on the roof  of
the Market of Sorrows. They stared at us, yellow, blue, gray, and dark eyes steady.
Knowing, like.
"He thinks we've got something," I said as I lifted Slapper off the sill. He pecked
at my hands. I flinched. Berryman came closer to sneeze and stare. "All the diggers'
birds  do.  They've  followed me since  dawn.  The  others  are on  the roof  across  the
alley." I reached in our sack of food for a roll. I crumbled it in my hand so he might
peck at that instead of me.
"There go Otterkin and her partner – good, they've turned the corner,"  Goodwin
said with satisfaction. "Grouse though I may about Otterkin's mage work, she knows
her street craft. And here comes our Rat. Berryman?"
Berryman stuck his head  between mine and  Goodwin's.  His lips moved.  On  the
back  of  the Rat's  hand  a sign writ in yellow fire blazed.  Yet he didn't  so  much as
twitch.
"That's your death mark," Berryman said. He drew  back.  Sweat rolled down  his
cheek. "A good one. I – I think I could counter it, but...perhaps not." He swallowed.
"I will be glad for Mistress Kora's help after all."
"Very well, then. Just  make  sure  you  keep  a  couple  of  these  guards  alive.  We
need them to bear witness against them that hire and pay them," Goodwin said. "But
they don't all have to live."
Slapper  fluttered up  to  my shoulder.  He could  set  there,  stump  tucked  into  the
hollow of my collarbone, but he wasn't steady. If he slipped, he'd grab my skin and
hold on with his beak and the claws of his good foot. Carefully I lifted the bird down
and  cradled  him  in  my  arm,  stroking  his  feathers.  "Soon,"  I  whispered.  "Please,
Crone and Black God. You and the others will be avenged soon."
Pounce jumped to the sill. Leaning in toward me, he touched his nose to Slapper's
beak.
"Settle, all of  you,"  Goodwin  said.  "Too  much movement up  here and  we'll  be
catching someone's eye. If those slave market guards were mine, I'd kick their bums
between their ears for working behind the gates instead of in front."
"Shadier behind the gates?" Berryman suggested. He sneezed into a handkerchief.
"They're  supposed  to  care  about  folk  watching  the  market,  not  their  own
comfort,"  Goodwin  told  him.  "But  what  do  you  expect  of  guards  who  work  the
slave business? Lazy scuts, or they'd get real jobs  –  Here we go.  I know this one.
She's been on Crookshank's payroll for years. Must've  done  something to  vex him
bad to get this job. If she has it. Berryman?"
He  muttered.  We  saw  the  yellow  flash  even  as  the  hard-looking  mot  passed
through the market gate.
"How can they not see that?" Goodwin asked.
I missed the answer. I went to look at the foot of the loft stairs. Aniki was below.
She hadn't chosen to make the climb when she returned. I glanced back at Goodwin,
who told me, "Jewel and Yoav."
I passed their names to Aniki. She went off to let them know we had someone for
them to follow.
The third death-marked Rat went to Tunstall, my lady, and Kora. The fourth was
Goodwin's,  Berryman's,  Aniki's,  and  mine.  We  went  out,  scattered.  Berryman

seemed to be a merchant looking to buy property. Aniki was herself, a rusher on an
errand or looking for work. Goodwin and me were in uniform. Goodwin  had  taken
the Puppy trim off my clothes in the loft.
"A Dog alone with a Puppy  is unusual; two  Dogs,  even two  females, isn't,"  she
said when I gasped. "You can sew it back on tonight."
As we moved on up into the Cesspool, I could see Berryman was ill at ease.  He
stood out, too. Finally he raised a hand. I saw a glint of yellow. Then he seemed to
be gone. I say "he seemed," because he did not think to avoid the wet edges of the
deeper ruts. We could see his footprints. Aniki grinned, following the prints with her
eyes. At last she moved ahead of Berryman and our Rat to buy ale from one vendor
and  a  turnover  from  another.  She  drank  and  ate,  ambling  just  ahead  of  the  Rat,
keeping him in the corner of her eye. Then she slowed enough to let him move ahead
again.
Pounce had it easier than any of us. No one noticed a black cat  in the street.  He
stopped here and there to sniff aught of interest. Wherever our Rat stopped, Pounce
was there, close enough to see up the Rat's nose. I was so proud. Now there was a
proper god, making himself useful!
Since  my  thought  might  be  deemed  blasphemy,  I  said  silent  prayers  to  the
Goddess  and  to  Mithros.  I  begged  forgiveness  and  asked  them  not  to
misunderstand.  Since  I wasn't  blasted  where I stood,  I guess  they  forgave  me,  or
they hadn't heard my blasphemy.
Our  Rat  never  guessed  he  was  followed.  Without  a  look  behind  he  went  to
Mulberry  Street,  where  he  turned  southwest.  He  walked  but  a  scant  two  blocks
down before he stopped and looked about.
We did not halt nor flinch. That would have given us away. There were plenty of
folk about  at this hour.  Dogs  patrolled out  here often  enough.  Aniki stopped  by  a
knife grinder's cart and gave over  her dagger for  sharpening.  Berryman's  footprints
appeared  in  the  mud  a  yard  from  our  Rat.  Lucky  for  us  the  mage  had  stopped
sneezing once we were out of the loft.
The guard walked up to a ramshackle house three stories  high and  banged  twice
on the door, then five times. It opened. He walked inside. Pounce  trotted  over  and
leaped atop a crate that sat beside the door. He curled up there in the sun.
A moment  later  the  footprints  crossed  the  street  to  us.  I  heard  Berryman  say,
"There are watch spells on the place. I can handle them."
Trees lined the other side of the street, on the edge of some empty land. "Cooper,
into  that  tree,"  Goodwin  said.  She  meant  a  great  old  oak  whose  heavy  branches
would give me an easy climb, one that stood right across from the house. "I'll be up
behind you. Berryman, let the others  know where we are. Carefully. They can  find
me here. And then I hope you can keep that no-seeing on you for a time." We waited
until a hay wagon passed between us and the house, then climbed into the oak.
Aniki left the knife grinder with a coin  and  found  a comfortable  spot  under  our
tree. She pretended to sleep. Pigeons came down from the sky. Some perched along
the roofs  to  either side  of  the house  we watched.  Slapper,  White  Spice,  Mumper,
and Ashes settled around me. None of them made a sound.
Crookshank  must  have chosen  this house  because  a  vein  of  the  pink  rock  that
carried opals in it came up in its cellar. Did he know how easy it would be for us to

spy  on  it?  No  one  built  anything  on  the  southwest  side  of  Mulberry  Street.  Two
hundred  years  ago,  they  say,  metal  human-bird  monsters  called  Stormwings  and
giant human-headed spiders known as spidrens fought a great battle here. The  land
was cursed. Brave souls hunted rabbits in the tall grasses, but mostly the place was
left to  weeds  and  trees.  We  could  hide  a  hundred  Dogs  to  watch  this  house  and
Crookshank's guards would never know.
Nevertheless, we were lucky no guards were posted outside. Of course, if they'd
been, the local folk would have noticed and talked.
We'd  not  been  there  long  before  Tunstall,  Lady  Sabine,  and  Kora  came  in  the
wake of their Rat. The Rat entered the house. Our friends found places to watch the
house and settled to wait.
Two  hard  coves  and  a mot  soon  went in. I knew two  of  them: the  ones  Jewel,
Otterkin,  and  their  partners  had  been  set  to  follow.  Berryman  whispered  up  to
Goodwin that these Dogs had come and were hidden away nearby.
Those Rats and diggers have a nasty  place  to  work,  I thought.  All the windows
were shuttered, despite the heat. I saw another house closed up  the same way, two
buildings down, and another just behind this one, on a thin alley to its right. Families
had lived in these places once. Where did they go?  Did Crookshank  toss  them out
or kill them?
Carefully I moved  down  a few  branches  and  whispered  to  Goodwin  about  the
shuttered houses. When she nodded, I went back to my post.
Seven rushers left the place as we watched. Was that all of them? We had no idea
how many were used with the diggers. The guards looked weary, coves at the end of
a day's work.  Berryman worked  his spell from  wherever he stood,  showing us  the
death mark on their hands.
Tunstall waited until the clocks struck six before he came over to our hiding place
from his. The sun had gone behind the wall for  the Lower City, making it easy  for
him to keep to the shadows.
Leaning against the tree, he murmured up to Goodwin, "I think the rabbits  are in
the burrow for the night, Clary."
"I think you're right," she said. "Berryman? Tell Ahuda where we are. It's time to
move."
The mage had a fresh spell to link him to our raiding party. He used it now. Kora
seemed  to  appear  next  to  Aniki.  I'd  have  thought  her  part  of  the  tall  grasses.
Certainly I'd  never seen  her footprints  in mud.  "It's  about  time," she  murmured to
Aniki. "I've  been  playing good  little washerwoman for  weeks.  I'm  ready  for  some
fun."
Aniki, still seated between two knotted roots, grinned up  at her. "Rosto  is going
to cry when he finds out he missed this."
Tunstall moved over to a screen of tall grass. That was when I saw Lady Sabine
was also there, stretched out on her belly, counting over a set of worry beads in her
long fingers. She had  unsheathed  her sword  and  placed  it on  the grass  beside  her,
ready for use in case someone surprised her.
I'd thought to be hungry and stiff. I'd even thought to be bored, though the stream
of Cesspool folk, carts, and messengers on horseback  was  interesting. As  I sat  on
my thick branch, carefully brushing away ants and easing out cramps a bit at a time,

more pigeons began to come. They roosted  in the trees  all around  me. They made
no sound the others could hear. But me – their ghosts had plenty to say to me.
"Ma, he offered cakes an' threw a bag over my head."
"Papa, I'm hungry an' she said ye have t' pay 'em t' let me come home!"
"A monster grabbt me clean outen me bed!"
It went on  and  on,  the cries  of  little ones  taken in the dark.  The  pigeons  on  the
roofs across the street dove at the newcomers, trying to drive them off.  They'd  get
caught in the twigs and nearly break their silly necks before they got themselves right
again. White Spice, Mumper, Ashes, and Slapper flapped their wings to distract me
until Goodwin hissed, "Do they want folk to notice us?"
They stopped flapping. The children's ghosts talked on.
I glared at Slapper as tears sneaked from my eyes. You sarden bastard, I thought
at him. You and your flock kept them from me, didn't you? You was so bound that I
would free you  first –  war among ghosts!  I'm  caught in a war of  ghosts,  may  the
Crone witness it!
Then I saw movement down  the street  by  torchlight. I heard  rustles  in the grass
behind me. Tunstall returned from  his  hiding  place  beside  my  lady.  The  shadows
had grown so long I could no longer see her.
"Ahuda's here," Tunstall said.  "Berryman, Kora,  get ready."  Berryman appeared
right next to Tunstall. He was sweating, but he wore a big grin. Tunstall clasped his
shoulder, then called softly, "Clary? Cooper? Time to go to work."
We  climbed  down  from  the  oak.  I  held  on  to  the  tree  when  I  got  down,  my
muscles stiff and sore. That was when riders came trotting up Mulberry. They drew
up before  the house  –  three nasty-looking rushers  and  Vrinday  Kayu.  I  saw  them
clear because one had a torch.  He set  it in a stand  by  the house,  then held Kayu's
horse as she slid off.
Goodwin whispered, "Berryman! Kora! It's the mage – don't let her go inside!"
The street echoed with a roar I'd heard once in Crookshank's, the sound of a cat
like a god. The horses reared, fighting the reins. In the torchlight I saw Pounce leap
onto Kayu's back, his claws shining in the dark.
Blue-green and  yellow  fire  shot  across  the  street  from  our  mages.  Both  colors
dropped over her like fishing nets, passing through my cat like he wasn't there.
"I  thought  I'd  have  to  fight  only  the  woman's  spells,  not  the  woman  herself,"
Berryman complained.
Kayu tried to throw Pounce off her. She was screeching. Magic rose from her in a
reddish mist. It flowed across  the street  toward  Kora  and  Berryman, following the
lines of their own spells.
Tunstall, Goodwin, and I charged across the road,  batons  in hand.  Lady Sabine
and Aniki were right behind us,  swords  out.  I heard  Ahuda blow the signal for  the
attack. I looked over my shoulder and saw her burst from the tall grass, Dogs at her
back. One of them carried a hammer that looked near as big as I was.
Kayu's two mounted rushers jumped to the ground and  closed  in to  protect  her.
The horses yanked free and ran, knocking down the one who had carried the torch.
He lay where he fell, his skull broken.
One  rusher  came  at  Tunstall,  sword  raised  high.  The  cove  didn't  even  see
Goodwin lunge in under his strike. She struck him full in the belly with her baton. He

doubled over, retching. She knocked him out. "Idiot," she said.
The third rusher tried to run. One of the Dogs who'd come up from the tall grass
took him.
The  Dog  who  carried  the  big  hammer  gave  it  to  Tunstall.  Roaring  like  a  bear,
Tunstall  smashed  the  door  with  it.  He  was  the  first  one  through  the  opening,
Goodwin and me behind him, Lady Sabine and Aniki on our heels.
There was lamplight within the house. From the back and sides I heard the smash
of wood. The other Dogs were breaking in. Guards  attacked  us  from  ground  floor
rooms, swords raised. Goodwin  and  me ducked  low as  my lady and  Aniki caught
the swords on their own blades.  I clubbed  my attacker  hard  across  the shins  on  a
swing to the side. He – I think it was a he – cried out, knees buckling.
I don't know what happened to him, or what Goodwin and our swordswomen did
to get the upstairs guards out  of  the way. Things went so  fast  after Pounce's  huge
roar, I only remember them in flashes. With Kayu down,  my only thought was  that
the cellar guards might already be killing the diggers.
Down the front hall there was an open door lit by two lamps. I could feel a damp
draft coming from it – cellar air. I ran down the hall, through that door, and down the
stairs. Tunstall was ahead of me.
The guards below were attacking the diggers, just as I feared. The diggers fought
back  with  picks.  Two  people  lay  bleeding  on  the  floor  already.  I  struck  at  the
guards. I tried to bring my prey down but not kill them. I wanted their masters.
The mage marks glowed on the guards' hands, flickering, then fading completely.
Berryman and Kora had bound up Kayu's magic or killed her. The guards would not
die, not from mage marks, at least. They'd live to tell who hired them.
I kicked a guard's feet from under him and knocked him to the floor,  then stood
with a foot on his shoulder. A digger came at us, pick raised. His eyes were locked
on  my  prisoner.  I  raised  my  baton,  keeping  it  between  us  as  the  digger  moved
around me. He was determined to bash my Rat's head in.
"In the King's name!" I cried. "This man is arrested and will stand trial!"
The digger paused. He was shaking.
"In the King's name," I repeated. "Kill him and I'll hobble you for murder."
He  stood  there  for  longer  than  I  liked.  Finally  he  lowered  his  pick.  I  looked
around  me.  The  cellar  was  bigger  than  I'd  expected,  and  deeper.  Just  as  well,
because there were ten Dogs here as well as the captives and the guards. Some Dogs
gently took  picks  from  the  diggers'  hands.  Goodwin  and  two  others  hobbled  the
guards who were alive.
Everyone was  staring, whatever their hands  did.  Those  who'd  worked  here  had
put water in shallow bowls  cut  in the rock  walls.  In  them  were  pieces  of  raw  fire
opal. In the cellar torchlight they shone with spangles and veils of red, blue, purple,
gold, and emerald fire. Deep green, crimson, orange, and amber pockets glinted like
dragons' eyes from two walls of pink stone that had been dug out twelve feet below
the eight-foot-deep cellar.
Opals  vanished  that  night.  I  know  they  did.  The  bowls  were  empty  when  the
house was cleared out and placed under guard by the army. I blame no one, Dogs or
diggers, nor even Aniki or Kora, if they helped themselves. I don't know that I could
have stopped  myself if I'd  not  had  something bigger on  my  mind.  I'm  not  sure  if

Goodwin or Tunstall got any. The ones we'd had before,  the finished ones,  had  all
gone into the Happy Bag. I know, because I was there when we logged them in. If
they took some this night, they didn't talk about it.
As I hobbled my guard and dragged him to his feet, the digger actually helped me.
"They  were going to  kill us,"  he said.  "I  heard  two  of  them  talkin'  when  I  carried
stones upstairs. That's why they made us swear to tell no one we'd  been  hired. My
children would have been left to starve – " He dropped the Rat's arm, letting the man
sway against me. "My little ones!"
"They're  safe,  Master  Ashmiller,"  I  told  him.  It  had  taken  me  a  moment  to
recognize him. He was caked in dirt and thinner by far than he'd been  when I'd  last
seen him. "Safe and sleeping on  my floor."  I shoved  the Rat  toward  the corner  of
the cellar where the rest of the surviving guards were kept.
"Cooper," Master Ashmiller said. "The determined one."
"No more determined than your younger daughter," I called over my shoulder.
We cleaned up as fast as we could.  The  cage  wagons  rolled out  with full loads.
Ahuda wanted to  get paper  issued  against Crookshank,  his paymistress  Norwood,
and the hiring man Poundridge,  then have them arrested  before  they could  flee the
city. The diggers, including Jack, had to see healers and tell the kennel's clerks what
had happened  to  them. I told  Jack  I would  take  him  to  his  children  when  I  came
back to the kennel to muster out.
Berryman and Kora got rides on the seat of the cage  wagon that held the bound
and magicked Kayu. She would go to the mages' prison. Our two mages would have
to undo their spells once they got there, to let the King's mages apply their own.
Aniki  and  Lady  Sabine  vanished.  I  think  they  feared  they  would  have  to  give
reports to the kennel clerks.
Soldiers came down from the Northgate barracks. A crowd was gathering, drawn
by the shouts and the fighting. The soldiers would keep them out of the house  until
the Magistrate's Court decided what to do about the vein of gems under it.
The rest of us gathered outside. With the diggers and their guards on  the way to
the  kennel,  we  could  take  a  breath.  Our  Dogs  leaned  or  sat.  I  wondered  if  the
excitement had rushed from their veins as it had from mine, leaving them feeling old.
We would have to go back to Jane Street. We had reports to give. For those  of  us
still on Evening Watch, it was too early to muster off. Kayfer's folk were still in the
streets, looking to take vengeance on Crookshank's raiders.
One  wagon  had  not  left.  It  held  shovels  and  twenty  sheets  of  canvas.  I  was
hoping I wouldn't have to deal with that wagon, but my hope was cracknobbed. Out
of  the  dark  came  pigeons.  They  flew  down  to  the  ground  in  front  of  me,  all
seventeen of them.
"They  know  something,  don't  they,  Cooper?"  Tunstall  asked  me  as  Pounce
wound among the birds. "Can they show us?"
"Show us what?" one of the tired Dogs asked.
I pointed  to  the  shuttered  house  down  the  alley.  "That  place  and  another  two
doors down on Mulberry," I said. "I'll bet it's them two."
"Shovels,"  Tunstall  ordered.  "Spare  handkerchiefs."  He  gave  me  a  shovel  and
showed me how to tie a pair of handkerchiefs together to make a mask over my nose
and mouth. Goodwin took another shovel, Jewel a third, Otterkin a fourth.  Tunstall

kept a fifth for himself. All tied on masks.
We walked down the alley behind a group of  Dogs  who kept  the crowd  back.  I
was glad to have a mask to hide behind. My tripes were a solid knot.  I would have
given  a  year's  pay  not  to  enter  that  lonely  looking  building.  It  was  a  ramshackle
place, peeling and cracked, the roof collapsed inward on one side. Only the shutters
and the door looked solid.
Someone handed along the hammer from the first house.  Tunstall put  his shovel
aside and smashed the door out of its frame. The others passed lamps to the rest of
us. Goodwin led the way inside.
Down the stairs  we went, into the cellar, while my heart  drummed  in  my  chest.
The area under the place  was  a big hollow, though not  as  big as  in the last house.
Pink rock showed on two sides, and the floor had been dug down fifteen feet. Half
of the cellar was under a huge mound of dirt.
I gagged. The smell was dreadful, like a Cesspool butcher's dump in the summer
heat.
"Breathe through your  mouth,  Cooper,"  Jewel said.  He sounded  kind, his voice
muffled by the handkerchief. "It's not so bad that way."
It was still vile.
"Quickest done, quickest  over,"  Tunstall said.  Carefully he set  his shovel to  the
mound of dirt and started to dig. We all began to help.
We worked  gently, fearing what we might hit.  I'd  just  felt  the  tip  of  my  shovel
touch sommat when we heard wings in that hot  space.  Eight pigeons  had  followed
us down.
They lined up on a shelf, their eyes glittering. I wasn't sure, color being so strange,
but I think Ashes, Pinky, and Spangles sat there, waiting on us.
We found eight dead there. Nine in the other  closed-up  house.  The  pigeons  had
gone all that day  in the hope  that we would get  to  those  sad  bodies  and  set  their
ghosts  free. It was  why  they  had  driven  off  all  the  other  ghosts.  Being  left  there,
unmarked  and  unmourned,  had  driven  them  mad.  Once  we  brought  their  poor
bodies into the open, the birds flew out into the night and were gone.
We needed morgue carts for the dead and more soldiers to guard the houses. The
crowd was growing. It was too quiet for a Cesspool gathering. I didn't have to be a
longtime Dog to know that. I was a Lower City girl. The  best  crowds  are the ones
that laugh and make jokes. Silent ones mean trouble.
Dogs are taught to break up crowds when we can, but none of us had the strength
for it. It made me feel better to see the senior Dogs were as weary as me, reduced to
slumped shoulders and blank stares by what we'd found in those cellars.
We should  have  returned  to  the  kennel  for  muster,  but  Jewel  led  the  way  to  a
bathhouse  instead.  The  nobles  are  starting  to  split  up  by  sexes,  lords  bathing
separate  from  ladies,  but  this  was  an  old-fashioned  place.  We  all  soaked  in  the
hottest water we could bear and soaped ourselves over and over to rid our hair and
skin of the stink. Even Pounce dove  into a tub  after one  group  of  us  left it, rolling
over and over in the water. I took a handful of soap and washed his fur. He'd never
taken a proper  bath  before.  I supposed  he'd  never been  in summer graves  before,
either. The  attendants  looked  like they  wanted  to  object.  Someone  would  have  to
clean the fur from the tub, after all. Pounce meowed at them. I was not to know what

he said. Whatever it was, they closed their gobs and kept them closed.
When I was  done,  Goodwin  held a clean uniform out  to  me. It was  long in the
arm and  leg  and  there  was  no  Puppy  trim,  but  it  was  good  enough.  The  veteran
Dogs  tipped  the attendants  well. It was  enough to  turn their fearful looks  over  the
muck  we'd  carried  in  with  us  into  small  smiles.  They  even  thanked  us  for  our
custom, though they did not invite us to return.
Seemingly word  had  gone  out  as  to  our  whereabouts.  Ersken,  Berryman,  Kora,
Lady  Sabine,  Aniki,  and  Jack  Ashmiller  all  waited  outside  the  bathhouse  for  us.
Ersken  bore  a  message  from  Sergeant  Ahuda.  He  delivered  it  wide-eyed.  "The
Sergeant says come in early in the afternoon  and  write up  your  reports.  She  had  a
talk  with  the  Provost's  Advocate  at  the  Magistrate's  Court.  He  says  you  will  all
present your cases next week, not tomorrow."
My head spun. I'd forgotten I would have to tell Sir Tullus about the robber  that
I'd run down on Beltane. Now I had a reprieve. I was so grateful it hurt.
Goodwin  read  Ahuda's  note.  "She  says  we're  to  have  supper,  on  my  lord
Gershom's  orders."  She  looked  at  Ersken.  "She  also  mentions  Lord  Gershom's
coin."
"Oh."  Ersken  grinned  and  held  out  a  small  pouch  of  coins.  "Sorry,
Guardswomen, Guardsmen."
Tunstall took the pouch and handed it to Jewel as  Senior Corporal  Dog.  "Come
on,"  Jewel said.  "We  never pass  up  a  meal.  All  of  us,"  he  added,  looking  at  our
friends. "We have all earned a real feed."
Jack hesitated. He wanted his children. I swallowed. I was wobbling with hunger,
but if the man needed to see his little ones...
"I would be grateful for a meal," Jack said. "A quick one."
In silence we trooped to the Mantel and Pullet. Our evening had left us wordless.
Even for  veteran Dogs,  this was  not  a  normal  watch's  work.  I  felt  like  what  we'd
done was just too big for talk.
"It's not often we can be proud of a night's striving," Lady Sabine told  us  when
the maids had  served  our  supper  and  filled our  jacks.  She  had  a cup,  befitting her
place as  a  guest  and  a  noble.  She  raised  it.  "Let  us  savor  it,  and  pray  the  Black
God's mercy for the souls that were set free."
"Black God's mercy," we all whispered, and drank.
Jack was good about me needing food, but he ate fast all the same. To thank him
for his consideration, I ate fast, too. Nobody said aught but good night when we left
with Pounce.
"I've been thinkin'," Jack said as we walked home.  "When  I've  built me strength
up a bit..." He dug his hands in his pockets. I heard  something click, like rocks.  "I
mean to train for a Dog."
I stopped and stared. "You've been in a cellar too  long,"  I said  flat out.  Pounce
leaped to my shoulder and added his noises to mine. "You're a cove with children –
"
"I saw tonight the good that Dogs can do for coves with families," he said.
"Think long and  hard,"  I told  him. "I  buried  a friend from  training already. And
Dogs get precious few nights like this." I saw a lump of dark clothing where Pottage
Lane met Jane Street. Surely the Night Watch  could  have rousted  a drunkard  in so

public a place.
I went over and prodded the lump with my baton. Torchlight from nearby taverns
gave me a better look. This was no drunkard. It was someone laid flat, with a black
veil cast over his face. I tugged at the veil.
Fulk lay there, eyes wide in death. Around his neck hung a leather cord. On it was
a gold coin.
"Guess you didn't escape Kayfer after all, you stupid cuddy," I whispered.  I put
my whistle to my lips and blew the summons for a murder.
 
 
Monday, May 11, 246
Though it is several hours past dawn and the room  is hot,  I have done  no  more
than dress and move out onto the landing with my journal. To  do  it, I had  to  leave
my bed without waking Tansy, then dress and cross the floor without waking one of
the four Ashmillers. Lucky for me, everyone was worn out from our late night return.
I spent  the  quiet  time  writing  up  yesterday,  since  I  can  hear  no  sound  from  any
rooms but my landlady's  on  the ground  floor.  Seemingly my other  housemates  are
also tired from yesterday.
I wonder what Rosto was up to, since he did not catch up with us.
The children are stirring. Mayhap I will go  to  Mistress  Noll's and  buy  a treat to
celebrate Jack's – 
 
 
That mess  happened  because  someone  whistled so  loud  from  the  ground  floor
that my hand jerked. My pen went clear out  of  my hand.  I ruined a whole  page  in
this  journal.  I  went  running  downstairs.  Even  seeing  the  lad's  armband  with  the
Provost's badge on it didn't stop me from saying, "Don't you know folk are sleeping
? And that after a sarden lousy night?"
He shrugged. "I'm told Puppy Cooper lives here."
I tried to stay cross, but I'd been a runner, after all. And a runner wouldn't be after
a Puppy unless the matter was important. "That's me."
"Riot  duty.  They're  calling  the  Fourth  Watch  and  the  Evening  Watch  in  for
backup duty. Muster at Westberk and Koskynen," the lad said.  "They  told  me you
might know where I'd find Puppy Ersken Westover."
Riot duty? Pox and murrain, I thought.  "I'll get Ersken,"  I said,  my gut twisting.
"What happened?"
The lad grinned at me. He was missing two bottom teeth. "They found four dozen
dead folk in one of Crookshank's houses, and the mob wants t' tear 'im apart. So  I
hear." He dashed off down the street, on his way to rouse some more Dogs.
Upstairs,  I heard  Jack's  little boy  start  to  cry.  "Piss,"  I said.  I ran up  to  Kora's
rooms and pounded on the door. The door was new. I remembered why and stood
to one side of the frame so as not to get blasted.
"Wha?" I heard Ersken moan inside.
"Riot backup duty!" I called. "Get dressed!"
I went upstairs and put on my uniform, boots, belt, and armor. "There's a riot, if

you  didn't  hear,"  I  told  the  Ashmillers  and  Tansy.  All  of  them  watched  me  with
scared eyes. "If it comes this far, go to the kennel. They'll protect you. Pounce, stay
with them. A riot's no place for a cat, even you." I closed  the door  behind me and
trotted downstairs. Ersken and Kora lingered at her door, kissing.
I grabbed him as I passed. "I'm not having fun, you're not having fun," I told him
as I towed him along.
"You sound more like Goodwin every day," he mumbled.
"I begin to see how she got the way she is," I said.
Even as we approached the mustering point, we could hear the distant roar of the
riot. Gooseflesh spread over my skin. Anyone of the Lower City knows that sound
and fears it. Folk caught up in a riot aren't our cousins and sisters, our brothers and
uncles. They are part of a big animal with many arms and claws, armed with stones
and sticks.
Armorers  handed  out  rectangular shields.  We  lined up  for  ours,  then found  our
Dogs.  To  my shock,  Goodwin  grinned when  she  saw  me.  "Days  like  this,  you're
glad you're a Dog, admit it, Cooper," she said.
Tunstall scratched his head. All of his short hair stood on end. "She acts like this
when  she's  worn  to  the  bone,"  he  told  me.  "You'll  get  used  to  it.  No  Master
Pounce?"
"He's too wise to come out here," Goodwin said, putting her helm on  and  doing
up the strap. "Why should he? He's not paid to get kicked in the head."
The Night Watch Commander was still in charge, since the riot had started on his
watch. He passed  among us,  giving orders.  "Keep  calm,"  he  told  us.  "With  luck,
you won't be needed." Other Dogs were out already, in the thick of it – Night Watch
Dogs  and  Day  Watch.  Soldiers  were  in  place  to  the  south  and  west,  he  told  us,
squeezing the mob. It was our duty to wait and to be ready, just in case.
After he moved on, I asked Tunstall, "Is it true? The mob wants Crookshank?"
"It's true," he said. "It started brewing when we found those graves."
"They started talking, and then they started drinking," Goodwin said. "It's not like
the old scale never made any enemies in the Cesspool. Seventeen dead,  finding out
eight more were lined up to die next, that Crookshank kicked two dozen families out
of those houses so he could dig there – I heard that on the way here this morning –
folk got upset."
I felt the fire opal in my breeches pocket. Crookshank would pay a high price for
his stones.
Other Dogs came over to talk to mine about what we'd found last night. That was
when I had the time to think. If the mob got hold of the old man, I'd not shed a tear.
But Herun was still with the Shadow Snake, still alive, with three days yet before the
kidnap deadline. If the mob tore Crookshank to pieces, the Snake had no reason to
keep Herun breathing.
I fidgeted, sweating under my armor in the thick heat. I listened to the distant roar
and watched the mages who were present. They huddled over crystals and  mirrors,
calling out all manner of reports to the Watch Commanders. It sounded confusing to
me. What wasn't confusing was the crowd's noise. It was  coming closer.  We  were
but two blocks from Stuvek Street and Crookshank's house.
Madly enough,  vendors  came by,  offering  food  for  sale.  Tunstall  bought  raisin

buns and shared  them, two  for  Goodwin  and  two  for  me. "You  don't  know when
we'll eat next," he said.
The pigeons  arrived,  their  wings  making  high-pitched  noises  in  the  heavy  air.  I
looked up, thinking they'd come for the food. Instead they flew at me, wings beating
at  my  head.  The  ghosts  of  children  screamed  in  my  ears,  demanding  mothers,
fathers, sisters, brothers. The birds soared and plunged around me. They dodged as
my Dogs  and  I  swung  at  them,  trying  to  drive  the  cursed  things  off.  Ersken,  his
Dogs, Jewel, and Yoav, who stood with us, all tried to help.
"What do they want?" shouted Jewel. I'd never seen the old man so pale before.
"The  Shadow  Snake!"  I  shouted.  I  grabbed  one  and  held  it  as  it  pecked  and
smacked at my face. "They want me to – us to get the Shadow Snake!"
Suddenly they flew to the rooftops. I stood there gawping, a pigeon in my hands.
"Now what?" I asked.
"Beka!" a voice I knew shouted from down the street.
I turned to look. Rosto the Piper walked down Koskynen like he owned it. He'd a
long cut over one cheekbone. The blood on it was dry, but the cut wasn't that old –
mayhap a few hours.
"Guardsfolk,"  he said,  and  smiled. "Lovely day  for  a riot."  They glared at  him.
"Beka, might I have a word?"
"We're on duty, you know," Tunstall said.
"Three  companies  of  infantry just arrived from  Riverfort,"  Rosto  said.  "They're
moving up Mulberry Street.  Phelan sent  a message  to  Kora  that two  companies  of
cavalry  are  crossing  Kingsbridge  right  now  from  the  Highfields  barracks.  Your
rioters are going to get crushed. Cooper?"
I looked at my Dogs. Tunstall shrugged. Goodwin gave me a tiny nod.
Still holding my pigeon, I went to Rosto.
"If you  wanted  another  pet,  couldn't  you  ask  that  cat  to  get  you  a  kitten?"  he
wanted to know. "Since he's distributing them?"
I just stared at him. I'd been having a hard week.
"Oh, I can see you're in a mood. What you need is a man."
He seemed more than a bit cracked today. And I couldn't  let him talk to  me like
that.  He  thought  I'd  be  one  of  his  deadly  mots,  like  Aniki  and  Kora,  though
seemingly Kora had changed her man, if not her place with the law.
"How'd you get that?" Even knowing better, I couldn't stop myself from touching
his cut.
It's hard to hold an angered pigeon with just one hand. The bird burst out of  my
grip and  smacked  us  both  with  its  wings.  Then  it  escaped  into  the  sky,  its  curst
ghost laughing.
"You  told  it to  do  that,"  Rosto  complained.  The  pigeon  had  struck  his  cut.  It
opened to bleed afresh.
I gave  him  my  handkerchief.  "No,  but  it  was  funny.  Master  the  Piper  –  since
you've no last name – I'm on duty. What did you have to say to me?"
Though the cut must  have hurt from  the pigeon's  blow,  he'd  been  smiling. Now
the humor left his face. He leaned down and put his lips beside my ear. "Yates Noll,"
he told me. "One of my people got word to me. He and three hard coves are laired
at the Sheepmire.  They  moved  into  one  of  the  special  sheds  two  days  ago,  after

dark."
I looked up at Rosto, blinking, my brain scrambling like a rabbit. They had sheds
in back  of  the tavern, I remembered.  I'd  run past  them that night  I'd  chased  Orva
Ashmiller down. Mostly they were said to hold goods that the Rogue considered his.
It wasn't healthy to inspect them, and the price for  leaving them be  was  part  of  the
weekly Happy Bag.
"You're trying to get me in bloody with the Rogue," I said in his ear.
Rosto  kissed  my  cheek.  "Forget  Kayfer,"  he  told  me.  "Do  you  want  Yates  or
not?" He trotted past my Dogs with a cheerful wave. "Don't mind me," he shouted.
"I'm off to chat with Dawull."
Tunstall and Goodwin came over to me. "He looks  like a rat with cheese  on  his
whiskers," Tunstall said. "What wickedness is he up to?"
I told them what he'd said. "Please, can we go?" I asked, though it was  begging,
more like. "You know what'll happen with soldiers' horses in it. We'll risk our  nobs
along with the crowd.  Herun's  only got  three more days  if  Crookshank  obeys  the
note. If he don't or if the mob gets 'im...Please, we've got to try!" I had my fire opal
tight in my fist. I could feel its edges biting into my glove.
Tunstall rubbed his chin. I heard whiskers rasp on his gloved fingers. "She's got a
point, Clary. And just think –  the digger case  and  the Shadow  Snake wound  up  in
the same week. That's tidy Dog work for you."
Goodwin gave us both a look that would peel rock.  "Now  I know why you  like
having a Puppy so much,"  she  said,  disgusted.  "It  makes you  all eager again. Like
you were getting bored." She stomped over to the Night Watch Commander.
"She was bored, too. Though I confess, I didn't think Puppies brought  such  big
crimes with them,"  Tunstall said.  "Or  found  big  crimes  so  quick."  He  gave  me  a
funny look. I thought there might be shame in it. "Mayhap it's just you see with fresh
eyes when you have a Puppy to care for. You see bad business that's been there all
along."
I didn't know what to say, so I kept my gob shut. The pigeons wheeled overhead,
their wings flapping. Slapper landed near me, stumping his way along as  he pecked
for crumbs.
From  somewhere  toward  the  river  we  heard  the  call  of  trumpets.  Toward  the
palace, we heard trumpets answer. The military was closing in.
Ersken came over to us. "Take me with you," he said. "You're going after Herun
Lofts – I want to come, too. I've done as much walking and questioning on  this as
you three. My Dogs will release me if you say so!"
Tunstall looked down at him. "How'd you know what we were planning?"
Ersken pointed at me. "Look at her eyes! She's got the scent of something. Lately
only two things do that to her!"
I could barely stand still. I was just thinking, Dogs be cursed, I'll go  on  my own
and take the  consequences,  when  Goodwin  returned.  "Let's  go,  you  eager  young
things. I hope Rosto's tip is a good one. The Commander says to take our  shields.
Roving parties of looters are escaping the Guard nets."  She  looked  at Ersken,  then
back at his Dogs. They nodded to her. "Come on, Ersken. We  may as  well have a
Puppy parade."
Ersken only grinned at her.

We grabbed our shields, though I would have been happy to leave the curst heavy
things behind.  Off  we went at a trot,  Ersken beside  me, Tunstall beside  Goodwin.
We'd just passed Nipcopper Lane when someone said, "Manh!"
I looked at Pounce. His purple eyes glinted up at me. He looked very pleased with
himself as he ran at my side.
The  deeper  we  went  into  the  Cesspool,  the  quieter  it  got.  Folk  were  staying
indoors.  The  sky  turned  a  sickly  green-gray  as  deep  black  clouds  climbed  high
overhead.  I thanked Mithros silently. A thunderstorm  would dampen  the  mob  and
put out  any  fires  that  got  started.  In  the  meantime,  though,  the  air  was  thick  and
sticky. I felt like I was dragging it into my chest.
We'd  reached  Crow  Street  when a clutch  of  twenty-odd  looters  charged  out  to
meet us. These were the ones smart enough to go around the places where Dogs and
soldiers would place traps. They were using the riot as an excuse to rob.
We  raised  our  shields.  Ersken  and  me  moved  sideways  like  we'd  been  taught,
getting  in  a  line  at  Tunstall's  right.  We  smashed  into  this  small  mob  hard.  Clubs
smacked my shield. A mot moved around to my side to hit me with a bucket, of all
things. I smacked  her raised  elbow with my baton.  She  squealed  and  dropped  the
bucket, grabbing the elbow with her other hand.
Pigeons flew down to attack the looters, flying into their faces. The looters cursed
and yelped, then called on their gods. Before my shield I felt them give way. All four
of us put our  shoulders  behind our  shields,  ramming ahead.  The  looters  stumbled.
One fell under Tunstall's feet. He kicked the lout in the belly. That  left the man too
busy puking to leap on our backs as we passed.
Behind us we heard the clatter of horses.
I chanced a look to the rear. Four armored knights and ten mounted soldiers rode
toward us. "Break," Goodwin said quietly.
We split in the middle, Ersken and  me to  one  side  of  the  street,  Goodwin  and
Tunstall to the other, letting the horsemen ride through. The pigeons flew up  out  of
the way. As the looters ran from the advancing horsemen, Tunstall beckoned to us.
He led us into one of the twisty side streets, away from Koskynen.
We saw some who might have been looters after that, but once they glimpsed us,
they ran. Any bigger groups, with numbers  to  give them courage,  were looking for
richer pickings on toward the markets.
We heard the first roll of thunder as we passed through the sagging gate at the rear
of  the  Sheepmire.  The  place  looked  even  more  depressing  than  it  did  at  night,
crumbling and nasty.
Tunstall motioned for us to put down our shields. Here they would only get in the
way.
We  looked  around.  There  was  the  tavern,  half  stone  and  half  timber.  It  had  a
stable, though I hated to think of horses there. Pigs and chickens did their best in the
yard. We saw a chicken coop. The pigeons came to rest on its roof, as silent now as
the birds with the diggers' ghosts had been the day before.
Two  of  the  sheds  were  good  only  for  wood  storage.  Two  more  weren't  big
enough for five men, if Herun was still alive. That left three the size of small cottages.
We  looked  at  the  first.  There  was  leaf  litter  at  the  front  and  rear  doors.  Tunstall
shook  his  head.  No  one  had  opened  those  doors  in  a  week  at  least.  Quietly  we

crossed the yard until we stood between that shed and the one  next to  it. It looked
more promising, it and the one closer to the tavern. These two had clear doorsills.
Tunstall signaled Ersken to check the other shed. As  he went running across  the
open yard I listened at the wall next to me for any leak of sound. I heard men laugh
inside just as Ersken shook his head.
Tunstall  signaled  him  back.  Goodwin  beckoned  him  around  to  the  rear  door.
Tunstall and I had the front. Tunstall held out  his hand  and  counted  fingers off  for
me, giving Ersken and Goodwin time to get ready: one, two, three, four,  five. Then
he hit the door with all of his weight.
Mayhap it had been a strong door. It wasn't up to Tunstall's strength and weight,
though.  It  snapped  from  its  hinges.  Three  men  who  were  dicing  on  the  floor
scrambled to their feet. I lunged at the first with my baton and swung it up under his
chin as hard as I could. He dropped and  lay still. Behind him, in a corner,  I saw  a
man bound hand and foot and hooded like a hawk. With the cold, clear attention that
came to me in a fight, I recognized the embroidery on his tunic. Tansy loved to sew
that griffin and flower pattern.
Goodwin and Ersken broke through the rear door. Thunder boomed, shaking the
very air. They hit another of  the rushers  from  behind as  Tunstall  hit  him  from  the
front. That one just wilted to the floor. I was on the third rusher. He tried to fend me
off with a footstool  until I kicked him between his legs. When he doubled  over,  I
struck  him down  with my baton  and  tapped  his kidneys so  he  wouldn't  rise  for  a
time.
Yates Noll had been sleeping on  a cot  in the corner.  The  sister  beater  and  child
stealer sported heavy whiskers, and his hair was greasy from lack of washing. As we
moved in, he backed into a corner, waving a dagger. He was smiling.
"Drop it," Goodwin ordered. "We arrest you in the King's name, for murder and
kidnapping as the Shadow Snake."
"I must stay shadowed," he said, his eyes a-glitter. "Di'n't your little terrier tell you
about  me? How I'm  a hard  cove,  a  cruel  one?  All  the  Lower  City  fears  me  now.
What good is it if I die screamin' on Execution Hill?"
"You've nowhere to go," Tunstall told him. "It's time to answer to Mithros."
"And I will," he said. He thrust the dagger into his throat under his jaw. He did it
before we could move, and no amount of healing could have saved him. He bled to
death fast,  making a frightful mess.  I  don't  think  I  will  ever  forget  the  look  in  his
eyes.
"Good," Tunstall said at last. "Saves the realm the cost of caging and trying him."
"No,  it's  the  execution  that's  the  expensive  part,"  Goodwin  said.  "Well,  and
caging him until then. That gets costly."
Tunstall spat on the dirt floor.
Pounce  had  run over  to  Herun. Suddenly  the ropes  slid  off  Herun's  wrists  and
ankles as  Pounce  dragged  them away in his teeth. Ersken hesitated,  then  lifted  the
hood  off  Herun's  head.  "Master  Lofts?  You're  free."  Herun  just  stared  at  Ersken,
dazed.  Ersken began to  chafe  Herun's  ankles,  working  the  blood  back  into  them.
"It's all right." Ersken's voice was gentle. "You're safe. We'll need a report from you,
understand. We still have to try these fellows." Pounce clambered onto  Herun's  lap
and began to knead one of his pale wrists, purring. Herun reached out and petted my

cat.
Tunstall was  already hobbling one  of  the  downed  men.  I  remembered  my  duty
and hurried to  help. Yates  dead,  Herun free...I  felt odd.  Not  quite  attached  to  the
world, as if I was a ghost myself. Who would tell Mistress Noll?
"Where's the loot?" Tunstall asked his Rat. "Not here. You weren't dicing for it."
We looked at the coppers on the floor.
"Where's  the loot  Yates  got  for  those  kidnapped  children?"  Goodwin  asked  as
she bound the hands of the second of the three Rats we'd taken. "What did you do
with it?"
Ersken hauled the third Rat  to  his feet. "There  wasn't  much coin,  all told.  They
could have spent it."
"Yates kept sayin' how we'd never need  another job  after this,"  his captive  said,
his voice  bitter. "No  more handfuls of  coin  and  bits  of  jewelry to  sell  for  half  the
worth – "
"If he'd let us  sell," complained  Tunstall's  captive.  "The  best  stuff  just vanished
and we'd get paid in coin."
"We'll tell you what you want to know. On'y keep us from the mob," Goodwin's
Rat told her.
"We'll think on it," Tunstall said. It took him and me both to haul his Rat up. He
was on the heavy side. "Went out and had a look this morning, did  you,  lads?  Got
an eyeful of what a mob might do?"
The Rat shuddered.
Goodwin propped her Rat on the wall and started to collect their packs,  stuffing
whatever might be of use to the Magistrate into them. Ersken went through Yates's
pockets and turned his things over to Goodwin. I hobbled our Rats in a string, like
slaves.
Tunstall got a horse and  a canvas  from  the inn's  stable,  and  the innkeeper came
out to squall. He'd been too afraid to do so while we were making noise in his shed,
but now that it looked  like we were real Dogs  who  were  taking  his  horse,  he  had
plenty to say.
Tunstall ignored him. First he wrapped Yates in the canvas. Then he tied the body
to the horse's back. I'd've expected a beast to be unhappy near the stink of so much
blood,  but  not  this one.  I think he might well have been  used  for  such  a  purpose
before.
When the innkeeper protested  one  time too  many, Tunstall  grabbed  him  by  the
collar. "Come to the Jane Street  kennel to  fetch  it," he said,  friendly for  all he half
lifted the man in the air. "And thank the gods we will give the horse back. Don't  try
to tell me you didn't know you were hiding wanted men." He dropped the innkeeper.
After that, we heard not one squeak more from the cove.
Once we'd gathered all that might be  useful, Goodwin  handed  a pack  to  Ersken
and a pack to me. "It's a long walk back to the kennel in the rain," she  said.  "Let's
see how much of it we can manage before the storm breaks."
 
I wondered  if fish in jelly felt as  I did  on  that  walk.  We'd  finished  the  Shadow
Snake.  He  was  dead,  the  Lower  City  safe.  These  Rats  were  eager  to  talk,  to  be
spared the cage Dog torturers and the mob. If they had information of value to trade,

they might turn their executions to lifetime labor in the quarries or on the roads of the
realm.
That was not my affair. I still had a feeling of things left undone.
Someone would have to tell Mistress Noll that her youngest  son  was  dead.  That
his presents to her were paid for in the blood of children. Did she suspect? She was
a wise mot. She had to think the son who'd never done well in the world had  come
by pretty things like that lily pendant in some crooked way.
Did he give her only the odd present, or did she get more? My mind showed me
pictures  with each  flash  of  lightning.  It  wasn't  just  that  pendant,  sommat  any  son
might  give  his  mother,  loot  that  wouldn't  fetch  much  coin  from  a  scale.  I
remembered the  lists  of  the  victims  and  the  prices  for  their  return  I  had  kept  for
weeks. Among the more than  twenty  payments  I  knew  of,  there  had  been  a  spell
book. Pearl earrings. Other pieces of jewelry our Rats hadn't kept.
The  rain  came  down  in  a  roar  before  we  reached  Crow  Street.  Even  with  our
shields held over  us,  we could  scarcely  see  where to  plant our  feet.  Then  the  hail
began, fist-sized chunks of it. We had to protect the horse with our shields, the poor
beast.  There  were  no  rioters  now.  They'd  fled  indoors.  We  did,  too,  at  the  first
chance, ducking into a collapsing warehouse. We sheltered there until the hail ended,
then trudged on. The closer we got to the kennel, the more we noticed the stench of
smoke.  There had  been  fires near the Nightmarket as  well as  in  other  parts  of  the
Cesspool. Near Crookshank's house.
The  line  of  Dogs  with  rioters  to  be  caged  stretched  from  the  kennel  to  the
Nightmarket. We all moaned even as we fell in behind the last pair and their captives.
A packed cage wagon rattled past. That meant the Jane Street cages were full. They
were sending the overflow straight to  Outwalls Prison.  The  rain poured  down.  Just
when I thought it was  easing, I heard  the approach  of  thunder.  A fresh  storm  was
coming in.
My  Dogs  talked  with  the  others  that  fell  in  line  behind  us  with  their  captives.
Ersken went off to find his Dogs and returned with news. One of the fires was lit at
Crookshank's house. The old man never got  out.  Two  had  been  trapped  with him,
but not Annis. No one knew where she was, but the servants that escaped  said  she
wasn't home, nor was Tansy.
Goodwin  looked  at  Herun.  "I'm  sorry  your  grandfather's  dead,"  she  told  him.
"Sorry you had to hear in such a way."
Herun was leaning against the wall of a building under  the eaves,  out  of  the rain.
He only nodded. He'd said little since we brought him out of the shed.
Goodwin's words made me itch under my skin. "May I go to Mistress Noll?" The
words just popped out of my mouth. Tunstall, Goodwin, Ersken, even the captives
stared at me. "That innkeeper won't keep his gob shut. Even if he does, his servants
won't. She did good things for me when I was little. Wouldn't it be kinder for her to
hear it from me?"
Goodwin  sighed.  Tunstall  looked  at  her.  "We  don't  need  Cooper  to  log  the
prisoners, Clary. And Mistress  Deirdry's  fed  us  often  enough.  She  deserves  better
than hearing it from the nearest busybody. Someone who'll tell her it was worse than
it was."
"Do it quick," Goodwin told me.

I gave  my  shield  to  Ersken  and  took  off  through  the  rain,  splashing  water  up
above my hips as I trotted. Pounce ran next to me. The mud slid off his glossy  fur
like it was coated with oil.
As the second downpour eased, the pigeons soared along the streets ahead of us.
Why were they still with me? Yates was dead.
Mistress Noll made her new home of the last year or  so  on  Whippoorwill Mews
and Pottage  Lane. It was  far better  than the place  she'd  had  on  Mutt Piddle  Lane.
That crowded little house  had  three ovens  and  a flock  of  children living all around
waiting to grab whatever she made. This place had ten ovens. Her married daughters
lived on  either side.  They helped her. She  had  hired workers,  too,  where once  her
husband  had  run her business  into the ground.  He'd  never  had  a  head  for  money
matters.
The servant who answered my knock looked at my uniform and let me in. Other
workers  were  putting  away  the  gate  braces  and  continuing  the  day's  baking.  The
servant waved me toward the house, not even noticing my cat. I scraped  my boots
and walked into the kitchen. A maid fetched  Gemma for  me.  Like  the  man  who'd
answered the gate, she paid no mind to Pounce.
"She's  doing  the  accounts,"  Gemma  said  when  I  asked  for  her  mother.  "This
way." As I followed her, she said, "I'm that surprised  to  see  you.  I thought certain
you'd be with your Dogs. They're saying the mob is setting fires."
"They're  out,  and  the  army  is  in  the  streets,  keeping  order,"  I  said,  thinking,
They've  not  heard  about  Yates.  Thank  the  gods  Tunstall  wrapped  him  before  we
took him through the city.
I watched Gemma as she walked through the narrow hall between the kitchen and
the main house. She wore her hair up in a cloth, and there were flour smears on her
long  outer  tunic.  I  wondered  if  she  ever  stopped  working.  Leaving  her  neck
uncovered as she had, she'd also left bare a bruise shaped like a man's fingers.
At least that has ended, I thought. Yates will beat her no more.
Why had Mistress Noll permitted it? I knew she  had  ruled her man and  children
with an iron will. She could have stopped Yates from hitting Gemma.
"Why didn't you leave here?" I asked her. "Why  stay  and  let Yates  treat you  so
bad? Couldn't you live with one of your sisters?"
"Ma wanted me here," Gemma said. "In this house, you do as Ma says."
"Always?" I asked, having a very bad  thought.  No.  Not  the grannylady. Not  the
woman who had given me and my family bread when we were hungry.
We walked into a tidy little sitting room, Gemma, Pounce, and me. Mistress Noll
was bent over a table, squinting at an account book. "You stupid slut, did I not  tell
you  we  needed  those  custards  made  as  soon  as  may  be?"  she  asked,  without
looking up.  "Riot  or  no,  the  Shoemakers'  Guild  has  their  supper  tonight  –  "  She
finally thought to glance at us. "Beka Cooper. Surely your Dogs have work for you
just now. Gemma, be about your business."
"Actually, I have news for you both, Mistress Noll," I said. "My Dogs sent me."
Mistress Noll set down her reed pen and leaned back in her chair. Pounce leaped
up on her account book to stare her in the face. "And what news is so important that
it brings you to my home in the middle of a riot?"
"The riot is done," I said. "I have news of Yates."

Mistress Noll went very still. "What of my son?"
"He is dead," I told her. I heard Gemma gasp. "Forgive me. We have his partners
in the  Shadow  Snake  kidnappings  in  hobbles.  We  took  them  all  together.  Yates
would be alive, but he killed himself."
Mistress  Noll's  face  was  as  hard  as  iron.  "And  he  said  he  was  the  Shadow
Snake?"
"Ma," Gemma whispered.
"Shut your gob," Mistress Noll ordered.
"Yates said it," I replied. "So do his friends,  who we took  alive." I did  not  take
my eyes from her face as I bluffed, "But we know he's no more the Snake than I am.
It was Tansy made me wonder about you, Mistress. Tansy and that lily pendant you
wear."
She raised  a hand  to  the  necklaces  around  her  throat.  The  lily  one  was  hidden
again,  under  her  clothes.  "What  has  that  waterfront  trull  to  say  about  me?"  she
asked.
"When my Dogs were there, you talked so well of Tansy," I said. I kept my voice
polite. Hearing Yates  was  dead  had  cracked  sommat  in  her,  for  all  she  talked  so
hard. She was going to pieces before me. "I remembered  how much she  cost  you,
how she'd put you in a rage. You were glad when you somehow got word of the fire
opals. It gave you an excuse  to  hurt her. I think you'd've  killed Rolond  even if the
old man did  pay."  I saw  her hands  turn to  big-knuckled fists  in her  lap.  All  those
years of baking – she could strike a fearful blow, even at her age. "Did you mean to
even kill her in time?"
"You  lived  on  Mutt  Piddle  Lane,  Beka,"  Mistress  Noll  said.  "We  worked  like
slaves to get out,  and  that brat  took  coin  from  my pocket.  Every time she  robbed
me, I had  to  replace  what goods  I'd  made.  I'd  not  gain a copper  on  business  that
was  meant  to  put  me  and  mine  ahead  in  the  world.  I  was  happy  to  feed  you
neighborhood  children  on  the  overdone  stuff  and  the  day's  leavings.  You  made
deliveries. You fetched firewood and water. But you'd let her steal from me and then
you'd laugh. No sense of gratitude, any of you. Content to wallow in the filth and let
others feed you."
"Why the other kidnappings? Those folk were your customers. Your neighbors."
I watched her, trying to keep my voice steady.
"Why?" She raised her eyebrows at me. "You ask me that? I'd  not  stay  on  Mutt
Piddle Lane! There I was, breaking my back over the ovens, getting us  a table here
and a stall there, and  along comes  Mistress  Painter with a ruby  pendulum. A ruby
pendulum, when all know she'd not enough Gift to whistle up rain in a thunderstorm.
Her brat was running about, kicking dust on the front  of  the stalls for  amusement."
She bowed her head, raising a hand to  her throat.  "I  lost  my temper,  as  I've  lost  it
now. But you'll not  live to  tell of  it."  I  heard  a  snap.  She  flung  something  at  me,
something she'd broken from one of her necklaces. I remembered too late that curse
charms were among the things she'd taken.
Pounce, who sat  forgotten  on  her account  book,  leaped.  He caught the thing in
his jaws and dropped to the floor. I cried out and jumped at Mistress Noll, smashing
her chair against her table. She punched at me with her heavy baker's hands. I seized
all of her necklaces and dragged them over her head, scraping her cheeks and nose,

pulling off her head cloth, and yanking her hair from its pins as she bruised my ribs
and chest.  I dropped  the necklaces  to  the side  of  the  chair  and  planted  one  hand
over her nose, third fingertip on her left eyelid, index fingertip on her right.
"Gemma, help me!" she cried.
"No, Ma," I heard Gemma say. "Not this time."
"Shut  your  gob,"  I told  Mistress  Noll, "or  you'll lose  an eye for  killing  my  cat.
Both eyes if you rush me."
She  went  still.  She  could  not  abide  the  thought  of  being  maimed.  She  knew  I
would do it. I, too, came from Mutt Piddle Lane.
One handed, as we'd practiced it in training, I tied a thong to her right wrist after
feeling it for more charms. Swiftly I grabbed her left arm with the hand  I'd  used  to
threaten her eyes and bound her wrists together.
"You've  no  proof,"  Mistress  Noll said,  her eyes  cold.  "You  think she  will  be  a
witness against me?"
"You have all the things you didn't sell," I said. I drew my dagger. From the heap
of  necklaces  I  fished  out  the  lily  pendant  and  two  others  I  recognized  from  the
descriptions I'd been given. Her pearl earrings looked  familiar for  the same reason.
To be sure, I took them off her and checked the silver backs. There, in tiny letters,
the cove  who'd  bought  them had  asked  the smith to  carve  his mot's  initials, T.  L.
"The charms and the books of spells will be in this house. And the mages will have
the rest of it out of you and Gemma."
"You can't arrest me," Mistress Noll said. "You're only a Puppy who's got above
herself."
"No,  I can't  arrest  you.  But I can  drag  you  by  the  hair  if  need  be,"  I  told  her.
"And as we go to Jane Street, I'll shout what I'm taking you in for. It's not raining so
hard that folk won't hear me. Mayhap you won't make it alive so my Dogs can arrest
you proper." My blood pounded in my temples, I was so cold and so angry. I had
believed in her kindness until today. She had kidnapped and murdered  children and
destroyed families for gain and for spite. "Or you and Gemma can  walk along with
me peaceful-like and get arrested on the quiet. Then you'll answer for it all before  a
proper court. Before the law." I looked at Gemma. "You knew about this. I'm taking
you with us."
Gemma nodded.
I made myself look  around  for  Pounce  then. I ground  my teeth, trying to  ready
myself for the sight of him dying or dead. He'd attacked a curse, after all.
Instead I saw him roll something around in his mouth, the better to chew it. Tiny
red arms shot out around his teeth, flailing. Then they curled  up.  Whatever Pounce
ate got smaller until he swallowed the remains. Then he began to wash.
"You're alive," I said like a ducknob.
Partway through licking a paw, he stopped and glared at me. You think me a poor
creature if you believe a tiny curse like that would even ruffle my fur.
Properly scolded, I knelt so Mistress Noll would not kick me and began to hobble
her ankles.
 
When I came back  to  my Dogs,  Ersken,  Herun, and  Yates's  gang,  they  were  a
block  from  the  kennel  in  the  line.  Tunstall  raised  his  brows  when  I  joined  them

towing Mistress Noll and Gemma.
"I thought you were breaking sad news, Cooper. This is a strange way to do it."
I explained about my dreams of the old days and knowing the way Mistress Noll
ruled her children. And how one idea had led to another.
"We were thinking about how much of the loot she got,  once  our  feet started  to
hurt," Tunstall said.  "Why  the Shadow  Snake still lived in his  mother's  house  and
worked for her hauling bakery goods. We just didn't see how we could go talk with
her dragging these three." He tugged the rope that tethered Yates's hobbled friends.
"An  old  woman  did  this?"  Herun  whispered.  "An  old  woman  had  my  boy
murdered, me kidnapped, for charms and a few coins?"
"For  fire opals,  lad,"  Goodwin  said.  "So  she  could  stop  dealing in charms  and
coins and never make another pasty."
Suddenly Gemma, at the back of the three men of Yates's gang, started to laugh.
We  looked  at  her  and  at  her  mother.  Mistress  Noll  raised  her  tied  hands  to  her
mouth. Gemma was laughing, but thin tears trickled down her mother's cheeks.
The Rat who was tied next to them moved  back  as  much as  he could.  "He told
them Crookshank's dead," Ersken said to us. "Gemma thinks it's funny."
"Never again, she swore," Gemma said, gasping for air. "All over after this. And it
is! Ma's a prophetess, because it is all over forever. But it was for naught!"
She began to laugh again. Suddenly Mistress Noll swung her arms. She smacked
her daughter on  the side  of  the head,  knocking Gemma to  the ground.  Tied  to  the
string  of  captives,  Gemma  almost  pulled  her  mother  down  with  her  before  she
scrambled to her feet.
"Shut yer useless gob, you sarden addlepate," Mistress Noll ordered Gemma, her
voice flat. "You'll get us torn t' bits. At least your brother was of use."
Gemma stared at her. "And he got us killed, Mother," she said. "When we scream
for the executioner's mercy, you'll remember Yates left us to face it! And I never did
a thing but share your house!"
Tunstall walked over  to  Gemma  and  put  a  hand  on  Mistress  Noll,  keeping  her
away from her daughter. "Agree to give testimony against your mother, and we'll get
you mercy.  You'll  live."  He  looked  at  the  bruise  that  was  shaping  on  the  side  of
Gemma's  face,  then at Mistress  Noll. "We'll even tie you  at the front  of  the  string
right now, close to us."
Gemma nodded. I retied Mistress Noll to  the Rat  who had  told  her Crookshank
was dead. Ersken brought Gemma up  and  tied her so  that she  was  the first of  our
string of captives.
"Guardsfolk,"  said  Herun.  He  nodded  to  the  Dogs  in  front  of  us.  They  were
standing  aside.  They  made  their  Rats  move,  too.  They'd  cleared  the  path  to  the
kennel.
"What's this?" Goodwin asked, hands crossed over her chest.
"We been  listenin'," one  of  the Dogs  in front  of  us  said.  He was  a big Scanran
who worked the Night Watch. "You got the Shadow Snake's gang. Go on."
"I don't want favors," Goodwin said.
Ersken looked  down,  making a face.  If his feet hurt as  bad  as  mine, I know he
wanted a favor or two.
"Don't  call it a favor,  then,"  the Scanran's  partner  said.  "If  word  gets  out  that's

who you've got, we'll have a fresh mob on us. Go."
Other Dogs waved us on.
"Guardswoman,  I  don't  know  what  has  become  of  my  mother,"  Herun  said
quietly. "And I don't know where my wife is."
"Tansy is at my place," I told him. "She came to stay with me two nights ago."
Herun  smiled  at  me  shyly.  "I  would  like  to  see  her  before  dawn,"  he  told
Goodwin. "And I want to find my mother."
Goodwin  looked  at  him.  Then  she  headed  for  the  kennel,  Herun  at  her  heels.
Tunstall led our string of captives. Me and Ersken brought up the rear with Pounce,
the tip of his tail a jaunty black flag.
As I passed, Dogs clapped me on the shoulder.
There was good news for Herun inside. Mistress Annis was  in the healers' room
with  three  of  Crookshank's  servants.  The  worst  harm  they  had  taken  was  in
breathing a bit of the smoke. For an extra blessing, Tansy had come the moment she
heard where she could find her mother-in-law. Once she saw her man, it was  all we
could do to pry Herun away long enough for him to give a report of his kidnapping.
Since I had work yet to do, I sent them all to my lodgings for the night. They could
find a place to live in the morning.
"You'll let Cooper get away with just going to  arrest  a Rat  on  her own?"  Ahuda
asked my Dogs when she looked over our reports.
"I didn't  plan  to  do  it  when  I  went  there,"  I  said.  I  shut  up  the  instant  Ahuda
scowled at me.
"She's  a  Puppy,"  Tunstall  said.  "She  hasn't  even  been  in  the  work  for  two
months. She'll learn."
"If she doesn't die," Goodwin  added.  "If  we don't  all three die of  sore  feet and
empty bellies."
"Everyone dies," the Day Watch Sergeant said. He was logging in prisoners, too.
"Down here, sooner before later. Take off. If you die tonight, at least you should do
it with a full belly."
We looked at Ahuda. She glared at us. "Go away," she  ordered.  "Cooper,  leave
the arrests to your Dogs."
 
 
Wednesday, May 13, 246
Noon.
I woke in the morning to  sunlight and  a  knock  on  the  door.  The  shutters  were
open. Pigeons fluttered there, eating from  Tansy's  hand.  Herun, wearing a wrinkled
shirt and  breeches,  watched  her  from  a  corner.  There  was  a  light  in  his  face  that
wasn't  anything to  do  with the morning sun.  I saw  then that he truly loved  her  for
more than her looks. That was a good thing.
She turned to smile at him, the same light in her eyes. Then she yelped. A pigeon
had pecked her for taking away the hand with the food in it.
One of the Lofts servants opened my door. Aniki poked her head inside. The two
Ashmiller  girls  got  up  to  pet  Laddybuck,  in  Aniki's  hand.  When  I  sat  up  on  my
blankets, Aniki said, "Breakfast?"
We went outside so there'd be room to move. The storm  had  cooled  things off.

From somewhere we found enough benches and barrelheads to sit on.  We  had  but
odds and ends – stale breads  and  old  turnovers  and  pasties.  Luckily sausages  and
cheese kept, and there was dried  fruit. No  one  could  shop  for  fresh  food  during a
riot. At least we had plenty. That was as well, because  there were plenty of  folk to
share it with – the Lofts household, the Ashmillers, my housemates, Ersken, Phelan,
and me.
When they came down to the yard to eat, Kora let go of Ersken's hand to hug me
fiercely.  "Crone's  blessings  on  you,  Terrier,"  she  whispered  in  my  ear.  "You've
caught and killed the Snake."
I hesitated, but truly, on this day I felt too good to lock my heart away. I hugged
her back.  "We did  it," I said.  "All of  us.  All of  us.  The  Lower City killed its own
Snake."
I heard a mew. I'd nearly mashed Fuzzball in his sling. "He'll never walk anywhere
if you go on carrying him," I said. Kora took him out and put him on the ground.
"If  she  puts  him  down,  he  heads  straight  for  the  nearest  food,"  Ersken  said.
"Uh-oh. He thinks Master Pounce will stand for that."
Pounce  was  eating  cheese.  He  was  particularly  fond  of  it,  though  it  did  not
improve his breath. Fuzzball grabbed a piece. Pounce smacked Fuzzball, sending the
little  one  rolling  into  Laddybuck.  Laddybuck  reared  back,  mewed,  and  smacked
Fuzzball himself.
"Now  there's  a  king,"  Rosto  said  of  the  fierce  kitten  as  he  joined  us.  The
Ashmiller girls shrieked with joy. Rosto  carried  a honeycomb  in a bowl as  well as
half a loaf of bread. He gave it over to them and picked up Laddybuck, looking him
in the eyes. "Don't let anyone show you disrespect, my lad, that's right. From furball
to rusher." The cut he'd had on his cheek was nearly mended, only a long scar left of
it. I frowned. He could have gotten a mage to heal it with no scar at all.
Unless he wanted  a scar.  "Mother's  milk,  you  did  it,"  I  said.  "You  killed  him.
You're the Rogue."
Rosto cupped Laddybuck in one hand, grabbed me by the back of the neck, and
kissed me on the mouth. I should have punched him, but his mouth was  sweet  and
soft. I will punch him next time.
"I promise,  I won't  let  my  head  get  swollen,"  he  said  after  he  let  me  go.  "But
things had  to  change,  Beka.  You  knew  it  as  well  as  we  did."  He  looked  around.
"This house makes a good headquarters. We could turn it into a tavern. The  Court
of the Rogue  that we have, that building is all wrong.  It  gives  people  notions  that
they're royalty. They forget they're supposed to look after the Lower City first."
Aniki slapped him on the calf. "Wonderful plans. Now sit down and eat."
Around nine a runner came to tell Ersken and me that all Dogs were off duty for a
few days. The King had proclaimed martial law in the city. Soldiers would keep  the
peace in the streets. Folk could  shop,  but  no  crowds  of  greater than ten would be
allowed to form.
Tansy, Herun, Mistress Annis, and the Lofts servants were the first to leave. They
had  money  –  Herun  is  his  grandfather's  heir.  They  would  stay  in  one  of
Crookshank's  Patten  District houses.  I  watched  them  go,  feeling  relieved.  Slapper
landed on my shoulder. He had no ghost on him. He didn't, always.
 

 
Thursday, May 14, 246
Jack and the children left yesterday. He said he'd come by some money. He didn't
say how. I didn't ask, though I fingered my fire opal as they packed their things. The
girls never warmed to me, but I did teach their brother the clapping games I'd taught
my brothers.
Yesterday  afternoon  a runner  came  for  me.  I  was  to  report  to  the  Magistrate's
Court,  in uniform, today  at nine. I would  have  to  stand  before  Sir  Tullus  and  tell
those parts of the capture that were mine alone. He had chosen to hold what's called
an "eclipse session." It is for the trial of Mistress Noll and the Shadow Snake gang.
It is feared that if they are tried on our regular Court Day, there might be another riot,
soldiers or no. Folk want revenge for three years of fear, and  they're angry that the
Dogs did not catch her and her gang before this.
I threw up so many times last night that naught was left to come up but water.
I carried Pounce to court. When we approached the gate, he struggled up  to  my
shoulders and scolded me fiercely. Calm down, will you? It will be over soon and
then you can find a rock to hide under.
The Dogs  on  the  gate  eyed  us  strangely  but  admitted  us.  There  were  no  rules
against cats, even in an eclipse session.
I felt  my  stomach  heave.  Luckily  there  was  naught  in  it.  Anyone  who  saw  me
would think I had only belched. Common folk were barred from an eclipse session,
but  Dogs  were  not.  With  the  army  in  the  streets,  they  were  off  duty.  Seemingly,
plenty of them were bored.
Surely they have sleep  to  catch  up,  washing to  do,  gardens  to  mind? I thought,
looking  at  a  river  of  black  uniforms.  There  were  so  many  they  flowed  into  the
onlookers' section, behind the bars. In truth, the front benches of the Dogs' section
of the court were empty but for three people: Goodwin, Tunstall, and Ersken.
Now I went to take my place with them. Goodwin patted the bench beside her. I
sat. Pounce jumped down and went to greet them, like a captain reviewing soldiers.
"Calm down, Cooper," Goodwin told me. "After the last month,  I'd  think you'd
be able to look Sir Tullus in the eye."
Just to try it, I glanced at his desk and flinched. In the places  where the soldiers
who represented the Crown were accustomed to  stand,  the court  Dogs  had  placed
two chairs  with the royal  emblem  of  the  crown  and  sword  carved  in  their  backs.
People would sit there today. Nobles. Nobles who represented the King.
A hand gloved in kid patted me on the shoulder. "Keep this in your mouth." Lady
Sabine offered me a spicy yet pleasant-tasting lozenge. "A friend sends these to me
from the Yamani Islands.  Tunstall said  you  get very nervous.  Just  remember,  nine
people are alive because you are a Terrier among Dogs." She  clapped  my shoulder
again, smiled to my Dogs and Ersken, then went to the other side of the front half of
the courtroom.  As  a knight, she  could  command  a seat  in  front  of  the  onlookers'
bars.
"I  wish  people  wouldn't  call  me  that,"  I  muttered,  though  my  lady's  kindness
warmed me as much as the lozenge warmed my mouth.
"You  gripped  the  digger  case  and  the  Snake  case  and  wouldn't  let  them  go,"
Tunstall whispered. "Get used to the name."

"The  diggers'  guards  dealt  for  mercy  on  execution  and  informed  on  the  whole
job,"  Goodwin  said.  "They  were terrified to  come  to  public  trial.  Kayu  had  some
potion  –  she  killed  herself  in  the  mages'  prison.  Good  riddance.  Norwood  and
Poundridge are singing like little birds, trying to buy their way out  of  the quarries –
Up we go. Maiden's tears."
She  said  that  as  we  stood  because  Sir  Tullus  came  out  with  the  Lord  High
Magistrate himself, and  my lord  Gershom  of  Haryse.  They took  those  two  carved
chairs. I sat before I fell.
Though  the Lord  High Magistrate was  present,  Sir  Tullus  ran  the  trial.  It  might
have been  an ordinary court  day,  except  for  the handful of  Rats,  only  four  Dogs,
and two great nobles seated to either side of Sir Tullus. One thing was the same. The
morning  took  forever,  because  we  had  to  place  all  of  the  Shadow  Snake  matter
before the court. My Dogs told some. They showed the maps we had kept and told
how  I,  and  my  Birdies,  found  information,  and  how  I  brought  it  to  them.  They
mentioned Ersken helped me, and  we  both  nodded.  Rosto,  Kora,  Aniki,  Mistress
Painter, and many other folk became "informants  of  the Lower City,"  according  to
custom. They told everything up to Yates's cutting his own throat. Then I had to get
up and tell the rest.
I dug my nails into my palms and stood. Pounce leaned against my leg, purring so
hard I trembled with it. I swallowed the last bit of lozenge and looked up, fixing my
eyes on Sir Tullus's chest.
"My  –  my  lord,  I  was  to  tell  Mistress  Noll  Yates  was  dead,"  I  began.  "But  I
remembered  that  Mistress  Noll  tried  to,  to  hit  Tansy  with  her  broom."  I  heard
chuckles  from  the  Dogs  and  gave  way.  They  were  listening.  I  had  never  seen  so
many Dogs gathered in one place in my life. They were all listening to me.
"I wish to know how it is that these  Guardsfolk  came by  so  much information,"
said the Lord High Magistrate. Startled, I looked at him. His eyes were pale as mine.
If that was how I looked at people sometimes, so they felt frozen  over,  no  wonder
they didn't like me staring at them. My throat went bone dry. "Goodwin and Tunstall
report  that this trainee  Guardswoman,  Cooper,  enlisted  folk  of  the  city  to  talk  to
those who had suffered the crimes of this gang. What have you to say for yourself,
girl? How did a trainee come to even think a childhood nightmare might be real?"
I looked at the floor. He made it sound like I thought myself better than my Dogs.
Like I thought myself better than anyone.
Goodwin rose. "She did this because she has been well taught. We approved her
doing so, because we were already hard-pressed,  and  she  had  unique connections,
my  lord,"  she  said.  She  sounded  as  calm  as  if  she  spoke  to  him  each  day  over
breakfast. "She went over everything with Tunstall and me. And she has magic. My
Lord  Provost  will  tell  you,  trainee  Guardswoman  Cooper  hears  the  voices  of  the
dead. When she showed us her skill, we understood her information was valuable. It
was the proof that we found tricky to get."
"Mages among Dogs have unusual ways to seek, my lord," Tunstall said,  getting
to his feet. "We have all seen it. May I add,  respectfully,  that has  made this a very
good week for us."
The Lord High Magistrate blinked like a lizard. "Very well. Sit, both of you. I will
still hear Cooper speak for herself."

Sir Tullus sighed. "Look at the floor,  Cooper."  To  the Lord  High Magistrate he
said, "She is shy in public speaking, my lord. She will do better if she does not have
to look – "
"No."
Lord Gershom's voice brought my head up. I stared at him. He leaned forward in
his chair, hands clasped between his knees. We might have been in his sitting room,
just us two and Pounce. "Tell me, Beka. Tell me how this all came about. Just look
at me, and tell it."
I stumbled  a few times. When my lips stuck  to  my teeth, I accepted  a  flask  of
cool tea that Ersken passed to me. Eventually I told my lord all of it, from Rolond's
death, to the map, to the lily pendant, to the capture of Yates's gang, to going to see
Mistress Noll that last time. I was even able to glance at her toward the end. Mistress
Noll stared directly ahead, more like a stone than a woman.
"Very  well,  Guardswoman  Cooper,"  Sir  Tullus  said  quietly  when  I  had  done.
"You may be seated."
The rest went as it should. The Shadow Snake gang was sentenced to Execution
Hill and smuggled from the court.  Gemma was  set  free, though she  was  sent  from
the city for not reporting her mother and brother to the law. The officials left, but for
my  lord  Gershom.  He  came  down  to  us,  smiling.  "A  very  good  week,"  he  said,
shaking hands with my Dogs and Ersken. "And a new Rogue. There will be changes
in  the  Lower  City."  He  looked  at  me.  "Some  people  would  like  you  to  go  to
supper." He pointed  to  the onlookers'  bars.  I heard  him tell my Dogs  and  Ersken,
"You are invited. I believe Tunstall and Goodwin know the place."
I felt odd. My brothers and my sister Lorine stood in the onlookers' section, Nilo
jumping up and down like a looby, Will grinning, and Lorine wiping at her eyes with
a handkerchief. Diona was not there, but this was miracle enough.
"They  miss  you,"  my  lord  said  in  my  ear.  Pounce  ran  over  to  them,  sliding
through the bars to get picked up and petted.  "Give them another chance?  I would
like to see you now and then, too."
I nodded. I didn't want to speak for fear of getting emotional. They were proud of
me. I could see it on their faces – they were proud of me.
We walked out, my lord in the lead, with Goodwin and Tunstall, Ersken,  Lorine,
and me just behind, and Will, Nilo, and Pounce behind us. We passed  through that
crowd of Dogs and into the outer  courtyard.  It was  packed  with folk who'd  heard
and gathered despite the army in the streets. That's the Lower City for you. Folk can
always find ways to break the rules.
As I walked by, they kept reaching out to brush my arm with their fingers. I heard
them whispering, "She's a Terrier, that one. A Terrier."
 
 
The Provost's Guard
Founded: 127 H.E. by His Royal Majesty King Baird III of Tortall
First Lord Provost: Padraig of haMinch (127–143)
 
Use of the terms "Dog," "Puppy," "Growl," "seek," "kennel," and related terms in
the Guard became popular about fifty years after the founding of the Guard.

FOUR WATCHES
Day Watch: nine in the morning until five in the afternoon
Evening Watch: five in the afternoon until one in the morning
Night Watch: one in the morning until nine in the morning
Fourth Watch: covers each of the other three watches on their Court  Days and
off days
 
In most districts, the best of the Guards are put on Day and Evening Watch, when
there is the most activity on  the streets.  The  slackers  are given Night Watch,  when
the least amount of activity is going on. The only area that is different is the Lower
City, where the Day Watch is less active as well. Evening Watch is busy there. So is
Night Watch,  but  while no  one  will say  so,  the  truth  is  that  the  criminals  own  the
streets  during Night Watch.  The  very  worst  Guards  have  duty  then.  They  are  the
ones who just don't care about the work, the ones who are regarded as expendable.
Everyone knows it.
DISTRICTS
Corus's  Watch  Districts,  interestingly, often  (but  not  always)  correspond  to  the
way the Rogues divide the city for their own organization:
Highfields District
Prettybone District
Unicorn District
Palace District
Flash District
Upmarket District
Patten District
Temple District
The Lower City: Conditions are very different in the Lower City overall. Since it is
the poorest area, the bribes are the lowest and so is the prestige. The casualty rate is
the  highest  because  it  is  the  most  violent  part  of  the  city.  Most  of  the  Guards
assigned there are Guards who are regarded as not being bright or promising enough
to make a good impression elsewhere. Even so, the elite Guards  of  the Lower City
are the most respected. They are also the toughest and the smartest.
CHAIN OF COMMAND
Lord  Provost:  governs  the  realm's  districts  Vice  Provost:  assists  Lord  Provost
(one per region in Tortall)
Captain (District Commander)
 
Per District:
Watch Commander
Watch Sergeant
Corporals (varies by district)
Senior Guards (varies by district)
Guards
Trainees
TRAINING

Formal training in 246: One year in school. There is no screening or testing to
enter the training program. Trainees are simply required to pass the classes.
All Guards  are  required  to  attend  combat  practice  for  their  first  four  years  of
service.
WEAPONS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
Primary weapon: Two-foot-long hardwood baton with lead core
 
Guards don't use swords: A sword is a killing weapon. The majority of reasons
a Guard uses a baton don't demand an intent to kill. Wielded properly, the baton can
stop  most  swords.  Also,  swords  require years  of  training for  proper  use,  they are
expensive and  require extensive maintenance, and  they can  break  just when they're
most needed.
 
The law and  bribery: Law enforcement  is a loose  affair, something that is still
being created. A law-keeping force  under  the control  of  the national government is
highly unusual. Most law-enforcement groups are formed and run by  neighborhood
associations,  guilds,  or  individual  cities,  or  they  are  part  of  the  military.  The
members of the Provost's Guard, like such groups, have a great deal of discretion in
whom they arrest, whether they take bribes, and whether they do the thing they have
been bribed to do. Bribery is the standard way to  ensure  that the underpaid  people
who protect merchants remember individuals and, at times, overlook their behavior.
(Too much of a history of taking bribes and not following through on them does get
a Guard killed. It is wise for a Guard to do what he's bribed to do most of the time.)
Guards memorize the laws and rules they are taught in training. They learn the rest
of their  skills  on  the  streets  and  from  each  other.  Some  Guards  are  smarter  than
others. Some Guards are more motivated than others.  And they all make up  police
work as they go.
 
 
CAST OF CHARACTERS
 
ROYALS AND NOBLES
 
Roger  II  –  King  of  Tortall,  House  of  Conté  first  Queen,  Alysy,  deceased;
second Queen, Jessamine (married one year), has just presented him with a son.
 
Jessamine – Roger II's  second  Queen (not  named in this book),  mother of  his
heir
 
Alysy – Roger II's first Queen, deceased
 
Sabine of Macayhill – lady knight
 
Joreth – knight, friend of Lady Sabine's
 

Tullus of King's Reach – knight, Magistrate of Lower City courts
 
 
DOGS – (THE PROVOST'S GUARD)
 
Acton of Fenrigh – Watch Commander, Evening Watch, Jane Street, nobleman
 
Alacia – Puppy, assigned to Unicorn District
 
Birch – Dog, Vinehall's partner
 
Cape – Dog, Otterkin's partner
 
Clara  Goodwin  –  "Clary,"  Corporal,  Evening  Watch  at  Jane  Street  kennel,
seventeen-year veteran, Beka's female partner, lower middle class of Corus
 
Clarke – Puppy on Night Watch, Prettybone District
 
Ersken  Westover  –  Puppy,  Beka's  good  friend,  fourth  son  of  a  middle-class
family, Jane Street kennel
 
Evermore – Dog, Evening Watch, Jane Street kennel
 
Fulk – mage for the Jane Street kennel Evening Watch
 
Hilyard – Puppy in Beka and Ersken's year, Jane Street kennel
 
Jakorn  –  Dog,  one  of  Lord  Gershom's  private Guards,  taught  Beka  when  she
was small
 
Kebibi Ahuda –  Sergeant on  the Evening Watch  at Jane Street  kennel,  combat
training master of Dogs, thinks Beka will do well, very tough
 
Matthias  Tunstall  –  "Mattes,"  Senior  Dog,  Beka's  male  partner,  Jane  Street
kennel, fifteen-year veteran, eastern hillman
 
Nyler Jewel – Corporal, Yoav's partner, Evening Watch, Jane Street kennel
 
Otelia – Verene's training Dog, Jane Street kennel
 
Otterkin  –  Dog,  has  magical  Gift,  Evening  Watch,  Jane  Street  kennel,  Cape's
partner
 
Phelan – second-year Dog, Evening Watch, Jane Street kennel
 

Rebakah Cooper – "Beka," Puppy, Evening Watch, Jane Street kennel, training
Dogs Goodwin and Tunstall, sixteen years old
 
Springbrook – Dog, Evening Watch, Jane Street kennel
 
Verene – Puppy, friend of Beka's, Jane Street kennel
 
Vinehall – Dog, Birch's partner, Jane Street kennel
 
Yoav – Dog, Jewel's partner, Evening Watch, Jane Street kennel
 
 
CROOKSHANK'S HOUSEHOLD AND ASSOCIATES
 
Ammon Lofts  –  "Crookshank,"  scale,  or  receiver of  stolen  goods,  landlord,  in
business with crooks and honest people alike
 
Annis Lofts – Crookshank's daughter-in-law
 
Herun Lofts – Crookshank's grandson, Annis's son, and Tansy's husband
 
Rolond Lofts – Tansy's son, murdered
 
Tansy  Lofts  –  Crookshank's  granddaughter-in-law,  Herun's  wife,  Rolond's
mother, friend of Beka's from their Cesspool days
 
Inman Poundridge – hirer of guards for slave market and Crookshank
 
Jens – guard of fire opal diggers
 
Otto – footman at Crookshank's house
 
Uta Norwood – Crookshank's bookkeeper and paymaster
 
Vrinday Kayu – Carthaki mage working for Crookshank
 
Zada – maid in Crookshank's house
 
 
COURT OF THE ROGUE AND ASSOCIATES
 
Kayfer Deerborn – the Rogue, king of the thieves
 
Dawull – Rogue chief, Waterfront District
 

Ulsa – Rogue chief, Prettybone District
 
Aniki Forfrysning – Scanran rusher and swordswoman
 
Koramin Ingensra – Kora, rogue and mage
 
Rosto the Piper – Scanran rusher, thief, friend of Aniki and Kora
 
Bold Brian – Dawull's crew, Aniki's friend
 
Fiddlelad – rogue, Dawull's crew, Aniki's friend
 
Lady May – Dawull's crew, Aniki's friend
 
Reed Katie – Dawull's crew, Aniki's friend
 
 
PROVOST'S HOUSE
 
Gershom of Haryse – Lord Provost under Roger II, husband of Lady Teodorie,
took in Beka and the Cooper family when Beka was eight years old, Beka's sponsor
 
Teodorie of Haryse – lady, Lord Gershom's wife
 
Jakorn – one of Lord Gershom's personal bodyguards, trained Beka
 
Myaral Fane – "Mya," cook at Provost's House, Beka's foster aunt
 
Ulfrec Fane – Mya's husband, head footman at Provost's House
 
 
THE COOPER FAMILY
 
Diona Cooper – Beka's fifteen-year-old sister, studying to be a lady's maid
 
Fern Cooper – Beka's grandmother, mother of her father, lives in the Lower City
 
Ilony Cooper – Beka's mother, deceased
 
Lilac – Beka's cousin
 
Lorine Cooper – Beka's thirteen-year-old sister, training to be a fine seamstress
 
Nilo Cooper – Beka's ten-year-old brother, training to be a stableman
 

Willes  Cooper  –  Beka's  twelve-year-old  brother,  good  rider,  training  to  be  a
messenger
 
 
THE COOPERS 200 YEARS LATER –  
Eleni Cooper – former priestess, single mother of George Cooper
 
George Cooper – Eleni's only son, six when she writes in her journal in 406 H.E.
 
 
OTHER PERSONS AND BEINGS OF INTEREST
 
Aveefa – dust spinner
 
Hasfush – dust spinner, found  at the corner  of  Charry Orchard  and  Stormwing
Streets
 
Shiaa – dust spinner
 
Deirdry Noll – prosperous baker, former neighbor and friend of Beka's
 
Gemma Noll – Deirdry's youngest daughter, unmarried, helps with baking
 
Yates Noll – Deirdry's youngest son
 
Gunnar Espeksra – rusher, or thug, runs with Yates Noll
 
Jungen  Berryman  –  gem  mage,  fascinated  by  Dogs,  friend  of  Goodwin  and
Tunstall
 
Jack Ashmiller – Orva's husband, father of three children
 
Orva Ashmiller – drunkard, hotblood wine addict,  Jack's  wife, mother of  three
children
 
Amaya Painter – mage, mother of a Shadow Snake victim
 
Calum Painter – five-year-old, kidnapped and killed by the Shadow Snake
 
Vonti Painter – Amaya's husband, lost at sea
 
Esseny – murdered dancer
 
Inknose – street denizen
 

Mother Cantwell – mumper (beggar) and thief
 
Paistoi – Carthaki slave merchant
 
Parkes – surname of a pair of brawling brothers
 
Wildberry – pretty woman with sisters
 
 
GLOSSARY
 
Barzun: country to  the south  of  Tortall, on  the north  shore  of  the Great  Inland
Sea
 
Birdie: informant
 
Black God: the hooded and robed God of Death, recognized as such throughout
the Eastern and Southern Lands
 
Black God's Option: suicide
 
bugnob: person of little brain
 
cages: holding cells for kennel prisoners
 
canoodling: sexual activity
 
Carthak:  ancient  and  powerful  slaveholding  empire  that  includes  all  of  the
Southern Lands, a storehouse of learning, sophistication, and culture
 
Chaos, Realms of: one of the four Realms (Mortal, Divine, Peaceful, Chaos); the
one where everything is unending change, destruction, and remaking
 
cityman:  any  respectable  person  who  is  not  noble;  knight's  usage  means
peaceable, sheeplike person
 
Copper Isles: slaveholding nation south and west of Tortall, originally named the
Kyprish Isles. The lowlands are hot, wet jungles; the highlands are cold  and  rocky.
Traditionally their tie is to Carthak rather than Tortall.
 
Corus:  capital  city  of  Tortall,  on  the  banks  of  the  River  Olorun  cracknob:
madman
 
cuddy: slob
 

Dog: member of Provost's Guard
 
douse: murder
 
doxie: female prostitute
 
ducknob: person of low intelligence
 
dust  spinner:  a  being  of  air  and  spirit,  a  continuous  whirlwind  that  gathers
breezes, conversations, emotions, and other bits from its surroundings
 
elsewise: otherwise
 
filcher: small-time criminal
 
foist: master pickpocket
 
Galla:  country  to  the  north  and  east  of  Tortall,  famous  for  its  mountains  and
forests, with an ancient royal line
 
gauds: bright, costly things
 
get in the way of: become; learn
 
Gift: human, academic magic, the use of which must be taught
 
gillyflower: carnation
 
gixie: girl
 
glims: eyes
 
gorget: mail plate cover for the neck, like a collar
 
Happy Bag: the collection of weekly bribes for Provost's office – jewels, coins,
art, magical objects – anything of value that can be sold for cash
 
hedgewitch: worker of small magics, not  powerful enough to  be  called a mage,
with little formal education
 
hobble: tie up or arrest
 
hobbles: rawhide restraints used on prisoners
 
hotblood wine: wine spiked with an amphetamine-like substance

 
Human Era (H.E.): time period  that began 246 years  prior  to  the present  book,
marking the exile of the immortals from the Mortal Realms
 
hunkerbones: haunches
 
immortals:  creatures  that,  unless  killed,  live  forever,  including  Stormwings,
giants, spidrens, winged horses
 
jack: tankard, often leather
 
jinglenob: empty-headed person
 
kennel: Provost's guardhouse; police station
 
Ladymoon: symbol of the Goddess
 
liar's fanfare: overstuffed codpiece
 
loaner: mocking term for nobles' sale of heirlooms they buy back when they get
more money; also a scornful term for a noble
 
Lord  Provost:  nobleman  in  command  of  the  Provost's  Guard  throughout  the
realm; most take a personal interest in the Guard in the capital, Corus,  as  well as  in
the running of the Guard throughout the realm.
 
Maren: one of  the Eastern Lands,  east  of  Tusaine and  Tyra,  rich and  powerful
land
 
midden hen: chicken that lives in dung; someone completely crazy
 
minnow: very small-time criminal, not worth the trouble to arrest
 
Mithros: the chief god of the Tortallan pantheon, God of War  and  the Law; his
symbol is the sun.
 
mot: woman, common-born
 
mumper: beggar
 
murrain: plague
 
nob, noll: head
 
noble: large coin in copper or silver

 
Olorun River: river that flows east to west through the heart of Tortall
 
Outwalls: Outwalls Prison, jail for serving long-term sentences
 
patten: hard wooden shoe, keeps feet out of the mud
 
Peaceful Realms: home of the spirits of the dead;  where the souls  of  the living
go to heal from the pain of life
 
Players' jollity: professional performance, play, or musical entertainment
 
Puppy: trainee, Provost's Guard
 
puttock: low-level female prostitute
 
raston: bread loaf stuffed with buttery bread crumbs and light filling
 
Rat: criminal; prey; captive (to Dogs)
 
river  dodgers:  hard  men  and  women  who  work  on  and  around  the  river,  on
boats, in shipping and trade (and smuggling)
 
rushers: thugs
 
sap:  handheld  lead-filled  cylinder,  six  inches  long,  with  a  loop  for  the  wrist;  a
knockout or bone-breaking weapon
 
sarden: blasted; damned; detestable
 
scale: fence, or receiver of stolen goods
 
Scanra: country to the north of Tortall, wild, rocky, and cold, with very little land
that can be farmed. Scanrans are masters of the sea and are feared anywhere there is
a coastline. They also frequently raid over land.
 
scummer: animal dung
 
scut: idiot
 
seekings: investigations; hunts for criminals or missing persons
 
Shakith: one of the Carthaki gods of the underworld, she is the blind seer and the
goddess who weighs things for their true value; thus,  she  is the goddess  of  justice,
bankers, jewelers, and traders in gemstones.

 
sommat: something
 
spintry: male prostitute
 
Stormwings: immortal creatures, banished before the Human Era. They had steel
birds'  wings and  claws  and  half-human  heads  and  chests.  They  lived  on  fear  and
battle-killed dead; very nasty personalities.
 
sutler: thief who takes goods from shops or vendors' stalls
 
ticklers: fingers
 
tosspot: drunkard
 
treats: bribes
 
trollop: woman who is morally lax, usually sexually
 
trull: very low-class kind of woman; the dregs
 
Tusaine: small country tucked between Tortall and Maren
 
twilsey: drink made of raspberry or cider vinegar and water, most refreshing
 
Tyra:  merchant  republic  on  the  Great  Inland  Sea  between  Tortall  and  Maren.
Tyra is mostly swamp, and its people rely on trade and banking for income.
 
 
Tamora Pierce captured the imagination of readers more than twenty years  ago
with  Alanna:  The  First  Adventure.  As  of  September  2006,  she  has  written
twenty-four books, including three completed  quartets  –  The  Song  of  the Lioness,
The Immortals,  and  Protector  of  the  Small  –  and  two  Trickster  books  set  in  the
fantasy realm of  Tortall. She  has  also  written  the  Circle  of  Magic  and  The  Circle
Opens quartets, as  well as  a stand-alone  Circle title: The  Will  of the  Empress.  Her
books have been translated into eleven different languages, and some are available on
audio  from  Listening  Library  and  Full  Cast  Audio.  Tamora  Pierce's  fast-paced,
suspenseful  writing  and  strong,  believable  heroines  have  won  her  much  praise:
Emperor Mage was a 1996 ALA Best Book for Young Adults,  The  Realms  of the
Gods  was  listed  as  an  "outstanding  fantasy  novel"  by  VOYA  in  1996,  Squire
(Protector of the Small #3) was a 2002 ALA Best Book for Young Adults, and Lady
Knight (Protector of the Small #4) debuted at number one on  the New  York Times
bestseller list. Trickster's Choice spent a month on the New York Times bestseller list
and was a 2003 ALA Best Book for Young Adults. The  sequel,  Trickster's Queen,
was a New York Times bestseller, as was The Will of the Empress.

An avid reader herself, Ms. Pierce graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She has worked at a variety of jobs and has written everything from novels to radio
plays.  Along with writer Meg Cabot  (The  Princess  Diaries  series),  she  cofounded
SheroesCentral, a discussion board about female heroes; remarkable women in fact,
fiction, and  history;  books;  current  events;  and  teen issues.  Though  she  no  longer
sponsors Sheroes-Central and Sheroes Fans as she  did  for  five years,  she  is still a
devoted member of the sites.
Tammy lives in Syracuse, New York, with her husband, Tim, a writer, Web page
designer, and  Web  administrator.  They are currently cowriting a female superhero,
White Tiger, for  Marvel Comics.  They share  their home with five cats,  two  birds,
and various freeloading wildlife.
For more information, visit www.tamorapierce.com.

