INTO GOLD
 
Tanith Lee
 
 
“Into Gold” was purchased by Gardner Dozois, and appeared in the
March 1986 issue of Asimov’s, with an illustration by Terry Lee and a
cover illustration by Carl Lundgren. Tanith Lee appears less frequently
in Asimov’s than we might wish, but each appearance has been
memorable. Tanith Lee is one of the best-known and most prolific of
modern fantasists, with over forty books to her credit, including (among
many others) The Birth Grave, Drinking Sapphire Wine, Don’t Bite The
Sun, Night’s Master, The Storm Lord, Sung In Shadow, Volkhavaar,
Anackire, Night Sorceries, The Black Uni-corn, and The Blood of Roses,
and the collections Tamastara, The Gorgon, Dreams of Dark and Light,
and The Forests of the Night. Her short story “Elle Est Trois (La Mort)”
won a World Fantasy Award in 1984 and her brilliant collection of retold
folk, tales, Red As Blood, was also a finalist that year, in the Best
Collection category. Her most recent books are the collection 
Nightshades and the novels Vivia and The Blood of Roses. Here she
takes us to the tumultuous days after the fall of the Roman Empire, to a
remote border out-post left isolated by the retreat of the Legions, for a
scary and passionate tale of intrigue, love, obsession ... and Dark Magic.
 
* * * *
 
I
 
Up behind Danuvius, the forests are black, and so stiff with black pork,
black bears, and black-grey wolves, a man alone will feel himself jostled.
Here and there you come on a native village, pointed houses of thatch with
carved wooden posts, and smoke thick enough to cut with your knife. All
day the birds call, and at night the owls come out. There are other things of
earth and darkness, too. One ceases to be surprised at what may be found
in the forests, or what may stray from them on occasion.
 
One morning, a corn-king emerged, and pleased us all no end. There
had been some trouble, and some of the stores had gone up in flames.
The ovens were standing empty and cold. It can take a year to get goods
overland from the River, and our northern harvest was months off.

 
The old fort, that had been the palace then for twelve years, was built
on high ground. It looked out across a mile of coun-try strategically cleared
of trees, to the forest cloud and a dream of distant mountains. Draco had
called me up to the roof-walk, where we stood watching these mountains
glow and fade, and come and go. It promised to be a fine day, and I had
been planning a good long hunt, to exercise the men and give the
breadless bellies solace. There is also a pine-nut meal they grind in the
villages, accessible to barter. The loaves were not to everyone’s taste, but
we might have to come round to them. Since the armies pulled away, we
had learned to improvise. I could scarcely remember the first days. The old
men told you, everything, anyway, had been going down to chaos even
then. Draco’s father, holding on to a commander’s power, assumed a
prince’s title which his orphaned warriors were glad enough to concede
him. Discipline is its own ritual, and drug. As, lands and seas away from the
center of the world caved in, soldier-fashion, they turned builders. They
made the road to the fort, and soon began on the town, shoring it, for
eternity, with strong walls. Next, they opened up the country, and got trade
rights seen to that had gone by default for decades. There was plenty of
skirmishing as well to keep their swords bright. When the Commander died
of a wound got fighting the Blue-Hair Tribe, a terror in those days, not seen
for years since, Draco became the Prince in the Palace. He was eighteen
then, and I five days older. We had known each other nearly all our lives,
learned books and horses, drilled, hunted together. Though he was born
else-where, he barely took that in, coming to this life when he could only just
walk. For myself, I am lucky, perhaps, I never saw the Mother of Cities, and
so never hanker after her, or lament her downfall.
 
That day on the roof-walk, certainly, nothing was further from my mind.
Then Draco said, “There is something.”
 
His clear-water eyes saw detail quicker and more finely than mine.
When I looked, to me still it was only a blur and fuss on the forest’s edge,
and the odd sparkling glint of things catching the early sun.
 
“Now, Skorous, do you suppose...?” said Draco.
 
“Someone has heard of our misfortune, and considerably changed
his route,” I replied.
 
We had got news a week before of a grain-caravan, but too far west
to be of use. Conversely, it seemed, the caravan had received news of our
fire. “Up goes the price of bread,” said Draco.
 

By now I was sorting it out, the long rigmarole of mules and
baggage-wagons, horses and men. He traveled in some style. Truly, a
corn-king, profiting always because he was worth his weight in gold amid
the wilds of civilization. In Empire days, he would have weighed rather less.
 
We went down, and were in the square behind the east gate when the
sentries brought him through. He left his people out on the parade before
the gate, but one wagon had come up to the gateway, presumably his own,
a huge conveyance, a regular traveling house, with six oxen in the shafts.
Their straps were spangled with what I took for brass. On the side-leathers
were pictures of grind-stones and grain done in pur-ple and yellow. He
himself rode a tall horse, also spangled. He had a slim, snaky look, an
Eastern look, with black brows and fawn skin. His fingers and ears were
remarkable for their gold. And suddenly I began to wonder about the
spangles. He bowed to Draco, the War-Leader and Prince. Then, to be
quite safe, to me.
 
“Greetings, Miller,” I said.
 
He smiled at this coy honorific.
 
“Health and greetings, Captain. I think I am welcome?”
 
“My prince,” I indicated Draco, “is always hospitable to wayfarers.”
 
“Particularly to those with wares, in time of dearth.”
 
“Which dearth is that?”
 
He put one golden finger to one golden ear-lobe.
 
“The trees whisper. This town of the Iron Shields has no bread.”
 
Draco said mildly, “You should never listen to gossip.”
 
I said, “If you’ve come out of your way, that would be a pity.”
 
The Corn-King regarded me, not liking my arrogance— though I
never saw the Mother of Cities, I have the blood— any more than I liked his
slink and glitter.
 
As this went on, I gambling and he summing up the bluff, the tail of
my eye caught another glimmering movement, from where his house
wagon waited at the gate. I sensed some woman must be peering round

the flap, the way the Eastern females do. The free girls of the town are
prouder, even the wolf-girls of the brothel, and aristocrats use a veil only as
a sunshade. Draco’s own sisters, though decorous and well brought-up,
can read and write, each can handle a light char-iot, and will stand and look
a man straight in the face. But I took very little notice of the fleeting
apparition, except to decide it too had gold about it. I kept my sight on my
quarry, and presently he smiled again and drooped his eyelids, so I knew
he would not risk calling me, and we had won. “Perhaps,” he said, “there
might be a little consideration of the detour I, so foolishly, erroneously,
made.”
 
“We are always glad of fresh supplies. The fort is not insensible to its
isolation. Rest assured.”
 
“Too generous,” he said. His eyes flared. But politely he added, “I
have heard of your town. There is great culture here. You have a library, with
scrolls from Hellas, and Se-mitic Byblos—I can read many tongues, and
would like to ask permission of your lord to visit among his books.”
 
I glanced at Draco, amused by the fellow’s cheek, though all the East
thinks itself a scholar. But Draco was staring at the wagon. Something worth
a look, then, which I had missed.
 
“And we have excellent baths,” I said to the Corn-King, letting him
know in turn that the Empire’s lost children think all the scholarly East to be
also unwashed.
 
* * * *
 
By midday, the whole caravan had come in through the walls and arranged
itself in the market-place, near the temple of Mars. The temple priests,
some of whom had been serving with the Draconis Regiment when it
arrived, old, old men, did not take to this influx. In spring and summer,
traders were in and out the town like flies, and native men came to work in
the forges and the tannery or with the horses, and built their muddy thatch
huts behind the unfinished law-house— which huts winter rain always
washed away again when their inhabitants were gone. To such events of
passage the priests were accustomed. But this new show displeased them.
The chief Salius came up to the fort, attended by his slaves, and argued a
while with Draco. Heathens, said the priest, with strange rituals, and
dirtiness, would offend the patron god of the town. Draco seemed
preoccupied.
 
I had put off the hunting party, and now stayed to talk the Salius into a

better humor. It would be a brief nuisance, and surely, they had been
directed to us by the god himself, who did not want his warlike sons to go
hungry? I assured the priest that, if the foreigners wanted to worship their
own gods, they would have to be circumspect. Tolerance of every
reli-gious rag, as we knew, was unwise. They did not, I thought, worship
lusa. There would be no abominations. I then vowed a boar to Mars, if I
could get one, and the dodderer tottered, pale and grim, away.
 
Meanwhile, the grain was being seen to. The heathen god-offenders
had sacks and jars of it, and ready flour besides. It seemed a heavy chancy
load with which to journey, goods that might spoil if at all delayed, or if the
weather went against them. And all that jangling of gold beside. They fairly
bled gold. I had been right in my second thought on the bridle-decorations,
there were even nuggets and bells hung on the wagons, and gold flowers;
and the oxen had gilded horns. For the men, they were ringed and buckled
and roped and tied with it. It was a marvel.
 
When I stepped over to the camp near sunset, I was on the lookout
for anything amiss. But they had picketed their ani-mals couthly enough,
and the dazzle-fringed, clink-bellied wagons stood quietly shadowing and
gleaming in the west-ered light. Columns of spicy smoke rose, but only
from their cooking. Boys dealt with that, and boys had drawn water from the
well; neither I nor my men had seen any women.
 
Presently I was conducted to the Corn-King’s wagon. He received me
before it, where woven rugs, and cushions stitched with golden discs, were
strewn on the ground. A tent of dark purple had been erected close by.
With its gilt-tasseled sides all down, it was shut as a box. A disc or two
more winked yellow from the folds. Beyond, the plastered colon-nades, the
stone Mars Temple, stood equally closed and eye-less, refusing to see.
 
The Miller and I exchanged courtesies. He asked me to sit, so I sat. I
was curious.
 
“It is pleasant,” he said, “to be within safe walls.”
 
“Yes, you must be often in some danger,” I answered.
 
He smiled, secretively now. “You mean our wealth? It is better to
display than to hide. The thief kills, in his hurry, the man who conceals his
gold. I have never been robbed. They think, Ah, this one shows all his
riches. He must have some powerful demon to protect him.”
 
“And is that so?”

 
“Of course,” he said.
 
I glanced at the temple, and then back at him, meaningly. He said,
“Your men drove a hard bargain for the grain and the flour. And I have been
docile. I respect your gods, Cap-tain. I respect all gods. That, too, is a
protection.”
 
Some drink came. I tasted it cautiously, for Easterners often eschew
wine and concoct other disgusting muck. In the for-ests they ferment thorn
berries, or the milk of their beasts, neither of which methods makes such a
poor beverage, when you grow used to it. But of the Semites one hears all
kinds of things. Still, the drink had a sweet hot sizzle that made me want
more, so I swallowed some, then waited to see what else it would do to me.
 
“And your lord will allow me to enter his library?” said the Corn-King,
after a host’s proper pause.
 
“That may be possible,” I said. I tried the drink again. “How do you
manage without women?” I added, “You’ll have seen the House of the
Mother, with the she-wolf painted over the door? The girls there are
fastidious and clever. If your men will spare the price, naturally.”
 
The Corn-King looked at me, with his liquid man-snake’s eyes, aware
of all I said which had not been spoken.
 
“It is true,” he said at last, “that we have no women with us.”
 
“Excepting your own wagon.”
 
“My daughter,” he said.
 
I had known Draco, as I have said, almost all my life. He was for me
what no other had ever been; I had followed his star gladly and without
question, into scrapes, and battles, through very fire and steel. Very rarely
would he impose on me some task I hated, loathed. When he did so it was
done without design or malice, as a man sneezes. The bad times were
generally to do with women. I had fought back to back with him, but I did not
care to be his pander. Even so, I would not refuse. He had stood in the
window that noon, looking at the black forest, and said in a dry low voice,
carelessly apol-ogetic, irrefutable, “He has a girl in that wagon. Get her for
me.” “Well, she may be his - ” I started off. He cut me short: “Whatever she
is. He sells things. He is accustomed to selling.” “And if he won’t?” I said.
Then he looked at me, with his high-colored, translucent eyes. “Make him,”

he said, and next laughed, as if it were nothing at all, this choice mission. I
had come out thinking glumly, she has witched him, put the Eye on him. But
I had known him lust like this before. Nothing would do then but he must
have. Women had never been that way for me. They were available, when
one needed them. I like to this hour to see them here and there, our
women, straight-limbed, graceful, clean. In the perilous seasons I would
have died defending his sisters, as I would have died to defend him. That
was that. It was a fact, the burning of our grain had come about through an
old griev-ance, an idiot who kept score of something Draco had done half a
year ago, about a native girl got on a raid.
 
I put down the golden cup, because the drink was going to my head.
They had two ways. Easterners, with daughters. One was best left
unspoken. The other kept them locked and bolted virgin. Mercurius bless
the dice. Then, before I could say anything, the Miller put my mind at rest.
 
“My daughter,” he said, “is very accomplished. She is also very
beautiful, but I speak now of the beauty of learning and art.”
 
“Indeed. Indeed.”
 
The sun was slipping over behind the walls. The far moun-tains were
steeped in dyes. This glamour shone behind the Corn-King’s head, gold in
the sky for him, too. And he said, “Amongst other matters, she has studied
the lore of Khemia—Old Aegyptus, you will understand.”
 
“Ah, yes?”
 
“Now I will confide in you,” he said. His tongue flickered on his lips.
Was it forked? The damnable drink had fuddled me after all, that, and a
shameful relief. “The practice of the Al-Khemia contains every science and
sorcery. She can read the stars, she can heal the hurts of man. But best of
all, my dear Captain, my daughter has learned the third great secret of the
Tri Magae.”
 
“Oh, yes, indeed?”
 
“She can,” he said, “change all manner of materials into gold.”
 
* * * *

 
II
 
“Sometimes, Skorous,” Draco said, “you are a fool.”
 
“Sometimes I am not alone in that.”
 
Draco shrugged. He had never feared honest speaking. He never
asked more of a title than his own name. But those two items were, in
themselves, significant. He was what he was, a law above the law. The
heart-legend of the City was down, and he a prince in a forest that ran all
ways for ever.
 
“What do you think then she will do to me? Turn me into metal, too?”
 
We spoke in Greek, which tended to be the palace mode for private
chat. It was fading out of use in the town.
 
“I don’t believe in that kind of sorcery,” I said.
 
“Well, he has offered to have her show us. Come along.”
 
“It will be a trick.”
 
“All the nicer. Perhaps he will find someone for you, too.”
 
“I shall attend you,” I said, “because I trust none of them. And fifteen
of my men around the wagon.”
 
“I must remember not to groan,” he said, “or they’ll be splitting the
leather and tumbling in on us with swords.”
 
“Draco,” I said, “I’m asking myself why he boasted that she had the
skill?”
 
“All that gold: They didn’t steal it or cheat for it. A witch made it for
them.”
 
“I have heard of the Al-Khemian arts.”
 
“Oh yes,” he said. “The devotees make gold, they predict the future,
they raise the dead. She might be useful. Perhaps I should marry her. Wait
till you see her,” he said. “I suppose it was all pre-arranged. He will want

paying again.”
 
When we reached the camp, it was midnight. Our torches and theirs
opened the dark, and the flame outside the Mars Temple burned faint.
There were stars in the sky, no moon.
 
We had gone to them at their request, since the magery was intrinsic,
required utensils, and was not to be moved to the fort without much effort.
We arrived like a bridal proces-sion. The show was not after all to be in the
wagon, but the tent. The other Easterners had buried themselves from
view. I gave the men their orders and stood them conspicuously about.
Then a slave lifted the tent’s purple drapery a chink and squinted up at us.
Draco beckoned me after him, no one demurred. We both went into the
pavilion.
 
To do that was to enter the East head-on. Expensive gums were
burning with a dark hot perfume that put me in mind of the wine I had had
earlier. The incense-burners were gold, tripods on leopards’ feet, with
swags of golden ivy. The floor was carpeted soft, like the pelt of some
beast, and beast-skins were hung about—things I had not seen before,
some of them, maned and spotted, striped and scaled, and some with
heads and jewelry eyes and the teeth and claws gilded. De-spite all the
clutter of things, of polished mirrors and casks and chests, cushions and
dead animals, and scent, there was a feeling of great space within that tent.
The ceiling of it stretched taut and high, and three golden wheels
depended, with oil-lights in little golden boats. The wheels turned idly now
this way, now that, in a wind that came from nowhere and went to nowhere,
a demon wind out of a desert. Across the space, wide as night, was an
opaque dividing curtain, and on the curtain, a long parchment. It was figured
with another mass of images, as if nothing in the place should be spare. A
tree went up, with two birds at the roots, a white bird with a raven-black
head, a soot-black bird with the head of an ape. A snake twined the tree
too, round and round, and ended looking out of the lower branches where
yellow fruit hung. The snake had the face of a maiden, and flowing hair.
Above sat three figures, judges of the dead from Aegyptus, I would have
thought, if I had thought about them, with a balance, and wands. The sun
and the moon stood over the tree.
 
I put my hand to the hilt of my sword, and waited. Draco had seated
himself on the cushions. A golden jug was to hand, and a cup. He reached
forward, poured the liquor and made to take it, before—reluctantly—I
snatched the vessel. “Let me, first. Are you mad?”
 
He reclined, not interested as I tasted for him, then let him have the

cup again.
 
Then the curtain parted down the middle and the parchment with it,
directly through the serpent-tree. I had expected the Miller, but instead what
entered was a black dog with a collar of gold. It had a wolf’s shape, but
more slender, and with a pointed muzzle and high carven pointed ears. Its
eyes were also black. It stood calmly, like a steward, regarding us, then
stepped aside and lay down, its head still raised to watch. And next the
woman Draco wanted came in.
 
To me, she looked nothing in particular. She was pleasantly made,
slim, but rounded, her bare arms and feet the color of amber. Over her
head, to her breast, covering her hair and face like a dusky smoke, was a
veil, but it was transparent enough you saw through it to black locks and
black aloe eyes, and a full tawny mouth. There was only a touch of gold on
her, a rolled torque of soft metal at her throat, and one ring on her right
hand. I was puzzled as to what had made her glimmer at the edge of my
sight before, but perhaps she had dressed differently then, to make herself
plain.
 
She bowed Eastern-wise to Draco, then to me. Then, in the purest
Greek I ever heard, she addressed us.
 
“Lords, while I am at work, I must ask that you will please be still, or
else you will disturb the currents of the act and so impair it. Be seated,” she
said to me, as if I had only stood till then from courtesy. Her eyes were very
black, black as the eyes of the jackal-dog, blacker than the night. Then she
blinked, and her eyes flashed. The lids were painted with gold. And I found
I had sat down.
 
What followed I instantly took for an hallucination, in-duced by the
incense, and by other means less perceptible. That is not to say I did not
think she was a witch. There was something of power to her I never met
before. It pounded from her, like heat, or an aroma. It did not make her
beautiful for me, but it held me quiet, though I swear never once did I lose
my grip either on my senses or my sword.
 
First, and quite swiftly, I had the impression the whole tent blew
upward, and we were in the open in fact, under a sky of a million stars that
blazed and crackled like diamonds. Even so, the golden wheels stayed put,
up in the sky now, and they spun, faster and faster, until each was a solid
golden O of fire, three spinning suns in the heaven of midnight.
 
(I remember I thought flatly, We have been spelled. So what now?

But in its own way, my stoicism was also suspect. My thoughts in any case
flagged after that.)
 
There was a smell of lions, or of a land that had them. Do not ask me
how I know, I never smelled or saw them, or such a spot. And there before
us all stood a slanting wall of brick, at once much larger than I saw it, and
smaller than it was. It seemed even so to lean into the sky. The woman
raised her arms. She was apparent now as if rinsed all over by gilt, and one
of the great stars seemed to sear on her forehead.
 
Forms began to come and go, on the lion-wind. If I knew then what
they were, I forgot it later. Perhaps they were an-imals, like the skins in the
tent, though some had wings.
 
She spoke to them. She did not use Greek anymore. It was the
language of Khem, presumably, or we were intended to believe so. A liquid
tongue, an Eastern tongue, no doubt.
 
Then there were other visions. The ribbed stems of flowers, broader
than ten men around, wide petals pressed to the ether. A rainbow of mist
that arched over, and touched the earth with its feet and its brow. And other
mirages, many of which resembled effigies I had seen of the gods, but
they walked.
 
The night began to close upon us slowly, narrowing and coming
down. The stars still raged overhead and the gold wheels whirled, but some
sense of enclosure had returned. As for the sloped angle of brick it had
huddled down into a sort of oven, and into this the woman was placing, with
extreme care—of all things—long sceptres of corn, all brown and dry and
withered, blighted to straw by some harvest like a curse.
 
I heard her whisper then. I could not hear what.
 
Behind her, dim as shadows, I saw other women, who sat weaving, or
who toiled at the grind-stone, and one who shook a rattle upon which rings
of gold sang out. Then the vision of these women was eclipsed. Something
stood there, between the night and the Eastern witch. Tall as the roof, or tall
as the sky, bird-headed maybe, with two of the stars for eyes. When I
looked at this, this ultimate apparition, my blood froze and I could have
howled out loud. It was not common fear, but terror, such as the worst
reality has never brought me, though sometimes subtle nightmares do.
 
Then there was a lightning, down the night. When it passed, we were
enclosed in the tent, the huge night of the tent, and the brick oven burned

before us, with a thin harsh fume coming from the aperture in its top.
 
“Sweet is truth,” said the witch, in a wild and passionate voice, all
music, like the notes of the gold rings on the rattle. “O Lord of the Word.
The Word is, and the Word makes all things to be.”
 
Then the oven cracked into two pieces, it simply fell away from itself,
and there on a bank of red charcoal, which died to clinker even as I gazed
at it, lay a sheaf of golden corn. Golden corn, smiths’ work. It was pure and
sound and rang like a bell when presently I went to it and struck it and flung
it away.
 
The tent had positively resettled all around us. It was there. I felt
queasy and stupid, but I was in my body and had my bearings again, the
sword-hilt firm to my palm, though it was oddly hot to the touch, and my
forehead burned, sweatless, as if I too had been seethed in a fire. I had
picked up the goldwork without asking her anything. She did not prevent
me, nor when I slung it off.
 
When I looked up from that, she was kneeling by the cur-tain, where
the black dog had been and was no more. Her eyes were downcast under
her veil. I noted the torque was gone from her neck and the ring from her
finger. Had she somehow managed her trick that way, melting gold on to
the stalks of mummified corn—No, lunacy. Why nag at it? It was all a
deception.
 
But Draco lay looking at her now, burned up by another fever. It was
her personal gold he wanted.
 
“Out, Skorous,” he said to me. “Out, now.” Slurred and sure.
 
So I said to her, through my blunted lips and woollen tongue, “Listen
carefully, girl. The witchery ends now. You know what he wants, and how to
see to that, I suppose. Scratch him with your littlest nail, and you die.”
 
Then, without getting to her feet, she looked up at me, only the
second time. She spoke in Greek, as at the start. In the morning, when I
was better able to think, I reckoned I had imagined what she said. It had
seemed to be: “He is safe, for I desire him. It is my choice. If it were not my
choice and my desire, where might you hide yourselves, and live?”
 
* * * *
 
We kept watch round the tent, in the Easterners’ camp, in the market-place,

until the ashes of the dawn. There was not a sound from anywhere, save
the regular quiet passaging of sentries on the walls, and the cool black
forest wind that turned grey near sunrise.
 
At sunup, the usual activity of any town began. The camp stirred and
let its boys out quickly to the well to avoid the town’s women. Some of the
caravaners even chose to stroll across to the public lavatories, though they
had avoided the bathhouse.
 
An embarrassment came over me, that we should be stand-ing there,
in the foreigners’ hive, to guard our prince through his night of lust. I looked
sharply, to see how the men were taking it, but they had held together well.
Presently Draco emerged. He appeared flushed and tumbled, very nearly
shy, like some girl just out of a love-bed.
 
We went back to the fort in fair order, where he took me aside,
thanked me, and sent me away again.
 
Bathed and shaved, and my fast broken, I began to feel more
sanguine. It was over and done with. I would go down to the temple of
Father Jupiter and give him something— why, I was not exactly sure. Then
get my boar for Mars. The fresh-baked bread I had just eaten was tasty,
and maybe worth all the worry.
 
Later, I heard the Miller had taken himself to our library and been let
in. I gave orders he was to be searched on leav-ing. Draco’s grandfather
had started the collection of manu-scripts, there were even scrolls said to
have been rescued from Alexandrea. One could not be too wary.
 
In the evening, Draco called me up to his writing-room.
 
“Tomorrow,” he said, “the Easterners will be leaving us.”
 
“That’s good news,” I said.
 
“I thought it would please you. Zafra, however, is to re-main. I’m taking
her into my household.”
 
“Zafra,” I said.
 
“Well, they call her that. For the yellow-gold. Perhaps not her name.
That might have been Nefra—Beautiful...”
 
“Well,” I said, “if you want.”

 
“Well,” he said, “I never knew you before to be jealous of one of my
women.”
 
I said nothing, though the blood knocked about in my head. I had
noted before, he had a woman’s tongue himself when he was put out. He
was a spoiled brat as a child, I have to admit, but a mother’s early death,
and the life of a forest fortess, pared most of it from him.
 
“The Corn-King is not her father,” he said now. “She told me. But he’s
stood by her as that for some years. I shall send him something, in
recompense.”
 
He waited for my comment that I was amazed nothing had been
asked for. He waited to see how I would jump. I won-dered if he had paced
about here, planning how he would put it to me. Not that he was required to.
Now he said: “We gain, Skorous, a healer and deviner. Not just my pleasure
at night.”
 
“Your pleasure at night is your own affair. There are plenty of girls
about, I would have thought, to keep you con-tent. As for anything else she
can or cannot do, all three temples, particularly the Women’s Temple, will
be up in arms. The Salius yesterday was only a sample. Do you think they
are going to let some yellow-skinned harlot devine for you? Do you think
that men who get hurt in a fight will want her near them?”
 
“You would not, plainly.”
 
“No, I would not. As for the witchcraft, we were drugged and made
monkeys of. An evening’s fun is one thing.”
 
“Yes, Skorous,” he said. “Thanks for your opinion. Don’t sulk too long.
I shall miss your company.”
 
An hour later, he sent, so I was informed, two of the scrolls from the
library to the Corn-King in his wagon. They were two of the best, Greek, one
transcribed by the hand, it was said, of a very great king. They went in a
silver box, with jewel inlay. Gold would have been tactless, under the
circum-stances.
 
* * * *
 
Next day she was in the palace. She had rooms on the women’s side. It
had been the apartment of Draco’s elder sister, before her marriage. He

treated this one as nothing less than a relative from the first. When he was
at leisure, on those occasions when the wives and women of his officers
dined with them, mere was she with him. When he hunted, she went with
him, too, not to have any sport, but as a companion, in a litter between two
horses that made each hunt into a farce from its onset. She was in his bed
each night, for he did not go to her, her place was solely hers: The couch
his father had shared only with his mother. And when he wanted advice, it
was she who gave it to him. He called on his soldiers and his priests
afterwards. Though he always did so call, nobody lost face. He was wise
and canny, she must have told him how to be at long last. And the charm he
had always had. He even consulted me, and made much of me before
everyone, be-cause, very sensibly he realized, unless he meant to replace
me, it would be foolish to let the men see I no longer counted a feather’s
weight with him. Besides, I might get notions of rebellion. I had my own
following, my own men who would die for me if they thought me wronged.
Probably that angered me more than the rest, that he might have the idea I
would forego my duty and loyalty, forget my honor, and try to pull him down.
I could no more do that than put out one of my own eyes.
 
Since we lost our homeland, since we lost, more impor-tantly, the
spine of the Empire, there had been a disparity, a separation of men. Now I
saw it, in those bitter golden mo-ments after she came among us. He had
been born in the Mother of Cities, but she had slipped from his skin like
water. He was a new being, a creature of the world, that might be anything,
of any country. But, never having seen the roots of me, they yet had me
fast. I was of the old order. I would stand until the fire had me, rather than
tarnish my name, and my heart.
 
Gradually, the fort and town began to fill with gold. It was very nearly a
silly thing. But we grew lovely and we shone. The temples did not hate her,
as I had predicted. No, for she brought them glittering vessels, and laved
the gods’ feet with rare offerings, and the sweet spice also of her gift
burned before Mars, and the Father, and the Mother, so every holy place
smelled like Aegyptus, or Judea, or the brothels of Bab-ylon for all I knew.
 
She came to walk in the streets with just one of the slaves at her
heels, bold, the way our ladies did, and though she never left off her veil,
she dressed in the stola and the palla, all clasped and cinched with the
tiniest amounts of gold, while gold flooded everywhere else, and everyone
looked forward to the summer heartily, for the trading. The harvest would be
wondrous too. Already there were signs of astounding frui-tion. And in the
forest, not a hint of any restless tribe, or any ill wish.
 
They called her by the name Zafra. They did not once call her

“Easterner.” One day, I saw three pregnant women at the gate, waiting for
Zafra to come out and touch them. She was lucky. Even the soldiers had
taken no offense. The old Salius had asked her for a balm for his
rheumatism. It seemed the balm had worked.
 
Only I, then, hated her. I tried to let it go. I tried to re-member she was
only a woman, and, if a sorceress, did us good. I tried to see her as
voluptuous and enticing, or as homely and harmless. But all I saw was
some shuttered-up, close, fermenting thing, like mummy-dusts reviving in a
tomb, or the lion-scent, and the tall shadow that had stood between her and
the night, bird-headed, the Lord of the Word that made all things, or
unmade them. What was she, under her disguise? Draco could not see it.
Like the black dog she had kept, which walked by her on a leash,
well-mannered and gentle, and which would probably tear out the throat of
any-one who came at her with mischief on his mind—Under her honeyed
wrappings, was it a doll of straw or gold, or a viper?
 
Eventually, Draco married her. That was no surprise. He did it in the
proper style, with sacrifices to the Father, and all the forms, and a feast that
filled the town. I saw her in colors then, that once, the saffron dress, the
Flammeus, the fire-veil of the bride, and her face bare, and painted up like
a lady’s, pale, with rosy cheeks and lips. But it was still herself, still the
Eastern Witch.
 
And dully that day, as in the tent that night, I thought, So what now?
 
* * * *

 
III
 
In the late summer, I picked up some talk, among the servants in the
palace. I was by the well-court, in the peach arbor, where I had paused to
look at the peaches. They did not always come, but this year we had had
one crop already, and now the second was blooming. As I stood there in
the shade, sampling the fruit, a pair of the kitchen men met below by the
well, and stayed to gossip in their argot. At first I paid no heed, then it came
to me what they were saying, and I listened with all my ears.
 
When one went off, leaving the other, old Ursus, to fill his dipper, I
came down the stair and greeted him. He started, and looked at me
furtively.
 
“Yes, I heard you,” I said. “But tell me, now.”
 
I had always put a mask on, concerning the witch, with everyone but
Draco, and afterwards with him too. I let it be seen I thought her nothing
much, but if she was his choice, I would serve her. I was careful never to
speak slightingly of her to any—since it would reflect on his honor—even to
men I trusted, even in wine. Since he had married her, she had got my duty,
too, unless it came to vie with my duty to him.
 
But Ursus had the servant’s way, the slave’s way, of hold-ing back bad
news for fear it should turn on him. I had to repeat a phrase or two of his
own before he would come clean.
 
It seemed that some of the women had become aware that Zafra, a
sorceress of great power, could summon to her, having its name, a mighty
demon. Now she did not sleep every night with Draco, but in her own
apartments, sometimes things had been glimpsed, or heard—
 
“Well, Ursus,” I said, “you did right to tell me. But it’s a lot of silly
women’s talk. Come, you’re not going to give it credit?”
 
“The flames burn flat on the lamps, and change color,” he mumbled.
“And the curtain rattled, but no one there. And Eunike says she felt some
form brush by her in the corridor—’’
 
“That is enough,” I said. “Women will always fancy something is
happening, to give themselves importance. You well know that. Then
there’s hysteria and they can believe and say anything. We are aware she

has arts, and the science of Aegyptus. But demons are another matter.”
 
I further admonished him and sent him off. I stood by the well,
pondering. Rattled curtains, secretive forms—it crossed my thoughts she
might have taken a lover, but it did not seem in keeping with her
shrewdness. I do not really believe in such beasts as demons, except what
the brain can bring forth. Then again, her brain might be capable of many
things.
 
It turned out I attended Draco that evening, something to do with one
of the villages that traded with us, something he still trusted me to
understand. I asked myself if I should tell him about the gossip. Frankly,
when I had found out—the way you always can—that he lay with her less
frequently, I had had a sort of hope, but there was a qualm, too, and when
the trade matter was dealt with, he stayed me over the wine, and he said:
“You may be wondering about it, Skorous. If so, yes. I’m to be given a
child.”
 
I knew better now than to scowl. I drank a toast, and sug-gested he
might be happy to have got a boy on her.
 
“She says it will be a son.”
 
“Then of course, it will be a son.”
 
And, I thought, it may have her dark-yellow looks. It may be a magus
too. And it will be your heir, Draco. My future Prince, and the master of the
town. I wanted to hurl the wine cup through the wall, but I held my hand and
my tongue, and after he had gone on a while trying to coax me to thrill at the
joy of life, I excused myself and went away.
 
It was bound to come. It was another crack in the stones. It was the
way of destiny, and of change. I wanted not to feel I must fight against it, or
desire to send her poison, to kill her or abort her, or tear it, her womb’s fruit,
when born, in pieces.
 
For a long while I sat on my sleeping-couch and allowed my fury to
sink down, to grow heavy and leaden, resigned, defeated.
 
When I was sure of that defeat, I lay flat and slept.
 
In sleep, I followed a demon along the corridor in the women’s
quarters, and saw it melt through her door. It was tall, long-legged, with the
head of a bird, or perhaps of a dog. A wind blew, lion-tanged. I was under a

tree hung thick with peaches, and a snake looked down from it with a girl’s
face framed by a flaming bridal-veil. Then there was a spinning fiery wheel,
and golden corn flew off clashing from it. And next I saw a glowing oven,
and on the red charcoal lay a child of gold, burning and gleaming and
asleep.
 
When I woke with a jump it was the middle of the night, and someone
had arrived, and the slave was telling me so.
 
At first I took it for a joke. Then, became serious. Zafra, Draco’s wife,
an hour past midnight, had sent for me to attend her in her rooms. Naturally
I suspected everything. She knew me for her adversary: She would lead
me in, then say I had set on her to rape or somehow else abuse her. On the
other hand, I must obey and go to her, not only for duty, now, but from
sheer aggravation and raw curiosity. Though I had al-ways told myself I
misheard her words as I left her with him the first time, I had never forgotten
them. Since then, beyond an infrequent politeness, we had not spoken.
 
I dressed as formally as I could, got two of my men, and went across
to the women’s side. The sentries along the route were my fellows too, but
I made sure they learned I had been specifically summoned. Rather to my
astonishment, they knew it already.
 
My men went with me right to her chamber door, with orders to keep
alert there. Perhaps they would grin, asking each other if I was nervous. I
was.
 
When I got into the room, I thought it was empty. Her women had
been sent away. One brazier burned, near the entry, but I was used by now
to the perfume of those aromatics. It was a night of full moon, and the blank
light lay in a whole pane across the mosaic, coloring it faintly, but in the
wrong, nocturnal, colors. The bed, narrow, low, and chaste, stood on one
wall, and her tiring table near it. Through the window under the moon, rested
the tops of the forest, so black it made the indigo sky pale.
 
Then a red-golden light blushed out and I saw her, lighting the lamps
on their stand from a taper. I could almost swear she had not been there a
second before, but she could stay motionless a long while, and with her
dark robe and hair, and all her other darkness, she was a natural thing for
shadows.
 
“Captain,” she said. (She never used my name, she must know I did
not want it; a sorceress, she was well aware of the power of naming.)
“There is no plot against you.”

 
“That’s good to know,” I said, keeping my distance, glad of my sword,
and of every visible insignia of who and what I was.
 
“You have been very honorable in the matter of me,” she said. “You
have done nothing against me, either openly or in secret, though you hated
me from the beginning. I know what this has cost you. Do not spurn my
gratitude solely because it is mine.”
 
“Domina,” I said (neither would I use her name, though the rest did in
the manner of the town), “you’re his. He has made you his wife. And—” I
stopped.
 
“And the vessel of his child. Ah, do you think he did that alone?” She
saw me stare with thoughts of demons, and she said, “He and I, Captain.
He, and I.”
 
“Then I serve you,” I said. I added, and though I did not want to give
her the satisfaction I could not keep back a tone of irony, “you have nothing
to be anxious at where I am concerned.”
 
We were speaking in Greek, hers clear as water in that voice of hers
which I had to own was very beautiful.
 
“I remain,” she said, “anxious.”
 
“Then I can’t help you, Domina.” There was a silence. She stood
looking at me, through the veil I had only once seen dispensed with in
exchange for a veil of paint. I won-dered where the dog had gone, that had
her match in eyes. I said, “But I would warn you. If you practice your
business in here, there’s begun to be some funny talk.”
 
“They see a demon, do they?” she said.
 
All at once the hair rose up on my neck and scalp.
 
As if she read my mind, she said:
 
“I have not pronounced any name. Do not be afraid.”
 
“The slaves are becoming afraid.”
 
“No,” she said. “They have always talked of me but they have never
been afraid of me. None of them. Draco does not fear me, do you think?

And the priests do not. Or the women and girls. Or the children, or the old
men. Or the slaves. Or your soldiers. None of them fear me or what I am or
what I do, the gold with which I fill the temples, or the golden har-vests, or
the healing I perform. None of them fear it. But you, Captain, you do fear,
and you read your fear again and again in every glance, in every word they
utter. But it is yours, not theirs.”
 
I looked away from her, up to the ceiling from which the patterns had
faded years before.
 
“Perhaps,” I said, “I am not blind.”
 
Then she sighed. As I listened to it, I thought of her, just for an
instant, as a forlorn girl alone with strangers in a for-eign land.
 
“I’m sorry,” I said.
 
“It is true,” she said, “you see more than most. But not your own
error.”
 
“Then that is how it is.” My temper had risen and I must rein it.
 
“You will not,” she said quietly, “be a friend to me.”
 
“I cannot, and will not, be a friend to you. Neither am I your enemy,
while you keep faith with him.”
 
“But one scratch on my littlest nail,” she said. Her musical voice was
nearly playful.
 
“Only one,” I said.
 
“Then I regret waking you, Captain,” she said. “Health and slumber for
your night.”
 
As I was going back along the corridor, I confronted the black
jackal-dog. It padded slowly towards me and I shivered, but one of the men
stooped to rub its ears. It suffered him, and passed on, shadow to shadow,
night to ebony night.
 
* * * *
 
Summer went to winter, and soon enough the snows came. The trading and
the harvests had shored us high against the crudest weather, we could sit in

our towers and be fat, and watch the wolves howl through the white forests.
They came to the very gates that year. There were some odd stories, that
wolf-packs had been fed of our bounty, things left for them, to tide them
over. Our own she-wolves were supposed to have started it, the
whorehouse girls. But when I mentioned the tale to one of them, she flared
out laughing.
 
I recall that snow with an exaggerated brilliance, the way you
sometimes do with time that precedes an illness, or a deciding battle.
Albino mornings with the edge of a broken vase, the smoke rising from
hearths and temples, or steaming with the blood along the snow from the
sacrifices of Year’s Turn. The Wolf Feast with the races, and later the ivies
and vines cut for the Mad Feast, and the old dark wine got out, the torches,
and a girl I had in a shed full of hay and pigs; and the spate of weddings
that come after, very sensibly. The last snow twilights were thick as soup
with blueness. Then spring, and the forest surging up from its slough, the
first proper hunting, with the smell of sap and crushed freshness spraying
out as if one waded in a river.
 
Draco’s child was born one spring sunset, coming forth in the bloody
golden light, crying its first cry to the evening star. It was a boy, as she had
said.
 
I had kept even my thoughts off from her after that inter-view in her
chamber. My feelings had been confused and displeasing. It seemed to
me she had in some way tried to outwit me, throw me down. Then I had felt
truly angry, and later, oddly shamed. I avoided, where I could, all places
where I might have to see her. Then she was seen less, being big with the
child.
 
After the successful birth all the usual things were done. In my turn, I
beheld the boy. He was straight and flawlessly formed, with black hair, but a
fair skin; he had Draco’s eyes from the very start. So little of the mother.
Had she contrived it, by some other witch’s art, knowing that when at length
we had to cleave to him, it would be Draco’s line we wished to see? No
scratch of a nail, there, none.
 
Nor had there been any more chat of demons. Or they made sure I
never intercepted it.
 
I said to myself, She is a matron now, she will wear to our ways. She
has borne him a strong boy. But it was no use at all. She was herself, and
the baby was half of her.
 

* * * *
 
They have a name now for her demon, her genius in the shadowlands of
witchcraft. A scrambled name that does no harm. They call it, in the town’s
argot: Rhamthibiscan.
 
We claim so many of the Greek traditions; they know of
Rhadamanthys from the Greek. A judge of the dead, he is connectable to
Thot of Aegyptus, the Thrice-Mighty Thrice-Mage of the Al-Khemian Art.
And because Thot the Ibis-Headed and Anpu the Jackal became mingled
in it, along with Hermercurius, Prince of Thieves and Whores—who is too
the guide of lost souls—an ibis and a dog were added to the brief itinerary.
Rhadamanthys-Ibis-Canis. The full name, even, has no power. It is a
muddle, and a lie, and the invocation says: Sweet is Truth. Was it, though,
ever sensible to claim to know what truth might be?
 
* * * *

 
IV
 
“They know of her, and have sent begging for her. She’s a healer and
they’re sick. It’s not unreasonable. She isn’t afraid. I have seen her close an
open wound by passing her hands above it. Yes, Skorous, perhaps she
only made me see it, and the priests to see it, and the wounded man. But
he recovered, as you remember. So I trust her to be able to cure these
people and make them love us even better. She herself is immune to
illness. Yes, Skorous, she only thinks she is. However, think-ing so has
apparently worked wonders. She was never once out of sorts with the child.
The midwives were amazed—or not amazed, maybe—that she seemed to
have no pain during the birth. Though they told me she wept when the child
was put into her arms. Well, so did I.” Draco frowned. He said, “So we’ll let
her do it, don’t you agree, let her go to them and heal them. We may yet be
able to open this country, make something of it, one day. Anything that is
useful in winning them.”
 
“She will be taking the child with her?”
 
“Of course. He’s not weaned yet, and she won’t let another woman
nurse him.”
 
“Through the forests. It’s three days ride away, this village. And then
we hardly know the details of the sickness. If your son—”
 
“He will be with his mother. She has never done a foolish thing.”
 
“You let this bitch govern you. Very well. But don’t risk the life of your
heir, since your heir is what you have made him, this half-breed brat—’’
 
I choked off the surge in horror. I had betrayed myself. It seemed to
me instantly that I had been made to do it. She had made me. All the stored
rage and impotent distrust, all the bitter frustrated guile—gone for nothing
in a couple of sentences.
 
But Draco only shrugged, and smiled. He had learned to contain
himself these past months. Her invaluable aid, no doubt, her rotten honey.
 
He said, “She has requested that, though I send a troop with her to
guard her in our friendly woods, you, Skorous, do not go with them.”
 
“I see.”

 
“The reason which she gave was that, although there is no danger in
the region at present, your love and spotless com-mitment to my well-being
preclude you should be taken from my side.” He put the smile away and
said, “But possibly, too, she wishes to avoid your close company for so
long, knowing as she must do you can barely keep your fingers from her
throat. Did you know, Skorous,” he said, and now it was the old Draco, I
seemed somehow to have hauled him back, “that the first several months, I
had her food always tasted. I thought you would try to see to her. I was so
very astounded you never did. Or did you have some other, more clever
plan, that failed?”
 
I swallowed the bile that had come into my mouth. I said, “You forget,
Sir, if I quit you have no other battalion to go to. The Mother of Cities is
dead. If I leave your warriors, I am nothing. I am one of the scores who
blow about the world like dying leaves, soldiers’ sons of the lost Empire. If
there were an option, I would go at once. There is none. You’ve spat in my
face, and I can only wipe off the spit.”
 
His eyes fell from me, and suddenly he cursed.
 
“I was wrong, Skorous. You would never have—”
 
“No, Sir. Never. Never in ten million years. But I regret you think I
might. And I regret she thinks so. Once she was your wife, she could
expect no less from me than I give one of your sisters.”
 
“That bitch,” he said, repeating for me my error, woman-like, “her
half-breed brat—damn you, Skorous. He’s my son.”
 
“I could cut out my tongue that I said it. It’s more than a year of
holding it back before all others, I believe. Like vomit, Sir. I could not keep it
down any longer.”
 
“Stop saying Sir to me. You call her Domina. That’s suf-ficient.”
 
His eyes were wet. I wanted to slap him, the way you do a vicious
stupid girl who claws at your face. But he was my prince, and the traitor was
myself.
 
Presently, thankfully, he let me get out.
 
What I had said was true, if there had been any other life to go to that
was thinkable—but there was not, anymore. So, she would travel into the

forest to heal, and I, faithful and unshakable, I would stay to guard him. And
then she would come back. Year in and out, mist and rain, snow and sun.
And bear him other brats to whom, in due course, I would swear my honor
over. I had better practice harder, not to call her anything but Lady.
 
* * * *
 
Somewhere in the night I came to myself and I knew. I saw it accurately,
what went on, what was to be, and what I, so cunningly excluded, must do.
Madness, they say, can show itself like that. Neither hot nor cold, with a
steady hand, and every faculty honed bright.
 
The village with the sickness had sent its deputation to Draco
yesterday. They had grand and blasphemous names for her, out there. She
had said she must go, and at first light today would set out. Since the native
villagers revered her, she might have made an arrangement with them,
some itin-erant acting as messenger. Or even, if the circumstance were
actual, she could have been biding for such a chance. Or she herself had
sent the malady to ensure it.
 
Her gods were the gods of her mystery. But the Semitic races have a
custom ancient as their oldest altars, of giving a child to the god.
 
Perhaps Draco even knew—no, unthinkable. How then could she
explain it? An accident, a straying, bears, wolves, the sickness after all...
And she could give him other sons. She was like the magic oven of the
Khemian Art. Put in, take out. So easy.
 
I got up when it was still pitch black and announced to my body-slave
and the man at the door I was off hunting, alone. There was already a rumor
of an abrasion between the Prince and his Captain. Draco himself would
not think unduly of it, Skorous raging through the wood, slicing pigs. I could
be gone the day before he considered.
 
I knew the tracks pretty well, having hunted them since I was ten. I
had taken boar spears for the look, but no dogs. The horse I needed, but
she was forest-trained and did as I instructed.
 
I lay off the thoroughfare, like an old fox, and let the witch’s outing
come down, and pass me. Five men were all the guard she had allowed, a
cart with traveling stuff, and her medicines in a chest. There was one of her
women, the thick-est in with her, I thought, Eunike, riding on a mule. And
Zafra herself, in the litter between the horses.
 

When they were properly off, I followed. There was no problem in the
world. We moved silently and they made a noise. Their horses and mine
were known to each other, and where they snuffed a familiar scent, thought
nothing of it. As the journey progressed, and I met here and there with
some native in the trees, he hailed me cheerily, supposing me an outrider,
a rear-guard. At night I bivouacked above them; at sunrise their first
rustlings and throat-clearings roused me. When they were gone we watered
at their streams, and once I had a burned sausage forgotten in the ashes of
their cookfire.
 
The third day, they came to the village. From high on the mantled
slope, I saw the greetings and the going in, through the haze of foul smoke.
The village did have a look of ailing, something in its shades and colors,
and the way the people moved about. I wrapped a cloth over my nose and
mouth before I sat down to wait.
 
Later, in the dusk, they began to have a brisker look. The witch was
making magic, evidently, and all would be well. The smoke condensed and
turned yellow from their fires as the night closed in. When full night had
come, the village glowed stilly, enigmatically, cupped in the forest’s
darkness. My mental wanderings moved towards the insignificance, the
smallness, of any lamp among the great shadows of the earth. A candle
against the night, a fire in winter, a life flickering in eternity, now here, now
gone forever.
 
But I slept before I had argued it out.
 
* * * *
 
Inside another day, the village was entirely renewed. Even the rusty straw
thatch glinted like gold. She had worked her miracles. Now would come her
own time.
 
A couple of the men had kept up sentry-go from the first evening out,
and last night, patrolling the outskirts of the huts, they had even idled a
minute under the tree where I was roosting. I had hidden my mare half a
mile off, in a deserted bothy I had found, but tonight I kept her near, for
speed. And this night, too, when one of the men came up the slope,
mak-ing his rounds, I softly called his name.
 
He went to stone. I told him smartly who I was, but when I came from
cover, his sword was drawn and eyes on stalks.
 
“I’m no forest demon,” I said. Then I asked myself if he was alarmed

for other reasons, a notion of the scheme Draco had accused me of. Then
again, here and now, we might have come to such a pass. I needed a
witness. I looked at the soldier, who saluted me slowly. “Has she cured
them all?” I inquired. I added for his benefit, “Zafra.”
 
“Yes,” he said. “It was—worth seeing.”
 
“I am sure of that. And how does the child fare?”
 
I saw him begin to conclude maybe Draco had sent me after all.
“Bonny,” he said.
 
“But she is leaving the village, with the child—” I had never thought
she would risk her purpose among the huts, as she would not in die town,
for all her hold on them. “Is that tonight?”
 
“Well, there’s the old woman, she won’t leave her own place, it
seems.”
 
“So Zafra told you?”
 
“Yes. And said she would go. It’s close. She refused the litter and
only took Cams with her. No harm. These savages are friendly enough—”
 
He ended, seeing my face.
 
I said, “She’s gone already?”
 
“Yes, Skorous. About an hour—”
 
Another way from the village? But I had watched, I had skinned my
eyes—pointlessly. Witchcraft could manage any-thing.
 
“And the child with her,” I insisted.
 
“Oh, she never will part from the child, Eunike says—”
 
“Damn Eunike.” He winced at me, more than ever uncer-tain. “Listen,”
I said, and informed him of my suspicions. I did not say the child was half
East, half spice and glisten and sins too strange to speak. I said Draco’s
son. And I did not mention sacrifice. I said there was some chance Zafra
might wish to mutilate the boy for her gods. It was well known, many of the
Eastern religions had such rites. The solider was shocked, and
disbelieving. His own mother—? I said, to her kind, it was not a deed of

dishonor. She could not see it as we did. All the while we debated, my heart
clutched and struggled in my side, I sweated. Finally he agreed we should
go to look. Cams was there, and would dissuade her if she wanted to
perform such a disgusting act. I asked where the old woman’s hut was
supposed to be, and my vision filmed a moment with relief when he located
it for me as that very bothy where I had tethered my horse the previous
night. I said, as I turned to run that way, “There’s no old woman there. The
place is a ruin.”
 
We had both won at the winter racing, he and I. It did not take us long
to achieve the spot. A god, I thought, must have guided me to it before, so
I knew how the land fell. The trees were densely packed as wild grass, the
hut wedged between, and an apron of bared weedy ground about the door
where once the household fowls had pecked. The moon would enter there,
too, but hardly anywhere else. You could come up on it, cloaked in forest
and night. Besides, she had lit her stage for me. As we pushed among the
last phalanx of trunks, I saw there was a fire burning, a sullen throb of red,
before the ruin’s gaping door.
 
Carus stood against a tree. His eyes were wide and beheld nothing.
The other man punched him and hissed at him, but Carus was far off. He
breathed and his heart drummed, but that was all.
 
“She’s witched him,” I said. Thank Arean Mars and Fa-ther Jupiter she
had. It proved my case outright. I could see my witness thought this too.
We went on stealthily, and stopped well clear of the tree-break, staring
down.
 
Then I forgot my companion. I forgot the manner in which luck at last
had thrown my dice for me. What I saw took all my mind.
 
It was like the oven of the hallucination in the tent, the thing she had
made, yet open, the shape of a cauldron. Rough mud brick, smoothed and
curved, and somehow altered. In-side, the fire burned. It had a wonderful
color, the fire, rubies, gold. To look at it did not seem to hurt the eyes, or
dull them. The woman stood the other side of it, and her child in her grasp.
Both appeared illumined into fire themselves, and the darkness of
garments, of hair, the black gape of the doorway, of the forest and the
night, these had grown warm as velvet. It is a sight often seen, a girl at a
brazier or a hearth, her baby held by, as she stirs a pot, or throws on the
kindling some further twig or cone. But in her golden arm the golden child
stretched out his hands to the flames. And from her moving palm fell some
invisible essence I could not see but only feel.
 

She was not alone. Others had gathered at her fireside. I was not
sure of them, but I saw them, if only by their great height which seemed to
rival the trees. A warrior there, his metal face-plate and the metal ribs of his
breast just glim-mering, and there a young woman, garlands, draperies and
long curls, and a king who was bearded, with a brow of thun-der and eyes
of light, and near him another, a musician with wings starting from his
forehead—they came and went as the fire danced and bowed. The child
laughed, turning his head to see them, the deities of his father’s side.
 
Then Zafra spoke the Name. It was so soft, no sound at all. And yet
the roots of the forest moved at it. My entrails churned. I was on my knees.
It seemed as though the wind came walking through the forest, to fold his
robe beside the ring of golden red. I cannot recall the Name. It was not any
of those I have written down, nor anything I might imagine. But it was the
true one, and he came in answer to it. And from a mile away, from the
heaven of planets, out of the pit of the earth, his hands descended and
rose. He touched the child and the child was quiet. The child slept.
 
She drew Draco’s son from his wrapping as a shining sword is drawn
from the scabbard. She raised him up through the dark, and then she
lowered him, and set him down in the holocaust of the oven, into the bath of
flame, and the fires spilled up and covered him.
 
No longer on my knees, I was running. I plunged through black waves
of heat, the amber pungence of incense, and the burning breath of lions. I
yelled as I ran. I screamed the names of all the gods, and knew them
powerless in my mouth, be-cause I said them wrongly, knew them not, and
so they would not answer. And then I ran against the magic, the Power, and
broke through it. It was like smashing air. Experienced— inexperiencable.
 
Sword in hand, in the core of molten gold, I threw myself on, wading,
smothered, and came to the cauldron of brick, the oven, and dropped the
sword and thrust in my hands and pulled him out—
 
He would be burned, he would be dead, a blackened little corpse,
such as the Semite Karthaginians once made of their children, incinerating
them in line upon line of ovens by the shores of the Inner Sea—
 
But I held in my grip only a child of jewel-work, of pore-less perfect
gold, and I sensed his gleam run into my hands, through my wrists, down
my arms like scalding water to my heart.
 
Someone said to me, then, with such gentle sadness, “Ah Skorous.
Ah, Skorous.”

 
I lay somewhere, not seeing. I said, “Crude sorcery, to turn the child,
too, into gold.’’
 
“No,” she said. “Gold is only the clue. For those things which are
alive, laved by the flame, it is life. It is immortal and imperishable life. And
you have torn the spell, which is all you think it to be. You have robbed him
of it.”
 
And then I opened my eyes, and I saw her. There were no others, no
Other, they had gone with the tearing. But she— She was no longer veiled.
She was very tall, so beautiful I could not bear to look at her, and yet, could
not take my eyes away. And she was golden. She was golden not in the
form of metal, but as a dawn sky, as fire, and the sun itself. Even her black
eyes—were of gold, and her midnight hair. And the tears she wept were
stars.
 
I did not understand, but I whispered, “Forgive me. Tell me how to
make it right.”
 
“It is not to be,” she said. Her voice was a harp, playing through the
forest. “It is never to be. He is yours now, no longer mine. Take him. Be
kind to him. He will know his loss all his days, all his mortal days. And never
know it.”
 
And then she relinquished her light, as a coal dies. She vanished.
 
I was lying on the ground before the ruined hut, holding the child
close to me, trying to comfort him as he cried, and my tears fell with his.
The place was empty and hollow as if its very heart had bled away.
 
The soldier had run down to me, and was babbling. She had tried to
immolate the baby, he had seen it, Cams had woken and seen it also. And,
too, my valor in saving the boy from horrible death.
 
* * * *
 
As one can set oneself to remember most things, so one can study to
forget. Our sleeping dreams we dismiss on waking. Or, soon after.
 
They call her now, the Greek Woman. Or the Semite Witch. There
has begun, in recent years, to be a story she was some man’s wife, and in
the end went back to him. It is generally thought she practiced against the
child and the sol-diers of her guard killed her.

 
Draco, when I returned half-dead of the fever I had caught from the
contagion of the ruinous hut—where the village crone had died, it turned
out, a week before—hesitated for my recovery, and then asked very little. A
dazzle seemed to have lifted from his sight. He was afraid at what he might
have said and done under the influence of sorceries and drugs. “Is it a fact,
what the men say? She put the child into a fire?” “Yes,” I said. He had
looked at me, gnawing his lips. He knew of Eastern rites, he had heard out
the two men. And, long, long ago, he had relied only on me. He appeared
never to grieve, only to be angry. He even sent men in search for her: A
bitch who would burn her own child—let her be caught and suffer the fate
instead.
 
It occurs to me now that, contrary to what they tell us, one does not
age imperceptibly, finding one evening, with cold dismay, the strength has
gone from one’s arm, the luster from one’s heart. No, it comes at an hour,
and is seen, like the laying down of a sword.
 
When I woke from the fever, and saw his look, all im-ploring on me,
the look of a man who has gravely wronged you, not meaning to, who says:
But I was blind—that was the hour, the evening, the moment when life’s
sword of youth was removed from my hand, and with no protest I let it go.
 
Thereafter the months moved away from us, the seasons, and next
the years.
 
Draco continued to look about him, as if seeking the evil Eye that
might still hang there, in the atmosphere. Sometimes he was partly uneasy,
saying he too had seen her dog, the black jackal. But it had vanished at the
time she did, though for decades the woman Eunike claimed to meet it in
the cor-ridor of the women’s quarters.
 
He clung to me, then, and ever since he has stayed my friend; I do
not say, my suppliant. It is in any event the crusty friendship now of the
middle years, where once it was the flaming blazoned friendship of
childhood, the envious love of young men.
 
We share a secret, he and I, that neither has ever confided to the
other. He remains uncomfortable with the boy. Now the princedom is larger,
its borders fought out wider, and fortressed in, he sends him often away to
the fostering of soldiers. It is I, without any rights, none, who love her child.
 
He is all Draco, to look at, but for the hair and brows. We have a
dark-haired strain ourselves. Yet there is a sheen to him. They remark on it.

What can it be? A brand of the gods—(They make no reference, since she
has fallen from their favor, to his mother.) A light from within, a gloss, of
gold. Leaving off his given name, they will call him for that effulgence more
often, Ardorius. Already I have caught the murmur that he can draw iron
through stone, yes, yes, they have seen him do it, though I have not. (From
Draco they conceal such murmurings, as once from me.) He, too, has a
look of something hidden, some deep and silent pain, as if he knows, as
youth never does, that men die, and love, that too.
 
To me, he is always courteous, and fair. I can ask nothing else. I am,
to him, an adjunct of his life. I should perhaps be glad that it should stay so.
 
In the deep nights, when summer heat or winter snow fill up the
forest, I recollect a dream, and think how I robbed him, the child of gold. I
wonder how much, how much it will matter, in the end.
 
* * * *

