ISSN 2399-2883 (online)
ISSN 2514-3808 (print)
Fenner Stanley Tanswell
Mathematical 
Rigour and 
Informal Proof
The Philosophy of 
Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Elements in the Philosophy of Mathematics
Ediited by
Penelope Rush
University of Tasmania
Stewart Shapiro
The Ohio State University
MATHEMATICAL RIGOUR
AND INFORMAL PROOF
Fenner Stanley Tanswell
Technische Universität Berlin
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009494380
DOI: 10.1017/9781009325110
© Fenner Stanley Tanswell 2024
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions
of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take
place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
When citing this work, please include a reference to the DOI 10.1017/9781009325110
First published 2024
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-009-49438-0 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-009-32510-3 Paperback
ISSN 2399-2883 (online)
ISSN 2514-3808 (print)
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will
remain, accurate or appropriate.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
Elements in the Philosophy of Mathematics
DOI: 10.1017/9781009325110
First published online: March 2024
Fenner Stanley Tanswell
Technische Universität Berlin
Author for correspondence:
Fenner Stanley Tanswell, fenner.tanswell@gmail.com
Abstract: This Element looks at the contemporary debate on the nature
of mathematical rigour and informal proofs as found in mathematical
practice. The central argument is for rigour pluralism: that multiple
diﬀerent models of informal proof are good at accounting for diﬀerent
features and functions of the concept of rigour. To illustrate this
pluralism, the Element surveys some of the main options in the
literature: the “standard view” that rigour is just formal, logical rigour;
the models of proofs as arguments and dialogues; the recipe model of
proofs as guiding actions and activities; and the idea of mathematical
rigour as an intellectual virtue. The strengths and weaknesses of each
are assessed, thereby providing an accessible and empirically informed
introduction to the key issues and ideas found in the current literature.
Keywords: mathematical rigour, informal proof, mathematical practice,
formalisation, epistemology of mathematics
© Fenner Stanley Tanswell 2024
ISBNs: 9781009494380 (HB), 9781009325103 (PB), 9781009325110 (OC)
ISSNs: 2399-2883 (online), 2514-3808 (print)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Contents
1 Prologue: Three Proofs?
1
2 Introduction
4
3 The Standard View: Rigour as Formality
10
4 Arguments and Dialogues
30
5 The Recipe Model of Proofs
43
6 Rigour Is a Virtue
57
7 Conclusion
65
References
68
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1 Prologue: Three Proofs?
Before we begin with the philosophy, an Element about mathematics should
start with some mathematics.
Proof 1: Sums of Odd Integers
Here is a classic proof by De Morgan (1838), updated into modern notation:1
Theorem: The sum of the ﬁrst n odd positive integers, starting from one, is n2:
Proof: Let P n
ð Þ be the statement “
Xn
k¼1 2k  1
ð
Þ ¼ n2”.
Since
X1
k¼1 2k  1
ð
Þ ¼1 ¼ 12 we see P 1
ð Þ is true.
Assume P n
ð Þ is true. Then
X
nþ1
k¼1
2k  1
ð
Þ ¼
X
n
k¼1
2k  1
ð
Þ þ ð2 n þ 1
ð
Þ  1Þ ¼ n2 þ 2n þ 1 ¼ n þ 1
ð
Þ2:
Hence P n þ 1
ð
Þ is true.
Since P 1
ð Þ is true and P n þ 1
ð
Þ follows from P n
ð Þ we conclude that P n
ð Þ is true
for all n by the principle of mathematical induction.
This proof is a typical rigorous proof, the sort students are given when they ﬁrst
learn about mathematical induction. In their study of mathematical rigour,
Sangwin and Kinnear (2021) found this proof to be rated by far the most
rigorous presentation of this result amongst a selection of different proof
methods and styles. There are no errors and no gaps. This proof accordingly
can be taken as a paradigm example of informal rigour.
Proof 2: Malfatti’s Marble Problem
In contrast to the previous correct and rigorous proof, let us look at the history of
a failed proof:2 that of Malfatti’s marble problem.3 The problem is about how to cut
three circular “pillars” out of a triangle while minimising the amount of marble
wasted. Mathematically: within a given triangle, to ﬁnd three non-overlapping
1 The exact version I’m using here is by Sangwin (2023).
2 A terminological note on the word “proof”: one way of using “proof” is as a success term,
meaning that “failed proof” is a non sequitur, or has to be read as “a failed attempt at a proof”.
A central theme of this Element is the philosophical complexity of separating correct, valid, or
rigorous proofs from incorrect, invalid, or unrigorous ones. Therefore, I will use “proof” in the
weaker sense of something like a “purported proof” or a “possible candidate for being a proof”,
meaning something created to be a proof, presented according to the norms of proof presentation,
without obvious reasons for judging them invalid, and so on.
3 This historical description primarily draws on Andreatta et al. (2011) and Lombardi (2022a).
1
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

circles with the greatest total area. This problem was named after Gianfrancesco
Malfatti (1803), though it had also appeared earlier in Japan in the work of
Chokuyen Naonobu Ajima and was studied for the special case of isosceles
triangles by Jacob Bernoulli (see Andreatta et al. 2011).
In his article, Malfatti (1803) assumes that the solution to the marble problem
is given by ﬁnding what are called the “Malfatti circles”: the unique trio of
circles inside a triangle that are tangent to one another and touch two sides of the
triangle each (Figure 1).4
For Malfatti, the problem was to ﬁnd a way to construct these circles for
a given triangle. That is, he believed the area maximisation problem was solved
via the circle construction problem. Malfatti himself worked on the latter
problem to give an initial solution, and an elegant straightedge-and-compass
solution was given by Steiner (1826). For a century, Malfatti’s marble problem
was considered settled.
However, it was shown by Lob and Richmond (1930) that the Malfatti circles
do not always maximise the area, because in an equilateral triangle the “greedy”
arrangement has a slightly larger area (see Figure 2). The greedy arrangement
involves placing the largest possible circle ﬁrst, then the largest possible one in
the remaining space, then doing so once more.
Figure 1 Malfatti circles.
Figure 2 Malfatti circles and the “greedy” arrangement for an equilateral
triangle.
4 Images public domain, via Wikimedia Commons, created by user Personline.
2
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Likewise, Eves (1965, pp. 245–7) noticed that for a long isosceles triangle it
is better to stack three circles, as in Figure 3, than to use Malfatti’s circles.
Amazingly, Zalgaller and Los’ (1994) eventually showed that the Malfatti
circles never have the maximum area, and Malfatti was simply mistaken.
Zalgaller and Los’ (1994) were themselves also attempting to make work by
Los’ four years earlier rigorous, work which they say “contained signiﬁcant
gaps” (p. 3163). Even then, their proof of the optimality of the greedy algorithm
is incomplete, as argued by Lombardi (2022a). Their solution is based on
enumerating the possible arrangements of circles and then excluding all but
the greedy arrangement from being maximal, but the lemma that enumerates the
possible arrangements is unproven. Furthermore, the trickiest case to exclude is
tackled by numerical checking on sample points given in a table, rather than by
a mathematical proof. The numbers being checked are also obtained by sub-
tracting one decreasing function from another, but the numerical checking
misses the fact that the total will not necessarily thereby be decreasing too.5
Only recently has Lombardi (2022a) closed these gaps and produced a fully
rigorous proof of the maximal solution, which is the greedy arrangement and not the
Malfatticircles.Thishistoryrevealsfourdifferentfailuresofrigour:(1)themistaken
assumption smuggled in that one problem has the same solution to another; (2)
making use of unproven lemmas; (3) using numerical methods that are not sufﬁcient
to establish the result; and (4) simple mathematical errors, like thinking a decreasing
sequence subtracted from another is always decreasing. There are thus multiple
seductive ways that mathematics can go wrong, even for such a seemingly simple
problem. Nonetheless, this story also reveals some of the complexity of developing
rigorous mathematics, ultimately culminating in a successful proof.
Proof 3: Hex Numbers
Finally, let us look at a tricky case. The following is one of my favourite proofs
from the ﬁrst volume of the Proofs Without Words series (Nelsen 1993, 2000,
2015) and is called “Sums of Hex Numbers are Cubes” (Nelsen 1993, p. 109),
with the reader shown the ﬁrst four hex numbers at the top to learn what they
are, followed by the proof (Figure 4).
Figure 3 Optimal “greedy” arrangement for a long isosceles triangle.
5 Lombardi (2022b) details various other gaps and errors.
3
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

One might call this a “proof by Gestalt shift”, where the main idea involves
a shift to seeing hex numbers in a different way, as the outer layer of a cube. While
this is in my view a proof – if one understands it properly, one can see why the
result must follow – it would be hard to argue that this is a rigorous proof. First of
all, it never even gives an algebraic deﬁnition of what hex numbers are. Second, it
implicitly contains an induction proof but does not make the key ingredients of an
induction explicit. Third, the Gestalt shift is merely illustrated for the particular
case of the ﬁfth hex number, so understanding the inductive step requires us to ﬁll
in the reasoning of why it holds generally. Sufﬁcient understanding and mathem-
atical insight are enough to ﬁll in these gaps, but there is no denying that they are
gaps, and that the proof is gappy enough not to be rigorous by itself.
The questions we face, then, are: what is the difference between the three
“proofs” we have seen? And what is mathematical rigour anyway?
2 Introduction
In this Element I will set out the range of answers that are available in
contemporary philosophy of mathematics to the questions about rigour and
informal proofs. Recent decades have seen a practical turn that shifts away
Figure 4 Nelsen’s proof that sums of hex numbers are cubes. Proof Without
Words © 1993 held by the American Mathematical Society.
4
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

from trying to answer philosophical questions about mathematics in the abstract
alone and towards philosophical positions that are informed by the practices of
mathematicians.6 The idea is that mathematics, while being abstract and logical
in its subject matter, is also a discipline shaped by human interests and values
like any other, and that answers to questions about mathematical rigour are not
independent of the activities involved in doing mathematics.
The concept of rigour can apply to many kinds of mathematical practices. The
one that has interested philosophers the most, and which I shall focus on
throughout, is the idea of rigorous proof. A rough ﬁrst pass is that a rigorous
proof is a detailed, logical proof that is free of errors and gaps. Another important
application is rigorous deﬁnition, a deﬁnition that is precise enough to settle for all
cases whether it applies or not.7 The quest for rigorous foundations involves
ﬁnding explicit axioms and inference rules to encode acceptable assumptions and
reasoning for mathematics.8 Furthermore, rigorous areas of mathematics are
those where results and techniques are reliable, well-deﬁned, and reproducible,
with clear, agreed-upon inferential practices and foundations.9 It is also common
to see mathematical rigour in physics contrasting scrupulous and careful reason-
ing with more conjectural, empirical, or experimental approaches.10
Exploring the notion of rigour in all of these senses would be too much for
such a short work, so my task will be to set out the contemporary debates on
mathematical rigour and informal proofs. Broadly speaking, informal proofs are
those proofs as written in actual mathematical practice, such as in journals,
textbooks, lectures, seminars, classrooms, online forums, emails, scribbled on
napkins, and so on. The central question is this: is there a single concept of
rigour across these many mathematical contexts, and what is it?
2.1 The Purposes of Rigour
I think it is important to consider the purpose of having a concept of rigour and
what it is being used for in the many contexts informal proofs might show up. In
fact, the concept of mathematical rigour can be put to many different uses. This
matches the idea that proofs themselves do not have a single purpose. Catarina
Dutilh Novaes (2021, §11.4) surveys some of the main uses of proofs, listing
6 Overviews of the state of the ﬁeld of ‘philosophy of mathematical practice(s)’ have been given
by Van Bendegem (2014), Löwe (2016), Carter (2019), and Hamami and Morris (2020).
7 For more on deﬁnitions in mathematics, see Tappenden (2008), Cellucci (2018), Coumans
(2021), and Coumans and Consoli (2023).
8 See, for example, Maddy’s (2017, 2019) careful work on the many possible purposes of set-
theoretic foundations.
9 For a case study of this going awry, see De Toffoli and Fontanari (2022, 2023) on the Italian
school of algebraic geometry.
10 See the discussion of the Jaffe–Quinn debate in Section 5.3.
5
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

veriﬁcation, certiﬁcation, persuasion, explanation, innovation, and systematisa-
tion. Likewise, we can list various functions that the concept of rigour is often
said to be used for:
(1) Soundness. A rigorous proof protects us from errors and counterexamples.
Historically, rigour was a driving force in the modernisation of mathemat-
ics. Concerns about inﬁnite and inﬁnitesimal quantities, especially in
analysis, reached a peak in the nineteenth century with the appearance of
mathematical ‘monsters’ such as the Weierstrass function, necessitating the
“rigorisation of analysis” and ε-δ deﬁnitions.
(2) Veriﬁcation. A rigorous proof veriﬁes that a theorem is true.
(3) Certainty. Rigorous proofs are those that can be used to obtain mathemat-
ical knowledge. They can provide a high level of a priori justiﬁcation, and
absolute certainty in the truth of the theorem.
(4) Body of Knowledge. Rigorous proofs form a body of knowledge that other
mathematicians can access and build on.
(5) Social. “Rigorous” is used as a label to identify which pieces of mathemat-
ics by other mathematicians are good and worth spending time on.
(6) Demarcation. The use of rigorous proofs is taken to be one of the main
criteria that separates mathematics from other disciplines.11
(7) Conviction. A rigorous proof should convince a reasonable but tough
audience of the truth of the theorem.
(8) Peer Review. Being rigorous is one of the standards for publishable
mathematics. In assessing the work of other mathematicians in peer review,
primarily for research journals, rigour is one of the main properties the
proofs need to have.
This list is far from exhaustive but gives some of the main potential purposes of
rigour.12 Obviously, some of these purposes also link to purposes of proof, such
as the idea that only a rigorous proof can truly verify a theorem. On the other
hand, some purposes of proofs might be better achieved in a less rigorous
fashion, for example, a proof might be more explanatory by providing
a compelling intuitive idea than by rigorously going through all of the details.
These purposes are debatable to varying degrees, so they can guide our discus-
sion in the following section but cannot be immutable constraints on accounts of
rigour. As we will see shortly, the plurality of purposes for rigour will connect to
my proposal that we need to be rigour pluralists.
11 This goal is notably defended by Auslander (2009).
12 It also remains to be seen how successful mathematics is at meeting these functions. For
example, the idea that mathematical proofs can produce certainty is a popular one but has
been widely challenged (e.g. Kitcher 1984; Ernest 1998; De Toffoli 2021a).
6
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2.2 Rigour in Principle and in Practice
One tricky feature of mathematical rigour is that it is used both descriptively and
normatively. The descriptive use concerns when and why certain proofs are
called “rigorous” in practice. The normative use concerns rigour as an ideal for
mathematics, that is, that mathematics ought to be done in a way to meet the
standards of rigour. These different uses raise different questions about rigour.
The descriptive use of rigour poses an empirical question: which kinds of
mathematics are actually described as “rigorous”? The normative use of rigour
prompts two further questions. The ﬁrst question is the thoroughly normative
one: what standards or ideals should mathematics be held to? The second
question is a hybrid descriptive–normative one: what standards do mathemat-
icians say or believe they apply? It is possible for the answers to all three
questions to come apart or coincide in any combination. Life would be simple
if the descriptive use followed the normative; that the proofs described as
rigorous were just the ones that meet the ideal standards, which are also just
what mathematicians say they are. Alternatively, it could be that the answers all
come apart; that the standards being applied are not the ones that mathemat-
icians say they apply, which are also not the standards that ought to be used.
Of the three questions, only the normative one looks immediately philosoph-
ical and, even then, mathematicians might prefer to keep it for themselves to
sort out. So, what role does philosophy play in untangling these various
purposes and questions about rigour? The way I see the philosophers’ job
here is in giving accounts of mathematical rigour that enlighten and inform.
The concept of rigour is multifaceted, unwieldy, and messy, so an account of
rigour should try to unify and explain its main features. The list of purposes in
the previous section is an example of this messiness: some of them are norma-
tive ideals, some of them are descriptive, and others can be read either way.
In the existing literature, the implicit approach to giving an account of rigour
seems to be to ﬁnd something like the “true essence” of mathematical rigour.
This would seem to suppose that one concept is fulﬁlling all – or at least the
most important – functions of rigour. A proponent of this approach would also
likely say that they are most interested in the normative question of what the
ideal standards of mathematics are. For them it would be better, but not essen-
tial, if this were to track mathematicians’ practices and what they say those
standards are. However, they must still be committed to at least approximating
the descriptive features of mathematical practice because a theory predicting
that all proofs described as rigorous are not actually rigorous would not be of
much use in satisfying the functional roles of the concept. This leads to two
connected challenges for an account of rigour to meet:
7
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(1) Functional adequacy: to satisfy some or all of the main functions of the
concept of rigour.
(2) Descriptive adequacy: to cohere with or approximate mathematical practices
concerning rigour.
One purpose of this Element is to survey the existing positions and to argue that
none of them provides an account of rigour that meets these conditions well
enough to be the “true essence” of rigour.
2.3 Rigour Pluralism
Throughout this Element, I intend to adopt a novel position I shall call rigour
pluralism. Instead of searching for a “true essence” of rigour and a unique correct
account, I will take the different proposals in the literature as different models of
rigour, in the sense of scientiﬁc modelling, and argue that all of these convey
important insights. On this view, the existing accounts of mathematical rigour are
seen as different theoretical models that each attempt to capture some combin-
ation of functions and descriptive and normative aspects of rigour. We will
investigate which features of mathematical practice are incorporated into each
model, and which are abstracted or idealised away. Unlike the “true essence”
approach, however, these models will not be assessed as ultimately right or
wrong. I believe that no such model is sufﬁcient for all the purposes of the
concept of rigour, nor are any of the models without merit. The rigour pluralist
approach will be to assess the strengths and weaknesses of different models,
evaluating which aspects of rigour they capture well, and which they do not.
A proponent of the “true essence” approach might try to object that the
modelling approach is less plausible because its rigour is ultimately about
logic, and that a rigorous proof is a logical proof. While I agree with this
slogan, I do not believe the appeal to logic is deﬁnitive here. More basic than
logicality, rigorous proof is about one way of doing good mathematics. On the
modelling approach, we can say that formal logic can provide models of good
mathematics and the mathematical reasoning found in proofs. The move to see
this as also involving scientiﬁc modelling ﬁts directly into the “logic as
modelling” view put forward by Cook (2000, 2010), Shapiro (2014), and
Kurji (2021).13 Furthermore, it can be seen as exemplifying the approach of
conceptual modelling proposed by Löwe and Müller (2011).
13 The philosophy of logic has obvious import to questions about the philosophy of mathematics
here, but has been surprisingly underutilised in debates about rigour. For example, the wider
debates on logical pluralism (see Beall & Restall 2005; Cook 2010; Shapiro 2014; Russell 2019)
and logical nihilism (see Franks 2015; Cotnoir 2018; Russell 2018; Kurji 2021) also show us that
logicality is not a settled matter.
8
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

We will return to the idea of rigour pluralism across the coming sections to
weigh how the various models of rigour and proof succeed and fail at capturing the
features we are interested in. Furthermore, the selection of models is also meant to
illustrate the pluralist position by showing that each of them models some aspects
of rigour and informal proofs well, but that no account models all of the features
well. A full defence of pluralism would take up more room than I have here, but
I hope that considering the merits of a selection of models will illustrate the value
of rigour pluralism as a viable and promising position for these debates.
2.4 The History of Rigour
My focus in this Element will be on setting out the contemporary research on
mathematical rigour and informal proofs, so I will not be digging into the history
of the development of mathematical rigour. Such a short treatment would not do it
justice. Nonetheless, the history of mathematics is very important and, like any
other concept, I hold that the concept of rigour cannot be fully understood without
reference to the historical and social context from which it emerged. For
a philosophical work that engages more explicitly with the historical development
of rigour, see Burgess (2015, chs. 1 & 2). For a more recent part of the picture of
proof and rigour, see Mackenzie (2004). A lot of excellent research in the history
of mathematics is directly engaged with questions about the history of mathem-
atical rigour and how conceptions of it have changed over time (e.g., Barany
2011, 2013; Haffner 2021; Cantù & Luciano 2021; De Toffoli & Fontanari 2022).
2.5 Outline
In the following sections, I will outline and evaluate a selection of models of
rigour and informal proofs, grouped into four broad families. The ﬁrst, in
Section 3, is the most prominent and orthodox, sometimes called the “standard
view”: that rigour is formality. In Section 4, we will look at models of informal
proofs and rigour that analyse proofs as arguments and dialogues. Section 5 will
focus on the recipe model of proofs, where proofs are akin to recipes for
mathematical activities. Finally, in Section 6, I will consider the idea of rigour
as an intellectual virtue of the mathematician.
With this wide selection of models of rigour and informal proof I hope to
illustrate the idea of rigour pluralism. These models are at different stages of
development, with some long-established and others more recent, but I believe all
of them are viable models of mathematical rigour. My claim is that trying to settle
which amongst these is the ultimate correct account of rigour and proof is
fruitless. Instead, each offers a different way of modelling important features of
the messy concept of rigour that tangles together norms of logic and mathematical
9
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

reasoning, real practices of mathematicians and their communities, and a complex
history of development. The project of this Element is to consider the strengths
and weakness of each family of models, and to reveal how between them they let
us see the diverse features of mathematical rigour.
3 The Standard View: Rigour as Formality
3.1 Introduction
Our ﬁrst model of mathematical rigour is often referred to as the ‘standard view’
because it is seen as the default position in modern discussions of mathematical
rigour.14 The standard view is, roughly, that rigour in mathematics should
simply and straightforwardly be understood as formal rigour. The sense of
formality in question is that of formal logic, so that a rigorous proof must be
a logical derivation in some system of formal logic.15 The standard view
emerged alongside modern logic, pioneered by prominent mathematical logi-
cians like Frege (1884), Hilbert (1899), and Whitehead and Russell (1910), as
part of a quest to ﬁnd the logical foundations of mathematics (see Ferreirós
2008). These foundations required a way to guarantee that every step in a proof
is in accordance with the exact rules of logic. Before long, this had solidiﬁed
into the dominant view among mathematicians and philosophers, exempliﬁed
most prominently by the Bourbaki group (see Hamami 2019; Barany 2020). In
turn, this legacy has been inherited by the contemporary proponents of formal,
computer-checkable mathematics, such as Hales (2008), Gonthier (2008),
Wiedijk (2008), and Avigad (2021).
The obvious motivation for this view is that formal derivations are by
deﬁnition gap-free and have precise and explicitly stated standards of correct-
ness. So, it is safe to say that all formal derivations are rigorous. It is extremely
tempting to claim that formality is also the only way to be rigorous. If a proof
has gaps or relies on inferential moves that are not explicitly stated, then this can
introduce assumptions that are not justiﬁed or reasoning that could lead to
ﬂawed conclusions. An example of this was seen in the story of Malfatti’s
marble problem in the Prologue, where both incorrect assumptions and unri-
gorous methods led to unrigorous proofs. Detlefsen (2009) summarised the
motivation for the standard view succinctly:
14 In Tanswell (2015) and Azzouni (2020) this class of views has also been called “derivationist”.
As will become clear, I actually think that calling it the “standard view” in the singular is
misleading because it is really a family of overlapping views with important differences,
something also pointed out by Burgess and De Toffoli (2022).
15 In fact, what counts as formality is not so straightforward. Dutilh Novaes (2011) identiﬁes many
different ways that logic can be said to be formal.
10
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The reasoning behind this view is straightforward: (i) proper proofs are
proofs that either are or can readily be made rigorous; (ii) proofs that are or
can readily be made rigorous are formalizable; therefore (iii) all proper proofs
are formalizable (Detlefsen 2009, p. 17).
In this section, we will start in Section 3.2 with a simplistic version of this view,
which involves a process of ﬁlling in the gaps of informal proofs, noting that this
does not stand up to scrutiny. Next, in Section 3.3, I will outline various desiderata
for a more defensible version of the view. With these in hand, Sections 3.4, 3.5,
and 3.6 will look at a range of more sophisticated versions of the standard view,
speciﬁcally ones involving routine translations, in principle formalisability, and
derivation-indication. Section 3.7 will then give a long list of criticisms of the
standard view. Finally, in Section 3.8 I will make the case that the standard view is
not a correct account of mathematical rigour by itself, but that it is a powerful
family of models of informal proof and mathematical rigour.
3.2 Filling in the Gaps
While the idea that rigour reduces to formality can be useful as a normative
ideal, the standard view needs to offer more in order to successfully describe
how people judge rigour. Most proofs produced by mathematicians are not
formal, and it would be an odd result for something called the “standard view”
to predict that almost no mathematics is ever rigorous. The standard view must
therefore include another component that explains how informal proofs can
nonetheless be rigorous in some sense. This can be approached in many differ-
ent ways, but the common thread between them is the idea that informal proofs
can be rigorous by corresponding to formal proofs, even if they themselves
aren’t formal proofs. In this way, formality can still be the gold standard for
rigour, but informal proofs can meet this standard indirectly.
What the correspondence should amount to in order to identify rigorous
informal proofs varies for different proposals. The simplest version of this
idea is that informal proofs abbreviate their formal counterparts, meaning that
simple, straightforward steps are left out from informal proofs, but could be
restored by a process of ﬁlling in the gaps. Especially for simple proofs, this idea
is very appealing because it explains why linking informal proofs to formal ones
still maintains rigour. The reason is that the main steps are all still present, and
the “missing steps” are actually just the easy logical moves that are too obvious
to need stating. The informal proof is rigorous despite the gaps because any
mathematician could easily supply the steps that have been left out.
However, the abbreviation approach glosses over many of the important
details. For example, the steps that are given in informal proofs are also typically
11
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

not in a formal language, so they would also need to be seen as abbreviations of
formulas, which leads to the question of how exactly they should be translated.
Informal proofs also don’t ﬂag which formal system is being used in the ﬁrst
place, and there are many, many options. Translating informal sentences into
formal ones is not as straightforward as the “ﬁlling in the gaps” idea would make
it sound, as can be attested by anyone who has ever attempted it. Furthermore, the
abbreviation approach would also be less clear for more advanced mathematics,
where the missing steps may be less obvious. Therefore, there are further
complexities that the standard view needs to address.
3.3 Aims for the Standard View
Before we get deeper into possible ways of ﬁlling out the standard view, let’s
discuss what it should be aiming to achieve. In some of my previous work I have
given various desiderata that the standard view might aim to meet (Tanswell
2015, sect. 2). Let us brieﬂy survey these.
To begin, the main idea behind the standard view is to explain rigorous
informal proofs:
(Rigour) To give an account of how informal proofs are (or can be said to be)
rigorous through their connection to formal proofs.
Furthermore, the account should be of practical use, in that it would ideally
provide insight into which proofs do not live up to the criteria it establishes:
(Correctness) To distinguish correct informal proofs from incorrect ones,
that is, the correspondence should only link the informal proofs that are
correct to the justifying formal proofs.
Rigour and correctness are closely connected. A rigorous proof will also be
a correct one, and so specifying criteria for when a proof is rigorous will also
specify a class of correct proofs. Conversely, one might think that there are correct
proofs that are not rigorous, such as by skipping too many details while getting the
overall ideas right, as in the sum of hex numbers proof that we saw in the
Prologue. This class of proofs will have gaps but not errors, as correct proofs
cannot contain errors.16 One could, alternatively, argue that this class doesn’t,
strictly speaking, exist at all, that all proofs worthy of the name must be rigorous.
In that case, there would be only two categories: correct, rigorous proofs, and
16 Even this might be too strong for actual practice. In joint work with Joshua Habgood-Coote
(2023), we consider the enormous proof of the Classiﬁcation of Finite Simple Groups. In this
case, the mathematicians seemingly accept the proof despite believing it will inevitably contain
some errors due to its size, because they are convinced that these errors will be so-called local
errors that could be ﬁxed without too much effort, and which do not affect the correctness of the
theorem overall.
12
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

failed proofs. This would amount to rejecting the proposed proof of the sum of
hex numbers. (Maybe one could demote it to some intermediate thing, like
a “proof sketch” or “proof idea”.) Ideally, then, if the standard view is appealing
to formal proofs to identify gaps and errors, it should provide guidance on how to
separate correct and rigorous proofs from those which are not.
To articulate the standard view properly requires one to address the details of
how a speciﬁc informal proof will link to a formal proof that explains its rigour.
That is:
(Content) To show how the content of an informal proof determines the
structure of the formal proof(s) it corresponds to.
We will see in the following sections that different versions of the standard view
take quite substantially different approaches to this task.
A particular difﬁculty that needs to be addressed by the standard view
concerns informal techniques:
(Techniques) To provide an explanation of apparently inherently informal
techniques.
The most obvious of these would be to set out what is to be said about diagrams in
proofs. There are multiple options for this, ranging from denying that diagrams
can play an essential role in proofs at all, to explaining which diagrams are
amenable to formalisation and how (see Brown 1999, ch. 3; De Toffoli 2023).
Finally, since the standard view is also attempting to give a descriptive
account of how mathematicians judge rigour in practice, another aim they
have is to account for the mechanism by which mathematicians agree on the
rigour and correctness of informal proofs:
(Agreement) To explain how, in practice, mathematicians manage to converge
and agree on the rigour and correctness of informal proofs.
It is commonly taken as one of the virtues of the standard view that it would help
to explain agreement among mathematicians. For example, Azzouni says, “[M]
athematicians have a way of agreeing about proof that is virtually unique
(agreement of any sort among humans is always a surprise, and always has to
be explained somehow), and the explanation of this surely is that some sort of
recognition of mechanical procedures is involved.” (2004, p. 103).
However, recent empirical work has shown that mathematicians do sometimes
disagree on what counts as a valid proof (Weber 2008; Inglis & Alcock 2012;
Weber & Czocher 2019) and what counts as a gap or error in a proof (Inglis et al.
2013; Davies et al. 2021). This does not mean there is no agreement to explain;
one notable ﬁnding from these articles is the importance of the context of the
13
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proof for evaluating its validity. The disagreement was also elicited by asking
about difﬁcult cases like diagrammatic proofs and computer proofs. So, by
keeping the context ﬁxed and choosing less borderline cases, there might still
be higher agreement among mathematicians than researchers in other ﬁelds. One
might also posit that there is something like long-term convergence on agreement,
so that even if there can be disagreement about validity about some step or type of
proof, over the long term mathematicians will converge on agreement. Of course,
these are also empirical claims that can and should be tested.
In Section 2.1, I gave some of the purposes of having a concept of rigour at
all, but it is noteworthy that this was not the same as the ambitions of the
standard view. The standard view seems to be interested primarily in a subset of
the broader uses of the concept, most obviously Soundness and Veriﬁcation,
though Agreement links to the social side of mathematics. In general, the
explanation for this is that the standard view leans more towards the normative
question of how mathematical theorems ought to be fully justiﬁed rather than
the descriptive claim of mathematical justiﬁcation in practice.
By setting out these aims for the standard view, we can judge individual
components of the various proposals against their aims. For example, the simple
“ﬁlling in the gaps” abbreviation model we already saw has proposals to answer
Rigour, Correctness, and Agreement. However, we found the story for
Content to be lacking in important details, and the answer to Techniques
would likely need to reject anything, like diagrams, that cannot undergo the
“ﬁlling in the gaps” process easily.
With a number of possible aims for the standard view, and a selection of
options for what it might mean for informal proofs to correspond to formal ones,
it now becomes clear that there is not really one standard view, but instead
a family of standard views which share a commitment to the general idea that
formal proofs explain which informal proofs are rigorous. In Sections 3.4, 3.5,
and 3.6, I will survey three of the most prominent proposed options in more
detail, and likewise evaluate them against the aims I have just considered.
3.4 Hamami’s Routine Translations
Let us begin with the version of the standard view set out by Hamami (2019).
Hamami claims that he is giving an exposition of the standard view as under-
stood by most mathematicians and following the ideas of Saunders Mac Lane
(1986) and the collective Bourbaki (1968) group.17 For example, he quotes
them as already defending some version of the standard view:
17 For a discussion of the social dynamics of the Bourbaki group, see Barany (2020).
14
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A Mathematical proof is rigorous when it is (or could be) written out in the
ﬁrst order predicate language L 2
ð
Þ as a sequence of inferences from the
axioms ZFC, each inference made according to one of the stated rules. . . . To
be sure, practically no one actually bothers to write out such formal proofs. In
practice, a proof is a sketch, in sufﬁcient detail to make possible a routine
translation of this sketch into a formal proof. (Mac Lane 1986, p. 377)
In practice, the mathematician who wishes to satisfy himself of the
perfect correctness or “rigour” of a proof or a theory . . . is content to
bring the exposition to a point where his experience and mathematical
ﬂair tell him that translation into formal language would be no more
than an exercise of patience (though doubtless a very tedious one).
(Bourbaki 1968, p. 8)
Hamami describes how the standard view will have a normative and
a descriptive component: the normative component will give the ideal of
how a proof ought to be rigorous, while the descriptive component will pick
out how judgements of rigour are actually made in practice. He argues that the
condition that an informal proof should be “routinely translatable” into
a formal proof provides a useful middle ground between these normative
and descriptive parts. The idea is that routine translatability is a weak enough
condition that proofs can meet it in practice, but nonetheless maintains the
strong connection to the ideal of formal derivations. His proposal is that
advocates of the standard view have an implicit conception of the mechanism
for judging rigour, with reasons for thinking they will succeed in identifying
when a proof conforms to the normative standard. The “conformity thesis” is
Hamami’s claim that every proof that is “descriptively” rigorous in practice
also satisﬁes the normative ideal of formal rigour. In other words: the practice
of rigour conforms to the ideal via an implicitly understood mechanism of
formalisability.
Hamami’s primary contribution is to give speciﬁcations of what the descrip-
tive and normative accounts of rigour are for his version of the standard view,18
and how they conform to one another. Let us take these in turn.
For the descriptive account, the general idea that Hamami proposes is that
informal proofs involve sequences of “higher-level” inference patterns. These
kinds of inferences are acquired as one learns mathematics. One begins with
basic knowledge of mathematical statements and simple, obvious inferential
moves, then proceeds to cumulatively gain knowledge by proving more things,
and recognising more complicated higher-level inferences as acceptable by
18 Hamami claims to be merely explicating the standard view as it is commonly held by mathemat-
icians and ﬁlling out the details implicit in the works of Bourbaki and Mac Lane. I don’t think this
gives credit to the substantial additional ideas he brings to this debate.
15
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

verifying that they merely abbreviate some longer-established pattern of
inferences.19
For the normative account, Hamami attempts to set out what a “routine
translation” is, and to give a precise insight into how it will proceed. His view
is that the routine translation is best understood as composed of three stages. The
ﬁrst stage takes an informal proof and ﬁlls in details so that the inferences use
higher-level inference rules. The second stage unpacks those higher-level infer-
ence rules, fully breaking them down into the more basic inferences that they
abbreviate. The third stage takes the sequence of basic inferences and formalises
it into some formal system. Importantly, Hamami claims that this procedure is
routine in the sense that it is algorithmic, mechanical, and automatic.
Finally, the argument for the conformity thesis uses the central role of higher-
level inferences in both the descriptive and normative parts: Hamami’s idea is
that a descriptively rigorous proof will be made up of higher-level inferential
moves, for which the routine translation will succeed, thereby reaching the
normative ideal.
In terms of the aims of the account, Hamami’s version of the standard view
is clearly more sophisticated than the original “ﬁlling in the gaps” account.
While he is still addressing Rigour and Correctness, the detailed descrip-
tion of the routine translation he gives is also addressing Content.
Furthermore, the idea that mathematicians implicitly recognise the mechan-
ism by which rigour is judged is intended to address Agreement, because the
mechanism is, presumably, shared by mathematicians who are able to make
the relevant judgements. The question of Techniques is less straightforward
because it is not obvious that Hamami’s account will apply and he does not
explain how to deal with cases such as diagrammatic proofs. The descriptive
account could potentially be the same: that one builds up a toolbox of
acceptable diagrammatic inferences cumulatively. However, one quick
objection is that this assumes that the acceptable inferences always come
from this kind of process, and do not rely on previously untested inferences
that take advantage of visual elements of the diagram, rather than being
made up of smaller inferences.
3.5 In Principle Formalisability
Another version of the standard view is to think that rigorous informal proofs
are those that would be formalisable in principle. That is, rather than thinking
19 This descriptive account is similar to that given by Tatton-Brown (2023) who also thinks that
mathematical learning is cumulative and thereby allows us to recognise more substantial
mathematical inferences as rigorous, while still having those inferences ultimately “deductively
grounded” in formal correctness.
16
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

there is a routine translation from a rigorous informal proof to a formal deriv-
ation, they instead rely on the theoretical possibility of such a translation.
Prominent proponents of this kind of approach include Steiner (1975) and
Burgess (2015).
Starting with Burgess, he builds on two general ideas about rigorous
proof. The ﬁrst is that: “A proof is what convinces a reasonable person;
a rigorous proof is what convinces [even] an unreasonable person” (Burgess
2015, p. 91).20 The second idea is that rigorous informal proofs are not about
giving an abbreviated version of a formal proof, but instead are primarily
about convincing other mathematicians that such a proof exists. Burgess
refers to this principle from Hyman Bass, who says:
The notion of mathematical proof is a precise theoretical construct, but it is
quite formal, rule bound, and ponderous. Mathematicians typically do not
produce such formal proofs, but rather convince expert colleagues essentially
that such a proof exists, the presumption being that the conviction carries the
belief that under duress and with sufﬁcient time such a proof could be
supplied by the proponent. (Bass 2003, p. 770)
Burgess summarises this in slogan form: “A proof is what convinces math-
ematicians that a formal proof exists” (Burgess 2015, p. 91). However, this
is not adequate by itself because it is relevant how the conviction comes
about. Being convinced can happen in numerous ways, such as through
expert testimony or brainwashing. Even an unreasonable person might be
convinced for the wrong reasons – given their unreasonableness, we might
expect this even more – and certainly expert testimony can convince people
of the existence of formal proofs. What Burgess is after is that the convin-
cing isn’t of this defective sort; that the convincing happens in the right way.
He tentatively suggests that the right way for this conviction to come about
is because the steps supplied show enough of the formal proof: “What rigor
requires is that each new result should be obtained from earlier results by
presenting enough deductive steps to produce conviction that a full break-
down into obvious deductive steps would in principle be possible” (Burgess
2015, p. 97).
In his review of Burgess’s book, Pettigrew (2016) responds that it isn’t
about supplying enough steps, but about supplying the right steps. He
observes that an advanced mathematician might only need to see a single
trivial step of a very difﬁcult proof to convince themselves that a formal
proof exists, in virtue of their ability to come up with proofs, but that cannot
20 Burgess ascribes this idea to Mark Kac. I’ve not managed to trace a direct quotation, other than in
his obituary by Thompson (1986).
17
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

be the relevant sense of the “right way” to bring about conviction, because
only supplying a trivial step does not make for a rigorous proof. Pettigrew
proposes that what is missing from Burgess’s account is a distinction
between ingenious and routine steps. A proof should display all of the
ingenious steps and thereby convince its audience of the existence of
a formal proof: “A rigorous proof is one that convinces its audience that
there exists a formally rigorous proof by providing those steps in the
formally rigorous proof that it is not simply routine to provide” (Pettigrew
2016, pp. 132–3). The idea is that the routine steps are those that one can
reasonably expect another mathematician to come up with for themselves,
while ingenious steps must be given. Therefore, to convince other math-
ematicians of the existence of a formal proof, one needs to supply those
ingenious steps, but may take the routine steps for granted.
A similar line of thought is present in Steiner’s (1975) account of mathemat-
ical knowledge. He thinks that one can gain mathematical knowledge from
a proof only if that proof is in principle formalisable. To ﬁll out what “in
principle” means he deploys the thought experiment of being able to produce
a formal proof with the assistance of a hypothetical logician helper. Most
mathematicians don’t know enough formal logic to produce formal proofs, so
it cannot be expected that they themselves can produce formal equivalents of
their proofs. Steiner solves this by imagining what would happen if they were
paired with a logician who could produce formal proofs. The logician would be
able to handle the logic itself and the details of the routine steps, while the
mathematician must supply the ingenious and creative parts of the mathematical
reasoning. If, in the hypothetical, the two of them could produce a formal
derivation together, then the informal proof would be sufﬁcient to establish
the mathematician’s knowledge all along.
The in principle formalisability approach is clear with regard to Rigour
but underspeciﬁed with respect to Correctness. After all, it is not obvious
that supplying enough (or enough ingenious) steps of a proof is sufﬁcient to
guarantee its formalisability, nor is it clear that the hypothetical logician
can really underpin an account of correct proofs. The in principle account
seems to bypass the demand of Content altogether because it does not want
to specify at all what an informal proof’s corresponding formal proof is, let
alone how the two are linked. For Techniques, this account rejects any
proof techniques that are inherently informal, since they couldn’t be for-
malised even in principle. For Agreement, a story is needed of how
mathematicians converge on which proofs are formalisable in principle,
though the suggestions of Burgess and Pettigrew provide an outline of how
this could go.
18
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

3.6 The Derivation-Indicator View
One of the most inﬂuential proposals for making informal rigour dependent on
formal proofs comes from the earlier work of Jody Azzouni (2004) on his
derivation-indicator view.21 We have seen the routine translations view try to
specify how formal proofs correspond to a given informal proof, and the in
principle formalisability view that informal proofs only need to be formalisable
in principle. In contrast, the derivation-indicator view is that informal proofs do
indicate corresponding derivations, but without the mathematicians needing to
know how that correspondence works. These indicated derivations explain
things like Rigour, Correctness, and especially Agreement, but do not need
to be known to the mathematicians, nor are they ﬁxed to a particular formalism.
The overall idea is that formal derivations are implicit in informal proofs, in
a way that secures mathematical rigour because those derivations are mechan-
ically checkable, which indirectly secures the informal proofs too.
I take a proof to indicate an ‘underlying’ derivation . . . Since (a) derivations are
(in principle) mechanically checkable, and since (b) the algorithmic systems
that codify which rules may be applied to produce derivations in a given system
are (implicitly or, often nowadays, explicitly) recognized by mathematicians, it
follows that if proofs really are devices mathematicians use to convince one
another of one or another mechanically-checkable derivation, this sufﬁces to
explain why mathematicians are so good at agreeing with one another on
whether some proof convincingly establishes a theorem. (Azzouni 2004, p. 84)
Mathematicians can agree on rigorous and correct proofs because they are
implicitly sensitive to which informal proofs indicate formally valid, mechan-
ically recognisable counterparts. Nonetheless, this doesn’t require them to
actually know what those indicated derivations are, which explains how math-
ematics could function in this way despite the long history of mathematics
before the invention of formal proofs and despite the many mathematicians who
are not able to produce formal proofs.
The proposal that the formal derivations are implicit and not necessarily
known by the mathematicians themselves works in part because the derivations
Azzouni has in mind are not ﬁxed to a single formal system. Instead, they can be
found across a whole family of algorithmic systems (with some technical
caveats that we do not need to explore here). Mathematicians are not bound to
some particular formalism, so neither are the derivations that underlie proofs.
21 In more recent work, Azzouni (2020) has moved away from the derivation-indicator view
towards the algorithmic device view of informal proofs. While this has some familial relation-
ship to the derivation-indicator view, it also has some substantial differences that mean it
explicitly no longer falls under the label of the “standard view”.
19
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Furthermore, new techniques can lead to needing the resources of different
formal systems, and Azzouni sees mathematicians as ﬂexible and free to move
to new formal systems that can accommodate their needs: “On the derivation-
indicator view of mathematical practice, the mathematician is seen instead as
gracefully sprinting up and down algorithmic systems, many of which he or she
invents for the ﬁrst time” (Azzouni 2004, p. 103).
This means that informal proofs that make use of more meta-level reasoning
are happening in a higher-level system that can handle them. Azzouni’s example
is using a “proof by symmetry”, where just one of several cases is proven in
detail and the rest are argued to follow symmetrically. He also takes this to allow
the ﬂexibility for there to be algorithmic systems that are indicated by diagram-
matic reasoning, allowing for an answer to Techniques.
In other papers, Azzouni (2005, 2009) develops a novel account of “inference
packages”, which are “psychologically-bundled ways of phenomenologically
exploring the effect of several assumptions at once without explicit recognition
of what those assumptions are” (Azzouni 2005, p. 9). These work like cognitive
black boxes which allow us to carry out mathematical manipulations without
having to be able to introspectively know the underlying formal justiﬁcation, or
even to recognise which assumptions are being manipulated. That mathemat-
icians often use inference packages to think about mathematics adds to the
account by explaining how Techniques can seem so inherently informal and
compelling while still indicating underlying derivations. Furthermore, it ﬁlls
out how indicated derivations might secure Agreement among mathematicians
despite them not knowing the exact derivations themselves.
Overall, Azzouni’s derivation-indicator view does well at accounting for Rigour
and Correctness, using the indicated family of derivations. For Agreement,
mathematicians are meant to agree about validity because their judgements are
tracking the implicit, indicated derivation. Meanwhile, by not needing mathemat-
icians to be aware of which derivation is indicated, the account can address
apparently inherently informal Techniques and not rely on the mathematicians
knowing substantial formal logic, which is uncommon even now and was impos-
sible prior to the relatively recent development of modern logic. One thing that is
left somewhat underspeciﬁed is Content: the indicated derivations are meant to
provide the ultimate source of justiﬁcation for the informal proofs, but it is not clear
how they do so or what the “indication” relation amounts to.
3.7 Criticisms of the Standard View
So far, we have been assessing the merits of the various versions of the standard
view by the criteria from Section 3.3. However, this has taken for granted that
20
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the views broadly succeed in the ﬁrst place. This is far from clear. One of the
major contributions of the practical turn in the philosophy of mathematics has
been to challenge the standard view with a wide selection of criticisms. In this
section, I will survey some of the most prominent ones and add some more of
my own. We won’t have space to go into much depth, but the reader can follow
the references for further discussion.
3.7.1 No Formal System
The ﬁrst objection to the standard view is the absence of a speciﬁc formal
system under discussion. Different systems will have different things they
can prove and different ways of proving them, so what system underlies the
rigour of informal proofs is far from an idle question. If the inferences found
in an informal proof are warranted by one formal system but not by another,
what is the status of that informal proof? This question applies at several
levels. First, one might ask what underlying logic is being used. The default
assumption would be classical logic, though the constructivists and propon-
ents of other alternative logics would reject this. Even within classical logic,
one must settle on using ﬁrst-order logic, some higher-order logic, or some-
thing in between. One must decide about the acceptability of inﬁnitary
proofs.22 At the technical level, these choices will matter as to what can be
formalised and how. Beyond the logic, one must settle on which axioms are
used. Again, the default would probably be those of ZFC set theory, which
itself can be supplemented with all kinds of extra axioms, but there are
alternative proposals for foundations of mathematics too, such as through
category theory or homotopy-type theory. Again, these would affect what
could be formalised.
Multiple formalisation projects are underway to use computer-checking in
mathematics, such as in Lean, Coq, the HOL family including Isabelle, and
Mizar. These all have different implementations of how proofs are written and
how things are formalised. If the successes of these formalisation projects are
to be used to support the standard view by vindicating the possibility of
formalising mathematics, it seems that we must accept that these systems
are capable of justifying rigorous proofs. However, these systems are all
idiosyncratic to some extent, and the product of various contingent program-
ming choices, so it is unlikely that they are really explaining the rigour of
mathematical proofs.
22 For example, Rav (1999) and Azzouni (2004) disagree on this matter. Weir (2016) argues that
allowing proofs to be inﬁnitary is necessary for the standard view.
21
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The proponents of the standard view would point out that the key feature of
these various systems is that they should contain enough standard, everyday
mathematics. The many systems all prove largely the same things, using
mostly the same tools. As Azzouni makes explicit for his derivation-
indicator view, the details of the exact system are not important so long as it
captures the right inferences. It could also be that any system is ﬁne so long as
it satisﬁes some list of criteria, though I know of no such list. Nonetheless, we
have seen that the details are important if the standard view is to explain
mathematical rigour.
3.7.2 Incompleteness and Inconsistency
One limitation on formal systems comes from Gödel’s two incompleteness
theorems. The ﬁrst shows that any consistent formal system that is sufﬁcient
to prove a certain amount of mathematics will fail to be complete, meaning
that there will be statements that it cannot prove or disprove. The second
then proves that, if such a formal system is consistent, then the statement
that the system is consistent will not be provable within the system. Gödel’s
proofs involve using a coding to construct a Gödel sentence GF (relative to
a formal system F), which is provably equivalent to the formula expressing
that GF is unprovable in the system F. The sentence GF will not be provable
in F, on pain of contradiction, but will therefore be true of the system F.
Priest (1987, ch. 2), who wants to argue for dialetheism – the view that there
are true contradictions – and, in support of this, that mathematics is inherently
inconsistent, uses the standard view as a main premise of his argument. The idea
is that if one takes the standard view seriously, then rigorous informal proof
procedures can be formalised, and hence can be used to generate an inconsist-
ency using Gödel’s theorems:
For let T be (the formalisation of) our naïve proof procedures. Then, since T
satisﬁes the conditions of Gödel’s theorem, if T is consistent there is a sentence ’
which is not provable in T, but which we can establish as true by a naïve
proof, and hence is provable in T. The only way out of the problem, other than
to accept the contradiction, and thus dialetheism anyway, is to accept the
inconsistency of naïve proof. So we are forced to admit that our naïve proof
procedures are inconsistent. But our naïve proof procedures just are those
methods of deductive argument by which things are established as true. It
follows that some contradictions are true; that is, dialetheism is correct.
(Priest 1987, p. 44)
In my own work (Tanswell 2016a), I have argued that the place where this
argument breaks is in adopting the standard view in the ﬁrst place.
22
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A proponent of the standard view is therefore challenged to offer a different
solution, or to accept Priest’s conclusion that mathematics is inconsistent.
3.7.3 Unformalisable proofs and Faithfulness
A major strategy for attacking the standard view has been to present proofs
that would appear to be unformalisable. If there exists a rigorous proof that
is unformalisable, this would be a counterexample to the standard view.
Likely candidates would be diagrammatic proofs or proofs that rely essen-
tially on diagrams.23 However, while these may be hard to capture in
language-based formal systems, there are formal systems for certain
kinds of diagrams too, such as Mumma’s (2010) formal system for
Euclid’s Elements and Shin’s (1994) systems Venn-I and Venn-II. This
suggests that rigorous diagrams could be amenable to treatment by
a formal system for diagrams. Nonetheless, De Toffoli (2023) shows that
there are rigorous diagrammatic proofs that cannot be faithfully translated
into formal counterparts.
Likewise, recall the proof by “Gestalt shift”. It may not be possible to
capture faithfully reasoning that relies on such a switch of perspective.24
However, the word “faithfully” is important here, because with the resources
of formal logic a great many things are formalisable in some broad sense, but
in trying to underwrite a rigorous informal proof we want the formalisation to
be faithful to the reasoning pattern of the original.25 Faithfulness will mean
something like preserving the main ideas, structure, and methods of the proof.
To the critic of the standard view, it may be obvious that a translation should be
faithful in order to secure rigour, but for the proponent this requirement could
be seen as unfairly restricting the tools of logic by setting a nebulous extra
requirement on translation. After all, who judges the faithfulness of
a translation, and by what standards?26
23 Azzouni (2020) argues against the standard view along these lines, with a recent reply by
Weisgerber (2022).
24 The speciﬁc version we saw was given as an example of an unrigorous but correct proof, so this
suggests that this example could be rejected. However, there is no obvious reason why there
could not be a rigorous proof by Gestalt shift. Even the one we saw could be made more explicit
while still relying on the Gestalt shift as its main strategy, and it is this move that seems to be
difﬁcult to formalise faithfully. In Sangwin and Tanswell (2023) we also look at the process of
translating back and forth between algebraic and diagrammatic proofs.
25 The signiﬁcance of faithfulness of translations in the literature might be traced to Lakatos (1976).
For example: “Alpha: Are you sure that your translation of `polyhedron’ into vector theory was
a true translation?” (Lakatos 1976, p. 121). I will discuss this book in Section 3.
26 This problem is also considered by De Toffoli (2023) who rightly points out that identity
conditions for proofs are hard to pin down and are context-dependent.
23
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

3.7.4 Knowledge and Explanatory Redundancy
A main line of attack from mathematical practice on the standard view has been
epistemic, arguing that formal proofs are not needed to explain how informal
rigorous proofs provide mathematical knowledge. That is: formal proofs are
explanatorily redundant in the epistemology of mathematics.27
Rav (1999) lists various areas of mathematics that are accepted as rigorous
and proceed without axiomatisation or formalisation as an intermediary.28
Therefore, as a descriptive account of how rigour secures mathematical know-
ledge in practice, it does not succeed. The three more advanced versions of the
standard view would reply that their models are necessary to explain rigour as
a normative ideal for proof, and that the actual practices are trying to meet this
ideal in various ways. Nonetheless, other literature challenges these solutions.
For example, replying to the routine translations view, Weber (2023) gives two
examples from computability theory where proofs are taken to be rigorous by
the mathematical community, but are not veriﬁable by mathematicians in the
way Hamami has set out, nor are the techniques developed in the cumulative
way that he describes.
Similarly, Antonutti Marfori (2010) argues that the lack of formalisations in
mathematical practice, either in presenting proofs or resolving controversies
about proofs, means that an epistemic account based on formalisation would
make mathematical knowledge mysterious. Either this leaves mathematical
practice “lazy and unsuccessful” (Antonutti Marfori 2010, p. 267) or it allows
informal proofs to track mathematical truth without the practitioners knowing
how, which makes for an unconvincing account of mathematical knowledge.
Pelc (2009) also argues that formal proofs might be too long to play a role
in mathematical knowledge. In practice, formalisations are longer than their
informal counterparts. Pelc argues that for complicated proofs, such as
Wiles’s proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem, it is not known whether the
formalisation is so long that it would ever be veriﬁable, even if all the
resources in the universe were dedicated to the task.29 Therefore, formal
27 Besides those listed in the text, Buldt et al. (2008) use this argument as a launch pad for
demanding a new epistemology of mathematics that does not rely on the standard view.
Goethe and Friend (2010) also give a version of this argument.
28 The list of “unaxiomatised” theories Rav (1999, p. 16–18) gives now looks rather quaint because in
the intervening years a lot more formal mathematics has been done, and many of the listed areas have
been formalised and veriﬁed in systems like Lean and Mizar. This doesn’t undermine Rav’s point,
though, which is that the mathematical practices were perfectly ﬁne and rigorous without those
formalisations.
29 Freek Wiedijk has a list tracking the formalisation efforts of 100 “top” theorems in various
formal systems, in an exercise to follow developments in formal mathematics (www.cs.ru.nl/
~freek/100/). Funnily enough, the only theorem that has not yet been formalised in any of the
main systems is Fermat’s Last Theorem. The fact that the other 99 haven’t seen the humongous
24
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proofs cannot be playing an active role in the actual mathematical know-
ledge mathematicians have.
Müller-Hill (2009) substantiates this criticism with an empirical study of
mathematicians’ intuitions about mathematical knowledge and formalisability.
In her study, she asked 76 respondents who had some experience in teaching or
researching mathematics about various vignettes and whether the characters
have mathematical knowledge or not, testing what kind of proof access is
considered necessary or sufﬁcient for mathematical knowledge.30 The most
interesting result concerns a vignette in which a proposed proof of a famous
conjecture is published after a favourable referee report, at which point
84.9 per cent of respondents considered the author “John” to know that the
theorem was true. However, the next vignette has John attend a talk ﬁve years
later which reveals the possibility of constructing counterexamples to the
conjecture he had proved. Now, 61.3 per cent of participants agreed that he
knows the conjecture to be false. Amazingly, after the existence of
a counterexample had been introduced as part of the example, participants
were asked whether John knew the conjecture was true on the morning before
the talk, and 71 per cent said that he did. This seems to ascribe knowledge to
John of something false, contrary to the received wisdom from epistemology
that knowledge entails truth. Examining the open-text replies that Müller-Hill
(2009, p. 289) reports, we might speculate that participants were not drawing
a sharp distinction between knowledge and some internalist kind of justiﬁed
belief. That is, John was both justiﬁed in believing the theorem in the morning,
and justiﬁed in believing it to be false after the talk. Müller-Hill’s own conclu-
sion
from
these
responses
is
that
mathematicians
are
not
invoking
a formalisability condition for mathematical knowledge because the proof is
judged to be sufﬁcient for John to have mathematical knowledge, but since it
must contain an error it also cannot be formalisable.
3.7.5 Overgeneration
Another argument, which I have set out myself as the “overgeneration” objection
(Tanswell 2015), is that the success of formal mathematics shows that formalisa-
tion can also be too easy to support the standard view. An informal proof
explosion in size after formalisation does not contradict Pelc’s point that the mere possibility of
them being too long is enough to show they are not playing an active role in mathematical
epistemology.
30 Perhaps concerningly for us, Müller-Hill (2011, p. 279) also reports that only 10 of 76 respond-
ents thought that philosophers would be best placed to know what mathematical knowledge is,
compared to 75 who thought mathematicians were. But participants were allowed to select
multiple options!
25
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

overgenerates formal counterparts because there are many different ways to
formalise even simple pieces of reasoning. The availability of multiple, substan-
tially different formal proofs corresponding to the same informal proof puts
pressure on the idea that the correspondence can explain rigour. In the paper,
I consider the example of the mutilated chess board problem: to cover a chess
board that is missing its two opposite corners (see Figure 5) with dominoes that
would cover two squares each. The simple proof that this is impossible is based on
the fact that any domino will cover two different colour squares, so to be
coverable there need to be the same number of squares of each colour. But the
removed corners are the same colour meaning that there are more squares of one
colour than another, so they cannot be covered by the dominoes.
The crux of the overgeneration argument is contrasting three substantially
different formalisations of this intuitively clear proof. If the rigour of the
informal argument depends on formal counterparts, then it is puzzling how
this dependence could be on many different formal proofs. If we view formal-
isation as a complex and creative process carried out by mathematicians –
among others – as opposed to mechanically extracting what is already implicit
in the informal proof, then the idea that formalisation is tracking some objective
way that rigour depends on formal derivations seems highly implausible.
Once again, an implicit assumption here is that the formalisation must be
faithfully capturing the “true essence” of the informal proof. I think a lot of the
explanatory work for the standard view (on both rigour and correctness) is done
on the general belief that formalisation is capturing the true essence of the proof.
Real formalisation projects have been hugely successful at actually formalising
proofs, but they cannot maintain the “true essence” idea because multiple
distinct formalisations will track different ways of formalising a proof, with
different ways of reasoning, dependencies, assumptions, and details.
Figure 5 The mutilated chess board. Edited from a public domain image from
Wikimedia Commons, uploaded by user Ovinus.
26
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

One possible reply to this overgeneration argument is that an informal
proof is rigorous so long as there exists even one formal correspondent, so
there being multiple such correspondents does not undermine the view
(e.g., Avigad 2021, p. 7387). But this misunderstands the criticism. The
point is that the correspondence between informal and formal proof is
doing a great deal of philosophical work for the various versions of the
standard view. The correspondence relation between them is such that the
rigour on the informal side depends on and is explained by the formal side.
The criticism is that this kind of dependence is not tracked by the process of
formalisation, because the multiple different formal proofs cannot all be the
explanation for the rigour of the informal proof. In sum, there may be many
formalisations of an informal proof, but their multiplicity undermines their
explanatoriness.
3.7.6 The Mismatch Argument
Another criticism focusing on the process of formalisation is what we can call
the mismatch argument, which is that there is a mismatch between rigorous
informal proofs and formalisable ones. The standard view would see them as
equivalent, so if they do not match up correctly then there is a problem. First
of all, an informal proof that fails to be rigorous might be formalisable
anyway. Such a proof would contain either gaps or errors. Gaps are already
ﬁxed in the process of formalisation (recall “ﬁlling in the gaps”), so gappy
proofs are formalisable. It would be hard to draw a ﬁrm and principled line
between gaps that can be routinely ﬁlled in and those that are substantial
enough to declare a proof to be unrigorous. But what is there to stop someone
involved in formalising a proof from also ﬁxing errors they come across?
Indeed, this is how formalisation is seen to work, even by proponents of the
standard view: “To be sure, the formalization process sometimes uncovers
minor errors and omissions in the informal presentation that have to be
remedied, but these are conventionally viewed as just that – errors and
omissions – rather than indications that the informal source is correct but
unformalizable” (Avigad 2021, p. 7379).
On the contrary, these suggest to me that the proof is formalisable but not
correct. These kinds of cases can occur when a theorem is true, but the proof is
ﬂawed. Note that the proponent of the standard view, in trying to explain
Correctness, does not, strictly speaking, have an independent characterisation
of errors to fall back on because this is precisely what is at issue. This means
they cannot wholesale rule out ﬁxing errors from the intended formalisation
process. That proofs with errors can be formalisable is thus a serious concern.
27
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Conversely, what happens when mathematicians are unable to formalise
a proof? Does this reveal that the informal proof was unrigorous or incor-
rect, or is it that they need to continue to work at the formalisation? Indeed, it
may be possible that a different mathematician would be able to formalise
the proof after all. The answer, then, comes down to whether one believes
the informal proof is correct and rigorous in the ﬁrst place. However, the
explanatory order is then the opposite of the standard view: our intuitions of
formalisability are explained by our judgements of informal rigour. This
would leave the standard view not as an explanation, but as a post hoc
rationalisation.
3.7.7 Larvor’s Regress
Larvor (2016) makes a quick argument that the standard view faces a regress
problem. He observes that the existence of a formal derivation in some system is
itself a mathematical claim. When a mathematician has informally proved
a theorem, then according to the standard view, this acts as an argument for
the existence of a corresponding formal proof in a suitable formal system.
Indeed, by the standard view this must be a compelling and rigorous argument
for the existence of such a formal derivation. However, then the rigorous
argument for a mathematical claim must itself be explained by the standard
view. If the rigour is to be explained by the existence of yet another derivation,
the view faces an unwelcome regress. Must each informal proof in fact be
supported by an inﬁnite hierarchy of derivations? Alternatively, one must
concede that the informal proof is sufﬁcient to establish the mathematical
claim that there exists a formal derivation in a suitable system. But of course,
this concedes everything: “Compare this with the more straightforward view
that [the informal proof] is as it stands, before any translation into a formal
language, an adequate proof of [the theorem]” (Larvor 2016, p. 3). Neither the
regress, nor the concession, seem to be palatable to the standard view, so
responding to this criticism would involve ﬁnding some other way to break
the dichotomy; but this strikes me as robust and so the criticism is, in my
opinion, formidable.
3.8 True Essences and Modelling
Let us draw our discussion of the standard view to an end. We have by now seen
a whole menagerie of criticisms of the standard view laid out. A more detailed
discussion of the various versions of the standard view could investigate
whether some of them are better able to defend against (or could be modiﬁed
appropriately to address) some of the criticisms, which is certainly the case.
28
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Such a discussion could also level more speciﬁc criticisms against the details of
those views. Taken together, though, I believe that the criticisms show that the
central idea of the standard view is wrong: that informal rigour cannot depend
on formalisation and corresponding derivations. The promise of computer-
checkable, gapless, fully correct derivations providing absolute mathematical
certainty is understandably appealing, but the philosophical details do not stand
up to scrutiny.
However, while I am certainly critical of the standard view on its own terms,
we should not be too hasty in abandoning it entirely. Many aspects of the
standard view are very sensible. For example, clearly mathematics and logic
are closely related, and the idea that when a gap is too large, the author of the
proof should be able to give more details is intuitively compelling. Furthermore,
treating proofs as formal derivations is central to metamathematical theorems
such as incompleteness results, independence results, the work on reverse
mathematics, and the mathematical possibilities of using different logics.
These results do have a direct inﬂuence on practice. For example, if
a mathematician discovered that a claim they were trying to prove was equiva-
lent to the continuum hypothesis, it would be a fool’s errand to try to prove this
informally from the axioms of ZFC.
I propose that the way to make sense of this conundrum is with rigour
pluralism. Implicit in several of the criticisms of the previous section was the
search for the “true essence” of an informal proof in its formal counterpart.
I think that the approach of searching for the formal essence of an informal
proof is doomed to fail because there is no such essence. However, if we take the
alternative view that what is going on is a kind of conceptual modelling (see
Löwe & Müller 2011), that different formalisations are different models of
informal proofs, and that the family of different versions of the standard view
are closely related models of rigour and proof, then we have a more coherent
story to tell.
The rigour pluralist, therefore, can happily accept metamathematical results
that rely on formal mathematics as telling us about the limits of provability more
generally, since this is one of the main purposes of these models of rigour. At the
same time, the pluralist is not thereby committed to the unique correctness of the
standard view. The move to the pluralistic modelling approach abandons the aim
of giving a uniquely correct answer to what mathematical rigour is. This means
that not only are there multiple versions of the standard view with different
strengths and weaknesses, but there is also a selection of other models of informal
rigour that provide different insights. In Sections 4, 5, and 6 we will investigate
three other families of models of informal rigour and proofs, and evaluate their
virtues and shortcomings.
29
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

4 Arguments and Dialogues
4.1 Introduction
In the previous section we saw that formal logic provides a good model for
rigorous mathematical proofs, but not without limitations. One thing that is
abstracted away by the family of standard views is the social dimension of
rigour: the mathematicians themselves are largely absent or highly idealised.
The other models we will consider in this and the remaining sections include
more of those social features of proofs in practice. In this section, we examine
a selection of models of rigour that rely on seeing proofs as arguments or
dialogues, where these also involve contextual features like who is arguing,
why they are arguing, their attitudes towards what they are arguing over, and the
dynamics of the exchange between them.
To begin, I shall look at the application of argumentation theory to mathemat-
ical proofs. The discipline of argumentation theory is about how arguments work:
what kinds of arguments do and do not succeed; how arguments are used to
persuade or convince; and what kinds of fallacies arise in argumentation.
Argumentation theory and informal logic have long and varied histories, but
their modern incarnations address shortcomings of formal logic in explaining
real arguments. Addressing the similar shortcomings of formal logic in explaining
features of real proofs is an obvious use to put it to. In Section 4.2 we will look at
how some of the leading theories from argumentation theory can apply to rigorous
proofs, drawing primarily on the extensive work on this by Andrew Aberdein.
In Section 4.3 we will turn to one of the best-known works on proofs as
dialogues: Imre Lakatos’s (1976) Proofs and Refutations. Lakatos proposes
a dialectical model of proofs in mathematics, with many important ideas that
affect how one should understand mathematical rigour. From here, in
Section 4.4, we will jump to a very recent model of proofs as dialogues by
Catarina Dutilh Novaes (2021) in The Dialogical Roots of Deduction. Her
proposal is to see deduction, and therefore also deductive mathematical proofs,
as fundamentally dialogical.
4.2 Proofs as Arguments
Characterising proofs as a kind of argument has several clear motivations. First
of all, empirical work by Davies et al. (2020) has shown that many mathemat-
icians do indeed think of proofs as arguments, so at the very least it ﬁts with the
descriptive-normative side of rigour, that is, it matches what mathematicians
say they are doing. Second, one of the best-known views of proofs, as defended
by Hersh (1993, 1997) is that: “In mathematical practice, in the real life of living
30
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

mathematicians, proof is convincing argument, as judged by qualiﬁed judges”
(Hersh 1993, p. 389).31
Argumentation theory is designed to understand the way in which arguments
do this convincing, and under what conditions they succeed and fail. Third,
argumentation theory attends to the context of argumentation, such as who is
arguing and why, so will include these features of the context for mathematical
proving too. Fourth, this discipline has a large catalogue of speciﬁc types and
patterns of argument that have been analysed, and which can be used to identify
speciﬁc patterns of argument invoked by mathematicians in an existing tax-
onomy. Finally, it can tell us about mathematical fallacies, and hence tell us
about rigour negatively, by identifying failures of rigour.
One of the leading proponents of analysing mathematics using argumentation
theory is Andrew Aberdein (2005, 2006, 2007, 2010, 2013, 2021, 2023).
A major contribution he makes is to examine what insights might be gained
from two classic models of argumentation by Toulmin (1958) and Walton
(1998). Let us consider these in turn.
Toulmin’s argumentation model (Figure 6) is designed to make explicit the
structure of an argument for a claim C, by picking how your starting data D will
warrant that conclusion. That warrant W, may also rely on some backing B, to
justify it. Furthermore, one should identify the qualiﬁers Q, needed when the
warrant is weaker than a logically valid inference, and the conditions under
which the inference would be rebutted, R.
This generalises to many more possible arguments than formal logic does.
As a model of mathematical proofs, though, we might wonder what exactly
it adds, since informal rigorous proofs should still be logical to the extent
that they do not admit qualiﬁcations and rebuttals. The beneﬁt of this
approach is shown by Alcolea Banegas (1997/2013) and Aberdein (2007),
who look at how Toulmin’s model will apply to the computer-aided proof of
the Four Colour Theorem (Appel & Haken 1977; Appel et al. 1977; see also
Figure 6 Toulmin’s argument model (Toulmin 1958, p. 97).
31 In his second article (Hersh 1997), this becomes: “It is argument which convinces the qualiﬁed,
skeptical expert” (p. 153). This extra clause will be relevant to the dialogical model we will see
shortly.
31
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Secco & Pereira 2017).32 The idea is that one can make explicit exactly how
reliance on the computerised case-enumeration feeds into the overall argu-
ment of the proof, such as by identifying the warrant and backing: “(W) The
computer has been properly programmed and its hardware has no
defects. . . . (B) Technology and computer programming are sufﬁciently
reliable” (Alcolea Banegas 1997/2013, p. 55).
Alcolea Banegas then argues that: “since no strictly mathematical warrant is
available,
the
door
remains
open for
a
speciﬁc
counterexample
. . .
Mathematicians ﬁnd themselves in the uncomfortable situation of having to
accept both the fallibility and the indispensability of the computer” (Alcolea
Banegas 1977/2013, p. 56). However, Aberdein points out that this reveals
a limitation in Toulmin’s model, since one could add that the reasoning would
be rebutted ‘when there has been an error in our reasoning’. Indeed, one could
add this to the layout for any mathematical proof. Since the case-checking for
the Four Colour Theorem has been done multiple times on multiple machines
with different software and coding, the likelihood of human error can easily be
argued to be higher than that of computer error.33 The point is that Toulmin’s
model may still be too detached from important context. In Aberdein’s words:
“The degree of abstraction necessary to use [Toulmin’s model] at all can make
different, incompatible, reconstructions possible, leaving the suspicion that any
such reconstruction may involve considerable (and unquantiﬁed) distortion”
(Aberdein 2007, p. 61).
We might also worry that choosing controversial cases of proofs, such as
that of the Four Colour Theorem, means that this model is too far removed
from rigorous proof because it is precisely focused on places where mathem-
atical rigour is lacking. However, it is possible to apply the model to more
central examples of informal rigorous proofs. For example, one can analyse an
inference within a proof in terms of its warrant and backing, with a domain of
validity. In that case, if the backing is sufﬁciently obvious to the intended
audience, then this may be a way to examine rigour without relying on formal
logic. Indeed, Aberdein gives more detailed examples of applications of
Toulmin’s layout to standard proofs, such as the proof of unique prime
factorisation (Aberdein 2006, p. 217), the intermediate value theorem
(Aberdein 2006, p. 219), and a classic proof about irrational numbers
(Aberdein 2005, ﬁg. 4) reproduced here (Figure 7).34
32 Alcolea Banegas’s original 1997 paper was published in Catalan, then translated into English and
republished in 2013.
33 Indeed, the entire proof of the Four Colour Theorem has been formalised and computer-checked
by Gonthier (2008).
34 The exact claim is that there exist two irrationals α and β such that αβ is rational.
32
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In Figure 7, we can see how Toulmin’s layout can be modiﬁed to ﬁt the chains
of reasoning found in proofs, with the conclusion of one argument becoming the
data for the second.35 Also, Aberdein here demonstrates how the layout can be
used to show the structure of a proof relying on different logical resources
(namely, constructively and classically valid inferences). This makes it possible
to analyse the rigour of the argument by bringing out explicitly the dependen-
cies and connections between different parts of the proof.
The second option that Aberdein considers is the model of argument sug-
gested by Walton (1998). Walton’s central idea is to see arguments as essentially
taking place between arguers, who each start with initial attitudes towards what
is being argued about (such as believing it true, false, or unknown) as well as
goals for being involved in the argument. This leads to a taxonomy of six
argument types, as summarised in Table 1. For example, if one person believes
that the proposition they are arguing about is true and the other doesn’t know
either way, then they might end up in an information-seeking dialogue, with the
goal of spreading knowledge from one to the other. However, if they disagree,
with one believing it is true and one believing it is false, then the type of
dialogue will depend on their goals. If they are looking to resolve the conﬂict,
then they may end up in a persuasion dialogue, attempting to convince one
another. Otherwise, they may enter a negotiation to ﬁnd an adequate comprom-
ise for both parties, or they may exchange their views in an eristic dialogue (that
is, a quarrel) with no hope of a stable resolution. In practice, the kind of
Figure 7 Toulmin’s layout for a proof about irrational numbers by Aberdein
(2005, ﬁg. 4). This uses the same abbreviations as those cited in this section:
Claim (C), Backing (B), Warrant (W), Qualiﬁer (Q), and Data (D).
Note: my thanks to Andrew Aberdein for help with reconstructing this diagram.
35 This modiﬁcation was brieﬂy considered by Toulmin himself (Toulmin et al. 1979, sect. 7).
Other modiﬁcations are considered by Aberdein (2006) and Knipping and Reid (2019).
33
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

argument one is engaged in might change over time, moving from one type to
another in response to the changing context.
The insight that this taxonomy provides is that an argument can only be
properly evaluated in the context of what kind of argument it is, that is, different
kinds of arguments have different norms and standards for arguing.
To apply this model to mathematical proofs, Aberdein (2007, p. 64, 2021)
points out that the usual perspective would be to see proofs as being special
cases of inquiry, where the arguers move from mutual ignorance to knowledge
via jointly accepted methods of reasoning. However, in practice there are many
other potential audiences for a proof. Aberdein lists journal referees, mathemat-
icians in the same ﬁeld, mathematicians from other ﬁelds, students, prospective
researchers, and “posterity” as other possible audiences that the prover may be
engaged with, with other possible goals. Dealing with journal referees, the
situation is more like one of persuasion, or even adversarial. Presenting
a proof for students means entering a pedagogical dialogue, a subtype of the
information-seeking dialogue. Aberdein (2007, p. 67) ﬁlls out a whole table of
mathematical versions of the various dialogue types, reﬂecting on different
ways to interpret proofs and their purposes. Some of these are at odds with
rigorous conceptions of proofs, such as Zeilberger’s (1993) suggestion to accept
“semi-rigorous” results up to a certain degree of certainty, with a price tag for
how much it would cost (ﬁnancially or computationally) to be sure, which
Aberdein interprets as viewing proofs as negotiation (weighing up how sure
we need to be to accept a mathematical statement) or deliberation (on how to
allocate ﬁnite resources for solving problems).
The question that remains is: what does Walton’s model mean for rigorous
mathematical proofs? Different argumentative contexts are evaluated differently,
Table 1 Six main argument types, from Walton and Krabbe (1995, p. 80).
Dialogue type
Initial situation
Dialogue goal
Persuasion
Conﬂicting point of
view
Resolution of conﬂict
Negotiation
Conﬂict of interest
Making a deal
Inquiry
General ignorance
Growth of knowledge
Deliberation
Need for action
Reach a decision
Information-
seeking
Personal ignorance
Spreading knowledge
Eristic (quarrel)
Antagonism
Accommodation
relationship
34
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

so if multiple different kinds of dialogues can be associated with proofs, then the
standards of rigour may also vary. Perhaps some of the dialogues are simply not
good models for mathematical rigour, such as Zeilberger’s explicit move away
from rigour. There seems to be scope to ﬁll out in further detail how different
dialogue types might make different kinds of gaps in proofs acceptable or not, as
Aberdein (2013) does, thus giving a more detailed model of rigorous proofs as
using different kinds of argumentative moves. In particular, recognising that
proofs aiming at pedagogy have different requirements on rigour from those of
peer review, or writing for one’s mathematical colleagues, is an important feature
of these argumentation models of proofs.
4.3 Proofs and Refutations
One of the most inﬂuential works on the development of the philosophy of
mathematical practice is Imre Lakatos’s (1976) Proofs and Refutations. Lakatos
presents a classroom dialogue about various proofs of “Euler’s conjecture” for
polyhedra, which links the vertices (V), edges (E), and faces (F) by the formula
V −E + F = 2. The dialogue is also a “rational reconstruction” of the historical
development of the proof attempts, counterexamples, arguments, and concepts
relating to this conjecture, where the various students are used as representa-
tives of various historical positions and reactions. Sometimes this is in a very
direct sense, with footnotes to the text indicating that the words of the students
are quotes from various mathematicians, such as Euler, Poincaré, Cauchy, Abel,
Kepler, and many more.
The dialogue begins with a proposed proof of the Euler conjecture that
involves removing a face from the polyhedron and using the resulting hole to
stretch and ﬂatten it out. Since one face is gone, the remaining ﬂattened network
should satisfy V −E + F = 1. Next one “triangulates” the network to turn all the
faces into triangles by connecting vertices with additional edges. Each extra
edge also creates an extra face, so leaves the totals in the Euler formula
unaffected. The next step is to remove other faces one at a time, where any
option once again leaves the formula unaffected, until just one triangle remains,
which satisﬁes the Euler formula. By tracking the numbers of faces, edges, and
vertices throughout this procedure, the idea is that one can conclude that the
Euler formula must hold for the network that we started with.
This procedure and the proof seemingly work well enough for simple, convex
polyhedra such as the ﬁve Platonic solids (tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, dodeca-
hedron, and icosahedron), cuboids, pyramids, or icosidodecahedra. However,
things are not so straightforward. The students quickly start to ﬁnd potential
counterexamples to both the main conjecture (“global counterexamples”) and to
35
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

individual proof steps (“local counterexamples”). For instance, a cylinder or
a picture frame (see Figure 8) both act as global counterexamples to the conjec-
ture. Furthermore, a cylinder is a local counterexample to the triangulations step
of the proof, while the picture frame is a local counterexample to the ﬁrst step of
removing a face and ﬂattening the polyhedron to a network, which can’t be done.
The interesting question that follows is: what to do with these counterexam-
ples? One could simply give up on the proof altogether, but that seems to
discard some promising mathematics involved in the procedure that does work
for plenty of examples. One can instead question whether these counterexam-
ples really count as polyhedra at all, maybe excluding them as “monsters” that
don’t need to be dealt with once we have a better deﬁnition. After all, the
cylinder has a curved face and circular edges; maybe these should exclude it
from being a polyhedron. One could try to discover the appropriate domain for
which the proof does work: could it be that the proof is just about convex
polyhedra?
A particularly important counterexample is the star-polyhedron (see
Figure 8). This is initially proposed as a counterexample made up of 12
interlocking “star-pentagons” as faces, with 12 vertices (only the tips) and 30
edges, whereby V −E + F = −6. However, an alternative way of seeing it would
be as being made up of 60 triangular faces, and on this interpretation it does
satisfy the Euler formula after all. The proof attempt thus forces the students to
confront their deﬁnitions of polyhedron, face, vertex, and edge. The develop-
ments of these deﬁnitions are therefore related to one another, but also depend
on the context of the Euler conjecture and the attempted proof. For instance, one
might be inclined to prefer the triangle-faces interpretation because it allows for
Figure 8 Lakatos’s picture frame (Lakatos 1976, p. 19) and Kepler’s star-
polyhedron (Lakatos 1976, p. 17). © Cambridge University Press.
36
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the proof procedure to be coherently carried out, whereas the star-pentagon
interpretation does not.
The crucial insight by Lakatos is that working with proposed proofs and
potential counterexamples drives the development of mathematical con-
cepts by forcing mathematicians to address questions about what those
concepts are, how they are used, and what they are used for. Lakatos’s
project involves developing a dialectical philosophy of mathematics.36
According to Larvor (2001), a dialectical philosophy of mathematics has
a number of characteristic features. First of all, it focuses on processes rather
than products, which means that that the relevant questions about proof are
not about truth or validity, but instead about how the proof came about, or
what roles it plays in further mathematical activity. Second, the dialectical
model will focus on the development of concepts, as opposed to the infer-
ential moves between propositions which are the standard subject of formal
logic. So, on the dialectical model, concepts are changed and reﬁned via
mathematical activity.37 Third, these developments are rational within
mathematics itself, which Larvor (2001, p. 215) calls the “inside-
phenomenological stance”. Simply put: mathematical developments (such
as of concepts, ideas, or theories) happen for good mathematical reasons, as
judged from within mathematics.
In combination, these features of a dialectical model of proofs mean that the
dialectical notion of rigour will come apart from the formal notion of rigour that
we saw in Section 3. The dialectical model of rigour will be about the process of
mathematics, and the rational development of concepts that goes along with it.
One way to put this is to contrast this dynamical concept of rigour with a more
standard, static concept of rigour, as Kneebone does: “In other words for the
purposes of philosophy we have to conceive of rigour in dynamical not in
statical terms – as the rigour of a process which yields knowledge, not of
a system of propositions which summarize a particular state of knowledge”
(Kneebone 1957, p. 223).
However, having this pair of concepts of rigour leads to a problem. One of the
main purposes of rigorous proofs is to establish theorems, but if the concepts
being used in a proof can change, then it is also possible for the proof to rely on
36 The work of Lakatos is commonly seen as an unholy marriage of the work of Hegel (1807) and
Popper (1959, 1963), with the dialectical parts coming from the former. An earlier, and
overlooked, proposal to develop a dialectical philosophy of mathematics in the spirit of Hegel
was made by Kneebone (1957) but this lacks the crucial account of just how mathematics is
dialectical that Lakatos provides.
37 The recent literature on conceptual engineering is precisely about how concepts can be revised
or replaced. I have investigated conceptual engineering in the case of mathematics, and in
relation to Lakatos, in earlier work (Tanswell 2018).
37
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a false equivocation, using properties of one version of the concept at one point
in the proof, and properties of another variation on the concept at some other
point. If this were the case, then the proof is fallacious and fails at its goal of
establishing theorems and providing mathematical knowledge.
Recent literature has provided various possible solutions to this puzzle.38 One
option is to try to identify some subset of concepts that will not be open to change,
so that proofs using only those concepts can be deductively rigorous. Vecht
(2023) argues that in mathematics algebraic concepts are fully ﬁxed, where
algebraic deﬁnitions are ones that do not assert the existence of any objects, but
instead say that any structure satisfying the deﬁnition counts. For example, group
and natural number have algebraic deﬁnitions, so proofs about these can be
rigorous in the deductive sense. Another option is to separate out the contexts
where concepts are ﬁxed and rigid from those where they are ﬂexible. Schlimm
(2012) takes this pluralistic approach, suggesting that some parts of mathematics
and its history are best understood using a Lakatosian dialectical model, while
others are better modelled using ﬁxed, unchanging concepts. Presumably, it is
proofs in the latter contexts that are deductively rigorous, but proofs outside of
that context may still be informative and mathematical in other ways. Another
option is to see the conceptual ﬂexibility as a feature of informal, unrigorous
mathematics that is removed by rigorisation or formalisation. This approach is
considered by both Shapiro and Roberts (2021) and Zayton (2022) and also ﬁts
with the second chapter of Proofs and Refutations itself. After one has formalised
away the conceptual ﬂexibility, though, new questions arise about the adequacy
and faithfulness of the formalisation.
Lakatos’s own perspective seems to be that there is no hope of sanitised
mathematics, free from the dialectical change of concepts:
Delta: Rationality, after all, depends on inelastic, exact, concepts!
Kappa: But there are no such concepts! Why not accept that our ability to
specify what we mean is nil, therefore our ability to prove is nil? If you want
mathematics to be meaningful, you must resign of certainty. You cannot have
both. Gibberish is safe from refutations, meaningful propositions are refutable
by concept-stretching. (Lakatos 1976, p. 102)39
I have likewise argued that there are no safe havens for mathematical
concepts where mathematicians have full control over their meanings
38 This literature combines the Lakatosian point with the question of whether mathematical concepts
are open-textured, a term from Friedrich Waismann (1968), roughly meaning that there will always
be possible cases for which it is unsettled whether they fall under the concept or not.
39 The italics here, from the original, are used to indicate that the dialogue is at this point pretty
heated.
38
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(Tanswell 2018). Nonetheless, I believe the equivocation threat to proofs
posed by changing concepts is rather overblown. For changing concepts to
cause a fallacy of equivocation within a proof requires that the concepts
change from one usage to the next within that very proof and in a way relevant
to the reasoning in the proof. The simple solution is that the dialectical change
of concepts does not happen so quickly, nor at this level of detail. Concepts
don’t change within proofs, precisely because this would lead to a failure of
deductive rigour, but proofs as a whole do drive the dialectical development of
concepts. Actually, the level of individual proofs is likely still too ﬁne-grained
for the dialectical model; instead, mathematical communities together are
negotiating, developing, reﬁning, and replacing the concepts that are being
used in their practices. But this also means that if new changes in a concept
invalidate some previously accepted proof, then it is down to the mathematical
community to be aware of that and either disambiguate the concepts, update
the proof, or rein in the concepts. Given a sufﬁciently large community, with
reasonable levels of expertise and shared standards, this task of self-checking
on changing concepts doesn’t need to be particularly demanding, and certainly
doesn’t pose a mortal danger to mathematical rigour, be it deductive or
dialectical.
4.4 The Dialogical Model of Proofs
The ﬁnal model we will examine in this section is Catarina Dutilh Novaes’s
(2021) dialogical model of proof. Dutilh Novaes’s central claim is that deduc-
tion is an essentially dialogical notion. Therefore, deductive mathematical
proofs are also essentially dialogical. This model has broad application, as
both a historical claim about the genealogy of the concept of deduction (from
Ancient Greece through the Middle Ages and Modern period to our current
understanding), a model of both normative and descriptive aspects of human
reasoning and cognition, and to explain collective reasoning in groups. Finally,
it provides a powerful model of mathematical proofs, both as idealised, abstract
pieces of reasoning and as real-world products in practice.
The dialogical model of deduction is based on the idea that a piece of
deductive reasoning can best be understood as a dialogue between two char-
acters: Prover and Sceptic. The goal of Prover is to show some claim that is to
be proved follows from other claims, ﬁrst by asking Sceptic to grant various
premises, then by putting forward further statements that purportedly follow
deductively from previously accepted ones. The goal of Sceptic is to block the
conclusion from being established, but not at all costs. Sceptic’s moves
provide counterexamples to Prover’s moves when they do not properly follow,
39
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

or ask for extra clariﬁcation and “why?” questions of steps that are not
sufﬁciently clear or persuasive.
One of Dutilh Novaes’s insights is that these dialogues are semi-cooperative,
rather than purely adversarial. At one level, the goals of Prover and Sceptic are
incompatible because either the proof is successful or it fails. At another level,
though, their shared goal is to ensure that all and only good proofs are accepted.
Prover must do their best at getting good proofs accepted, while making them
perspicuous and explanatory, and Sceptic must do their best to block bad proofs.
Neither of them is looking to win at all costs, meaning Sceptic does not
stubbornly refuse to accept premises or endlessly ask for further clariﬁcation
just for the sake of winning, nor does Prover want to win deceptively by
presenting persuasive but fallacious inferences. This means that Prover also
wants the steps they propose to be convincing and explanatory, and Sceptic
helps to make sure a proof is perspicuous and clear.
This model can be used at a very basic level to explain logical
deduction. For example, Sceptic should only grant the conjunction
A ∧B
ð
Þ when they have previously granted both A and B, and grant A→B
ð
Þ if
it has been shown that assuming A gets to B through valid inferences. The model
can also be used for higher-level mathematical proofs, by stipulating that
Sceptic will be convinced by standard mathematical inferences (namely, those
that are familiar and acceptable to both Prover and Sceptic) without demanding
full logical detail.
Dutilh Novaes argues that the Prover–Sceptic dialogical model of deduc-
tion explains three core features of deductive arguments. First of all, the
property of necessary truth preservation is explained in game-theoretic
terms of strategy: if Prover only makes necessarily truth-preserving moves,
then there can be no counterexamples, so Sceptic cannot block the proof in this
way. Second, the property that each step should be clear and convincing, is
explained by the cooperative nature of the dialogues, because Prover wants to
convince Sceptic, not just win the game. Finally, the property of belief
bracketing, that deduction should be about the connection between premises
and conclusion regardless of whether one believes them, ﬂows naturally from
the dialogical game of proposing and granting premises, where the whole
point is to reason about the granted premises of one’s interlocutor without
having to believe them oneself.
One immediate objection is that modern proofs are mostly not dialogues,
since they do not have two participants at all. Maybe there are some exceptions,
like in a seminar or classroom, but most proofs are written as if by a single
author, even when the proofs are collaborative. Dutilh Novaes’s reply to this is
that modern proofs have internalised the role of the Sceptic:
40
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Skeptic becomes an implicit interlocutor, as it were, given that his main roles
in Prover–Skeptic dialogues become constitutive of the deductive method as
such. We no longer hear the voice of Skeptic because, if all goes well and the
proof is correctly formulated according to the precepts of the deductive
method, there is no need for Skeptic to interject. (Dutilh Novaes 2021, p. 70)
The idea is that the way that proofs are written does not need to be explicitly
dialogical, because the Prover–Sceptic dialogue is already implicit in how
proofs are structured and presented.
Next, let us consider what the dialogical model can tell us about rigorous
proofs. A rigorous proof comes about when Prover wins, but Sceptic has carried
out their role extremely thoroughly. No step has counterexamples that Sceptic
missed, so there are no errors in the proof. There are also no gaps in the proof
because Sceptic would’ve asked for further clariﬁcation. Unlike in the standard
view, this doesn’t mean a rigorous proof must be formal. The standards for what
counts as a gap – and therefore also the “granularity” of the proof – can vary by
context. This would ﬁt well with empirical ﬁndings such as those of Davies et al.
(2021), who interviewed mathematicians about how they would evaluate vari-
ous proofs across different contexts. They found that the context of the author
makes a substantial difference: mathematicians are far more accepting of gaps
in proofs if these are produced by other mathematicians in lectures or textbooks.
Indeed, they spoke of these positively as inviting students to ask questions and
think for themselves about why the “missing” steps work. Furthermore, even in
evaluating students’ work, mathematicians grade differently in the context of
homework, class quizzes, or ﬁnal exams. They also explicitly said that the level
of rigour they demand from their students is connected to the level of the class
they are teaching. For instance, one participant said:
There are times when you give them examples in class that have a certain
level of rigor, but as time goes on and as the students become more mature in
their own abilities to reason and argue . . . you can make statements and
assumptions that they have an obligation to sit down and ﬁgure out what the
details are or know what the implied statements are within that. (Davies et al.
2021, p. 9)
A formal proof might be the limit case of a pedantic Sceptic demanding full detail,
but on the dialogical model the Sceptic is also cooperative with the Prover, so this
limit case is not always the ideal. Instead, it is often in the cooperative interests of
the Prover and Sceptic to rigorously establish that the theorem holds with as few
steps as possible, to not waste their time ﬁlling out inferences that are obvious to
them both. Likewise, as the quote suggests, the optimum level of detail for rigour
might vary substantially by context.
41
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In the closing chapter of her book, Dutilh Novaes (2021, ch. 11) looks at three
examples of the dialogical model as applied to actual mathematical practice.
Without going into the details of her examples, the main point is that the social
aspects of proof-checking in practice can be modelled dialogically. In particular,
seemingly surprising claims like Gödel’s incompleteness theorems, Edward
Nelson’s failed proof of the inconsistency of Peano Arithmetic, and Shinichi
Mochizuki’s purported proof of the abc conjecture stimulate the mathematical
community into scrutinising the claims.40 The author of the proof acts as Prover
while the members of the community examining the proof act as Sceptic.
Depending on how the claim is presented, they can sometimes quickly reach
a consensus on the correctness of a proof, such as happened in the ﬁrst two
examples. However, at other times, when a proposed proof is less clear, the
dialogue between Prover and Sceptic can get trickier, as in the third example,
which at the time of writing is still unsettled.41
4.5 Conclusion
In this section, we have seen a family of models of rigorous proofs based on
argumentation and dialogue, including Toulmin and Walton’s argumentation
models applied to mathematics, Lakatos’s dialectical model of mathematics,
and Dutilh Novaes’s dialogical model of proof.
One strength of this family of models is that they are more descriptively
adequate than the standard view for mathematical practice. By emphasising the
role of the mathematicians as interlocutors in a dialogue or argument, the model
begins to account for important features of rigour in practice. For example, these
models have a clear story about why rigour varies by context; why the rigour of
a proof in a classroom, seminar, textbook, journal article, or scribbled on
a napkin is evaluated differently. Similarly, the argumentation model can
explain why there can be disagreement about rigour or validity or proofs,
since different arguers might not agree on the operative proof standards in the
current context.
A major beneﬁt of these models is also that they can account for mathemat-
ical rigour while also giving a convincing overarching story about the history
and development of mathematical concepts. The dialectical model of mathem-
atics sees concepts as developed through mathematical activities, including
40 Crucially, these claims are by well-known and respected mathematicians. For outsiders, it can be
much harder to get the community to engage with your work at all (see Rittberg 2023).
41 For a detailed account of the unfolding story of Mochizuki’s purported proof so far, see Aberdein
(2023). I also wrote about this case from a virtue-theoretic perspective (Tanswell 2016b, ch. 5.8).
Even calling this “unsettled” is not neutral, as different groups have different attitudes to the
proof’s status.
42
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proving, while the dialogical model offers the view that deduction itself
emerged from dialogical roots. While the standard view has to jump through
hoops to explain how proofs could be said to have been rigorous prior to the
invention of modern logic, the models we have seen here explain this directly.
One thing that is not settled by the argumentation or dialogical models is the
nature of diagrammatic proofs. Argumentation and dialogue are – at least
primarily – linguistic, and so the models do not obviously apply to proofs that
are entirely pictorial, or hybrids of picture and prose. It is possible that one could
modify a mathematical argumentation model to take non-propositional prem-
ises, or the Prover–Sceptic model to include diagrammatic moves, but this is yet
to be done.
Overall, the family of models we have seen here is extremely good at
including some aspects of the social context of mathematics without thereby
giving up on rigour as an ideal for proofs.
5 The Recipe Model of Proofs
5.1 Introduction
The next model we turn to is the recipe model of proofs, and it’s one I have
developed in my own work (Tanswell 2016b, ch. 4, in press) and with collabor-
ators Keith Weber (Weber & Tanswell 2022) and Matthew Inglis (Tanswell &
Inglis 2023), building on work by Larvor (2012). The idea is to understand
proofs via an analogy to cooking recipes: that proofs provide a set of instruc-
tions for carrying out a particular kind of mathematical activity. The recipe
model invites a switch of perspective, whereby the proofs as written artefacts
become secondary to the activity and the sequence of actions that they instruct
the reader to carry out. Just like a recipe is a way of communicating and
recording practical knowledge of how to prepare something to eat, a proof is
a way of recording and communicating practical knowledge of how to carry out
some piece of mathematical reasoning. A proof also has ingredients, in the form
of the prerequisite assumptions and deﬁnitions, which list which concepts, facts,
and mathematical objects can be called upon in the course of the proof. This
could be given a stronger constructivist reading, where the recipe has to be for
constructing some mathematical object, but the model does not assume this in
general, nor is it limited to constructive proofs.
There are three primary motivations for the recipe model. First, the model
makes sense of a number of features of how proofs are written and presented,
such as how the language of written proofs includes explicit instructions, and
how diagrams can succeed as proofs. Second, the emphasis on mathematical
activity allows for a different and broader analysis of the place of rigorous
43
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

proofs in mathematical practice. Third, the recipe model provides a clear answer
to the epistemic question of how we gain knowledge from mathematical proofs.
In this section, we will survey all of these facets of the recipe model of proofs.
5.2 Imperatives and Instructions
Let us begin with the language of mathematical proofs. There is a huge range of
proof styles and presentations across mathematical cultures and the history of
mathematics, and a full survey would ﬁll multiple volumes. I will here consider
the linguistic patterns used in contemporary, English mathematics.42 The pro-
posal is that the way in which proofs are typically written by mathematicians
tells us what proofs and rigour are in contemporary mathematical practice. In
particular, many theorists characterise a proof as being a logically structured
sequence of assertions, beginning with accepted premises and proceeding by
established inference rules to a conclusion. However, in practice this is often not
how proofs are written, as proofs also contain imperative sentences to provide
instructions for reasoning. A sentence is in the imperative mood when it forms
a command or instructions, such as “Watch out!”, “Preheat the oven to 200
degrees”, or “Compose the two bijections”.
Matthew Inglis and I have recently carried out a corpus linguistics study of
mathematical proof texts (Tanswell & Inglis 2023) to examine the frequency
with which proofs contain imperatives. By looking at the word distributions in
6,988 preprint research papers from the ArXiv (an online repository that many
mathematicians use to circulate their work prior to publication), we found that
proofs in research mathematics do frequently contain imperatives. The most
common imperatives used the verbs `let’, `consider’, `assume’, `denote’, `note’,
`deﬁne’, `suppose’, `recall’, `write’, `take’, `choose’, `ﬁx’, and `observe’ in that
order of prevalence. Furthermore, there was a lot of diversity in the verbs that
could be used across different areas of mathematics, suggesting that the writing
of mathematical proofs is ﬂexible in allowing instructions to be used. We
interpreted these results as showing that imperative sentences were both com-
mon and diverse in mathematical proofs. Similarly, Weber (2023) carried out an
analysis of all of the proofs in an introductory set theory textbook by Kunen
42 For a discussion of some of the ethical problems of the dominance of English in mathematics, see
Tanswell and Rittberg (2020). In particular, we discuss the way that learning the language of
academic English used in mathematics presents an extra challenge in learning mathematics for
students who don’t have English as their ﬁrst language or who speak dialects. These traits and
language challenges map on to existing patterns of power and dominance, and because mathem-
atics is also used to rank attainment and thereby affects life opportunities, the dominance of the
English language also perpetuates existing power structures. Another concern about English as
lingua franca in science is raised by Vučković and Sikimić (2023), who argue that it leads to
linguistic injustice and the loss of diverse ideas.
44
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(1980), ﬁnding that 95 per cent of the substantial proofs contained one or more
instructions. He also found a similar pattern of a core of 13 instructions being
most common, making up 88 per cent of instructions, though not quite the same
ones.43 Furthermore, he found the same pattern of diverse instructions, with 54
different instructions appearing in the textbook.
The recipe model proposes to take this instructional language in proofs
seriously, rather than paraphrase or idealise it away (as would be the strategy
for the standard view discussed in Section 3). By doing so, this approach can
start to analyse how instructions function in proofs. Speciﬁcally, different
instructions seem to serve different kinds of purposes in a proof, and
a detailed understanding of proofs would involve identifying these purposes
and analysing how they are achieved while maintaining rigour.
One way to divide the instructions used in proofs was proposed by Brian
Rotman (1988) who distinguished between “inclusive” and “exclusive” impera-
tives. His idea is that the function of “inclusive imperatives” is to establish
a shared domain of meanings, referents, conventions, and nomenclature, usu-
ally with the instructions “Let . . .”, “Suppose . . .”, “Fix . . .”, “Assume . . .”, and
the like. The “exclusive imperatives” then operate within that domain to ask the
reader to carry out particular actions, like “Differentiate the function f”.
Weber (2023) builds on Rotman’s distinction with three additional categor-
ies. He notes that Rotman’s exclusive instructions operate on mathematical
objects, instructing the reader to manipulate or use them in some way. Weber
thus introduces the category of “inference instructions”, which act instead on
assertions, such as instructing the reader to apply some previously established
fact, or show that something is true by constructing a sub-proof. For example,
“Apply Theorem 2.15 . . .” would be an inference instruction. The other two
categories Weber proposes are “observational instructions”, which instruct the
reader to notice a particular fact (e.g., “Observe that . . .”, “Note that . . .”,
“Recall that . . .”), and “reference instructions”, used to direct readers to another
part of the text using “See [reference]”.
These different categories of instructions in proof are clearly relevant to how
proofs function, how they are understood, and how they can be rigorous. For
example, the existence of the category of observational instructions implies that
informal proofs may make use of salience, that is, bringing certain facts to the
readers’ attention in order to use them as part of the reasoning. These features of
43 ‘Denote’, ‘recall’, ‘write’, and ‘take’ were replaced by ‘see’, ‘apply’, ‘pick’, and ‘use’. This can
largely be explained by the textbook being by one particular author, so reﬂecting his own stylistic
preferences. For example, ‘recall’ and ‘see’ will often be interchangeable, as will ‘take’ and
‘use’. Academic papers and textbooks have somewhat different purposes and target audiences,
which could also explain slight differences in the writing.
45
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

attention and salience may then be directly relevant to how the reader under-
stands the proof. Furthermore, the distinction between instructions that act on
mathematical objects and those that act on mathematical propositions suggests
different kinds of activities are taking place in carrying out the reasoning.
Consequently, we would also expect that the different instructions may be
rigorous (or not, as the case may be) in different ways. We will return to the
question of rigour in Section 5.6.
5.3 Diagrams and Instructions
Instructions are not limited to written language. Human communication comes
in many forms, and instructions can be given and understood in many ways.
One thing the recipe model can do well is account for otherwise puzzling
features of diagrams in proofs, with the idea that some features of diagrams
are acting as instructions.44
A common challenge in dealing with diagrams in proofs is that more trad-
itional views of proofs as sequences of assertions would require that the
diagrammatic elements should be convertible into a sequence of propositions,
but how this conversion should work is unclear. With the recipe model of
proofs, one can dismiss this requirement as overly narrow. Instead, proofs are
about providing directions to engage in a piece of mathematical reasoning, and
diagrams can provide those instructions directly. In particular, according to the
recipe model, we can understand various explicit and presentational features of
diagrams as giving instructions.45
For example, consider the diagrammatic proof of Pythagoras’s Theorem
(Figure 9). Here, the arrows are used explicitly to instruct us to scale up the
initial triangle by the three factors, and to rotate and combine them into two
larger triangles.46 My analysis of this proof would be that it instructs us how to
transform the initial triangle to build up the two new triangles, then to see that
they are mirror images of one another, so will have the same length hypotenuse.
No formal or linguistic counterpart is needed.
For a more implicit set of instructions, consider this proof that the sum of odd
positive integers add up to a square (Figure 10).
44 A recent study by Blåsjö (2022) argues that ancient Greek geometry was primarily about
constructing things. His operationalism for the ancient Greeks is very similar in spirit to the
recipe model.
45 In other work (Tanswell 2017, in press), I compare mathematical diagrams to familiar cases of
using diagrams to give instructions such as for LEGO® sets and IKEA furniture. On my
understanding, these diagrams all work fundamentally in the same ways.
46 The volumes by Nelsen (1993, 2000, 2015) fall into the category of “recreational” mathematics,
so being slightly cryptic is part of the fun.
46
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Figure 10 gives the base case and the ﬁrst eight instances, but the claim is
general for any odd number. Implicitly, the proof is by induction, and the
diagram not only gives the base case, but shows the reader how an extra
“layer” gets added to move from one case to the next, which is the inductive
step. Reﬂecting on the procedure makes it obvious to the reader how the
inductive step generalises for any n. My interpretation of how this proof
works, then, is as a picture that ﬁrst demonstrates the base case and then acts
as a recipe for moving from one step to the next. It takes advantage of the ability
Figure 9 Pythagoras’s Theorem adapted by Nelsen from an idea by Frank Burk
(see Nelsen 2000, p. 7). Proof Without Words II © 2000 held by the American
Mathematical Society.
Figure 10 Proof of the sum of odd positive integers credited to Nicomachus of
Gerasa (see Nelsen 1993, p. 71; Sangwin 2023; Sangwin & Tanswell 2023).
47
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of the readers to understand the procedure of adding the extra layers in order to
see how it will hold for any n.
Finally, consider the more advanced example from research-level mathemat-
ics explained by De Toffoli & Giardino (2015), who detail several proofs in
low-dimensional topology, and speciﬁcally one by Rolfsen (1976). The proof
involves a series of instructions for moving between a sequence of diagrams.
They summarise that: “We have to follow the instructions given in the text in
order to identify the various transitions connecting the pictures. For example, to
move from the fourth to the last picture, as the knife suggests, we cut the surface
open and lay it ﬂat on the plane” (De Toffoli & Giardino 2015, p. 324).
(Figure 11).
These instructions explain various manipulations that are to be carried out
between the diagrams, such as “drilling holes”, “inﬂating”, “sewing” pieces
together, “cutting a surface open”, and “ﬂattening out”. Indeed, one of the
pictures contains a picture of a knife to instruct the reader to make a cut in the
right place.
De Toffoli and Giardino argue that this proof is a hybrid of text and diagram
where neither part is dispensable: “Without the pictures, it would be impossible
to understand the text; conversely, without the text, it would be very hard to
correctly interpret the pictures: neither one is complete without the other. The
argument requires both for its cogency” (De Toffoli & Giardino 2015, p. 326).
Figure 11 Using a knife to indicate proof actions (Rolfsen 1976, pp. 249–50; see
De Toffoli & Giardino 2015, p. 325). © Dale Rolfsen 1976.
Note: my thanks to Professor Rolfsen for permission to reproduce this image here.
48
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

As such, this example shows a recipe proof that requires both written
instructions and the diagrammatic elements to interpret them. De Toffoli and
Giardino discuss various features of this proof, such as the heterogeneous set of
permissible actions, the way that the visual representations are used to trigger
the “manipulative imagination”, which combines the reader’s cognitive and
visual abilities to allow them to understand what actions can be rigorously
carried out, and what their effect would be on the represented items.47 However,
for the purposes of the recipe model of proof, the simpler point is that this model
is the most direct and faithful way to understand such a proof, which is clearly
using instructions to guide a reader through a complicated and heterogeneous
piece of reasoning.
5.4 Epistemology of Proofs
Let us turn now to the epistemology of proofs because this is another place
where the recipe model offers a new proposal. Recall from Section 2.1 that one
of the core reasons for being interested in rigorous proofs is their link to
mathematical knowledge. The orthodox view is that one gains a priori mathem-
atical knowledge from rigorous mathematical proofs. The very simplest picture
of this would be that one starts by knowing the premises (or axioms) of a proof,
and then carries out a priori-preserving inferences, whereby one derives further
a priori knowledge of the theorem that has been proved.
The orthodox picture is highly idealised and immediate difﬁculties arise
when one tries to apply it at a more real-world level. For one thing, the story
is one of gaining mathematical knowledge, but a real mathematician might
forget things again, over time. With the inherent complexity of mathematical
arguments, it is not uncommon for a mathematician to forget the exact proof of
some theorem, but also to be able to readily reconstruct it based on the main
idea, or even to be able to reinvent it entirely, should the need arise. So, when
exactly is a theorem still known?
Löwe and Müller (2008) address this question by looking through many
options for making precise the conditions for having mathematical knowledge.
They demonstrate that many of the intuitive options fail to accurately ascribe
knowledge in even basic cases. For example, one proposal, that you have
mathematical knowledge of a theorem when you have a proof available, falls
47 In response to criticism by Tatton-Brown (2021), De Toffoli (2021b) elaborates on how these
proofs can be considered rigorous even by the standard view, but maintains that the real object of
investigation in De Toffoli and Giardino’s (2015) study was acceptability criteria (i.e., the
descriptive part of when mathematicians will actually accept a proof), which their study shows
may depend on local criteria without, she argues, thereby implying that rigour is merely local or
socially constructed.
49
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

down because “availability” is too broad: this option would say you could know
a theorem merely by loading up the ArXiv containing a paper that proves it, or
by stepping foot in the library. Another proposal would be that you have
mathematical knowledge of a theorem if you are in principle able to generate
a proof of it. Löwe and Müller point out that this would require further
specifying what “in principle”, “generate”, and “proof” mean. For example,
one could demand a formal proof, but then most mathematicians would be
unable to produce this unless the “in principle” were very permissive (recall the
hypothetical logician helper from Section 3.5), in which case it risks being too
permissive and ascribing knowledge that the mathematician doesn’t really
possess. Regardless of how one ﬁlls these out, a general worry with this
approach is that the modal component will always be too permissive, since
the theorems that a mathematician could in principle generate proofs for will
always outstrip those that they actually know. Löwe and Müller’s solution is to
argue that mathematical knowledge is context-dependent, since different con-
texts will prescribe different standards, and furthermore that it must invoke
some notion of mathematical skill.48 Their idea is that a mathematician’s skills
will be the deciding factor in whether a mathematician possesses some math-
ematical knowledge. For example, in a permissive context, knowing a proof
idea might already be sufﬁcient for knowledge, in which case a mathematician
who is not an expert in that particular area can have sufﬁcient skills to have
mathematical knowledge. However, in a more demanding context, it may be
that only the mathematical expert of some area, who has the skills necessary
to set out the exact details of a proof, would count as knowing the proof.
Nonetheless, Löwe and Müller’s (2008) proposal still seems open to the
modal objection that a mathematician will often have the skills to prove more
things than they actually know. One way out of this tangle is to expand our
understanding of what kinds of knowledge proofs are important for. Rav (1999)
famously argues that the substantial part of mathematical knowledge is not of
the theorems that are proved, but of the proofs themselves:
Proofs rather than the statement-form of theorems are the bearers of math-
ematical knowledge. Theorems are in a sense just tags, labels for proofs,
summaries of information, headlines of news, editorial devices. The whole
arsenal of mathematical methodologies, concepts, strategies and techniques
48 They expand on this in a follow up paper (Löwe & Müller 2010), where they argue that the
relevant skills are professional mathematical skills; those necessary for being a professional
mathematician. They point out that some of these necessary skills may be peripheral (such as
skill at booking trains to conferences), but that there will be no clear dividing line that forms an
“epistemic core” of just those strictly necessary skills.
50
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

for solving problems, the establishment of interconnections between theories,
the systematisation of results – the entire mathematical know-how is embed-
ded in proofs. (Rav 1999, p. 20)
The point is that the focus on conditions for possessing a piece of propositional
knowledge of some theorem statement is too narrow. Proofs provide knowledge
of how something is proved, as well as a range of other types of knowledge.
Here we can draw on the distinction introduced by Ryle (1946) between
knowledge-that and knowledge-how. Knowledge-that is propositional know-
ledge: knowledge that some fact is true. Knowledge-how is practical know-
ledge: knowledge of how to do some action or activity. We can thus interpret
Rav’s proposal to include the idea that the knowledge-how in proofs is more
important in mathematics than the knowledge-that of theorem statements.49
Using this distinction, a new proposal on mathematical knowledge can be put
forward: that you know that a theorem is true when you know how to prove it.
This is extremely close to Löwe and Müller’s (2008, 2010) skill-based proposal,
but does not suffer the same modal problem of including all the things they
would hypothetically be able to prove. Indeed, knowledge-how is closely
connected to skills, abilities, competences, and capacities that agents possess
(see Hornsby 2012).
For this proposal to offer a useful insight into mathematical knowledge, it
needs to give more detail about what mathematical knowledge-how is. This is
a question the recipe model can help to answer. With the focus on proofs as
recipes for certain kinds of mathematical activities, there is an immediate link to
knowing how to carry out those activities. Furthermore, the recipe model also
leads us to consider the kinds of actions that are undertaken, so in turn tells us
the kind of actions that the mathematician needs to know how to do. We will
dive deeper into this question in the next section.
5.5 What Kind of Actions?
An important question for the recipe model of proofs is: what kind of actions
does proving involve? If a proof is merely a vehicle by which to record and
communicate the knowledge of how to go about enacting some piece of
mathematical reasoning, then we want to know about those actions and get
a better understanding of what they are. In this section I will look at some of the
49 For a more detailed dive into mathematical know-how, see Tanswell (2016b, ch. 4). The
connection between mathematics and Ryle’s knowledge-how was already drawn by Löwe and
Müller (2010). From a different direction, Rodin’s (2014) mathematical arguments also respond
to this distinction between knowledge-how and knowledge-that.
51
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

existing proposals: that they are speech acts, inferential actions, or epistemic
actions.
Rufﬁno, San Mauro, and Venturi (2021) argue that mathematical texts
involve speech acts, in the tradition of Austin (1962). Even stronger, they
argue that the pragmatics of the different speech acts are an essential part of
mathematics. For example, to understand the difference between content tagged
as ‘Theorem’, ‘Lemma’, ‘Proposition’, ‘Fact’, ‘Observation’, ‘Corollary’, and
‘Claim’, they argue that we need to see them as combining two kinds of speech
acts. The ﬁrst is as an assertion of the content, while the second is a declarative
speech act that places the given assertion in a structural hierarchy of how the
author perceives their role in the theory. Similarly, mathematical deﬁnitions are
taken to be declarative speech acts, declaring that a certain term be used in
a particular way. Rufﬁno et al. do not consider the internal workings of a proof,
but it is clear that the same ideas would apply; that proofs contain some
assertions, some declaratives (for instance, the inclusive imperatives we have
discussed could be analysed in this way), and some directive imperatives (as we
have seen in Section 5.2).
However, while Rufﬁno et al. (2021) make a convincing case that the
pragmatics of speech acts are important to mathematics, it does not seem like
this will sufﬁce for all the actions a recipe proof can prescribe. For one thing, the
speech acts seem to be primarily on the part of the author of a proof, but a recipe
is directed at the reader. The author may assert some mathematical proposition,
but the reader is instead asked to assent to it, based on the justiﬁcation given in
the proof, and then to enact it.50
Larvor (2012) instead makes the case that informal proofs are best under-
stood as systems of inferential actions. He argues that speech acts are insufﬁ-
cient to capture the kind of actions that may be involved in a proof. His
argument is that the inferential actions involved in proving can act on
a diverse array of objects or no object at all:
Sometimes, we act inferentially on non-propositional representations of the
subject-matter such as diagrams, notational expressions, physical models,
mental models and computer models. Sometimes, we re-describe the subject-
matter in some insightful way, perhaps with the aid of an analogy or
metaphor. . . . Some inferential actions do not have objects; for example,
one might show that an unlikely act (such as a new move in gymnastics) is
possible by performing it. (Larvor 2012, p. 721)
50 Perhaps one could explain this using the perlocutionary force of a speech act, that is, its effect on
the audience. This is certainly an option worth exploring, but would not be sufﬁcient to explain
mathematical actions in proofs as solely a matter of speech acts.
52
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

These inferential actions thus include other possible action types beside speech
acts. For example, recall from Section 5.3 De Toffoli and Giardino’s (2015)
examples involving the manipulative imagination acting on diagrams in low-
dimensional topology. They explicitly draw on Larvor’s work to classify these
as instances of inferential actions, but it would not make sense to describe them
as speech acts.
However, inferential actions might still not enumerate all of the action types
that the recipe model of proof predicts the reader is instructed to carry out. As
we saw, not all of the actions in a proof are strictly speaking inferential.
Instructions can also tell the reader to construct new objects to work with,
adopt new notations, take note of salient facts, or refer to previously established
results.51
A way to broaden this is to consider the mathematical actions directed by
proofs to include epistemic actions. This proposal is evaluated by Gelfert
(2022) who draws on a classic distinction from philosophy of action between
pragmatic actions and epistemic actions by Kirsh and Maglio (1994).
Pragmatic actions are those that are immediately directed at some physical
goal, for example, moving my legs in order to climb up a hill. Epistemic
actions are those “physical actions that make mental computation easier,
faster, or more reliable – [they] are external actions that an agent performs
to change his or her own computational state” (Kirsh & Maglio 1994, p. 514).
Unlike pragmatic actions, these might not directly pursue a deﬁned goal, but
instead help with the cognitive work required to achieve it. One can consider
some of the examples we have already seen, such as using physical models or
manipulating written notations (Gelfert’s central example), as epistemic
actions involved in proving. Gelfert also points to the use of gestures in
presenting mathematics at the blackboard, such as that studied by
Greiffenhagen and Sharrock (2005), as involving epistemic actions. He
does, however, argue that the external, physical requirement on epistemic
actions makes it hard to recycle this distinction properly into mathematics. For
instance, manipulating diagrammatic representations cognitively (and so
internally) would not ﬁt exactly, despite seemingly taking on a similar enab-
ling role for mental computation. One option is to drop the external, physical
part of the deﬁnition of epistemic actions. Another option is to recognise
parallel classes of actions, either internal or external, which play an enabling
role within proofs. For example, it may be that introducing an additional
51 This may be a merely terminological worry about calling them “inferential”, since Larvor (2012)
seems to cast the net wide for which things might be included. On a more permissive reading, the
proposal to see proofs as systems of inferential actions is closely related to and directly inspired
the recipe model. This relationship is explored by Tanswell (in press).
53
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

construction, diagram, or piece of notation within a proof is not strictly
required for the argument, but does make understanding it signiﬁcantly easier,
thus enabling cognitive engagement.
Overall, it seems that the kinds of actions that a proof instructs its reader to
carry out can vary dramatically. While some actions may be internal, cognitive
ones, they might also be external and physically embodied. They must include
a diverse array of inferential actions, but also other mathematical actions, like
Rotman’s inclusive instructions for establishing a shared domain of concepts,
references, and notations. Mathematical actions might include speech acts of
varying sorts, but can also include non-linguistic activity, such as using visual
imagination to manipulate a cognitive representation.52 The result of this
section is therefore that there is no clear, uniform class of all mathematical
actions, but that there is a great deal of potential for identifying interesting and
important subclasses to analyse.
5.6 Rigorous Recipes
We can now consider what the recipe model will say about mathematical rigour.
What makes a proof, seen as giving a recipe for mathematical actions, rigorous?
The general answer is that following the recipe should lead you to establishing
the theorem, just as following a cooking recipe should lead you to making the
desired meal. Let us examine this in more detail.
First of all, a recipe comes with a list of ingredients. A proof will make use of
certain deﬁnitions and rely on previously established results. Then, according to
the recipe model, a rigorous proof will make such dependencies clear and
explicit, as needed. Even stronger, one could enforce the norm that all of the
previous results already need to be rigorously proved. However, I believe this
would be too strong because even if a previous result has not been rigorously
proved, so long as the dependency on the assumption is made explicit, the
current proof may still be rigorous. This might point to a distinction between
a rigorous proof and a rigorously established theorem, where the latter requires
that all of its dependencies are rigorous.
Second, the proof must not contain any errors or gaps. As with other models
of rigour, this should mean that no inferences are of a sort that can lead one into
falsehoods. However, unlike the various versions of the standard view, the
recipe model can only partially rely on formal logic to identify which inferences
are acceptable. Additionally, it needs to give an account of which instructions
are acceptable in a proof. Given the diverse array of actions that one can be told
to undertake, as we saw in Section 5.5 , this task may be formidable.
52 For example, recall Azzouni’s inference packages from Section 3.6.
54
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Nonetheless, formal logic does not have a monopoly on rigour. There are ways
to approach the task of understanding how the various mathematical actions
might be rigorously set out. For example, Larvor talks about inferential actions
as requiring systems of control:
[F]or every kind of inferential action, there must be a corresponding means of
control, to ensure rigour. Sometimes these controls are simple rules like “do
not divide by zero”. In other cases, these controls may be the fruit of
mathematical research (think of the seventeenth-century experiments in
exponentiation, or the nineteenth-century developments necessary to estab-
lish rules for handling inﬁnite series). (Larvor 2012, p. 728)
Developing a sense of what kind of actions are allowed under which circum-
stances, in the form of these controls, seems to be crucial in learning
mathematics.
Of course, we have seen that not all actions in a proof are strictly inferential so
assessing rigour will not always come down to checking for valid inferences.
Other kinds of actions might be assessed in different ways. Taking the presence
of instructions in proofs seriously, we can observe several ways that these might
go wrong in a proof, where one cannot follow an instruction.53 This might
happen when the recipe instructs you to do something impossible, for example,
“Multiply by the largest odd number.” Alternatively, it may be that an instruc-
tion doesn’t result in what it claims to – for example, “Factorise the equation to
get . . .”, where it does not factorise in the given way. Similarly, an instruction
may tell us to use something that cannot be used in that way. These errors may
well be subtle, such as when an instruction works for most cases but fails for
difﬁcult edge cases.
We can extend this thinking to gaps in a proof, since a rigorous proof should
not contain gaps. A gap might occur in a proof on the recipe model when one
can follow some instruction, but the proof doesn’t justify why. Alternatively,
there may be a gap if a proof leaves the reader unsure how to proceed, by failing
to string instructions together into a coherent whole.54
53 Here I am following a line of discussion from Weber and Tanswell (2022, sect. 5.1). There we
focus on the educational importance of teaching students about the instructions found in proofs.
Simply put: if we want students to be able to understand proofs as they are written, and they are
written containing instructions, then it is better to conceive of proofs on the recipe model and
teach students how to understand such instructions directly.
54 A different approach to rigorous mathematical instructions is taken by Fine (2005) in his work on
“procedural postulationism”, where he attempts to build a foundational system for mathematics
based on instructions. I have been describing what philosophy can say about the mathematical
practice of having many different mathematical instructions. In contrast, Fine deﬁnes a set of
logical, instructional rules that can be used to generate a menagerie of mathematical objects. The
questions of rigour for Fine are different, for example, about whether the postulation rules can be
consistently carried out.
55
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This only gestures at a full account of rigorous recipes. If we want to account
for rigour in actual practice, however, and real proofs involve these kinds of
instructions, then it follows that it is necessary to pursue this project further.
5.7 Conclusion
To conclude this section on the recipe model of proofs, let us consider its
strengths and weaknesses. The recipe model is closer to mathematical practice
than the standard view, so has the advantage of explaining the descriptive,
empirical facts more immediately. The linguistic data on the presence of
imperatives in written mathematical proofs ties directly with seeing proofs as
recording and communicating how to carry out the activity they describe. The
recipe model predicts the use of imperatives and instructions, but can also
accommodate instructions issued through diagrams. It also motivates a richer
picture of mathematical knowledge, which has a clear role for non-propositional
knowledge-how, so is good for investigating the epistemology of mathematics
and how it links to proving. The emphasis on actions and activities also aligns
nicely with the practical turn in philosophy of mathematics: interest in practices
is, at least in part, interest in the actions and activities of mathematicians when
doing mathematics.
The recipe model ﬁts well with many of the empirical results we have already
encountered. For example, the context-dependence of judgements about valid-
ity, acceptability, and what counts as proof (Weber 2008; Heinze 2010; Inglis &
Alcock 2012; Inglis et al. 2013; Weber & Czocher 2019; Davies et al. 2021)
would support the idea that what counts as a sufﬁcient recipe for a piece of
reasoning (or cooking a meal) will vary by target audience.
Furthermore, the empirical literature contrasts two pictures of how math-
ematicians read proofs: “zooming out” to understand the overall structure and
“line-by-line checking” of the individual steps. In interview studies, mathemat-
icians often describe using a “zooming out” approach (Weber 2008;
Mejía-Ramos & Weber 2014), but eye-tracking studies seem to indicate that
mathematicians generally just use “line-by-line checking” (Inglis & Alcock
2012; Panse et al. 2018). Nonetheless, Andersen’s (2017) interview study about
the mathematics refereeing process saw her interviewees reporting that they
would employ the “zooming out” process, only checking the details of proofs or
subproofs for results that “stand out as surprising or suspicious” (Andersen
2017, p. 186). Such an approach would rely on their expertise in having a feel
for what results are surprising or suspicious – for example, by knowing how
strong certain assumptions normally need to be to deliver certain kinds of
results. Again, the recipe model can account for this well. Sometimes the best
56
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

way to get the big picture of a recipe is to zoom out to the overall picture,
looking for the most important instructions or clusters of instructions.
Sometimes, though, line-by-line examination might be the best way to under-
stand what the overall strategy being deployed is. The model can also explain
that mathematicians might have sufﬁcient experience to be able to tell quickly
which instructions need to be checked carefully, because they are difﬁcult,
error-prone, or otherwise suspicious, just as a chef can pick out which bits of
a recipe will be the most difﬁcult or error-prone to make.
The recipe model does not match well with descriptive–normative descrip-
tions of what mathematicians say counts as a proof, since these tend to focus on
formalistic ideas better captured by the standard view (see Müller-Hill 2009;
Davies et al. 2020). By moving away from the standard views, the recipe model
is less favourable for projects that rely on identifying rigour and formality, such
as in metamathematics or the formalisation of mathematics for computer-
checkability. By embracing actions, instructions, and non-propositional prac-
tical knowledge, the resulting account of rigour will have to address a diverse
array of action types, which, as we have seen, involves some complexity.
I would argue, though, that this diversity is a fact about proving as it is found
in practice, and that it is crucial to work to explain it.
6 Rigour Is a Virtue
6.1 Introduction
Consider the difference between the description of a “long proof” and that of
a “creative proof”. In the ﬁrst case, it is unambiguous that “long” is a property of
the proof presentation. There may still be contextual factors that affect what
counts as a long proof: the standards for a long proof in a school classroom may
be different to those for a long proof for a research mathematics journal, just as
the standards for “heavy” will be different for new-born babies and sumo
wrestlers. In the case of “creative proof”, however, the proof presentation itself
isn’t necessarily creative, but rather displays the creativity of the proof’s author,
who has come up with creative ideas.55 A proof itself doesn’t have the imagina-
tive and original ideas characteristic of creativity, but instead is labelled as
“creative” when it takes an approach that shows those creative characteristics on
the part of the originator of the proof. In this case, creativity is primarily an
intellectual virtue of the prover, and only secondarily a property of the proof.56
55 To be clear, proof presentations can also be creative, as is exempliﬁed brilliantly by Ording
(2019).
56 Once one starts to pay attention to this distinction, it turns out that dividing commonly used
adjectives for proofs between the two categories is surprisingly hard. For example, is a “dull
57
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In all of the models of proof and rigour we have seen so far, “rigorous” is treated
as a mere property of proofs, just like “long”.57 In this section, I will consider
the virtue model of rigour that emerges when one instead treats rigour as
primarily an intellectual virtue of the mathematician engaged in proving activ-
ities. This builds on recent work by various scholars who have proposed
adopting some of the ideas from virtue theory for the philosophy of mathematics
(Tanswell 2016b; Su 2017, 2020; Aberdein et al. 2021; Ernest 2021; Martin
2021; Morris 2021; Rittberg 2021; Tanswell & Kidd 2021).
Before we get started on this model, let us consider a small piece of empirical
motivation for this view. In their study of mathematical beauty, Inglis and
Aberdein (2015) investigated 80 adjectives that mathematicians could apply to
proofs, asking them how well each one applied to a proof of their participants’
own choosing. Using the responses from 255 mathematicians, their results
revealed clusters of these adjectives into four “dimensions”: aesthetics (relating
to mathematical beauty); utility (relating to how useful the proof is); precision
(how precise the proof is); and intricacy (how simple or complicated the proof is).
For example, the aesthetics dimension contained adjectives like “beautiful”,
“profound”, “charming”, “deep”, and “elegant”. Importantly, the adjective “rigor-
ous” was on the precision dimension, alongside “precise”, “meticulous”, “care-
ful”, “accurate”, “clear”, “deﬁnitive”, and “unambiguous”. The adjectives
“meticulous” and “careful” are obvious candidates for being primarily about
the intellectual virtues of the mathematician, manifested in the proof they have
come up with, rather than a direct description of the proof itself. The guiding
thought in this section is to take “rigorous” to be of the same kind.
6.2 Mathematical Epistemic Virtues
The central proposal of the virtue model of rigour is to draw on the tools of
virtue theory in studying rigour. The modern approach to virtue ethics was
championed by authors such as Anscombe (1958), Foot (1978), and MacIntyre
(1985), who all followed a broadly neo-Aristotelean stance (Aristotle 2009),
though virtue theory is also found in Confucian, Buddhist, and Hindu traditions
(see Hursthouse & Pettigrove 2022). The guiding thought is to look at moral
character as the central pillar of ethical theory, rather than deontology or
proof” one that is totally routine with too much calculation, or is it one that lacks interesting or
creative ideas? One adjective that has received quite some attention in the literature is “explana-
tory”. The difference between explanatoriness as merely a property of proofs or as something
connected to the agent’s understanding is present in the literature as Delarivière et al.’s (2017)
distinction between ontic and epistemic explanation. Taking this even further, it may well be that
many adjectives linked to proofs have these two different senses.
57 The difﬁculty of separating properties of the product from properties of the agent is discussed by
Tanswell and Kidd (2021, p. 417).
58
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

consequentialism. Extending this idea, virtue epistemologists emphasise the
importance of one’s intellectual character in the pursuit of knowledge. This
approach has two broad camps: the virtue reliabilists and virtue responsibilists.
The reliabilists generally take the relevant virtues to be stable, reliable abilities
(Greco 2010), or competences (Sosa 2009). The responsibilists take virtues to
be excellent intellectual character traits (Code 1987; Montmarquet 1993;
Zagzebski 1996). In the recent literature, various hybrid options are also
available (Battaly 2008; Ohlhorst 2022).
Whichever account of intellectual virtues one prefers, they will both agree
that intellectual virtues are manifested in certain kinds of activities. Therefore,
we will be interested in intellectual virtues that play a role in mathematical
activities. In keeping with the rest of this Element, we can focus this discussion
speciﬁcally on proofs and proving, but this is not as necessary for the virtue
model of rigour. One advantage of taking rigour to be associated with the
mathematicians themselves is that this provides a uniform account of rigour
across different kinds of mathematical activities. After all, one can approach
any area of mathematics or mathematical activity in a rigorous way, not just
those that involve proving.
Nonetheless, let us investigate what the virtue model will say about rigour in
proving. The main idea will be that rigorous proving is rigorous just because it
manifests the intellectual virtue of rigour, which involves meticulous and
careful attention to detail. On a reliabilist account, this will be further ﬁlled
out in terms of competences or abilities, that is, meticulousness is about being
able to spot and correct gaps and errors reliably. On a responsibilist account, this
will be about stable traits of character, that is, the mathematician will develop
habits of care and attention in their work that guard against gaps and errors.
One thing that virtue models of rigour will give us is a solution to a persistent
epistemic puzzle. We have seen in other models that mathematical knowledge
from proofs has inherited the challenge from epistemology of explaining what it
means to justify our beliefs “in the right way”. (This emerged in both the
standard view about justifying the belief that a formal proof is available, and
in the recipe model of having activities carried out in the right way.) Crucially,
however detailed a given proof is, one does not gain knowledge from it unless
one engages with it in the right way: for example, making the correct inferences
at the right points. In epistemic terms, this is about avoiding epistemic luck,
where incorrect reasoning happens to lead to the correct result by coincidence.58
58 Some cases might involve subtle errors, while others might be what Aberdein (2010) calls
“howlers”, illustrated by this humorous example from Maxwell (1959, p. 88):
“To solve the equation x þ 3
ð
Þ 2  x
ð
Þ ¼ 4. Either x þ 3 ¼ 4 so x ¼ 1: Or 2  x ¼ 4 so x ¼ 2.
Correct.”
59
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

For instance, someone who reads through a proof, but misunderstands why the
inferences succeed at each step, cannot truly be said to know the theorem
proved. The virtue model of rigour can answer this puzzle because the missing
ingredient seems to be outside of the proof, and to do with how the agent carries
out their reasoning. For the virtue model the answer is that “the right way” of
doing the reasoning is to do so rigorously, deploying intellectual character traits
to successfully gain knowledge.
Perhaps the easiest way to see this is using Sosa’s “triple A” account about
accuracy, adroitness, and aptness (Sosa 2009). In Sosa’s famous archery
example, when an archer hits the target, the shot was accurate. But one can
be accurate because of a lucky shot. Another evaluative dimension is how
skilful a shot was, its adroitness. However, an adroit shot may not be accurate
if a sudden gust of wind redirects the arrow after it has been released.
Furthermore, an adroit and accurate shot might still be missing something:
in the “lucky” case where one gust of wind redirects the arrow, then a second
one directs it back. Sosa proposes that the evaluative component necessary for
knowledge is aptness: that the shot is accurate because it is adroit, that is, that
the manifestation of the competence is the reason for the accuracy. For
knowledge, one’s beliefs must be accurate because they manifest the intellec-
tual virtues. Applied to the case of mathematical knowledge, one’s mathem-
atical beliefs must be apt, meaning they are accurate because they are adroit,
and so they must be true because one has manifested the intellectual virtue of
rigour.
Using this virtue model of rigour, it is also possible to explain some of the
empirical ﬁndings we have discussed. One of the main results of the literature is
the context-dependence of judgements of rigour: for example, what is suitable
for a student is not always suitable for a mathematics journal and vice versa. The
explanation for this would be simple: that proofs are written to cater to different
levels of competence. When one can assume the reader will have a high level of
mathematical competence, less needs to be communicated, whereas when one is
teaching or assessing the level of competence of a proof, more needs to be made
explicit to show that the proof has been adeptly written.
Additionally, Weber et al. (2022) have recently produced a clever study that
examined how 16 senior maths PhD students gain certainty from proofs. They
provided participants, sequentially, with a theorem statement that an inﬁnite
sum was equal to π; a proof for the claim; empirical evidence in the form of an
Excel ﬁle demonstrating that the sum approached π rapidly; and ﬁnally, a copy
of The American Mathematical Monthly from 1997 that contains a published
version of the proof. At each step, they asked participants to rate how conﬁdent
they are in the claim, with the results shown in Table 2.
60
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Table 2 Results from Weber et al.’s (2022, p. 72) study of PhD students’ conﬁdence in a mathematical claim when given successive pieces
of evidence.
Phase of the
study
Average
Conﬁdence
Score
# Participants who
gained conﬁdence
# Participants who were
certain (score of 100)
# Participants with
a score of 99 or higher
# Participants with
a score of 95 or
higher
After reading the
claim
44.7
n/a
0
0
0
After reading the
proof
82.4
15 (out of 16)
2
4
7
After reading
empirical
evidence
95.3
12 (out of 14)
6
7
13
After seeing the
article
98.7
9 (out of 10)
8
12
16
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

It is striking that a relatively straightforward and rigorous proof leaves the
participants with only 82 per cent average conﬁdence, and that this further
increases with appeals to empirical evidence and the authority of it being
published. The mathematicians are also reluctant to say they are certain, rather
than having a high conﬁdence, suggesting an awareness of their own fallibility.
One interesting point that arose in interviewing participants after the test was
about the interaction between the proof and empirical evidence. Describing why
they increased their conﬁdence in light of the empirical evidence, one partici-
pant said: “[I may have] missed a log 2 along the way where everything seems to
cancel out and the answer’s not π. It’s a lot harder to do that and have the sum
converge to quite close to π, if not π” (Weber et al. 2022, p. 73).
This provides the valuable insight that even when we acknowledge the
human fallibility inevitably present when reading and evaluating proofs,
careful checking may nonetheless limit the space for possible errors. The
quote here points out that the kind of minor errors that someone might miss
in reading a proof, such as manipulation errors, are not compatible with
getting the convergence correct. Coordinating a rigorous proof with other
forms of evidence thus has the power to increase our conﬁdence that no such
error is present. Such empirical results can easily be explained by the virtue
model: that the rigorous mathematician would be both careful not to be
overconﬁdent and sensitive to multiple sources of evidence. For the virtue
theorist, rigour is not about deductive rigour attached to the proof itself, but
about how mathematicians approach mathematics, so evidence about what
doing careful, meticulous mathematics might look like in practice is very
welcome.
Another advantage of the virtue model of rigour is that it broadens the scope
of philosophy of mathematics because rigour is just one among many relevant
intellectual virtues for mathematics. For example, recent research has already
engaged with intellectual generosity (Morris 2021) and intellectual humility
(Rittberg 2021). Francis Su (2017) argues for the importance to mathematics
of virtues including hopefulness, perseverance, joy (“the wonder or awe or
delight in the beauty of the created order”, p. 486), transcendence (“the ability
to embrace the mystery of it all”, p. 486), rigorous thinking, humility, and
circumspection (“we know the limits of our arguments, and we don’t over-
generalize”, p. 488). Martin (2021) argues that with the increase in collabora-
tive mathematics, there should be a new emphasis on social virtues that aid
collaboration. Tanswell and Kidd (2021) weigh up the trade-offs between
individual-level and collective virtues and vices in mathematics. All this
opens up a lot of fertile, new material for philosophers of mathematical
practice to investigate in the future.
62
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

6.3 Rigour and Justice
The virtue model of rigour also reveals another overlooked feature of rigour in
mathematical practice. Describing a proof as “rigorous” may implicitly be used to
make a judgement about the mathematicians who created it. Whenever one ﬁnds
evaluative judgements of people, there will be the possibility that those judge-
ments are made unfairly. Mathematics is no exception. As a discipline, it contains
power dynamics, and plenty of opportunities for judgements about “rigour” to
make a difference to who can participate, who gets jobs and material beneﬁts, who
wins prizes and accolades, whose ideas are respected and celebrated, and who has
access to the mathematics community. When those judgements are made unfairly,
the social structuring of the discipline reﬂects this disparity.
One infamous case where the meaning of “rigour” was central to a disagreement
about mathematical practice was in the Jaffe–Quinn debate, triggered by
a provocative article by Jaffe and Quinn (1993), with a selection of responses by
Atiyah et al. (1994) and Thurston (1994).59 Jaffe and Quinn’s main argument was
that the high standards of rigour for mathematical publication were being under-
mined by what they called “speculative mathematics”, especially by work in
mathematical physics. They argued that many results were being published in
mathematics without actually being rigorously established, and that this has
a series of negative effects on the state of mathematical knowledge. For example,
the literature becomes unreliable and misleading; further work is discouraged
because the credit for the results has already been claimed; areas of mathematics
are deserted; and credit is unfairly claimed (Jaffe & Quinn 1993, p. 9). Various
working mathematicians are even mentioned by name as having produced unri-
gorous mathematics. While ostensibly the argument is about mathematical rigour,
it is clear that these issues are inseparable from social issues of disciplinary
boundaries, inclusion and exclusion, and the fair distribution of credit.
The term epistemic injustice is used for cases where an injustice occurs in the
setting of knowledge-making activities, such as mathematics. This notion was
developed by Fricker (2007) who gave a framework for understanding injust-
ices involving, for example, not sufﬁciently trusting testimony from marginal-
ised groups, or depriving groups of conceptual resources for making sense of
unfair practices.60 In my own work and that of my collaborators (Rittberg et al.
2020; Tanswell & Rittberg 2020; Hunsicker & Rittberg 2022) we have explored
some ways in which epistemic injustice can come about in mathematics, too.
59 A detailed discussion of the cultural impact of Thurston’s article is given by Hanna and Larvor
(2020).
60 It is worth noting that Fricker’s work is also based in the virtue epistemology tradition, arguing
that we need to develop the intellectual virtue of epistemic justice.
63
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

For example, we argued that judgements about the “novelty” of a piece of
mathematics might seem like a straightforward matter (has it been published
before or not?), but in fact judgements of novelty can lead to unjust exclusionary
effects. What is considered known to the inner members of the mathematical
community, who communicate at conferences and seminars, over dinner and
drinks, by email or video calls, and so on is very different to what someone
external to the mathematical community can consider known. Some people
outside of the in-crowd must rely on publicly available resources such as online
preprints, and navigating the literature via bibliographic references, libraries,
and online search tools. This leads to what Hookway (2010) characterises as
participatory epistemic injustices: it is harder for the outsiders to access the
insiders’ ideas of novelty, and this in turn decides who gets to participate in
mathematical practices. Mathematics is a ﬁeld that has a poor track record of
diversity (see Hunsicker & Rittberg 2022, sect. 3), so structural barriers that
exclude and disadvantage outsiders will often involve epistemic injustice
(though not always, see Rittberg 2023).
Judgements of “rigour” can similarly function to include or exclude partici-
pants from mathematical communities. With the standard view discussed in
Section 3 tracking what many mathematicians think are the standards of
mathematics – that is, the standard view as a main part of the descriptive–
normative view of rigour for many mathematicians – one might expect judge-
ments of rigour to be objective. Either a proof is rigorous because it corresponds
to a formal proof, or it isn’t because it doesn’t. However, like judgements of
novelty, judgements of rigour may well be not so objective after all. We have
already seen the empirical evidence that there can be substantial disagreements
about valid proofs and acceptable gaps, cemented further in the work of Inglis
and Aberdein (2016) who ﬁnd widespread disagreement in mathematicians’
judgements about the aesthetics, intricacy, utility, and precision of a given
proof. Even if the standard view were correct about the normative standards,
it is not necessarily correct about the descriptive question of understanding how
judgements are actually made. Furthermore, we saw the mixed evidence on
mathematical peer review: that many editors don’t expect referees to check the
proofs and that referees often only carefully examine proofs that “stand out as
surprising or suspicious” (Andersen 2017, p. 186). Such judgements are clearly
open to subjectivity. Therefore, we should also expect that judgements of rigour
will not always be fair and just. This could manifest itself in marginalised
groups being subjected to more strenuous demands to get their work published.
There is evidence of this in the underrepresentation of women in prestigious
mathematics journals (Mihaljević et al. 2016; Mihaljević & Santamaría 2022)
and this parallels the same problem in the neighbouring ﬁeld of economics,
64
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

where women are held to higher standards (Hengel 2022). Not only does this
demand more work to begin with, it also has cascading consequences for the
opportunities a mathematician will have in their career, and ultimately whether
they will have a career at all.
6.4 Conclusion
The virtue model of rigour is unlike the other models we have seen, because it
changes the very object of investigation. It is no longer the proof itself that is
rigorous, or not, but the mathematicians who are doing mathematics. Rather
than looking at the reasoning encoded by a proof, the virtue model is interested
in the evaluation of how the mathematician carries out that reasoning, and what
kind of traits allow them to do well at it. For strengths, we have seen that the
virtue model can draw on a major theory in modern epistemology to solve
epistemic puzzles for proof and rigour, and that it provides a rich theory of other
intellectual virtues relevant to mathematical practice. It is also a particularly
helpful model for considering ways in which using judgements of rigour to
make judgements about mathematicians might be unfair or unjust.
Turning to weaknesses of the virtue model of rigour: it is clear that the term
“rigorous” is commonly applied to proofs even when the author is unknown. By
moving away from the connection to the logic of mathematical inferences, the
virtue model also attempts to explain different features of mathematical prac-
tice. Just as the proponent of the virtue model can point to these features of
mathematics as having been overlooked by the other models, its critics can point
to the logical structure of proofs as being largely ignored by the virtue model.
Another weakness is that the normative guidance the virtue model provides is
less exact than, for example, a criterion of formalisability. Virtue theory is
a normative theory (as seen in ethics and epistemology) but the guidance it
provides is to cultivate certain ways of approaching mathematics and to have
certain virtuous attitudes and behaviours. This may be less than helpful in the
moment one has to evaluate a borderline case of a proof. However, it might also
explain some of the contextual effects regarding how mathematicians judge
proofs and rigour differently in different contexts, especially with respect to
students’ proofs. It may be that they are implicitly trying to evaluate how well
the student has adopted the mathematical virtues that are being taught.
7 Conclusion
We have seen a selection of models of rigour and informal proofs, grouped into
four families: the standard views; the argumentation and dialogical models; the
recipe model of proofs; and virtue-theoretic models of rigour. A question that
65
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

remains is: are these all of the options? One place we could look for inspiration
for other models is in other metaphors for proof that have been used, such as
proof as mountaineering (Hardy 1929), proof as exploring (Ryle 1971), proof as
narrative (Thomas 2007), proofs as judicial reasoning (Thomas 2015; Termini
2019), proof as landscape gardening (Thomas 2017), proof as play (Su 2017),
proof as journeying (Lane et al. 2019), proof as craft (Lane et al. 2019), and
many more. Invoked as metaphors, these are all intended to emphasise and
explain aspects of mathematical proofs in practice, but they have the potential to
be developed into fully ﬂedged conceptual models of proof and rigour.
I also haven’t considered the model of informal rigour proposed by Kreisel
(1967), and later developed by Isaacson (2011), Barton (2012), and Dean and
Kurokawa (in press). Kreisel’s notion is foremost about the rigorous use of
concepts in mathematics, and how these progressively develop from intuitive
notions to more robustly mathematical concepts amenable to axiomatisation,
though informal rigour can also be applied to mathematical arguments, as Dean
and Kurokawa argue. Relatedly, there is the possibility of a semantic model of
rigour and informal proof, such as Leitgeb (2009) reads into the work of Gödel,
and which is explicit in the work of Rav (1999). Both of these models are
already further developed than those based on analogies and are clearly worth
closer attention in future work.
I hope that in the process of describing and evaluating these models of rigour
and proof, I have also implicitly made a case for rigour pluralism. None of the
views we have seen is a uniquely correct account of the complicated tangle of
normative and descriptive features of rigour and proofs in practice, and I think
the quest to ﬁnd such an account that underpins all of the functions and features
of rigour is futile. Switching to a modelling perspective, however, allows us to
observe that all of the models provide insights and explanations of different
features of mathematics. Such a move makes it possible to say that the standard
view, for example, is actually a very good model of rigour, despite the many
criticisms showing that it isn’t correct in some unqualiﬁed or objective way. The
standard view models many mathematical proofs using the tools of formal logic,
thereby enabling metamathematics, reverse mathematics, and computer veriﬁ-
cation to be done. That’s fantastic! But it also makes it possible to recognise that
other models might simply be better at accounting for some parts of mathemat-
ical practices, and in this Element we have seen many ways in which this is the
case.
One ﬁnal observation is that models are primarily representational, but they
can also affect and shape the practices and the conceptions we have of them. The
ubiquity of versions of the standard view in undergraduate mathematics teach-
ing does have an impact on what mathematicians believe they are doing, which
66
Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

affects what they actually do. By illustrating other good models of rigour, I hope
that these will in turn affect the way in which mathematics is really practiced.
In conclusion, if one is searching for the “true essence” of mathematical
proofs, then a well-placed criticism can be devastating for the account.
However, on the pluralistic approach, criticisms just reveal places where the
model is a less good ﬁt or can even be seen as harmless artefacts of the model.
When dealing with conceptual models, it is important to keep in mind the
difference between the model and the phenomena itself, and the ways in
which some features of the model are just artefacts of the process of abstraction,
idealisation, and formalisation. I thus hope to have convinced you that rigour
pluralism, where there are many good models of rigour and informal proof, is
a better approach than taking one account to give the ultimate correct answer.
67
Mathematical Rigour and Informal Proof
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
Aberdein, A. (2005). The uses of argument in mathematics. Argumentation, 19,
287–301.
Aberdein, A. (2006). Managing informal mathematical knowledge: Techniques
from informal logic. In Borwein, J. M., & Farmer, W. M. (eds.), MKM 2006,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 4108 (pp. 208–21). Berlin, Springer.
Aberdein, A. (2007). The informal logic of mathematical proof. In Van
Kerkhove, B., & Van Bendegem, J. P. (eds.), Perspectives on Mathematical
Practices (pp. 135–51). Dordrecht, Springer.
Aberdein, A. (2010). Observations on sick mathematics. In Van Kerkhove, B.,
Van Bendegem, J. P., & de Vuyst, J. (eds.), Philosophical Perspectives on
Mathematical Practice (pp. 269–300). Suwanee, GA, College Publications.
Aberdein, A. (2013). The parallel structure of mathematical reasoning. In
Aberdein, A., & Dove, I. (eds.), The Argument of Mathematics (pp. 361–
80). Dordrecht, Springer.
Aberdein, A. (2021). Dialogue types, argumentation schemes, and mathemat-
ical practice: Douglas Walton and mathematics. Journal of Applied Logics,
8(1), 159–82.
Aberdein, A. (2023). Deep disagreement in mathematics. Global Philosophy,
33(1), 17.
Aberdein, A., Rittberg, C. J., & Tanswell, F. S. (2021). Virtue theory of
mathematical practices: An introduction. Synthese, 199, 10167–80.
Alcolea Banegas, J. (1997). L’argumentació en matemàtiques. In Casaban i
Moya, E. (ed.), XIIè Congrés Valencià de Filosoﬁa, València (pp. 135–47).
English translation (2013). Argumentation in mathematics. In Aberdein, A., &
Dove, I. (eds.), The Argument of Mathematics (pp. 47–60). Dordrecht, Springer.
Andersen, L. E. (2017). On the nature and role of peer review in mathematics.
Accountability in Research, 24(3), 177–92.
Andreatta, M., Bezdek, A., & Boronski, J. P. (2011). The problem of Malfatti:
Two centuries of debate. The Mathematical Intelligencer, 33(1), 72–6.
Anscombe, G. E. M. (1958). Modern moral philosophy. Philosophy, 33(124), 1–19.
Antonutti Marfori, M. (2010). Informal proofs and mathematical rigour. Studia
Logica, 96(2), 261–72.
Appel, K., & Haken, W. (1977). Every planar map is 4-colorable. Part I:
Discharging. Illinois Journal of Mathematics, 21(3), 429–90.
Appel, K., Haken, W., & Koch, J. (1977). Every planar map is four colorable.
Part II: Reducibility. Illinois Journal of Mathematics, 21(3), 491–567.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Aristotle. (2009). The Nicomachean Ethics. Ross, W. D. (trans.), 2nd edition
revised and with notes by Brown, L. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Atiyah, M., Borel, A., Chaitin, G. J. et al. (1994). Responses to: A. Jaffe and
F. Quinn, ‘Theoretical mathematics: Toward a cultural synthesis of mathem-
atics and theoretical physics’. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society,
30(2), 178–207.
Auslander, J. (2009). On the roles of proof in mathematics. In Gold, B., &
Simons, R. A. (eds.), Proof and Other Dilemmas: Mathematics and
Philosophy (pp. 61–78). Washington, DC, The Mathematical Association
of America.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to Do Things with Words. Oxford, Oxford University
Press.
Avigad, J. (2021). Reliability of mathematical inference. Synthese, 198(8),
7377–99.
Azzouni, J. (2004). The derivation-indicator view of mathematical practice.
Philosophia Mathematica (III), 12(2), 81–106.
Azzouni, J. (2005). Is there still a sense in which mathematics can have
foundations. In Sica, G. (ed.), Essays on the Foundations of Mathematics
and Logic (pp. 9–48). Monza, Polimetrica.
Azzouni, J. (2009). Why do informal proofs conform to formal norms?
Foundations of Science, 14(1), 9–26.
Azzouni, J. (2020). The algorithmic-device view of informal rigorous mathem-
atical proof. In Sriraman, B. (ed.), Handbook of the History and Philosophy
of Mathematical Practice (pp. 1–82). Cham, Springer. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-19071-2_4-1.
Barany, M. J. (2011). God, king, and geometry: Revisiting the introduction to
Cauchy’s Cours d’analyse. Historia Mathematica, 38(3), 368–88.
Barany, M. J. (2013). Stuck in the middle: Cauchy’s Intermediate Value
Theorem and the history of analytic rigor. Notices of the AMS, 60(10),
1334–8.
Barany, M. J. (2020). Impersonation and personiﬁcation in mid-twentieth
century mathematics. History of Science, 58(4), 417–36.
Barton, N. (2012). Structural relativity and informal rigour. In Oliveri, G.,
Ternullo, C., & Boscolo, S. (eds.), Objects, Structures, and Logics: FilMat
Studies in the Philosophy of Mathematics (pp. 133–74). Cham, Springer.
Bass, H. (2003). The Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate: The case of
mathematics. Notices of the AMS, 50(7), 767–76.
Battaly, H. (2008). Virtue epistemology. Philosophy Compass, 3(4), 639–63.
Beall, J. (1999). From full blooded Platonism to really full blooded Platonism.
Philosophia Mathematica (III), 7(3), 322–5.
69
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Beall, J. C., & Restall, G. (2005). Logical Pluralism. Oxford, Oxford University
Press.
Blåsjö, V. (2022). Operationalism: An interpretation of the philosophy of
ancient Greek geometry. Foundations of Science, 27(2), 587–708.
Bourbaki, N. (1968). Elements of Mathematics, Theory of Sets. Reading, MA,
Addison-Wesley.
Brown J. (1999). Philosophy of Mathematics: An Introduction to the World of
Proofs and Pictures. London, Routledge.
Buldt, B., Löwe, B., & Müller, T. (2008). Towards a new epistemology of
mathematics. Erkenntnis, 68(3), 309–29.
Burgess, J. P. (2015). Rigor and Structure. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Burgess, J., & De Toffoli, S. (2022). What is mathematical rigor? Aphex, 25,
1–17.
Cantù, P., & Luciano, E. (2021). Giuseppe Peano and his school: Axiomatics,
symbolism and rigor. Philosophia Scientiæ. Travaux d’histoire et de philo-
sophie des sciences, 25(1), 3–14.
Carter, J. (2019). Philosophy of mathematical practice: Motivations, themes and
prospects. Philosophia Mathematica (III), 27(1), 1–32.
Cellucci, C. (2018). Deﬁnition in mathematics. European Journal for
Philosophy of Science, 8(3), 605–29.
Code, L. (1987). Epistemic Responsibility. Hanover, NH, University Press of
New England.
Cook, R. T. (2000). Logic-as-Modeling: A New Perspective on Formalization.
Doctoral dissertation, The Ohio State University. https://etd.ohiolink.edu/
acprod/odb_etd/etd/r/1501/10?clear=10&p10_accession_num=osu12602
02088.
Cook, R. T. (2010). Let a thousand ﬂowers bloom: A tour of logical pluralism.
Philosophy Compass, 5(6), 492–504.
Cotnoir, A. J. (2018). Logical nihilism. In Wyatt, J., Pedersen, N. J. L. L., &
Kellen, N. (eds.), Pluralisms in Truth and Logic (pp. 301–29). Cham, Palgrave
Macmillan.
Coumans, V. J. W. (2021). Deﬁnitions (and concepts) in mathematical practice. In
Sriraman, B. (ed.), Handbook of the History and Philosophy of Mathematical
Practice (n. pag.). Cham, Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
19071-2_94-1.
Coumans, V. J. W., & Consoli, L. (2023). Deﬁnitions in practice: An interview
study. Synthese, 202(23), 1–32.
Davies, B., Alcock, L., & Jones, I. (2020). Comparative judgement, proof
summaries and proof comprehension. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
105(2), 181–97.
70
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Davies, B., Alcock, L., & Jones, I. (2021). What do mathematicians mean by
proof? A comparative-judgement study of students’ and mathematicians’
views. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 61, 100824.
Davies, B., Miller, D., & Infante, N. (2021). The role of authorial context in
mathematicians’ evaluations of proof. International Journal of Mathematical
Education in Science and Technology, 54(5), 725–39.
De Morgan, A. (1838). Mathematical induction. The Penny Cyclopedia, 12,
465–6.
De Toffoli, S. (2021a). Groundwork for a fallibilist account of mathematics. The
Philosophical Quarterly, 71(4), 1–22.
De Toffoli, S. (2021b). Reconciling rigour and intuition. Erkenntnis, 86,
1783–802.
De Toffoli, S. (2023). Who’s afraid of mathematical diagrams? Philosophers’
Imprint, 23, 9. https://doi.org/10.3998/phimp.1348.
De Toffoli, S., & Fontanari, C. (2022). Objectivity and rigor in classical Italian
algebraic geometry. Noesis: Objectivity in Mathematics, 38, 195–212.
De Toffoli, S., & Fontanari, C. (2023). Recalcitrant disagreement in mathemat-
ics: An ‘endless and depressing controversy’ in the history of Italian alge-
braic geometry. Global Philosophy, 33(4), 1–29.
De Toffoli, S., & Giardino, V. (2015). An inquiry into the practice of proving in
low-dimensional topology. In Lolli, G., Panza, M., & Venturi, G. (eds.), From
Logic to Practice (pp. 315–36). Cham, Springer.
Dean, W., & Kurokawa, H. (in press). On the methodology of informal rigour:
Set theory, semantics, and intuitionism. In Antonutti Marfori, M., &
Petrolo, M. (eds.), Intuitionism, Computation, and Proof: Selected Themes
from the Research of G. Kreisel, Springer.
Delarivière, S., Frans, J., & Van Kerkhove, B. (2017). Mathematical explan-
ation: A contextual approach. Journal of Indian Council of Philosophical
Research, 34(2), 309–29.
Detlefsen, M. (2009). Proof: Its nature and signiﬁcance. In Gold, B., &
Simons, R. A. (eds.), Proof and Other Dilemmas: Mathematics and Philosophy
(pp. 3–32). Washington, DC, The Mathematical Association of America.
Dove, I. J. (2013). Towards a theory of mathematical argument. In Aberdein, A.,
& Dove, I. (eds.), The Argument of Mathematics (pp. 291–308). Springer,
Dordrecht.
Dutilh Novaes, C. (2011). The different ways in which logic is (said to be)
formal. History and Philosophy of Logic, 32(4), 303–32.
Dutilh Novaes, C. (2021). The Dialogical Roots of Deduction: Historical,
Cognitive, and Philosophical Perspectives on Reasoning. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.
71
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Ernest, P. (1998). Social Constructivism as a Philosophy of Mathematics.
Albany, NY, State University of New York Press.
Ernest, P. (2021). Mathematics, ethics and purism: An application of
MacIntyre’s virtue theory. Synthese, 199(1), 3137–67.
Eves, H. (1965). A Survey of Geometry, Volume 2. Boston, MA, Allyn and Bacon.
Ferreirós, J. (2008). The crisis in the foundations of mathematics. In Gowers, T.,
Barrow-Green,
&
Leader,
I.
(eds.),
The
Princeton
Companion
to
Mathematics (pp. 142–56). Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Fine, K. (2005). Our knowledge of mathematical objects. In Gendler T. S., &
Hawthorne, J. (eds.), Oxford Studies in Epistemology (pp. 89–109). Oxford,
Oxford Academic.
Foot, P. (1978,) Virtues and Vices and Other Essays in Moral Philosophy.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Franks, Curtis (2015). Logical nihilism. In Hirvonen, Å., Kontinen, J.,
Kossak, R., & Villaveces, A. (eds.), Logic without Borders: Essays on Set
Theory, Model Theory, Philosophical Logic and Philosophy of Mathematics,
pp. 147–66. Berlin, De Gruyter.
Frege, G. (1884) The Foundations of Arithmetic. Austin, J. L. (trans.), 1953.
Oxford, Blackwell.
Fricker, M. (2007). Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of Knowing.
Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Geist, C., Löwe, B., & Kerkhove, B. V. (2010). Peer review and knowledge by
testimony in mathematics. In Löwe, B., & Müller, T. (eds.), Philosophy of
Mathematics: Sociological Aspects and Mathematical Practice. Research
Results of the Scientiﬁc Network PhiMSAMP (pp. 1–24). London, College
Publications.
Gelfert, A. (2022). Thinking with notations: Epistemic actions and epistemic
activities in mathematical practice. In Friedman, M., & Krauthausen, K.
(eds.), Model and Mathematics: From the 19th to the 21st Century: Trends
in the History of Science (pp. 333–62). Cham, Birkhäuser.
Goethe, N. B., & Friend, M. (2010). Confronting ideals of proof with the ways
of proving of the research mathematician. Studia Logica, 96(2), 273–88.
Gonthier, G. (2008). Formal proof – The four-color theorem. Notices of the
American Mathematical Society, 55(11), 1382–93.
Greco, J. (2010). Achieving Knowledge. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Greiffenhagen, C., & Sharrock, W. (2005). Gestures in the blackboard work of
mathematics instruction. Paper presented at Interacting Bodies: Proceedings
of 2nd Conference of the International Society for Gesture Studies (Lyon,
15–18 June 2005), pp. 1–24. http://gesture-lyon2005.ens-lyon.fr/IMG/pdf/
Greiffenhagen-Gesture.pdf.
72
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Habgood-Coote, J., & Tanswell, F. S. (2023). Group knowledge and mathemat-
ical collaboration: A philosophical examination of the classiﬁcation of ﬁnite
simple groups. Episteme, 20(2), 281–307.
Haffner, E. (2021). The shaping of Dedekind’s rigorous mathematics: What do
Dedekind’s drafts tell us about his ideal of rigor? Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic, 62(1), 5–31.
Hales, T. C. (2008). Formal proof. Notices of the AMS, 55(11), 1370–80.
Hamami, Y. (2019). Mathematical rigor and proof. Review of Symbolic Logic,
15(2), 409–49.
Hamami, Y., & Morris, R. L. (2020). Philosophy of mathematical practice:
A primer for mathematics educators. ZDM, 52(6), 1113–26.
Hanna, G., & Larvor, B. (2020). As Thurston says? On using quotations from
famous mathematicians to make points about philosophy and education.
ZDM: Mathematics Education, 52(6), 1137–47.
Hardy, G. H. (1929). Mathematical proof. Mind, 38(149), 1–25.
Hegel, G. W. F. (1807). Phenomenology of Spirit. Miller, A. V. (trans.), 1977.
Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Heinze, A. (2010). Mathematicians’ individual criteria for accepting theorems
and proofs: An empirical approach. In Hanna, G., Jahnke, H. N., & Pulte, H.
(eds.), Explanation and Proof in Mathematics (pp. 101–11). Boston, MA,
Springer.
Hengel, E. (2022). Publishing while female: Are women held to higher standards?
Evidence from peer review. The Economic Journal, 132(648), 2951–91.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ej/ueac032.
Hersh, R. (1993). Proving is convincing and explaining. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 24(4), 389–99.
Hersh, R. (1997). Prove – Once more and again. Philosophia Mathematica (III),
5(2), 153–65.
Hilbert, D. (1899). Grundlagen der Geometrie. Leipzig, Teubner.
Hookway, C. (2010). Some varieties of epistemic injustice: Reﬂections on
Fricker. Episteme, 7(2), 151–63.
Hornsby, J. (2012). Ryle’s knowing-how, and knowing how to act. In Bengson, J.,
& Moffett, M. A. (eds.), Knowing How: Essays on Knowledge, Mind and
Action (pp. 80–98). Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Hunsicker, E., & Rittberg, C. J. (2022). On the epistemological relevance of
social power and justice in mathematics. Axiomathes, 32, 1147–68.
Hursthouse, R., & Pettigrove, G. (2022). Virtue ethics. In Zalta, E. N., &
Nodelman, U. (eds.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2022
Edition). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2022/entries/ethics-virtue/.
73
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Inglis, M., & Aberdein, A. (2015). Beauty is not simplicity: An analysis of
mathematicians’ proof appraisals. Philosophia Mathematica (III), 23(1), 87–109.
Inglis, M., & Aberdein, A. (2016). Diversity in proof appraisal. In Larvor, B.
(ed.), Mathematical Cultures (pp. 163–79. Cham, Birkhäuser.
Inglis, M., & Alcock, L. (2012). Expert and novice approaches to reading
mathematical proofs. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,
43(4), 358–90.
Inglis, M., Mejía-Ramos, J. P., Weber, K., & Alcock, L. (2013). On mathemat-
icians’ different standards when evaluating elementary proofs. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 5(2), 270–82.
Isaacson, D. (2011). The reality of mathematics and the case of set theory. In
Noviak, Z. & Simonyi, A. (eds.), Truth, Reference, and Realism (pp. 1–75).
Budapest, Central European University Press.
Jaffe, A., & Quinn, F. (1993). ’Theoretical mathematics’: Toward a cultural
synthesis of mathematics and theoretical physics. Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, 29(1), 1–13.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic
action. Cognitive Science, 18(4), 513–49.
Kitcher, P. (1984). The Nature of Mathematical Knowledge. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.
Kneebone, G. T. (1957). The philosophical basis of mathematical rigour.
Philosophical Quarterly, 7(28), 204–23.
Knipping, C., & Reid, D. A. (2019). Argumentation analysis for early career
researchers. In Kaiser, G. & Presmeg, N. (eds.), Compendium for Early
Career Researchers in Mathematics Education (pp. 3–31). Cham, Springer.
Kreisel, G. (1967). Informal rigour and completeness proofs. In Lakatos, I. (ed.),
Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Vol. 47 (pp. 138–86).
Amsterdam, Elsevier.
Kunen, K. (1980). Set Theory: An Introduction to Independence Proofs.
Amsterdam, North-Holland.
Kurji, A. H. (2021). What the Heck Is Logic? Logics-as-Formalizations,
a Nihilistic Approach. Doctoral dissertation, University of Bristol. https://
research-information.bris.ac.uk/en/studentTheses/what-the-heck-is-logic.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and Refutations: The Logic of Mathematical
Discovery. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Lane, L., Martin, U., Murray-Rust, D., Pease, A., & Tanswell, F. (2019). Journeys
in mathematical landscapes: Genius or craft? In Hanna, G., Reid, D. A., & de
Villiers, M. (eds.), Proof Technology in Mathematics Research and Teaching
(pp. 197–212). Cham, Springer.
74
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Larvor, B. (2001). What is dialectical philosophy of mathematics? Philosophia
Mathematica (III), 9, 212–29.
Larvor, B. (2012). How to think about informal proofs. Synthese, 187(2),
715–30.
Larvor, B. (2016). Why the naïve derivation recipe model cannot explain how
mathematicians’ proofs secure mathematical knowledge. Philosophia
Mathematica (III), 24(3), 401–4.
Leitgeb, H. (2009). On formal and informal provability. In Bueno, O., &
Linnebo, Ø. (eds.), New Waves in Philosophy of Mathematics (pp. 263–99).
London, Palgrave Macmillan.
Lob, H., & Richmond, H. W. (1930). On the solutions of Malfatti’s problem for
a triangle. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 2(1), 287–304.
Lombardi, G. (2022a). Proving the solution of Malfatti’s marble problem.
Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo, Series 72, 1751–82. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12215-022-00759-2.
Lombardi, G. (2022b). Demistifying Malfatti’s marble problem. Medium,
27 June. https://medium.com/@giancarlolombardi_25894/demistifying-mal
fattis-marble-problem-fcb0a4b98b36.
Löwe, B. (2016). Philosophy or not? The study of cultures and practices of
mathematics. In Ju, S., Löwe, B., Müller, T., & Xie, Y. (eds.), Cultures of
Mathematics and Logic (pp. 23–42). Cham, Birkhäuser.
Löwe, B., & Müller, T. (2008). Mathematical knowledge is context-dependent.
Grazer Philosophische Studien, 76, 91–107.
Löwe, B., & Müller, T. (2010). Skills and mathematical knowledge. In Löwe, B.,
& Müller, T. (eds.), Philosophy of Mathematics: Sociological Aspects and
Mathematical Practice (pp. 265–80). London, College Publications.
Löwe, B., & Müller, T. (2011). Data and phenomena in conceptual modelling.
Synthese, 182(1), 131–48.
Löwe, B., & Van Kerkhove, B. (2019). Methodological triangulation in empir-
ical philosophy (of mathematics). In Aberdein, A., & Inglis, M. (eds.),
Advances in Experimental Philosophy of Logic and Mathematics (pp.
15–37). New York, Bloomsbury Academic Publishers.
Mac Lane, S. (1986). Mathematics: Form and Function. New York, Springer-
Verlag.
MacIntyre, A. (1985). After Virtue, 2nd Edition. London, Duckworth.
MacKenzie, D. (2004). Mechanizing Proof: Computing, Risk, and Trust. London,
MIT Press.
Maddy, P. (2017). Set-theoretic foundations. In Caicedo, A., Cummings, J.,
Koellner, P., & Larson, P. B. (eds.), Contemporary Mathematics 690:
75
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Foundations of Mathematics (pp. 289–322). Providence, RI, American
Mathematical Society.
Maddy, P. (2019). What do we want a foundation to do? Comparing set-
theoretic, category-theoretic, and univalent approaches. In Centrone, S.,
Kant, D., & Sarikaya, D. (eds), Reﬂections on the Foundations of
Mathematics: Univalent Foundations, Set Theory and General Thoughts
(pp. 293–311). Cham, Springer.
Malfatti, G. (1803). Memoria sopra un problema sterotomico. Memorie di
matematica e di ﬁsica della Societá Italiana delle Scienze, 10(1), 235–44.
Martin, J. V. (2021). Prolegomena to virtue-theoretic studies in the philosophy
of mathematics. Synthese, 199(1), 1409–34.
Maxwell, E. A. (1959). Fallacies in Mathematics. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Mejía-Ramos, J. P., & Weber, K. (2014). Why and how mathematicians read
proofs: Further evidence from a survey study. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 85(2), 161–73.
Mihaljević, H., & Santamaría, L. (2022). Mathematics publications and
authors’ gender: Learning from the Gender Gap in Science project.
European Mathematical Society Magazine, 123, 34–8.
Mihaljević, H., Santamaría, L., & Tullney, M. (2016). The effect of gender in
the publication patterns in mathematics. PLoS One, 11(10), e0165367.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0165367.
Montmarquet, J. (1993). Epistemic Virtue and Doxastic Responsibility.
Lanham, MD, Rowman & Littleﬁeld.
Moore, R. C. (2016). Mathematics professors’ evaluation of students’ proofs:
A complex teaching practice. International Journal of Research in
Undergraduate Mathematics Education, 2(2), 246–78.
Morris, R. L. (2021). Intellectual generosity and the reward structure of
mathematics. Synthese, 199(1), 345–67.
Müller-Hill, E. (2009). Formalizability and knowledge ascriptions in mathem-
atical practice. Philosophia Scientiæ: Travaux d’histoire et de philosophie
des sciences, 13(2), 21–43.
Müller-Hill, E. (2011). Die epistemische Rolle formalisierbarer mathema-
tischer Beweise. Doctoral dissertation, University of Bonn. https://bonndoc
.ulb.uni-bonn.de/xmlui/handle/20.500.11811/4850.
Mumma, J. (2010). Proofs, pictures, and Euclid. Synthese, 175(2), 255–87.
Nelsen, R. B. (1993). Proofs without Words: Exercises in Visual Thinking.
Washington, DC, Mathematical Association of America.
Nelson, R. B. (2000). Proofs without Words II: More Exercises in Visual
Thinking. Washington, DC, Mathematical Association of America.
76
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Nelsen, R. B. (2008). Visual gems of number theory. Math Horizons, 15(3),
7–31.
Nelsen, R. B. (2015). Proofs without Words III: Further Exercises in Visual
Thinking. Washington, DC, Mathematical Association of America.
Ohlhorst, J. (2022). Dual processes, dual virtues. Philosophical Studies, 179(7),
2237–57.
Ording, P. (2019). 99 Variations on a Proof. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University
Press.
Panse, A., Alcock, L., & Inglis, M. (2018). Reading proofs for validation and
comprehension: An expert–novice eye-movement study. International Journal
of Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education, 4(3), 357–75.
Pelc, A. (2009). Why do we believe theorems? Philosophia Mathematica (III),
17(1), 84–94.
Pettigrew, R. (2016). Review of John P. Burgess’s Rigor and Structure.
Philosophia Mathematica (III), 24, 129–46.
Popper, K. (1959) The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. London, Hutchinson. (First
published in German as Logik der Forschung, 1934.)
Popper, K. (1963) Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientiﬁc
Knowledge. London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Priest, G. (1987). In Contradiction: A Study of the Transconsistent. Oxford,
Oxford University Press.
Rav, Y. (1999). Why do we prove theorems? Philosophia Mathematica (III),
7(1), 5–41.
Rittberg, C. J. (2021). Intellectual humility in mathematics. Synthese, 199(3),
5571–601.
Rittberg, C. J. (2023). Justiﬁed epistemic
exclusion in mathematics.
Philosophia Mathematica (III), 31(3), 330–59,
Rittberg, C. J., Tanswell, F. S., & Van Bendegem, J. P. (2020). Epistemic
injustice in mathematics. Synthese, 197(9), 3875–3904.
Rodin, A. (2014). On constructive axiomatic method. arXiv preprint,
arXiv:1408.3591. https://arxiv.org/abs/1408.3591.
Rolfsen, D. (1976). Knots and Links. Berkeley, CA: Publish or Perish.
Rotman, B. (1988). Towards a semiotics of mathematics. Semiotica, 72, 1–35.
Rufﬁno, M., San Mauro, L., & Venturi, G. (2021). Speech acts in mathematics.
Synthese, 198(10), 10063–87.
Russell, G. (2018). Logical nihilism: Could there be no logic? Philosophical
Issues, 28(1), 308–24.
Russell, G. (2019). Logical pluralism. In Zalta, E. N. (ed.), Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/logical-plural
ism/.
77
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Ryle, G. (1946). Knowing how and knowing that: The presidential address.
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 46, 1–16.
Ryle, G. (1971). Thinking and self-teaching. Journal of Philosophy of
Education, 5, 216–28.
Sangwin, C. (2023). Sums of the ﬁrst n odd integers. Mathematical Gazette,
107(568), 10–24.
Sangwin, C. J., & Kinnear, G. (2021). Investigating insight and rigour as
separate constructs in mathematical proof. EdarXiv preprint. https://doi
.org/10.35542/osf.io/egks4.
Sangwin, C., & Tanswell, F. S. (2023). Developing new picture proofs that the
sums of the ﬁrst n odd integers are squares. Mathematical Gazette, 107(569),
249–62.
Schlimm, D. 2012. Mathematical concepts and investigative practice. In
Feest, U. & Steinle, F. (eds.), Scientiﬁc Concepts and Investigative Practice
(pp. 127–47). Berlin, de Gruyter GmbH.
Secco, G. D., & Pereira, L. C. (2017). Proofs versus experiments:
Wittgensteinian themes surrounding the four-color theorem. In Silva, M.
(ed.), How Colours Matter to Philosophy (pp. 289–307). Cham, Springer.
Shapiro, S. (2014). Varieties of Logic. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Shapiro, S., & Roberts, C. (2021). Open texture and mathematics. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 62(1), 173–91.
Shin, S. J. (1994). The Logical Status of Diagrams. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Sosa, E. (2009). Knowing full well: The normativity of beliefs as performances.
Philosophical Studies, 142(1), 5–15.
Steiner, J. (1826). Einige geometrische Betrachtungen. Journal fürdie reine und
angewandte Mathematik, 1826 (1), 161–84. https://doi.org/10.1515/
crll.1826.1.161. Reprinted as Steiner, J. (1901) in Stern, R. (ed.), Einige
geometrische Betrachtungen (section 14, pp. 25–7). Leipzig: Verlag von
Wilhelm Engelmann. https://archive.org/details/einigegeometris01steigoog/
page/n29/mode/2up?view=theater.
Steiner, M. (1975). Mathematical Knowledge. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University
Press.
Su, F. (2017). Mathematics for human ﬂourishing. American Mathematical
Monthly, 124(6), 483–93.
Su, F. (2020). Mathematics for Human Flourishing. New Haven, CT, Yale
University Press.
Tanswell, F. (2015). A problem with the dependence of informal proofs on
formal proofs. Philosophia Mathematica (III), 23(3), 295–310.
78
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Tanswell, F. S. (2016a). Saving proof from paradox: Gödel’s paradox and the
inconsistency of informal mathematics. In Andreas, H., & Verdée, P. (eds.),
Logical Studies of Paraconsistent Reasoning in Science and Mathematics
(pp. 159–73). Cham, Springer.
Tanswell, F. S. (2016b). Proof, Rigour and Informality: A Virtue Account of
Mathematical Knowledge. Doctoral dissertation, University of St Andrews.
https://research-repository.st-andrews.ac.uk/handle/10023/10249.
Tanswell, F. (2017). Playing with LEGO® and proving theorems. In Cook, R. T.,
& Bacharach, S. (eds.), LEGO® and Philosophy: Constructing Reality Brick
by Brick (pp. 217–26). Hoboken, NJ, Wiley Blackwell.
Tanswell, F. S. (2018). Conceptual engineering for mathematical concepts.
Inquiry, 61(8), 881–913.
Tanswell, F. S. (in press). Go forth and multiply! On actions, instructions and
imperatives in mathematical proofs. In Bueno, O., & Brown, J. (eds.), Essays
on the Philosophy of Jody Azzouni. Cham, Springer.
Tanswell, F. S., & Inglis, M. (2023) The language of proofs: A philosophical
corpus linguistics study of instructions and imperatives in mathematical
texts. In Sriraman, B. (ed.), Handbook of the History and Philosophy of
Mathematical Practice (pp. 1–30). Cham, Springer. https://link.springer
.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-3-030-19071-2_50-1.
Tanswell, F. S., & Kidd, I. J. (2021). Mathematical practice and epistemic virtue
and vice. Synthese, 199(1), 407–26.
Tanswell, F. S., & Rittberg, C. J. (2020). Epistemic injustice in mathematics
education. ZDM: Mathematics Education, 52(6), 1199–1210.
Tappenden, J. (2008). Mathematical concepts and deﬁnitions. In Mancosu, P.
(ed.), The Philosophy of Mathematical Practice (pp. 256–75). Oxford,
Oxford University Press.
Tatton-Brown, O. (2021). Rigour and intuition. Erkenntnis, 86, 1757–81.
Tatton-Brown, O. (2023). Rigour and proof. Review of Symbolic Logic, 16(2),
480–508.
Termini, M. (2019). Proving the point: Connections between legal and math-
ematical reasoning. Suffolk University Law Review, 52, 5–35.
Thomas, R. S. D. (2007). The comparison of mathematics with narrative. In Van
Kerkhove, B., & Van Bendegem, J. P. (eds.), Perspectives on Mathematical
Practices (pp. 43–59). Dordrecht, Springer.
Thomas, R. S. D. (2015). The judicial analogy for mathematical publication. In
Zack, M., & Landry, E. (eds.), Research in History and Philosophy of
Mathematics (pp. 161–70. Cham, Birkhäuser.
Thomas, R. S. D. (2017). Beauty is not all there is to aesthetics in mathematics.
Philosophia Mathematica (III), 25(1), 116–27.
79
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Thompson, C. J. (1986). The contributions of Mark Kac to mathematical
physics. Annals of Probability, 14(4), 1129–38.
Thurston, W. P. (1994). On proof and progress in mathematics. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 30(2), 161–77.
Toulmin, S. E. (1958). The Uses of Argument. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Toulmin, S., Rieke, R., & Janik, A. (1979). An Introduction to Reasoning.
London, Macmillan.
Van Bendegem, J. P. (2014). The impact of the philosophy of mathematical
practice on the philosophy of mathematics. In Soler, L., Zwart, S., Lynch, M.,
& Israel-Jost, V. (eds.), Science After the Practice Turn in the Philosophy,
History, and Social Studies of Science (pp. 215–26). Abingdon, UK, Taylor &
Francis.
Vecht, J. J. (2023). Open texture clariﬁed. Inquiry, 66(6), 1120–40.
Vučković, A., & Sikimić, V. (2023). How to ﬁght linguistic injustice in science:
Equity measures and mitigating agents. Social Epistemology, 37(1), 80–96.
Waismann, F. (1968). Veriﬁability. In Flew, A. (ed.), Logic and Language (pp.
118–44). Oxford, Basil Blackwell.
Walton, D. N. (1998). The New Dialectic: Conversational Contexts of
Argument. Toronto, University of Toronto Press.
Walton, D., & Krabbe, E. C. (1995). Commitment in Dialogue: Basic Concepts
of Interpersonal Reasoning. Albany, NY, State University of New York
Press.
Weber, K. (2008). How mathematicians determine if an argument is a valid
proof. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 39(4), 431–59.
Weber, K. (2023). Instructions and constructions in set theory proofs. Synthese,
202(2), 1–17.
Weber, K., & Czocher, J. (2019). On mathematicians’ disagreements on what
constitutes a proof. Research in Mathematics Education, 21(3), 251–70.
Weber, K., & Tanswell, F. S. (2022). Instructions and recipes in mathematical
proofs. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 11(1), 73–87.
Weber, K., Mejía-Ramos, J. P., & Volpe, T. (2022). The relationship between
proof and certainty in mathematical practice. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 53(1), 65–84.
Weir, A. (2016). Informal proof, formal proof, formalism. Review of Symbolic
Logic, 9(1), 23–43.
Weisgerber, S. (2022). Visual proofs as counterexamples to the standard view of
informal mathematical proofs? In Giardino, V., Linker, S., Burns, R., et al.
(eds.), Diagrammatic Representation and Inference. 13th International
Conference, Diagrams 2022, Rome, 14–16 September. Lecture Notes in
80
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Computer Science, vol. 13462. Cham, Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-031-15146-0_3.
Whitehead, A. N., & Russell, B. (1910). Principia Mathematica, Volume I.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Wiedijk, F. (2008). Formal proof – Getting started. Notices of the American
Mathematical Society, 55(11), 1408–14.
Zagzebski, L. T. (1996). Virtues of the Mind. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.
Zalgaller, V. A., & Los’, G. A. (1994). The solution of Malfatti’s problem.
Journal of Mathematical Sciences, 72(4), 3163–77.
Zayton, B. (2022). Open texture, rigor, and proof. Synthese, 200(4), 1–20.
Zeilberger, D. (1993). Theorems for a price: Tomorrow’s semi-rigorous math-
ematical culture. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 40, 978–81.
81
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325110 Published online by Cambridge University Press

