
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 

Contents
About the Author..........................................................................................vii
Acknowledgments..........................................................................................ix
Introduction.....................................................................................................xi
Part I  Before the Business Opens................................................................1
Chapter 1:	 The Business Entity......................................................................................... 3
Chapter 2:	 An Overview of Taxation............................................................................19
Chapter 3:	 Before Your Business Opens.......................................................................33
Part II  Day-to-Day Expenses......................................................................45
Chapter 4:	 The Basics of Expenses................................................................................47
Chapter 5:	 Cost of Goods Sold......................................................................................53
Chapter 6:	 The Office.......................................................................................................63
Chapter 7:	 The Car............................................................................................................75
Chapter 8:	 Travel................................................................................................................85
Chapter 9:	 Meals and Entertainment.............................................................................93
Chapter 10:	 Fixed Assets and Depreciation.................................................................105
Part III  Employees, Payroll Taxes, and Benefit Plans.............................123
Chapter 11:	 Other Deductions.......................................................................................125
Chapter 12:	 Employees and Wages................................................................................145
Chapter 13:	 Payroll Taxes.................................................................................................163
Chapter 14:	 Medical Expenses.........................................................................................179
Chapter 15:	 Retirement Plans..........................................................................................189
Part IV  Other Items..................................................................................201
Chapter 16:	 Other Taxes..................................................................................................203
Chapter 17:	 Dear Valued Taxpayer: When You Hear from the IRS.......................217
Chapter 18:	 Other Topics................................................................................................235
Index..............................................................................................................255

Introduction
When I was just out of college, my father gave me Charles Adams’s classic 
book on the history of taxes, For Good and Evil: The Impact of Taxes on the  
Course of Civilization.1 Since then, I’ve been fascinated with taxes and am 
something of a tax nerd.  As one of my clients said to me, “We’re glad someone 
enjoys taxes.”
That’s not really accurate. I like working in tax, but I don’t know anyone who 
truly enjoys paying taxes. I suspect we would all like to pay less. Meanwhile, 
many Americans are facing the specter of tax increases on the federal, state, 
and local levels.
That’s where this book comes in. This is a commonsense, practical guide to 
taxes for the small business owner. The goal of the book to give small business 
owners an understanding of what he or she needs to think about regarding 
taxes—from when the business is formed to when it is sold.
The book is divided into four parts. “Before the Business Opens” focuses on 
the types of business entities (and how they are taxed), the taxes a small 
business owner faces, and the start-up phase and record-keeping requirements. 
“Day-to-Day Expenses” looks at deductions you can take and what’s required 
to take them. The third part, “Payroll, Payroll Taxes, and Benefit Plans,” looks at 
paying yourself and employees, payroll taxes you must pay, retirement plans, 
and medical expenses (with a focus on the new Affordable Care Act). The final 
part, “Other Items,” reviews the documentation you generally need for taxes 
besides the federal income tax, what to do when a tax agency contacts you, 
and other topics (including electronic filing, foreign issues, using a tax 
professional, and selling your business).
I tell my clients that tax is a combination of common sense and arcane rules. 
I’ve tried to keep the minutiae of the rules, regulations, and laws to a minimum 
in this text. I hope this book will set you on the course of paying the least 
amount of tax you legally can.
1 Charles Adams, For Good and Evil: The Impact of Taxes on the Course of Civilization (2nd 
Edition), (Toronto: Madison Books, 2001).

I
pa r t
Before the 
Business Opens
There are several different types of business entities for a small business 
owner to choose among, including sole proprietorships, partnerships, 
corporations (both C and S), and limited liability companies. This is perhaps 
the most critical decision a business makes, and Part I begins by exploring this 
important area. 
Chapter 2 looks at the types of taxes a small business owner must pay, the 
definitions of income and expenses, and cash versus accrual accounting. The 
last chapter in Part 1 covers the rules of the start-up phase: that part of the 
business before you receive any revenue. The final part of Chapter 3 examines 
the recordkeeping requirements of a small business in dealing with tax 
agencies.

c h a p t e r
1
The Business 
Entity
The business of America is business.
—President Calvin Coolidge
You’ve been in business or you’re just starting out. You’ve picked up this book 
because you’re wondering how to deal with taxes. You might expect the book 
to start by looking at taxes; however, we won’t look directly at them at all in 
this first chapter. That’s because the most important decision a business 
owner can make is about the structure of the business.
You may have been told, “The best structure for a business is an LLC.” Perhaps 
your buddy told you he has an S corporation, and it works great. If you 
choose your business entity based on someone else’s business, you may be 
making a major mistake. There is no one right business structure. Like many 
things in tax (and business), the correct answer to “What is the best structure 
for a business?” is: “It depends.” 
Generally, all businesses calculate their income in the same manner: Figure 
out the gross income, subtract all ordinary and necessary business expenses, 
and whatever is left is profit. Of course, this is a simplification, but the general 
principle holds. Why, then, is the choice of business entity so important?
• 
Different tax treatments. Though income is generally calculated 
identically across business structures, the tax may not be.
• 
Legal consequences. Not only will different entities be treated 
differently under the law, but the treatment can vary state by 
state.

Chapter 1 | The Business Entity
4
• 
Your goals. Depending on your goals, you may be able to only 
use one specific type of business entity.
In this chapter we take a look the different types of business entities, the 
requirements for each, their pros and cons, and how they are taxed. We 
discuss how you can change your type of entity and conclude with how you 
should choose your form of business entity.
The Sole Proprietor
If you alone conduct your business without forming a separate legal entity, 
you are a sole proprietor. This is the simplest form of business entity. Any 
business conducted by an individual that is not another form of business entity 
will be a sole proprietorship.
There is no such thing as wages or salary with a sole proprietorship. You are 
the business, so wages would just be moving money from your left hand to 
your right hand.
This is by far the simplest form of business entity. It’s just you conducting a 
business. Of course, you must truly be conducting a business and not just 
trying to make a hobby into a business.
Hobby Loss Test
Most of us have hobbies—activities we pursue for enjoyment, not to make 
money. Many individuals attempt to turn their hobbies into businesses; after 
all, activities we pursue for enjoyment can make the best businesses. That 
said, to have a business for tax purposes, you must be trying to make money 
at it. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is naturally skeptical of a “business” 
that loses money year after year. A nine-factor test is used by the IRS and the 
courts to determine whether an activity is being conducted as a business or a 
hobby:1
1.  The manner in which the taxpayer carried on the activity;
2.  The expertise of the taxpayer or his or her advisers;
3.  The time and effort expended by the taxpayer in carrying on the 
activity;
4.  The expectation that the assets used in the activity may 
appreciate in value;
1 Treasury Regulation §1.183-2(b).

5
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
5.  The success of the taxpayer in carrying on other similar or 
dissimilar activities;
6.  The taxpayer’s history of income or loss with respect to the 
activity;
7.  The amount of occasional profits, if any, which are earned;
8.  The financial status of the taxpayer; and
9.  Elements of personal pleasure or recreation.
The effect of these rules for a business that’s considered a hobby is that gross 
income is taxable but the expenses might not be deductible. Most of the time 
you do not want your business to be considered a hobby.
One of the most important ways of avoiding this is to document all of your 
expenses. My mother, a realtor, says that the cliché that real estate is location, 
location, and location is true. Similarly, the most important thing for a business 
owner is to document, document, and document. 
■ Tip  Keep good records! I cannot overemphasize this. You will see this point recurring 
throughout this book because it really is that important.
Let’s look at a business that is a hobby. Say you’ve decided to buy a lot of 
cosmetics, and you decide to become a distributor for a multilevel marketing 
(MLM) company. By becoming a distributor for an MLM that markets 
cosmetics, you can make a little bit of money on the side. MLMs typically pay 
a residual to you for every product you order (and for product ordered by 
others you recruit to the company). However, in this example you do not 
have a profit motive: Your goal is solely to purchase cosmetics for your own 
use. This “business” would clearly be a hobby.
I deliberately chose an MLM for this example because they have a reputation 
for abuse with tax agencies. That does not mean that you should avoid MLMs 
as your choice when starting a business. On the contrary, many people have 
done quite well with businesses that are structured as MLMs. If you honestly 
conduct your business with the goal of making money, you will likely be 
considered to be running your business for the purpose of making a profit, 
not as a hobby.
Sole Proprietorship: The Advantages 
The main reason for choosing a sole proprietorship is its ease. The moment 
you “hang up your shingle,” you’ve formed a sole proprietorship. Other than 

Chapter 1 | The Business Entity
6
a local business license2 and/or a fictitious business statement,3 there are 
usually no other requirements to form a sole proprietorship.4 This makes it 
one of the easiest businesses to create.
From a tax perspective, a sole proprietorship reports its income and expenses 
on a Schedule C. This is part of your personal tax return, so no separate 
business entity tax return is required.
A sole proprietorship is usually one of the least expensive businesses to run 
from an organizational standpoint. Because there are few (if any) legal filings 
required, legal costs are usually limited. Because there’s no separate tax return 
required, there can be a savings on tax preparation costs.
It’s also easy to close a sole proprietorship: You simply stop working in that 
business and don’t include the Schedule C on your tax return (though you 
may need to cancel your business license or fictitious business statement).
Sole Proprietorship: The Disadvantages
The ease of forming a sole proprietorship is also one of its negatives. A sole 
proprietorship is you conducting a business. You can be held personally liable 
for anything that is conducted by your business.
Indeed, protection from legal liability is one of the main reasons that people 
form business entities. I am not an attorney, and nothing written in this book 
is meant as legal advice. That said, it’s safe to say that most individuals do not 
want to be exposed to potential liability issues.
Second, a sole proprietorship is, by definition, you conducting a business by 
yourself. With one exception,5 there cannot be any other owners if you file as 
a sole proprietorship.
Finally, according to IRS statistics, a business that files a sole proprietorship 
has on average five to ten times the audit risk of a corporation or a partnership.6 
2 Business licenses are generally issued by cities and counties, though some states (such as 
Nevada) also require them. 
3 A fictitious business statement is required when you conduct a business in anything other than 
your own name. In most jurisdictions, these statements are issued by counties.
4 A business conducted out of a home may be subject to zoning and/or homeowners 
association restrictions. Consult an attorney familiar with your jurisdiction and legal issues to 
determine whether this is a concern.
5 A married couple living in a community property state jointly conducting a business can file 
their business as a sole proprietorship. The income and expenses of the business would be 
split onto two Schedule C’s. I discuss this in the note in the next section.
6 2011 Internal Revenue Service Data Book: October 1, 2010, to September 30, 2011, 
accessed at http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs=soi/11databk.pdf, page 22.

7
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Why is this the case? The IRS has found that tax returns for sole proprietor-
ships tend to have more errors than do corporate or partnership returns. 
The IRS is a collection agency; they go where the money is. They get more 
bang for their buck by examining sole proprietorships than investigating other 
business entities (except for the largest C corporations). Audits are covered 
in detail in Chapter 17.
Partnerships
A partnership is when two or more persons conduct a trade or business. Note 
that I did not say “two or more individuals”; a partner in a partnership can be 
a business entity, such as a corporation or an LLC (though this is rare). A 
business does not have to have a written agreement to be considered a 
partnership. Most states do not require partnerships to register with the 
state; however, partnerships have the same requirements as sole proprie-
torships in obtaining business licenses and fictitious business statements.
Partnerships file an information return (Form 1065) noting their income and 
expenses, but they generally do not pay income tax.7 The income and expenses 
from a partnership flow through to the partners’ own tax returns. Thus, a 
partnership is a flow-through entity. A partnership issues Schedule K-1’s noting 
each partner’s share of the income and expenses so that these items can be 
reported on each partner’s personal tax returns.
As in sole proprietorships, individual owners in a partnership cannot be paid 
wages. Instead, owners take draws of money from the business. Note that a 
draw is not an expense; rather, it is the movement of earnings from the 
partnership to the partners. 
■ Note  The married couple exception in community property states. There is one business 
with two owners that can, if it wishes, file a Schedule C (sole proprietorship) rather than a 
partnership return: a business operated by a married couple in a community property state (Arizona, 
California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin; Alaska and 
Puerto Rico allow for community property but it is not the default status). Such a business can file 
a partnership return (Form 1065) or two Schedule C’s on their individual return (Form 1040). If the 
owners choose to file Schedule C’s, the income and expenses would be split equally on the two 
Schedule C’s. The pros and cons of this should be carefully considered before choosing a filing 
method. Be aware that community property law is not identical in each community property state.
7 A few jurisdictions, such as Illinois, do charge tax on partnerships. Illinois calls its tax the 
“Partnership Replacement Tax.”

Chapter 1 | The Business Entity
8
Partnerships: The Advantages
The positives of a partnership are similar to those of a sole proprietorship. If 
two individuals go into business together, they have formed a partnership. I 
recommend that a business partnership create a written partnership 
agreement; it will make things far easier if the partnership should dissolve. 
First, a partnership is easy to form. Although you should have a written 
partnership agreement (ideally, reviewed by an attorney), you don’t have to. 
Two individuals who go into business together absent some other form of 
business entity will have a partnership.
A partnership is usually easy to dissolve. The partners simply dissolve (close) 
the entity.
Partnerships have a low audit risk. In fiscal year 2011, only 0.4% of partnership 
returns were examined by the IRS.8 Compare that to 3.6% of sole proprietorship 
returns with income of $200,000 to under $1 million and you can see why 
you might prefer a partnership return to a Schedule C.
Finally, a partnership is a flow-through entity. The partnership itself generally 
does not pay tax; rather, each partner pays tax based on his or her share of 
the income. Thus, a partner pays tax on the partnership income based on his 
or her marginal tax rate.
Partnerships: The Disadvantages
The ease of forming a partnership can also be a negative. When a partnership 
splits, it can be messy—especially if there was not a written partnership 
agreement.
There are other potential legal issues. A partnership does not give a business 
liability protection. Additionally, each partner can be held personally liable for 
another partner’s actions.
A business entity that is similar to a partnership—a limited liability company 
(LLC)—gives liability protection while usually allowing for a partnership tax 
return. However, an LLC does require an operating agreement; the operating 
agreement should be prepared by an attorney. I discuss LLCs in more depth 
in the “LLCs” section of this chapter.
8 2011 Internal Revenue Service Data Book, page 22.

9
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Corporations
.
.

Chapter 1 | The Business Entity
10
a low tax rate on the first $75,000 of income, advantages for health insurance 
and other fringe benefits, ability to use a fiscal year (a business year that ends 
other than on December 31), and some other tax benefits. There are some 
significant disadvantages, too: double taxation, high tax rates on income above 
$75,000, and certain other negative quirks.
C Corporations: The Advantages
Low Tax Rate on First $75,000 of Income. A C corporation, unlike a partnership 
or an S corporation, pays its own taxes; it files a Form 1120 each year. C 
corporations have a deserved reputation for high tax rates; income above 
$75,000 a year is taxed at a minimum rate of 34% for federal income tax. 
However, the marginal tax rate for a C corporation on its first $50,000 of 
income is just 15%; the next $25,000 is taxed at just 25%.10 If a business is 
expected to remain small (or marginally profitable) a C corporation could be 
a wise choice.
Health Insurance and Fringe Benefits. C corporations are among the most 
flexible structures for a business entity. Besides the ability to have multiple 
classes of stock, there are some tax rules that benefit C corporation owners. 
Under §105(b) of the Tax Code, a self-insured medical reimbursement plan is 
allowed. This can cover owners’ medical expenses that are not reimbursed by 
medical insurance, and it may allow for coverage of some over-the-counter 
medications.11 If most of the employees of the corporation are owners, this 
can be a significant advantage.
Use of a Fiscal Year. Most business entities are required to use a calendar year; 
that is, the business year ends on December 31.12 A C corporation can use a 
fiscal year—a business year that ends at the end of a month other than 
December (for instance, a fiscal year might run June 1 to May 31).
This gives the owner some ability to control when he or she receives salary 
and when expenses are taken. Also, tax professionals love businesses that 
have a fiscal year: Their tax returns will be due outside of the busy season.
10 These figures based on 2012 tax rates.
11 Everything related to medical care, medical insurance, and reimbursements therein is 
subject to change based on the Affordable Care Act. While the Act was recently held to be 
constitutionally valid by the Supreme Court, challenges to specific provisions are certain. 
Additionally, many Republicans vow to repeal the measure at their first opportunity. Thus, 
anything written concerning health insurance and medical expenses while accurate as of the 
date of writing could be inaccurate as you read this book.
12 Other business entities can make a §444 election to use a fiscal year; however, this is rarely 
of value to the business.

11
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Other Tax Advantages. There are some other tax advantages of a C corporation. 
Under Tax Code §1202, if the stock of the business qualifies as “small business 
stock,”13 then 50% of the gain from sale of shares can be excluded from 
income and the other 50% is taxed at 28% (an effective 14% tax rate). Some 
states recognize this exclusion, and this can cut state capital gains taxes in 
half. Under §1244, a deduction of $50,000 ($100,000 if married filing jointly) 
is available as an ordinary loss if the corporation fails. This potentially allows 
the owners to plan for the failure in a year when this can offset other income 
the owners have. Finally, if you plan on taking your business “public” (selling 
stock to the general public), you must be a C corporation.
C Corporations: The Disadvantages
There is no perfect business entity type, and C corporations definitely have 
their tax disadvantages. These include the ability to move money to the 
owners, double taxation, and generally high tax rates.
Moving Money to the Owners. There are generally only two methods available 
to move money to owners of C corporations: salaries and dividends. Using 
wages means that you pay payroll taxes; dividends will cause double taxation 
(see the next paragraph). Although other methods can be devised, the 
movement of money from the business to the owners is always an issue with 
a C corporations.
Double Taxation. Taxes are bad enough the first time around. They’re even 
worse when you have to take after-tax money (with regard to the business) 
to send to yourself (the owner) and then pay taxes on that! But that’s what a 
dividend is: An after-tax distribution of funds from the business that’s then 
taxed again on your personal return. Additionally, assets of the business can 
end up being double-taxed when the business is sold or dissolves.
High Tax Rates. Although C corporations have relatively low income tax rates 
on income of $75,000 or less, that’s not the case when income rises above 
that. The minimum tax rate on income above $75,000 is 34%.
Is a C Corporation Right for You?
A C corporation can be the right business structure for a small business. That 
said, if you choose this structure, make sure you are fully aware of all of the 
advantages and disadvantages.
13 Among the requirements: The stock must be held for at least five years, at least 80% of the 
assets of the entity must be used in a trade or business, and the business cannot be a 
personal service provider.

Chapter 1 | The Business Entity
12
S Corporations
Most corporations elect to become S corporations. The “S” refers to the 
Subchapter S of Chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code (the Tax Code). 
There are some technical rules for S corporations that you must follow. First, 
all shareholders must be either US citizens or resident aliens. There can be a 
maximum of only 100 shareholders (spouses are automatically treated as a 
single shareholder; other family members can be treated as a single shareholder 
if any family member elects such treatment). Shareholders generally must be 
people, though some trusts, estates, and tax-exempt corporations qualify as 
shareholders.
A corporation elects S corporation status by filing Form 2553 with the IRS. 
This form must be filed by the fifteenth day of the third month of the tax year 
for which the election is to be effective. Although there is a procedure 
available to make a late S election, it is far easier to do it correctly the first 
time. Note that some states (such as New Jersey and New York) require a 
separate election to be made for state tax purposes.
■ Caution  What happens if your S corporation suddenly doesn’t qualify? Suppose a 
shareholder of your S corporation gives a share of the corporation to a nonresident alien. You will 
suddenly have made a “deemed election” to lose your S corporation status and will become a C 
corporation. If you choose to be an S corporation, make sure your stock cannot go where it would 
disqualify you from being an S corporation.
S Corporations: The Advantages
A C corporation pays its own taxes. Although an S corporation does have to 
file a tax return (Form 1120S is used for federal taxes), it generally does not pay 
any tax.14 Instead, S corporations are flow-through entities: The profits and 
losses flow through to the owners’ tax returns.
While S corporation officers must take a “reasonable salary,” distributions 
can be made that are not subject to payroll taxes. This eliminates the double 
taxation issue of dividends that impacts C corporations.
14 The most common exception is if the business converted from a C corporation and is 
subject to the Built-In Gains Tax. See the discussion on converting business types later in this 
chapter. Additionally, California taxes S corporations at 1.5%, and New York City does not 
recognize S corporations for their business tax (S corporations are treated the same as C 
corporations).

13
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
S Corporations: The Disadvantages
S corporations are corporations, a formal business entity. That means that 
you must have your annual shareholders and board of directors meetings (and 
keep minutes of those meetings). There are some other tax issues that 
negatively impact S corporations.
Required Salary. As mentioned, any corporate officer of an S corporation must 
be paid a reasonable salary. This has become a point of emphasis with the IRS 
in examinations (audits) of S corporations and their owners. What is 
reasonable can be debated, but clearly a salary of $0 for a profitable entity is 
not reasonable. A rule of thumb is that you should take as salary that is at least 
half the net income of the business, or the current FICA wage base,15 
whichever is less. This is discussed in depth in Chapter 12.
Health Insurance. Although health insurance premiums are deductible for the 
self-employed, S corporation owners16 cannot take full advantage of this 
deduction. The rules are not straightforward and are the result of how 
Congress has made the Tax Code overly complex.
The deduction is taken not on the S corporation tax return; rather, it’s taken 
on the owner’s tax return (Form 1040). To take the deduction, you must 
include the premiums as part of your taxable income (wages) in Box 1 of your 
W-2. However, these “wages” are not included for FICA or Medicare tax. You 
then can take the deduction on your Form 1040. The premiums must be paid 
for by the employee, but can be reimbursed by the corporation.
Documentation of Loan Basis. Loans add basis to an S corporation. (I look at the 
reasons you want basis in Chapter 18.) Let’s say you personally lend money to 
your S corporation. Make sure you document the loan (have a written loan 
agreement), the loan repays with interest,17 and that the terms of the loan are 
followed. The Tax Court has disallowed loans that are not documented with 
signed agreements. 
LLCs
One of the newest forms of business entity is the limited liability company 
(LLC). An LLC is a more informal entity than a corporation. For example, no 
15 The FICA (Federal Insurance Contributions Act, or Social Security payroll tax) wage base 
for 2012 is $110,100.
16 Defined as someone who owns at least 2% of the stock of an S corporation.
17 Each month, the IRS publishes the minimum required loan rates, or Applicable Federal 
Rates (AFRs). These are published as Revenue Rulings and can be downloaded from the IRS 
website at http://www.irs.gov/app/piclist/list/federalRates.html. 

Chapter 1 | The Business Entity
14
annual meeting of owners or officers is required. A properly formed LLC 
offers liability protection (similar to corporations).
The key for an LLC is its operating agreement. Though it’s relatively easy to 
change a corporation’s bylaws, it is more difficult to change an LLC’s operating 
agreement. This means that if you form an LLC, you should carefully consider  
having your operating agreement professionally prepared (by an attorney).
The tax treatment for an LLC depends on its number of owners. The owners 
of an LLC are considered to be its members. A single-member LLC is generally 
a disregarded entity for tax purposes. Because the entity is ignored on the tax 
return, a single-member LLC files a Schedule C (just like a sole proprietorship).
LLCs with more than one member are generally considered partnerships for 
tax filing and will file a Partnership Return of Income (Form 1065). That makes 
multiple-member LLCs flow-through entities (like partnerships and S 
corporations).
However, LLCs can elect a different tax status. An LLC can elect to be taxed 
as a C corporation or an S corporation. This gives this business structure 
tremendous flexibility.
LLCs, like corporations, are creatures of state law. Corporate law is similar in 
most states, but the laws dealing with LLCs vary considerably. For example, 
many professionals cannot form LLCs in California. You should consult with a 
local attorney familiar with business formations to make sure that your LLC is 
legal in your local jurisdiction.
Be aware that state tax treatment of LLCs is not identical. Although most 
states will consider a single-member LLC a disregarded entity (and, thus, 
there is no separate tax filing), California does not. All LLCs in California must 
pay an $800 a year minimum franchise tax. California also has a gross receipts 
tax on LLCs.
The tax advantages and disadvantages of LLCs depend on how they are taxed. 
A disregarded LLC will have the same issues as a sole proprietorship (see 
“Sole Proprietorships: The Disadvantages” section); a multiple-member LLC 
will have the same issues as a partnership (see “Partnerships: The 
Disadvantages”). LLCs electing C corporation status or S corporation status 
will have the same issues as those entities (see the respective “Disadvantages” 
sections). The one special advantage that LLCs will have over sole 
proprietorships and partnerships is that they offer liability protection, whereas 
sole proprietorships and partnerships do not.
It’s easy to see why LLCs have become very popular. This structure combines 
liability protection with the ease of a sole proprietorship and a partnership. 

15
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Other Business Entities
The types of entities noted here are the most common, but the limited liability 
partnership and the professional service corporation are also options.
Limited Liability Partnership
The limited liability partnership (LLP) is a hybrid entity between a partnership 
and an LLC. It offers the liability protection of an LLC with the tax filing of a 
partnership. Generally, only individuals in professions who cannot form LLCs 
will consider an LLP. These are usually professionals who are prohibited by 
state laws or other rules from forming LLCs.
Professional Service Corporation
A professional service corporation (PSC) is a special kind of C corporation. 
Under the Tax Code, professionals such as accountants, architects, or 
attorneys who form C corporations are considered to have formed a PSC. 
PSCs are taxed at a flat rate of 35%. Thus, a PSC loses one of the tax 
advantages of a C corporation (the relatively low tax rate on income of less 
than $75,000).
PSCs are generally used only by professionals who must have a C corporation 
because of benefits such as health insurance or retirement planning or are 
forced into this entity because of legal reasons. Most PSCs try to zero out 
their income each year: Usually it is less expensive to pay the owners’ wages 
(and the associated taxes) than to pay the 35% income tax rate (plus state 
income tax).
Moving from One Entity Type  
to Another
Sometimes you form a business entity and you want or need to change it. In 
some cases, you can move from one kind of entity to another. 
You can almost always move from a sole proprietorship to any other form of 
business entity. The sole proprietorship is not a separate entity, so if you 
move from one to, say, an S corporation, it would be like forming the S 
corporation from scratch. Note that for tax reporting purposes, you would 
use the date the new entity formed as the date you stopped reporting income 
on a Schedule C and began reporting it as an S corporation.

Chapter 1 | The Business Entity
16
Similarly, you can almost always move from a partnership to any other form 
of business entity (you would become a sole proprietorship if there were only 
one partner remaining in the business). A partnership is a group of individuals 
acting as a business. Again, you would be forming a new business.
You can move from being an S corporation to a C corporation or vice versa. 
(Note that if you become an S corporation you must legally qualify as an S 
corporation; see “S Corporations” section for the requirements.) However, 
there can be tax consequences to doing so.
If you convert a C corporation to an S corporation, there are three major 
taxes that might be faced. First, there is the Built-in Gains Tax on any assets 
that have appreciated (above what they are shown on the books for) that are 
disposed of within ten years of the S corporation election. Second, any C 
corporation that used LIFO inventory must pay a tax on the benefits under 
LIFO.18 (This tax can be paid over four years.) Third, S corporations that have 
converted from C corporations must pay a tax if their passive investment 
income (i.e., dividends, interest, rents, and capital gains) exceeds 25% of their 
gross receipts and they have accumulated earnings and profits from the time 
they were a C corporation. One additional factor is that any net operating 
losses from the time a business was a C corporation do not carry forward to 
the S corporation.
It is much easier to move from an S corporation to a C corporation. Sometimes 
this will be forced on you if you no longer meet the S corporation qualifications. 
Note that if you convert from an S corporation to a C corporation you 
cannot convert back to an S corporation for five years (unless the IRS approves 
the reconversion, something that almost never happens).
Although you can convert from being a corporation (both an S and a C) to 
any other form of entity (such as an LLC), there will be significant tax 
consequences. The corporation will dissolve for federal tax purposes; thus, 
the owners of the corporation may have a large capital gains tax to pay.
Finally, it’s rare to convert an LLC to another form of entity because the LLC 
can elect to be taxed like a C corporation or an S corporation. An already 
existing LLC files Form 8832 to be taxed as a C corporation or Form 2553 to 
be taxed as an S corporation. Note that these forms have date deadlines if the 
entity wishes to be taxed as a corporation for the entire year.
18 LIFO stands for Last In, First Out. Under this method of inventory, items purchased most 
recently are considered sold first rather than the oldest items. LIFO is discussed in detail in 
Chapter 5.

17
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
In all cases where you are considering converting your business entity, make 
sure you discuss your options with a tax professional and an attorney so that 
you understand all the rules and consequences prior to making the conversion.
Which Entity Is Right for You?
There is no one right entity for every kind of business. You have to weigh the 
tax issues, legal issues, and your goals to determine which form you should 
choose. 
First, determine your goals. Let’s say you’ve started a high-tech business that 
you want to take public in a few years; you would likely want to be a C 
corporation. Perhaps you are an architect in California, just starting out in 
your own business. In most states an LLC would be a good choice of entity, 
but you can’t choose that in California. You might decide to form an S 
corporation. The decision will always be different depending on your situation. 
Once you’ve set your goals, you should discuss them with a tax professional 
and an attorney familiar with business entity formation in your jurisdiction. 
They should be able to help you decide which kind of entity is right for your 
situation. 
■ Tip  Do not form a business entity before discussing it with a tax professional and an attorney.
Table 1-1 lists the different kinds of business entities and their strengths and 
weaknesses.
Table 1-1. Business Entity Types and Their Strengths and Weaknesses
Sole 
Prop.
Partner-
ship
S Corp.
C Corp.
LLC
Easy to 
form?
Yes
Yes
More 
difficult
More difficult
More 
difficult
Liability 
protection
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Flow-
through 
entity?
No*a
Yes
Yes
No
If taxed as 
partnership
Reasonable 
salary 
required?
No salary
No salary for 
partners
Yes
No
If taxed as S 
corp

Chapter 1 | The Business Entity
18
Sole 
Prop.
Partner-
ship
S Corp.
C Corp.
LLC
Annual 
meeting 
required?
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Tax audit 
risk
High
Low
Low
Medium
Low to high
Can have 
fiscal year?
No
No
No
Yes
If taxed as C 
corp
Tax rate
Owners
Owners
Owners
Low on first 
$75,000; high 
after
Owners 
except if 
taxed as C 
corp
Owners 
restricted?
No
No
Yes
No
If taxed as S 
corp
* A sole proprietorship is the individual alone, so this really does not apply.

a p t e r
2
An Overview  
of Taxation
.

Chapter 2 | An Overview of Taxation 
20
Types of Taxes
We begin by looking at the federal income tax, as most of the taxes that 
businesses pay are based on this tax. We then move through the remaining 
litany of taxes that business owners face. 
The Federal Income Tax
The Sixteenth Amendment (ratified in 1913) to the US Constitution states, 
“The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from 
whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several States, 
and without regard to any census or enumeration.” 
The first income tax form was just four pages long (including one page of 
instructions).1 Today, an owner of a small business almost certainly looks at a 
return many times this size. But the basics of the return have not changed. 
Form 1040 is still designed so that you report and pay tax based on your 
income over the last year. 
The US tax system is a self-reporting system. You report your income and file 
your return each year. Your report is accepted at face value subject to the 
right of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to examine (audit) your return. 
There’s a three-year statute of limitations on your return (three years from the 
due date or date of filing, whichever is longer). That’s the amount of time the 
IRS has to audit your return.2 
Almost everyone has heard the legal concept that you are innocent until 
proven guilty. Tax law works differently. Because you self-report your income, 
you are generally guilty until proven innocent when your return is examined by 
the IRS. This is another reason that it is so important to keep excellent 
records. (For more on audits, see Chapter 17.)
Self-reporting doesn’t mean voluntary. Failing to file an income tax return 
when you are required to do so can be a crime. An individual who has a low 
income may not have to file a tax return, but almost all business entities that 
separately file must file a tax return every year. Suppose you are the sole 
stockholder of a shell corporation, Acme. (A shell corporation is an entity that 
exists but is doing no business.) You still have to complete a Form 1120 
federal corporate tax return. Because your income is zero, the corporation 
1 Original Form 1040 available at http://taxhistory.org/thp/1040forms.nsf/WebByYear/1913/.
2 The IRS has six years to examine a return in case of a gross understatement of income 
(defined as an understatement of at least 25 percent). There is no statute of limitations in 
cases of fraud or if you don’t file a return.

21
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
will generally owe no tax. However, if you do not file the return in a timely 
way, you can be subject to penalties.
■ Note  The strange case of Wesley Snipes. In the “don’t try this at home” category, consider 
the tax protester. They have all sorts of reasons that on their face sound great as to why we don’t 
or shouldn’t have to pay income tax. None of them work, but that doesn’t stop them!
Wesley Snipes is an actor who fell under the spell of American Rights Litigators (ARL). ARL 
attempted to take the position that only foreign income is taxable. That argument is frivolous, and 
the courts have universally thrown it out. Snipes was found guilty of three misdemeanor counts of 
willful failure to file a tax return. He made millions of dollars as an actor. He was sentenced to three 
years in federal prison, where he’ll make a few dollars an hour. It’s a lot easier in the long run to 
file and pay your taxes than to take a frivolous position.
No matter what kind of business you have, the basic format of the federal tax 
is the same. You note your income and cost of goods sold to come up with 
your gross income (the income before your business expenses). You then 
note business expenses by category to determine the net income of the 
business. If only it were that simple.
Over time, Congress (which writes the laws) and the IRS (which writes 
regulations promulgated under the laws) have made taxes extremely complex. 
There’s a scene in one of Tom Clancy’s novels where the Secretary of the 
Treasury designate puts the entire Tax Code on a table and the table collapses.3 
Unfortunately, I don’t see tax simplification happening soon, so we all must 
live with the current tax system.
There are layers to tax rules. The Tax Code is law (Title 26, US Code). 
Sections of the Code cover what income is, what expenses can be deducted, 
and filing requirements. The Code itself is the highest authority: It’s the law.
Similarly, there are tax treaties between the United States and various 
countries. Although these are generally beyond the scope of this book (there 
are a few paragraphs on this subject in Chapter 18), treaties hold the force of 
law.
Below the Code and treaties are regulations promulgated under the Code. 
Congress may write a law allowing the secretary of the Treasury or his or her 
designee (typically the IRS) to write administrative law—a regulation.
Regulations are written and published in the Federal Register. Once written, 
they are open for comment by anyone for at least thirty days. Based on the 
3 Tom Clancy, Executive Orders. (New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1996).

Chapter 2 | An Overview of Taxation 
22
comments, the proposed regulation may be rewritten or may become the 
final regulation. The regulation is again published in the Federal Register and 
shortly thereafter becomes final.
Sometimes the IRS issues temporary regulations. These cover situations that 
urgently require resolution. Although titled “temporary,” some temporary 
regulations may remain in force twenty years (or longer) after being written.
Below the Code, treaties, and regulations lie revenue procedures. These are 
official statements of a procedure that affects taxpayers under the Code, 
statutes, treaties, and regulations that the IRS believes should be public. 
Revenue procedures are published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some 
revenue procedures are published annually. For example, every year there’s a 
revenue procedure on how you obtain a private letter ruling from the IRS. 
Some are issued as needed. For example, Revenue Procedure 2012-11 is titled 
“Procedures for issuing determination letters and rulings on the exempt 
status of qualified nonprofit health insurance issuers (QNHIIs) described in 
IRC 501(c)(29) of the Internal Revenue Code.”4 Generally, taxpayers must 
follow revenue procedures.
Revenue rulings are the lowest form of guidance. These are official interpretations 
of how the IRS would apply the law to a specific set of facts. Revenue rulings 
are also published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. 
Revenue rulings usually cover a specific situation. For example, Revenue Ruling 
2012-18 is titled “Tips included for both employee and employer taxes.”5 
Unlike a revenue procedure, a taxpayer does not have to follow a revenue 
ruling. That said, if you don’t follow a revenue ruling, you are required to note 
that fact on your tax return (possibly increasing your chances for an 
examination), and you will need basis in your position (for example, a court 
ruling). In reality, most taxpayers follow the guidance that the IRS gives in 
revenue rulings.
Finally, courts interpret the law. The ultimate arbiter is the US Supreme 
Court. The Supreme Court does not take many tax cases; usually, a tax case 
taken up by the Court is done so because two different circuit courts of 
appeal have issued opposing rulings. A Supreme Court ruling is precedential 
throughout the United States.
4 See Revenue Procedure 2012-11. 
5 See www.irs.gov/irb/2012-26_IRB/ar07.html. The IRS states that the purpose of this revenue 
ruling is “to clarify and update guidelines first presented in Rev. Rul. 95-7, 1995-1 C.B. 185, 
concerning the taxes imposed on tips under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) 
and the notice and demand under section 3121(q) of the Internal Revenue Code (Code).”

23
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Note  The Supreme Court speaks: Can you be a professional gambler? Back in 1987, the 
Supreme Court took up the case of Robert Groetzinger.6 Groetzinger was a professional gambler 
and wanted to deduct his business expenses on his tax return. The Supreme Court took up his 
case, “Because of a conflict on the issue among Courts of Appeals, we granted certiorari.” 
The key to this case—and a major factor in hobby loss cases—are these lines from the decision: 
“We conclude that if one’s gambling activity is pursued full time, in good faith, and with regularity, 
to the production of income for a livelihood, and is not a mere hobby, it is a trade or business within 
the meaning of the statutes with which we are here concerned. Respondent Groetzinger satisfied 
that test in 1978. Constant and largescale effort on his part was made. Skill was required and was 
applied. He did what he did for a livelihood, though with a less-than-successful result. This was not 
a hobby or a passing fancy or an occasional bet for amusement.”
Below the Supreme Court are the regional Courts of Appeal. There are 
twelve regional circuits. A precedential decision of a court of appeal serves as 
precedent throughout that region. 
The lowest rung in the regular federal court system are district courts. A 
decision of a district court is on a specific case and does not serve as precedent.
There are also specialized federal courts. One of these is the US Tax Court, 
which hears cases solely on tax issues. Full decisions of the Tax Court serve 
as precedent. Decisions can be appealed to the regional appeals courts, 
depending on where the petitioner resides.
Although thousands of Tax Court cases are filed each year, relatively few are 
actually heard. This is because the court urges both sides (the petitioner who 
files the claim and the respondent, the IRS) to settle if at all possible.
Most tax cases that make it to court are heard by the Tax Court. That’s 
because you do not have to pay assessed tax when you file a Tax Court 
petition. However, if you pursue a tax case in either district court or the 
Court of Federal Claims (the other methods of challenging the IRS in court) 
you must pay the tax first.
Most of this book covers the specific income and expense items you report 
for federal income tax. This is the primary tax paid by business owners, either 
directly if their business entity pays tax or indirectly on their personal return 
if the business is a sole proprietorship or a flow-through entity.
6 Commissioner v. Groetzinger, 480 U.S. 23 (1987).

Chapter 2 | An Overview of Taxation 
24
State Income Taxes
Most states have an income tax. If you pay federal income tax for your 
business, you likely will have to pay state income tax, too.
A few states do not have an income tax on individuals: Alaska, Florida, Nevada, 
New Hampshire,7 South Dakota, Tennessee,8 Texas, Washington, and 
Wyoming. However, Alaska and Florida have a corporate income tax (C 
corporations must file and pay this tax). New Hampshire has a business profits 
tax paid by all businesses within the state. South Dakota has a tax on financial 
institutions. Texas has a gross margin tax that exempts sole proprietorships 
and partnerships; the tax also applies only to businesses with gross revenues 
of more than $600,000 (though all affected businesses must file a return). 
Washington has a Business and Occupation tax—a gross receipts tax on all 
businesses with a tax rate of 0.138% to 1.9% depending on the industry. Only 
Nevada and Wyoming truly have no state income taxes.
A few jurisdictions, such as California, have minimum franchise taxes that 
must be paid every year. California’s minimum tax of $800 must be paid each 
year by every corporation and LLC in the state.9 
For most businesses, the state income tax flows directly from the federal tax. 
This is because most state systems are based on the federal income tax. 
However, a few states, such as Arkansas, Iowa, and New Jersey, do not use 
federal taxable income as the beginning point in calculating tax. Many states 
have conformity issues, where state tax law differs from federal tax law. 
California has numerous areas in which the state does not conform to federal 
law. For example, Section 179 depreciation in California is limited to $25,000 
a year, vs. the current federal maximum Section 179 depreciation of $500,000. 
Other State-Level Taxes
Three states have taken a different approach to taxes. As mentioned in the 
previous section, Texas has a gross margin tax that impacts larger businesses, 
and Washington has a Business and Occupation tax that impacts all businesses 
in the state. Hawaii has a general excise and use tax that applies to all 
businesses. This functions not only as the state’s sales tax but also as a gross 
receipts tax on businesses. A business in Hawaii has the joy of paying two 
state-level taxes: income tax and the general excise and use tax.
7 New Hampshire has an interest and dividends tax of 5 percent.
8 Tennessee has an interest and dividends tax of 6 percent.
9 There is no minimum tax in the first year of a corporation that is registered with the 
California Secretary of State.

25
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Tip  Location matters. Suppose you are starting a business near Lake Tahoe (on the border of 
California and Nevada). If you are in California, you will be paying income tax and are subject to the 
California regulatory environment. If you are in Nevada, you will not be paying income tax and are 
subject to Nevada’s regulatory environment. 
Although this is a rather polarized example, where you locate your business definitely matters. I 
moved my business from Southern California to Nevada for several reasons (a major one was 
taxes). When you’re choosing a business location, pay attention to all the requirements, regulations, 
and taxes that exist in your chosen location. You may decide that a different location is a better 
choice. 
Most businesses also have to comply with sales tax laws. Five states do not 
have a sales tax: Alaska, Delaware, Montana, New Hampshire, and Oregon. 
Although sales taxes are thought of as a cost mainly for consumers, businesses 
must pay them on purchases for their own use. States have become increasingly 
proactive in collecting use tax. Use tax is the equivalent of sales tax when a 
product is purchased but no sales tax is paid. Suppose you buy a machine that 
you would generally resell to a customer, but you end up keeping the machine 
for your own use. You generally owe use tax on that purchase.
Sales tax rates vary widely throughout the country and even within a state. 
Most states allow local jurisdictions to charge additional sales tax. California 
has over 100 different districts charging sales tax!
Many businesses find they have to collect sales tax in multiple states even 
though they have just one physical office. In 1992, the Supreme Court decided 
Quill Corp. v. North Dakota.10 The Court held that for there to be nexus (see 
definition in the note) to a state, there must be a physical presence in the 
state. Since that decision, states have been pushing the envelope and 
attempting to enforce nexus when there is no physical presence.11 A few 
states now have economic nexus statutes on their books. These laws are of 
questionable constitutionality, but this doesn’t change the fact the laws are on 
the books. 
10 Quill Corp. v. North Dakota (91-194), 504 U.S. 298 (1992).
11 California and Washington are two states with economic nexus laws.

Chapter 2 | An Overview of Taxation 
26
■ Note  What is nexus? One of the most important concepts in tax is nexus. The dictionary 
defines nexus to mean “a means of connection; tie; link.”12 In tax, nexus means that your business 
has sufficient ties to the state (or local jurisdiction) and has become subject to the tax laws of that 
state. For income tax purposes, generally a business will have nexus with a state if it has a physical 
location in the state, employees in the state that are doing more than just soliciting business, or 
property in the state. Nexus rules vary in each state.
The rules for nexus for sales tax law are more complex. All of the factors that can cause nexus to 
arise for income tax can cause nexus for sales tax. Additionally, activities by affiliates and even 
manufacturers’ representatives have been used to cause nexus for sales tax. Again, the rules vary 
among the states.
Complying with sales tax law requires documentation. Sales tax agencies will 
assume that every sale is for your own use unless you properly document 
resale licenses or certificates. The required procedure varies in each state. If 
you keep good records and follow your state’s procedures, you will be far 
better off. 
Local Income Taxes
Some local jurisdictions have their own income taxes. At the time of this 
writing, if you are in Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, New York, or Pennsylvania you 
may have to deal with local income taxes. These are tax forms you must file 
and pay to a local jurisdiction. (Indiana has a county option with its income 
tax, but the tax is collected with the state income tax.)
New York City is the most infamous locale for local taxes in the United 
States. First, residents of the metropolitan area (within New York state) must 
pay the Metropolitan Commuter Transportation Mobility Tax (MCTMT). 
Though the tax rate is low, it’s yet another set of paperwork and regulations 
for the business owner.
A resident of New York City pays a higher personal income tax rate than 
other residents of the state.13 This additional tax is collected on the state 
income tax return (similar to Indiana).
Unfortunately, it doesn’t end there. A business in New York City must file and 
pay business taxes to the city. An unincorporated business (a sole 
proprietorship, partnership, or LLC) files an unincorporated business tax 
12 Definition of “nexus,” Dictionary.com, http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/nexus?s=t. 
13 Yonkers also has a local income tax add-on that’s collected with the New York state 
income tax.

27
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
return. A corporation (either a C corporation or an S corporation) must file 
and pay New York City General Corporation Tax. New York City does not 
recognize S corporations for its tax. The tax rate isn’t low; it can be up to 
8.85%.
Another jurisdiction with high local taxes is Philadelphia. The City of Brotherly 
Love has a school district income tax, a business privilege tax, and a net 
profits tax.
Ohio has city and school district taxes; each local jurisdiction has a different 
rate. At least it’s easy to determine your rate: The Ohio Department of 
Taxation offers The Finder, which allows you to look up your city, school 
district, and sales tax rates for wherever you reside in the Buckeye State.14
If you are a resident of one of the affected states, make sure you check to see 
if you have a local tax filing obligation along with your state and federal taxes.
Payroll Taxes
If your business has employees, you will have payroll taxes. These include 
FICA (social security), Medicare, federal unemployment insurance, state 
unemployment insurance, and possibly other state payroll taxes. 
Payroll taxes are covered in depth in Chapter 13. For now, one major point 
to realize is that an officer or owner of a business can be held personally liable 
for payroll taxes. Say you use Fly by Night Payroll Service, and they properly 
calculate and withhold your payroll taxes but don’t remit them to the 
government. You can be held liable for paying them again! I cover how to avoid 
this in Chapter 13.
Real Property Taxes
For most US citizens, their home is their biggest investment. Among the bills 
homeowners must pay are local property taxes. A business that owns real 
property must also pay property taxes on the land and buildings.
Personal Property Taxes
In most jurisdictions businesses must pay personal property taxes. These are 
assessed on machinery, equipment, supplies, and sometimes inventory; the 
tax is usually administered at the county level. A business files a statement of 
personal property annually noting the property it has (or the property it has 
14 Ohio’s Finder, Ohio Department of Taxation, www.tax.ohio.gov/online_services/thefinder.
stm. 

Chapter 2 | An Overview of Taxation 
28
added or retired); later, the tax agency sends the business a bill. Tax rates vary 
widely depending on state and local laws. 
Business License Taxes
Most businesses must obtain a business license. These are usually administered 
at the local (city or county) level. Some jurisdictions charge a flat fee for a 
license; others charge based on gross receipts or payroll taxes. You should 
carefully check local law on obtaining a business license and the associated 
taxes and fees. A few states, such as Nevada, also require a business to obtain 
a state license (in addition to the local license).
■ Tip  Location matters (again). Suppose you are opening a business in Southern California. 
You’re debating between a location in Los Angeles and one in Irvine (in Orange County). You look at 
the licensing requirements of both cities.
You discover there’s an annual tax of just $50 in Irvine.15 However, you find that Los Angeles has a 
gross receipts–based business license structure.16 
This does not necessarily mean that Irvine is a better location than Los Angeles. The gross receipts 
tax (or lack thereof) is just one factor that should be evaluated in choosing the location of your 
business. 
Excise Taxes
Businesses in a few industries must pay an excise tax. These were typically 
introduced to pay for specific items. For example, the telephone excise tax 
was introduced in 1898 to pay for the Spanish-American War. In 2006, this 
tax was eliminated for all but local telephone service. Excise taxes exist at 
both the federal and state levels.
A complete listing of federal excise taxes (except for taxes administered by 
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives) is found in IRS 
Publication 510.17 The most well-known IRS-administered excise taxes are on 
fuel, telephone use, and indoor tanning. There are also excise taxes on sport 
fishing equipment, bows and quivers, arrow shafts, and vaccines.
15 Business License Application, City of Irvine, https://cityofirvine.org/ipd/divisions/business_
licenses/regulartax.asp. 
16 Tax Information Booklet, City of Los Angeles, http://finance.lacity.org/content/
TaxInfoBooklet.htm. 
17 See www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p510.pdf. 

29
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
.
.
What Is Income? 
The first step in determining tax is determining income. The Tax code gives 
a starting place for this—Section 61(a) states, “except as otherwise provided 
in this subtitle, gross income means all income from whatever source derived.” 
courts have interpreted this broadly; in Commissioner v. Schleier the Supreme 

Chapter 2 | An Overview of Taxation 
30
Court notes,18 “We have repeatedly emphasized the ‘sweeping scope’ of this 
section and its statutory predecessors.” 
A simple way of looking at this is to assume that everything is taxable unless 
Congress exempts it. 
I’m sometimes asked if there’s a minimum threshold for taxation. There’s 
not—if your business earns $1 of gross income, that $1 is reportable. 
You do get to deduct any sales adjustments and refunds you make. For 
example, if a check from a client bounces, that’s a deduction from gross 
receipts; if a customer returns a product he’s purchased, that’s a deduction 
from sales.
If you recall the definition of gross income, your cost of goods sold can be 
deducted against your gross receipts. This would include the material costs of 
items you sell, the labor costs related to that, shipping and handling to get the 
goods to customers, and similar costs.
But that’s it. Gross income is simply your gross receipts minus your sales 
adjustments minus your cost of goods sold.
What Are Expenses?
The next step is to determine expenses. The Tax Code is the first resource. 
Section 162(a) begins, “There shall be allowed as a deduction all the ordinary 
and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year in carrying 
on any trade or business.” Courts have interpreted expenses narrowly; in 
Commissioner v. Schleier, the Supreme Court states,19 “We have also emphasized 
the corollary to §61(a)’s broad construction, namely the ‘default rule of 
statutory interpretation that exclusions from income must be narrowly 
construed.’” In plain English this can be stated: Nothing is deductible unless 
Congress allows it. Though Section 162(a) appears broad (and it is), the rest of 
the Tax Code narrows what can and cannot be deducted. Indeed, most of the 
remainder of this book is devoted to what you can deduct for expenses and 
how to correctly document those expenses. Although most tax professionals 
would prefer a simpler Tax Code, the current Code is anything but 
straightforward.
18 Commissioner v. Schleier (94-500), 515 U.S. 323 (1995).
19 Commissioner v. Schleier.

31
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Cash vs. Accrual Accounting
The final topic of this chapter is an important one: cash vs. accrual. This may 
seem arcane, but the difference in accounting methods can make a difference 
in the tax you pay.
Cash basis accounting is relatively straightforward. You recognize income 
when you receive it; you recognize expenses when you pay for them. This is 
the method that most Americans use for their day-to-day lives.
There’s a second type of accounting: accrual accounting. Here, income is 
recognized when the invoice is sent out; expenses are recognized when you 
receive the invoice from the vendor.
Some businesses do not have a choice. You must use the accrual method if 
you have annual sales of more than $5 million or you have annual sales of $1 
million and you maintain an inventory of items you sell to the public. 
For the most part, the results will be the same no matter which method you 
use. However, there can be timing differences. Let’s look at two examples 
with a calendar year C corporation, Acme. 
Example 1. Acme makes a $25,000 sale on December 29. The customer pays for 
the product on January 24. If Acme is cash basis, the sale will not be included in 
this year’s income (it will go on next year’s income); if Acme is accrual basis, the sale 
will be included in this year’s income.
Example 2. Acme purchases supplies costing $20,000 on December 30. Acme pays 
its vendor on January 25. If Acme is cash basis, the $20,000 expense will not be 
included in the year’s results (it will go on next year’s expenses list). However, if 
Acme is accrual basis, the expense will be included in the year’s results.
Most small businesses use cash basis accounting. That does not necessarily 
make it the right choice for your business. Although cash basis is more like 
how you keep your books for your personal life, accrual basis accounting is 
better for showing your overall results without emphasizing a particularly 
good (or bad) month.

c h a p t e r
3
Before Your 
Business Opens
The beginning is the most important part of the work.
—Plato
You are ready to start building your business. Most people just plunge in, and 
taxes and record keeping fall by the wayside. “Let’s get the business up and 
running as fast as possible,” they think. The problem with this is that things we 
keep track of today are known tomorrow. When we reconstruct things 
tomorrow that occurred yesterday, we tend to make mistakes.
In this chapter we look at how to make sure your business starts off on the 
right foot from a tax standpoint. The focus is on the start-up phase, the time 
when you’re building your business but you have not yet had any revenue. 
There are rules that must be followed, and we look at what you can and can’t 
deduct.
The Start-Up Phase
The cost of getting started in a business is considered a capital expense. All of 
your costs that are both ordinary and necessary (see Chapter 4 for more on 
these standards) are deductible. This includes everything from the purchase 
of equipment, wages for your employees, and advertising your business. Your 
organizational expenses are separately accounted for (see “Organizational 
Expenses” section later).

Chapter 3 | Before Your Business Opens
34
There is an exception to start-up costs being capital expenses: capital 
equipment you purchase for your business. Let’s say you are starting a pizza 
shop, and you buy a pizza oven. The oven would be separately capitalized as a 
fixed asset (see Chapter 10 for more on fixed assets and depreciation).
The start-up phase commences when you begin building your business, and it 
ends once you have your first dollar of revenue. 
Start-Up Expenses
What are start-up expenses? The Internal Revenue Service (IRS)1 gives the 
details:
Start-up costs are amounts paid or incurred for: (a) creating an active trade or 
business; or (b) investigating the creation or acquisition of an active trade or 
business. Start-up costs include amounts paid or incurred in connection with an 
existing activity engaged in for profit; and for the production of income in 
anticipation of the activity becoming an active trade or business. 
Let’s put that into plain English. A start-up expense is almost anything you 
spend money on that is used for creating a business that will attempt to make 
a profit. I’ve already covered the major exceptions (organizational expenses 
and capital expenses). There are three other costs that do not qualify as start-
up expenses: interest, taxes, and research and development. Those items are 
still deductible business expenses, so it’s not as if you lose them.
Unfortunately, how you deduct start-up expenses is very different from how 
other items are deducted. The Tax Code states that start-up expenses are 
generally deducted over a fifteen-year period.2 A related part of the Code3 
states that you can elect to take up to $5,000 of start-up expenses in your 
first year in business. However, if your total start-up costs are more than 
$55,000, you cannot make an election to expense up to $5,000 of start-up 
expenses in your first year in business. (The ability to make the election 
phases out as the total of start-up expenses increases from $50,000 to 
$55,000.)
When you make the election to amortize and expense your start-up 
expenditures, you will attach a statement to your tax return. A sample 
statement is shown in Figure 3-1.
1 IRS, Publication 535: Business Expenses (for 2011 returns), www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p535.
pdf. 
2 IRC §195(c)(1)(A). 
3 IRC §195(b). 

35
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Note  Start-up expense election now deemed. Effective as of September 2008, the election 
to expense up to $5,000 of start-up expenses is now deemed to have been made. If you have 
$5,000 or less of start-up expenses, you do not have to attach a statement to your return (as 
detailed next). You can simply include those costs as “start-up expenses” on your tax return. 
However, if you have more than $5,000 of start-up expenses you must include a statement and 
follow the procedures as noted.
Note the detail that’s required on the statement in Figure 3-1. First, it must 
note that the taxpayer is electing under Section 195(b)(1) of the Internal 
Revenue Code that the total start-up expenses were $5,830, that $5,000 of 
those expenses are elected to be deducted, and the remaining $830 of 
expenses are being amortized over 180 months (15 years). The name of the 
business and a description of the business must be given. The month the 
business began must also be provided. Finally, each expense must be separately 
listed.
I have deliberately made the listing of expenditures short. The sample business 
had just six expense items. However, it’s possible to have hundreds of items. 
If you do, they still must be individually listed.
■ Tip  Accounting software to the rescue. Typing six entries is no big deal when completing 
your tax return; however, I doubt you want to type 60, 600, or 6,000 entries. This is one of the 
benefits of using accounting software.
You can create an expense account titled “Start-Up Expenses” and simply charge all such expenses 
into that account. Many tax software products can import from popular accounting software such 
as QuickBooks. (Note that importing is generally not available from the QuickBooks online product). 
If you use accounting software, make sure you have everything set up correctly. A mistake made 
early in a business’s life will tend to cascade and cause increasing problems over time. If you have 
any doubts, consider hiring a bookkeeper experienced with your software to make sure you start 
off on the right foot.

Chapter 3 | Before Your Business Opens
36
Figure 3-1. Sample election to amortize start-up expenses

37
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
In the first year of this business, $5,000 will be expensed as start-up expenses. 
Of the remaining $830, only $37 will be amortized in the first year (8/12 of 
1/15 of the $830).
Notice also that the expense listing notes both a description of the expense 
(e.g., Design of Website) and the name of the vendor. This allows for an easy 
reconciliation if the return is audited.
Any tax or interest expenses incurred during the start-up phase are expensed; 
these items are not treated differently during the start-up phase. Tax and 
interest expense are covered in Chapter 10.
You do not have to elect to deduct $5,000 of start-up expenses; you can, if 
you wish, deduct a lesser amount. However, most business owners want to 
get the benefit of the expenses (the tax write-off) as quickly as possible. 
Thus, it is rare when a business does not deduct the maximum allowable 
start-up expenses.
Organizational Expenses
The second major type of expense incurred during the start-up phase is 
organizational expenses. Organizational expenses are incurred only if you 
have a separate business entity, such as a corporation, LLC, or partnership.
Organizational expenses are costs used for the creation of the business entity 
that would be amortized over the life of the business (if the business had a 
fixed life). They must also be incurred either before the end of the first tax 
year in which a corporation is in business or incurred prior to the due date of 
a partnership tax return (excluding extensions).
■ Tip  The left and right hands of a sole proprietorship. You may ask, “Why can’t there be 
organizational expenses for my sole proprietorship? I still need legal and accounting advice.” The 
reason is that legally there is no difference between you and the sole proprietorship. If you recall 
from Chapter 1, a sole proprietorship is you acting as a business. The business functions as your 
alter ego. Although you can have costs for starting the business, these costs cannot be deducted 
as organizational expenses because you haven’t organized a new business! Legal and accounting 
fees in the start-up phase for a sole proprietorship would be deductible as start-up expenses.
Also note that you can’t pay yourself a salary when you have a sole proprietorship. You are the 
business; paying yourself a salary would just be moving money from your left hand to your right 
hand.

Chapter 3 | Before Your Business Opens
38
The rules for deducting and amortizing organizational expenses are identical 
to those for start-up expenses (though the Code section and regulation 
allowing for the deduction and amortization are different).4
The election to amortize and/or deduct organizational expenses is now 
deemed to have been made. If you have less than $5,000 of these expenses, 
you do not have to attach an election statement to your tax return. If you 
have more than $5,000 of expenses, you will need to attach a statement.
Figure 3-2 shows a sample statement for Acme Consulting LLC. The statement 
is very similar to the start-up election statement shown in Figure 3-1. There’s 
a statement that the partnership is electing under Section 709 of the code to 
deduct $5,000 of organizational expenditures and amortize the remaining 
$550 over 180 months. The total of the organizational expenses is given along 
with the name of the business and a description of the business. The starting 
month of the business and a listing of the expenses is the last part of the 
statement.
The number of organizational expenditures is usually smaller than it is for 
start-up expenses. That’s because organizational expenses are limited to only 
a few kinds of expenses. In practice, many businesses will not have to file the 
organizational expense election statement because their expenditures in this 
category will not exceed $5,000.
4 IRC §709 allows for the amortization for partnerships; §248 is for corporations. The 
statement falls under IRC Regulation 1.709-1(b) and (c) for partnerships and IRC Regulation 
1.248-1(c) for corporations.

39
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Figure 3-2. Sample election to amortize organizational expenses

Chapter 3 | Before Your Business Opens
40
■ Tip Consider including the elections statement when you do not have to. Let’s say you’ve 
started a new LLC, and your organizational expenses total $4,000. You can deduct those 
organizational expenditures without including a statement on your tax return. You should consider 
including the statement anyway, and the reason has to do with what would happen if you’ve made 
a mistake. 
Imagine you forgot about a $1,200 invoice from your attorney, so the true total of organizational 
expenses was $5,200 rather than the $4,000 you included. You would be able to expense the 
maximum $5,000. However, you might not be allowed to amortize the $200 of expenditures that 
exceed the $5,000 that can be deducted in an audit. 
If you include the deemed statement and you have left off the $1,200 invoice, you will be allowed 
to either amend your return (noting the additional expense, deducting an additional $1,000, and 
then amortizing the remaining $200 over fifteen years). By including the election statement, you 
allow yourself the ability to more easily recover from an error.
Record Keeping Requirements 
.
.

41
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
• 
Credit card records.
• 
Forms 1099-MISC you receive.
Note that if your business uses the accrual method of accounting, the cash 
you receive might not match your income. In this case, the invoices you 
generate should match the income. For a cash-basis business, the money you 
receive should match your income, whereas the invoices you generate might 
not match the income.
■ Tip  Use a separate bank deposit for nonincome items. Although most of the deposits you 
make into your business bank account will be for income, you will likely have some nonincome 
items that you have to deposit. For example, you may have a refund of a deposit you made to a 
utility company. If you use a computer system for your accounting, make sure to note your bank 
deposit as a refund. Consider making a separate deposit at the bank so that it is readily identifiable 
in case of an audit.
Expenses (Including Cost of Goods Sold)
You need to be able to prove your expenses. This not only means being able 
to show that you spent, say, $200 for a hotel but that it was business-related. 
If there might be any doubt, write the business purpose of the expense on the 
receipt. If you have a business meal or entertainment expense, write on the 
receipt who was with you and the business purpose. 
Documents you can use to prove business expenses include:
• 
Canceled checks.
• 
Account statements.
• 
Credit card sales slips.
• 
Invoices.
• 
Petty cash slips.
These are primary records and, as long as there is a business purpose, these 
will be accepted by the IRS. Credit card statements are secondary records that 
do not have to be accepted by the IRS. The problem with a credit card 
statement is that it only shows you spent, for example, $200 at a business. It 
doesn’t show what was purchased or that it had a business purpose.

Chapter 3 | Before Your Business Opens
42
Electronic Records
Up until the 1990s, keeping records meant keeping the original documents. 
Although you can still keep original documents, the IRS allows scanned copies 
(and photocopies) as long as all of the information on the original document 
is readable. 
If you use a scanning system, your system must have an index so you can easily 
retrieve a specific document. The IRS has the right to test your system to 
make sure that it accurately reproduces an original record. You should test 
your scanner (and electronic filing cabinet software, if applicable) to make 
sure that you can retrieve anything you store digitally.
■ Tip  Only back up the data you want to keep. Computer hard drives can and do fail. My 
corollary to Murphy’s Law is that your computer will crash at the least opportune moment. Make 
sure you are backing up all the data you wish to keep, and test the backups! This means you need 
to attempt a restoration from your backups. If you can’t restore the data, your backup is worthless.
Additionally, make sure you store a backup off-site and that you regularly backup your data to the 
off-site location. What would happen to your backup if it’s next to your computer and that room is 
destroyed? If you don’t regularly back up your data, you may have to recreate a week or a month’s 
worth of records when (not if) your computer crashes. You may wish to consider one of the online 
backup services that will automatically back up your data.
Computer Accounting Systems
The same regulations that allow you to use electronic systems for storing 
your data also allow computer-based accounting systems. All reputable 
software providers, such as QuickBooks and Peachtree, comply with IRS 
requirements of being able to reproduce records. Make sure that if you use a 
computer system that you back it up!
■ Caution  Two sets of books aren’t better than one. Most business owners want just one set 
of financial records (books). After all, that’s all you need for your business. Of course, where most 
wouldn’t consider going the Bozo contingent has no problem heading to. The IRS routinely sends 
undercover agents to businesses that are for sale. Here’s an example of something you definitely 
shouldn’t try at home.
In July 2008, AJ’s Green Dry Cleaners in Palo Alto, California, went up for sale. Sung Ho Choi 
managed the business for his parents. An IRS undercover criminal investigator approached Choi 
and he provided the investigator with sales data. The sales exceeded what was reported on the tax 

43
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
return for the business. It turned out that Choi only provided the bank records and not the complete 
sales records to his tax preparer. He pleaded guilty to four counts of preparing or aiding in preparing 
false tax returns. He was sentenced to two months’ community confinement, eight months’ home 
confinement, full restitution of $60,537, and a $5,000 fine.
How Long Should You Keep Your Records?
The IRS gives recommendations for the amount of time to keep records in 
Publication 583.5 I believe the IRS recommendations are too short. In Table 
3-1, I present my recommendations for the length of time to keep various 
records.
The IRS recommends keeping income and expense records for three years. 
Note that this length of time is from the due date of the return or the date of 
filing, whichever is later. I recommend eight years, a much longer period of time.
The reason I recommend this extended timeframe is that the IRS can attempt 
to assess a gross understatement of income penalty for six years from the due 
date of the return or date of filing (whichever is later). Most states give their 
tax agencies extra time to challenge returns; eight years is typical for many 
states. Of course, if you do not have a state filing requirement (for example, 
you are in Nevada), then six years is likely long enough. You should check with 
your state and/or local tax agency for their period of limitations (the amount 
of time they have to challenge your return).
Table 3-1. Suggested Record Keeping Times
Type of Record
How Long to Keep Record
Tax returns
Forever
Income and expense backup records
8 Years
Payroll records
Forever
Corporate minutes
Forever
Worthless security/bad debt
7 Years
Records for fraudulent return
Forever
Records if you do not file a return
Forever
5 See IRS, Publication 583: Starting a Business and Keeping Records, www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/
p583.pdf, page 15.

Chapter 3 | Before Your Business Opens
44
I’m hopeful that no one reading this book would ever consider filing a 
fraudulent return or not filing their tax return. That said, if you don’t file a 
return when you’re required to, the statute of limitations doesn’t begin to 
run. In theory, the IRS has forever to come after you if you don’t file a return.
Finally, I strongly advise that you keep copies of your tax returns forever. The 
returns have information you will find useful in future years. Additionally, make 
sure you retain proof of filing: either the receipt from the postal service (if 
you mail the return, always mail it using certified mail, return receipt requested) 
or the proof of electronic filing. 

pa r t
II
Day-to-Day 
Expenses
It’s time to examine the deductions you are allowed to take on a tax return. 
We begin by reviewing what’s an allowable expense and what’s not. We then 
look at each category of expenses: cost of goods sold, the office, the car, 
travel, meals and entertainment, fixed assets and depreciation, and everything 
else. (Employees, payroll taxes, and benefits are covered in Part III.) 

c h a p t e r
4
The Basics of 
Expenses
The hardest thing in the world to understand is the income tax.
—Albert Einstein
What can I deduct as a business expense? How far can I stretch the envelope? 
What records do I need? What about expenditures that are part personal and 
part business? Are there business expenses that I can’t deduct on my tax 
return? 
Expenses are frequently a trouble spot for business owners. We begin by 
looking at what an expense is and some of the more common (and uncommon) 
expenses. Next, we examine the two standards that all expenses must meet: 
the ordinary standard and the necessary standard. The chapter concludes by 
looking at nondeductible expenses.
Overview of Expenses
Section 162(a) of the Tax Code begins, “There shall be allowed as a deduction 
all the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the taxable 
year in carrying on any trade or business.” 
As noted in Chapter 2, nothing is deductible unless Congress allows it. That 
said, if you can demonstrate that the expenditure is both necessary and 
ordinary for your business (both terms will be discussed in depth later in this 
chapter), and you have proper documentation for your expense, the IRS (or 
the courts) will generally allow it.

Chapter 4 | The Basics of Expenses
48
Once again, the documentation is what ends up being the issue for most 
people. You need proof that you spent the money. Document, document, 
document! If you can show you spent the money on a legitimate business 
activity, you will likely prevail.
■ Note  Breast implants deductible for exotic entertainer? Most tax court cases feature 
mundane matters of taxation. However, every so often something unusual hits the court. So it was 
in 1994 when Cynthia Hess faced down the IRS over $699 of self-employment tax. Hess claimed 
that her breast implants were depreciable; the IRS challenged it as a personal expense.
Hess’s agent urged her to increase the size of her breasts to increase her income. Her custom-
made implants were size 56N. She truly earned her stage name of “Chesty Love.” Her income 
increased but at the cost of serious medical problems. Hess considered the implants a necessary 
stage prop. The court agreed, noting that her implants were similar to special clothing that’s 
essential for a business and not suitable for general or personal wear. “Petitioner’s line of business, 
that of a professional exotic dancer, was such that part of her ‘costume’ was her freakishly large 
breasts.” Hess prevailed at Tax Court and didn’t owe the $699.
For the most part, your expense deduction is whatever you spend. Let’s say 
you buy some paper for $30 for your business and are charged $2 of sales tax. 
The sales tax is included in your deductible expense. If you pay shipping or 
handling on your purchase, that is also deductible.
■ Tip  Sales tax and shipping and handling are includable as an expense in the cost of a purchase. 
There is one expense item where you do not get the full cost. Congress 
limited meals and entertainment expenses to 50% of the actual cost. These 
expenses are discussed in depth in Chapter 9.
Documentation Requirements
In Chapter 3, I noted that you need to have proof of your business expenses. 
This doesn’t mean just the receipt or invoice; you have to be able to show 
that there’s a business purpose to the expense. Let’s look at some examples 
of what’s required.
Example 1. Suppose you purchase a stapler for use in your business. You save 
or scan the receipt. That should be sufficient to satisfy the IRS, because the 
use of a stapler is normal for almost any business.

49
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Example 2. You are developing a line of cosmetics. You purchase some of your 
competitor’s cosmetics to see what they have recently developed. This 
purchase meets both the ordinary and necessary standards (discussed later). 
However, the IRS might wonder if you’re purchasing cosmetics for personal 
use rather than business use. Thus, you should note on the receipt the business 
purpose of the purchase. This should be done for any purchase that could be 
used for personal use but is being used for a business purpose.
■ Caution  More stringent requirements for travel, gifts, meals and entertainment, and 
listed property. Section 274(d) of the Tax Code requires that there be adequate records or sufficient 
evidence for these categories of expenses. (Listed equipment relates to certain depreciable items 
and is discussed in Chapter 10.) As discussed in Chapter 17, you must have documentation for 
these expenses. 
Keep good records of your business expenses, and make sure you know 
where important documents are stored. Back up all computer records (your 
computer can and will crash at the least opportune moment). Additionally, 
make sure you test your backups and that you can restore from them. If you 
follow good backup procedures, you will be far better off than most business 
owners.
The Ordinary Standard
To deduct a business expense, it must be both ordinary and necessary. The IRS 
notes that an ordinary expense is: “[O]ne that is common and accepted in your 
trade or business.”1 Ordinary also means exactly what common sense dictates: 
An expense cannot be extraordinary to be deductible.
This is a relatively easy standard to meet. Because you hopefully want to turn 
a profit, all of your expenses should be on items that are typically used in your 
business. Where problems arise are for lavish expenses or for unusual 
businesses.
Let’s say you are traveling for business, and you have breakfast in the hotel 
coffee shop. That expense will almost certainly be considered ordinary. After 
all, you have to eat breakfast. You then decide to celebrate signing a huge 
contract with a client by eating dinner in the fanciest restaurant in town. You 
spend $200 a person before even considering the $500 bottle of wine. If your 
return is examined, you will be sitting across from an IRS auditor. When 
1 See IRS, “Deducting Business Expenses,” www.irs.gov/Businesses/Small-Businesses-&-Self-
Employed/Deducting-Business-Expenses.

Chapter 4 | The Basics of Expenses
50
government employees travel, they must live within their means; the per diem 
meal standard for the most expensive metropolitan areas in the United States 
is $71 a day. Attempting to fully deduct this dinner as an ordinary expense 
won’t work.
If you are in an unusual business, you will likely have to help the IRS examiner 
if your return is audited. Although the IRS has audit manuals to help their 
examiners, these materials are not all-inclusive. Thus, if your business is 
unusual you will have to be able to explain why your expenses are used in 
your business. If you can show that such expenses are used by your competitors 
or how the expense helps your business, you should prevail at audit.
The Necessary Standard
What is a necessary expense? In Publication 535 (Business Expenses), the IRS 
states: “A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for your 
trade or business. An expense does not have to be indispensable to be 
considered necessary.”2 Necessary means what common sense would tell us: 
An expense is necessary if it helps our business. 
A few years ago, I was preparing an Estate Tax return. The decedent had 
owned a few US silver coins from the early twentieth century. I purchased a 
reference book on antique coins to obtain a rough idea of their value. I needed 
to know if the coins were worth $100 or $10,000; if they were worth the 
latter, I would need to hire an appraiser to obtain an exact valuation. (The 
coins were worth less than $100.) Normally, a reference book on US coins 
would not be considered a necessary expense for a tax preparation business. 
However, I could show that I needed the book, so it became a legitimate 
business expense.
In general, the IRS won’t deny an expense as necessary as long as you can 
reasonably show it is related to your business.
For the Business
Business expenses must be just that—for the business. They cannot be personal 
expenses. You are not allowed to deduct personal expenses on a business 
return. Section 262 of the Tax Code specifically disallows deductions for 
personal, living, and family expenses. Doing so and getting caught is a good 
way to find yourself heading to prison.
2 See IRS, Publication 535: Business Expenses (for 2011 returns), www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/
p535.pdf.

51
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Note Personal expenses on the corporate return lead to prison. Michael Fisher is a former 
co-owner of a sand and gravel business. Fisher decided to go on an African safari and renovate a 
truck stop he owned. There’s nothing wrong with that. The problem was that these expenses were 
both decidedly personal in nature and had nothing to do with the sand and gravel business.
Unfortunately for Fisher, these expenses were deducted on his corporate tax return. More 
unfortunately, the IRS discovered these issues (plus he didn’t include all of his income on his 
personal tax returns). Fisher pleaded guilty to nine counts of tax fraud. He was sentenced to thirty-
seven months in prison, assessed a $90,000 fine, and was required to make restitution of 
$308,069.3
.
■ Tip Backup required for mixed-use items. If you have an expense item that is used for both 
business and personal use, you will need records to show what portion of the usage is business 
and what portion is personal. 
There are two other expense items that can be used for both business and 
personal use: the car and the home. home office expenses are discussed in 
3 See uS department of Justice, Tax division, “north dakota executive Sentenced to Prison 
for Tax fraud,” www.justice.gov/opa/pr/2009/december/09-tax-1337.html, december 2009. 

Chapter 4 | The Basics of Expenses
52
depth in Chapter 6; automobile expense deductions are discussed in Chapter 
7.
Nondeductible Items
Besides personal expenses, some other expenses are also not deductible. 
Part IX of the Tax Code (sections 261–280H) notes those items that cannot 
be deducted on a tax return.
Most of these items will seem obvious. As already mentioned, you can’t 
deduct personal, living, or family expenses. Items that are capital expenses 
cannot be deducted (although you do get to depreciate these items; §263 of 
the Tax Code). Many of the other items in the list cover very specific situations.
One category of nondeductible expenses includes items related to tax-
exempt income. A basic principle in accounting is that you match expenses to 
income. If an item of income isn’t taxable, it follows that the associated 
expenses are not deductible. Section 265 of the Tax Code notes this.
Various Tax Code sections prohibit expenses related to evading or avoiding 
income tax (sections 269–269A). Expenses related to illegal sales of narcotics 
are disallowed (section 280E). Expenses that Congress doesn’t like have also 
been ruled as nondeductible; these include golden parachutes (section 280G) 
and costs associated with disposing of coal or iron ore (section 272). Although 
federal income tax is clearly an ordinary and necessary expense, section 275 
states that you can’t deduct it on your federal income tax.
Finally, penalties are not deductible. This includes penalties issued by a federal, 
state, or local tax agency.

c h a p t e r
5
Cost of Goods 
Sold
Whatever you tax, you get less of.
—Alan Greenspan
If you look at any business tax form, the first section after gross receipts is for 
cost of goods sold. Can all businesses use cost of goods sold? What part does 
inventory play within cost of goods sold? What other expenses, if any, are 
taken within this category?
As will be seen in the first section of this chapter, cost of goods sold applies 
when there are tangible goods being handled by the business—something that 
can be touched, held, or moved. Many business owners never deal with this 
category of expenditures.
Can All Businesses Use Cost  
of Goods Sold?
“If it’s on a tax return form, it can be used.” That’s what some of my clients 
have told me. Sadly, that’s just not true in every case. The very phrase cost of 
goods sold implies merchandise. That’s what a good is—a physical item.
The Tax Court also held this. In Perry v. Commissioner, the court noted:1 
1 US Tax Court, T.C. Memo 2012-237, http://ustaxcourt.gov/InOpHistoric/PerryMemo.TCM.
WPD.pdf, p. 10.
4

Chapter 5 | Cost of Goods Sold
54
Cost of goods sold may be subtracted from gross receipts to compute gross 
income in a taxpayer’s manufacturing, merchandising or mining business. See 
sec. 1.61-3(a), Income Tax Regs. We have held that a business must involve 
the sale of a material product to which direct cost may be allocated to reduce 
gross receipts by the costs of goods sold in computing gross income. More 
generally, we have held that gross receipts equal gross income where a business 
is primarily engaged in providing services; i.e., ability, know-how and experience. 
[citations and note omitted]
This passage makes it clear that if your business is a service business—you are 
selling yourself or providing services to others—you cannot have cost of 
goods sold. If you’re in a service business the rest of this chapter will not apply 
to you. Do note that if your business provides services and sells a product, 
you will have cost of goods sold for the portion of your business that sells a 
product.
Inventory: The Basics
Inventory is part of the accrual method of accounting. Some businesses don’t 
have to use the accrual method. As noted in Chapter 2, businesses with 
annual revenues of $1 million or less can use the cash method.2 Additionally, 
businesses that are not mining, manufacturing, wholesale or retail trade, or in 
the information industry and have annual revenues of $10 million or less can 
use the cash method.3
All other businesses that sell products have inventory. The idea of inventory 
from a tax point of view is that you clearly show your expenses as they relate 
to your sales. One of the fundamental principles of accounting is that expenses 
should be matched to revenues. 
Let’s say that your business manufactures a machine. The costs of manufacturing 
the machine will include the materials used to make it and the cost of labor 
used in making it. Related expenses will include the packaging used for the 
machine, supplies used with the machine, and inbound shipping and handling 
costs.
The problem in tying the expenditures to the sale is that the expenses are 
incurred over time. It’s also nearly impossible to match specific raw materials 
2 Specifically, if the average annual gross receipts over the past three years is $1 million or 
less. The business must also not be a tax shelter.
3 Specifically, the average annual gross receipts over the past three years is $10 million or less. 
The business must not be a tax shelter. The specific NAICS codes prohibited from using the 
cash method under this exception are given in IRS, Revenue Procedure 2002-28, Internal 
Revenue Bulletin 2002-18 (2002), www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-18.pdf, p. 815.

55
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
with the cost of a specific product. You may know that you use four half-inch 
brass screws in your machine, but did you use the brass screws you bought in 
June or the ones you purchased in July that cost 10% more? You don’t know 
which screws were used, of course. That’s why inventories are used.
This whole area of accounting is called cost accounting and is the subject of a 
semester-long course in colleges. The nuances are generally beyond the scope 
of this book. What you need to know for purposes of taxation is that your 
inventory allows you to match your expenses to your income. You also need 
to know the methods of inventory that are allowed, how you value that 
inventory, and what happens if you’re a cash-basis business that sells goods.
What’s in Inventory?
Inventory normally includes the merchandise you sell, the raw materials you 
use to manufacture the merchandise (if applicable), work in progress (if 
applicable), finished goods, and supplies that become part of the goods you 
sell.
Cost of Goods Sold for the Year
If you look at a tax form where cost of goods sold is calculated (such as Part 
III of a Schedule C,—Sole Proprietorship), you will see the basic calculation 
used in determining your cost of goods sold. Part III of Schedule C is shown 
in Figure 5-1.
Figure 5-1. Cost of goods sold calculation

Chapter 5 | Cost of Goods Sold
56
The cost of goods sold for the year is the beginning inventory, minus the 
ending inventory, plus any related expenses. Some of this appears obvious 
(and is), but there are many facets to cost of goods sold that you should 
know.
How Inventory Is Expensed
If you look at Figure 5-1, you will notice that there are various choices you 
have in how you value inventory. These choices matter, and the method you 
use influences whether you are considered profitable for tax purposes. Note 
that it is quite possible to have a profit (or loss) for tax purposes but a loss 
(or profit) based on cash flow. There are two major methods used for 
inventory valuation: cost and lower of cost or market.
Cost
Valuing your inventory at cost means that you generally use the price you pay 
for goods. You adjust the price for shipping and handling costs and for cash 
discounts you receive on purchases. 
When you value your inventory (see the “Inventory Valuation and the Physical 
Inventory” section later), you identify the specific pieces of inventory and use 
the price you paid for each item. Most businesses can’t do this: How can you 
tell one widget from another? 
IRS regulations allow for two methods around this problem: last-in, first-out 
(LIFO) and first-in, first-out (FIFO). These have important tax consequences.
Under both methods you value inventory based on the purchase price of 
goods. Where the methods differ is on which goods are considered sold: the 
last goods purchased or the first goods purchased.
LIFO
LIFO assumes that the last product purchased is what is sold from your 
inventory. Using LIFO lessens the impact of price changes. If you are selling 
the most recently purchased inventory, most of what you sell will be those 
recently purchased items. If your inventory turns a lot, the value of the 
inventory could be based on prices from years ago. (Inventory turnover or 
turns is a measure of the number of times inventory is sold or used in a time 
period, typically one year. A higher number of turns means your inventory 
moves quickly; a low number of turns means your inventory might be on your 
shelves for some time.)

57
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Under LIFO, your most recently purchased inventory will be “used” first. If 
prices are changing, your income tax statement will tend to show current 
costs. With LIFO, your tax returns will be closer to reality than they would 
with FIFO. You will tend to have older costs in your inventory; this can have 
the benefit of reducing personal property taxes on inventory (if prices are 
increasing). Finally, when inventory costs increase, the taxable income will 
decrease. This is because more recent costs are shown in cost of goods sold. 
An increase in cost of goods sold decreases income.
■ Note  Purchases directly impact cost of goods sold. If you look at Figure 5-1, you will see 
that purchases made are part of cost of goods sold. In an environment of rising prices, those 
purchases will have a direct impact on cost of goods sold, likely increasing cost of goods sold and 
decreasing profit. 
There are drawbacks to using LIFO. First, if costs are falling LIFO will tend to 
increase taxable income. If an old inventory layer begins to get used (in 
calculating cost of goods sold), this also tends to increase income. There is 
also a LIFO recapture tax on a C corporation that elects to become an S 
corporation (if the business uses LIFO).
■ Note  What is an inventory layer? A layer of inventory refers to a group of inventory purchased 
at one price. In an environment of rising prices, those purchases will have a direct impact on cost 
of goods sold, likely increasing cost of goods sold and decreasing profit. 
Overall, LIFO leads to an increase in cost of goods sold and a decrease in tax 
profit when prices are increasing. When prices are decreasing, LIFO leads to 
a decrease in cost of goods sold and an increase in tax profit.
FIFO
FIFO means that the oldest inventory on the books is what is considered 
sold. This mimics what most businesses actually do: They use the oldest stock 
first to avoid spoilage. FIFO has its own advantages and disadvantages for tax 
purposes.
First, FIFO is far simpler to understand than LIFO. FIFO is what we do in our 
lives. If we’re going to heat a can of soup, we usually use the oldest can first. 
This is the normal procedure for businesses; almost everyone uses the oldest 
materials first.

Chapter 5 | Cost of Goods Sold
58
FIFO leads to an increase in cost of goods sold and a decrease in taxable income 
when prices are decreasing. Many technology products see a decrease in costs 
over time; thus, FIFO can be advantageous for high-technology businesses.
There is a major disadvantage to FIFO as well. When prices are increasing, 
FIFO will not reflect the current (market) price of goods. Thus, in this 
situation, FIFO leads to a lower cost of goods sold than with LIFO, and a 
higher tax profit.
Businesses with inventory using the cost method should carefully weigh the 
advantages and disadvantages of LIFO versus FIFO in choosing a method for 
their business. Like most everything in tax, there is no one-size-fits-all choice. 
Lower of Cost or Market
The second major method used in valuing inventory is the lower of cost or 
market. Here, inventory is valued at either its cost or the market price if the 
price has gone down. Businesses using LIFO cannot use lower of cost or 
market.
Lower of cost or market allows a write-down of inventory when prices fall. 
Say your inventory has some microprocessors valued at $100 each. A new 
microprocessor is introduced with double the speed at the same price; the 
microprocessors you have in stock are now on sale for just $50 each. In such 
a situation, if you are using lower of cost or market you can take a write-down 
of $50 per microprocessor on hand. This will increase your cost of goods sold 
and decrease your tax profit.
Inventory write-downs are normally taken in conjunction with the year-end 
physical inventory (see the section on “Inventory Valuation and the Physical 
Inventory,” later). Assume that in the example above that the business has 
100 of the old microprocessors in stock at year-end. They are on the company’s 
books at a value of $10,000; however, they are now worth only $5,000.The 
company can take a $5,000 write-down of inventory based on the new lower 
price for the microprocessor. 
■ Caution  Estimates don’t work for write-downs. If you’re going to take a write-down of 
inventory, you need objective evidence, not subjective estimates. In Best Auto Sales, Inc. v. 
Commissioner, the Tax Court noted that “The testimony of [the] president that at year-end he made 
estimates of the value of the automobiles does not provide a basis on which the claimed inventory 
write-downs can be allowed in this case.”4
4 Best Auto Sales, Inc. v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 2002-297, p. 11 (http://ustaxcourt.gov/
InOpHistoric/BestAuto.TCM.WPD.pdf). 

59
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Other Methods
There are other methods that have been allowed for specific industries. 
Section 1.471-2(b) of Income Tax Regulations states, “It follows, therefore, 
that inventory rules cannot be uniform but must give effect to trade customs 
which come within the scope of the best accounting practice in the particular 
trade or business.”
Most of these other methods are used in specific industries. For example, 
when I worked in the citrus industry, the orange juice plant my employer 
owned used a hybrid average cost method that was standard for citrus juice 
plants.
Inventory Valuation and  
the Physical Inventory
Almost all businesses with significant inventory conduct an annual physical 
inventory. A physical inventory is usually conducted at year-end. You are 
required to include an accurate valuation of your year-end inventory on your 
tax return.
The main reason physical inventories are conducted is to verify that your 
inventory records are accurate. Additionally, expired merchandise should be 
disposed of. Physical inventories are also a check for employee malfeasance.
The most important part of a physical inventory is the preparation. Count 
sheets, cards, or bar-code scanners are prepared, and personnel are assigned 
(where applicable) to handle the count. If you have a single retail store, you 
may be the only individual involved in the physical inventory.
Prior to the inventory, it’s a good idea to straighten everything out. Cleaning 
up the location of the physical inventory will make the process go faster and 
increase its accuracy.
Once the inventory is complete, you enter the corrected quantities (where 
applicable) into your computer system. If you are using lower of cost or 
market, this is also the time to adjust prices downward. At the conclusion of 
your data entry, you will have your year-end inventory valuation.
■ Tip  Counting by weight. Suppose your inventory contains tens, hundreds, or thousands of 
resistors, capacitors, screws, or other small objects with a low per-piece value. Instead of counting 
each small item, you can count these items by weight. Suppose ten 100-ohm resistors weigh 3.0 
ounces. You weigh your bin of 100-ohm resistors and find that it weighs 15.0 ounces (excluding 
the weight of the bin). You can conclude that you have fifty 100-ohm resistors in your inventory. 

Chapter 5 | Cost of Goods Sold
60
If you determine that adjustments need to be made to your inventory for 
reasons other than change in quantity and/or lower of cost or market, 
adjustments are also made at this time. These changes might include theft 
and spoilage adjustments.
■ Note  Goods on consignment. If you have goods out on consignment—products for which 
you still have title but that are in the possession of others—those goods are includable in your 
inventory. Similarly, if you have possession of goods belonging to others on consignment to you, 
those items should not be included in your inventory. 
Cash Basis Inventory
If a business sells merchandise but uses the cash basis, what does it do for 
inventory? First, such a business does not record inventory on its tax return. 
There is no such thing as inventory for a cash basis business.
However, that does not mean there isn’t a cost of goods sold. All of the other 
expenditures used in cost of goods sold are still recorded. This business will 
have purchases, shipping, labor, and other related costs.
Other Expenses Included in  
Cost of Goods Sold
There are other items in addition to inventory that impact cost of goods sold. 
Although some directly relate to inventory, others do not.
Purchases
Purchases are exactly what it sounds like: the expenditures made to acquire 
raw materials and goods for sale or resale. These are the purchases of goods 
that make up your inventory. This is very straightforward in that this should 
exactly match your cost of the items purchased.
Do note that if you remove any items for your personal use, those items must 
be deducted from purchases.
Cost of Labor
Cost of labor is your expense for personnel working in the manufacturing or 
mining industries. Note that only direct labor costs (wages) are included; 
indirect costs (i.e., administrative costs and selling costs) are not part of cost 

61
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

c h a p t e r
6
The Office
I just filled out my income tax forms. Who says you can’t get killed by a blank?
—Milton Berle
The single largest investment for most Americans is a home. Many small 
businesses are conducted out of the home. This chapter focuses on the office, 
whether it is rented or in your home.
The first part of the chapter looks at the rented office. Certainly rent is 
deductible. But how are leasehold improvements handled? What’s done with 
CAM charges?
The second part of the chapter looks at the home office: which home offices 
are (and are not) deductible and how the type of business entity changes the 
deductibility. The chapter closes by looking at how the deduction is calculated 
and provides an example of the calculation.
The Rented Office
Many small businesses are conducted out of rented space. This could be an 
executive suite or a building in a light industrial park. Obviously, rent is 
deductible as an ordinary and necessary business expense. 
Many lease agreements come with additional charges. Generally, all of these 
additional charges are ordinary and necessary expenses and are thus 
deductible. That’s because these expenditures are required for you to lease 
the office space.
Many commercial leases are structured as triple-net leases (sometimes called 
NNN leases). With a triple-net lease the lessee is responsible for property 
tax, building insurance, and maintenance (the three nets referred to in the 

Chapter 6 | The Office
64
name). Almost all leases are written so that the lessee is responsible for a 
proportionate amount of the costs of any common areas. These are sometimes 
referred to as common area maintenance (CAM) charges, which are deductible 
business expenses.
In an audit situation, the IRS will usually ask to see a copy of your lease. The 
lease document and copies of any invoices for triple-net and CAM charges 
(along with canceled checks noting the payments of these amounts) is usually 
all the proof you need to show your rent expense.
Finally, if you rent an off-site storage space—for example, a ten-by-ten-foot 
space at a self-storage facility—that expense would also be noted as rent.
The Home Office
A great many small businesses are conducted out of the home. Until 1976 
there was nothing specific in the Tax Code regarding the home office. In that 
year, Congress added Section 280A to the Tax Code. Today the general rules 
for a deductible home office are settled for the business owner.
Generally you can take a deduction for a home office if the space is used 
exclusively as a home office, solely for your business. “Exclusively” has two 
meanings here: The space is used exclusively as a home office, and it is used 
exclusively by you as a home office. Let’s say you use a room in your home as 
your home office; your spouse also uses the room as her office. Your home 
office would not be deductible because it is not used exclusively as a home 
office for a single business.
IRS Publication 587 has a flowchart that shows the general rules on whether 
you can take a home office deduction, reproduced in Figure 6-1. Let’s look at 
how this flowchart works. (Note that there are different rules for storage 
spaces within the home and for daycare facilities.)
The first question is whether you’re using your home in connection with your 
business. You can’t deduct personal expenses, so if you are not using your 
home for the business, you can’t take the home office deduction.
■ Tip  Apartments count. You do not have to live in a house to take the home office deduction. 
An apartment or other rented space can be deductible if it meets the criteria for the home office 
deduction.

65
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
This book is concerned generally with business owners and not employees. 
Next we look at whether the use of the home is regular and exclusive. If it’s 
not, you can’t take the home office deduction. You can then take the deduction 
if it’s your principal place of business, if you meet with clients in your home, 
or if it is a separate structure.
There’s another way the deduction is allowed: If you perform administrative 
or management functions solely in your home office even if you perform 
other functions elsewhere. In 1997, Congress amended the Tax Code to 
specifically allow for this to be a valid reason for the deduction. Here’s an 
example.
Suppose you are an anesthesiologist performing work in a few local hospitals. 
None of the hospitals gives you any space for the administrative functions of 
your work (billing, writing reports, etc.). You use a room in your home 
exclusively as a home office to perform these required functions. You can take 
the home office deduction.
Figure 6-1. Can you deduct business use of the home expenses? (From IRS, Business Use of 
Your Home, Publication 587 [2011 edition], www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p587.pdf, p. 4)

Chapter 6 | The Office
66
■ Note  The anesthesiologist we have to thank for an administrative home office. Dr. Nadir 
Soliman, a Washington, DC–area anesthesiologist, took the home office deduction in 1983 (his use 
of a home office mirrored the facts in the paragraph above). His deduction was challenged by the 
IRS. Soliman took his case to Tax Court and won. The IRS appealed and lost in the Fourth Circuit 
Court of Appeals. The IRS then appealed to the Supreme Court, which took the case. In 1993 the 
Supreme Court ruled against Soliman (see Commissioner v. Soliman [91-998], 506 U.S. 168 
[1993]). The uproar against this decision was a major factor in persuading Congress to change the 
law in 1997. As noted, Soliman’s deduction would be allowed today.
What If You Use the Home Office  
for Two Activities?
Assume you use your home office for two activities. If you use it for two 
businesses, and you meet the criteria for the home office deduction for both 
businesses, you can take the deduction. If not, you cannot take the deduction 
for either business. This rule also holds if you use your home office for a 
business and as an employee: You must meet the criteria for a deductible 
home office for both activities to take the deduction for either activity.
Deducting a home office as an employee is more difficult: You must meet the 
convenience of the employer test.1 If you think you won’t meet the test but 
would still like to deduct your home office for your business, you may want 
to not use your home office for the employer work. Set up a desk in a different 
room of your home for telecommuting. Your home office will now be used 
exclusively for your business, so you should be able to take the home office 
deduction.
What Can You Deduct?
If you have a home office, you are allowed to deduct both direct and indirect 
costs of the office. Direct expenses directly relate to your office. These include 
repainting and repairs made to your office. Indirect expenses are for your entire 
home. These include your mortgage interest (or rent), utilities, insurance, 
repairs on your entire house, and property tax. You cannot deduct direct 
expenses that are unrelated to your home office. If you repair a gazebo in 
your back yard or paint a bedroom, those expenses are not deductible for 
your home office.
1 If your employer provides you with an office at their facility, you will generally not meet this 
test.

67
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
How the Deduction Is Figured
The deduction is calculated differently depending on your business structure. 
A sole proprietor uses Form 8829 (see Figure 6-2). A partner (or a member 
of an LLC that files as a partnership) uses a worksheet to determine the 
Figure 6-2. Form 8829 (2011 version)

Chapter 6 | The Office
68
deduction (see the “Deducting the Home Office as a Partner” section). The 
home office for a corporation is discussed later in this chapter (see ”S 
Corporations and C Corporations”).
You must first determine the percentage of your home used as a home office. 
Most business owners take the ratio of the square footage of their home 
office to the square footage of their whole home. 
However, you are allowed to use other methods if they accurately show the 
portion used as a home office. If you rent an apartment and all the rooms are 
approximately the same size, you can take the ratio of room(s) used as a 
home office to the total number of rooms in your apartment.
After you compute the business percentage, you enter all of your direct and 
indirect expenses. The trickiest calculations relate to mortgage interest and 
including certain indirect expenses.
Mortgage Interest
Only allowable mortgage interest can be deducted; the fact that you are 
taking the deduction on Form 8829 rather than on Schedule A (itemized 
deductions) does not change whether the interest is deductible. Thus, you 
must first determine the amount of your deductible mortgage interest.
You are only allowed to deduct mortgage interest based on $1.1 million of 
home acquisition debt.2 You can also deduct all points paid on the acquisition 
of your main home.3 (Points are fees charged by your mortgage lender for 
your loan; generally, the more points you pay, the lower the interest rate. 
Points are also called loan origination fees, maximum loan charges, loan 
discount, or discount points.) However, you must deduct points paid on 
refinancing over the life of the loan. Again, taking the deduction on Form 8829 
rather than Schedule A does not change this rule. Let’s look at an example of 
how this works for a refinancing.
You refinance the $200,000 of principal left on your mortgage, and obtain a 
new 4% 30-year loan. You pay one point, or 1% of the loan amount ($2,000). 
Your loan closes on July 1. What portion of the points can be deducted?
The points must be amortized over the life of the loan, or over 360 months. 
The deduction will be based on $2,000 ÷ 360 × 6 = $33. The $33 of deductible 
2 You are allowed to deduct up to $1 million of home acquisition debt between your first and 
second home ($500,000 if married filing separately). However, you can also deduct up to 
$100,000 of home equity debt. Generally, this allows you to deduct up to $1.1 million of 
home acquisition debt.
3 There are specific rules detailing this given in IRS Publication 936. 

69
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
points for the current year will be split between the home office deduction 
and the mortgage interest deduction (taken on Schedule A).
The allowable mortgage interest that is not deductible on Form 8829 is taken 
on Schedule A. Most tax software automatically flows the nonbusiness 
portion of mortgage interest directly to Schedule A. However, you may need 
to confirm that the points taken on Schedule A are correct, especially if you 
are deducting points paid on a refinanced mortgage.
Indirect Expenses
Make sure you include all allowable indirect expenses you have incurred. Some 
common expenditures that are frequently forgotten include burglar alarm 
monitoring fees, pest control, all utilities (including water and sewer), janitorial 
service, and homeowners association fees.
Depreciation
If you own your home, you can recover a portion of the costs through 
depreciation. As noted on line 36 of Form 8829, you depreciate based on the 
lesser of your adjusted basis or its fair market value. Most fixed assets and 
depreciation of those assets are covered in Chapter 10. Here we focus only 
on the depreciation of a home.
Basis is generally (but not always) your cost. For a home, basis is adjusted by 
any improvements made to the home and any costs of acquiring the home 
that could not be expensed at the time of purchase.
Land never depreciates. Although Dust Bowl farmers of the 1930s might 
disagree, land is there forever, so it can’t depreciate. You must subtract the 
value of the land (as shown on line 37) to determine the basis of the building. 
Usually, the property tax assessment has a breakout of the value of the land 
and buildings on your property.
You multiply the business percentage use of your home by the basis of the 
building to determine the business basis of the building. The depreciation 
percentage (line 40) is given in the instructions to Form 8829.4 
4 See IRS, Instructions to Form 8829, 2011 edition, www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/i8829.pdf, 
instructions to line 40.

Chapter 6 | The Office
70
■ Caution  One drawback of depreciation for a home office is that this depreciation is 
recaptured when you sell your home. At that time, any depreciation you have is generally 
income. You cannot avoid this by electing to not take depreciation when you have a home office, 
though. Depreciation is required to be taken if you have ownership of your home (and are taking 
the home office deduction). If you don’t take it, the IRS can impute it, and you could have 
depreciation recapture when you never took the depreciation expense!
Allowable Home Office Expenses
One rule for home office expenditures is that these expenses cannot force 
your business into a loss. If your expenses are large enough that taking all of 
them would cause a loss, any expenditures that would cause a loss are carried 
forward to the following year. You can take these expenses in the following 
year (subject to that year’s limitation) even if you reside in a different home.
Home Office Deduction for Partners  
and LLC Members
Partners and members of LLCs that are taxed as partnerships can also take 
the home office deduction. This deduction is not taken on Form 8829; instead, 
a worksheet is prepared that is not submitted with the tax return. That 
worksheet is shown on Figure 6-3.
Note that the calculations done are basically identical to that of Form 8829. 
The difference is that the calculations are not shown when filing the return. 
You need to keep the worksheet; if your return is examined (audited), you 
will need to provide the auditor with the worksheet and the backup 
information.
■ Caution  Having a deductible home office is not enough for a partner (member). To 
deduct unreimbursed partnership expenses, the partnership agreement (or LLC operating 
agreement) must require that the partners (members) pay these expenses. Otherwise, the partners 
must submit the expenses to the partnership (or LLC) and be reimbursed by the partnership. In that 
case, the partnership (or LLC) would take the expenses on its books.

71
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
The unreimbursed partnership expenses, including the home office deduction, 
are shown on Part II of Schedule E (page 2). A sample deduction is shown in 
Figure 6-4.
Figure 6-3. Worksheet for business use of home for partners

Chapter 6 | The Office
72
.
.
E

73
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Note that if you are reimbursed by your corporation for $1,000 of property 
tax out of a total of $5,000, you can only take a deduction for $4,000 of 
property tax on your Schedule A. The S corporation will be deducting the 
other $1,000—a single expense can only be deducted once.
■ Note  What is an accountable plan? An accountable plan is a written plan for reimbursing 
expenses. The plan can only cover job-related expenses. The business must approve the plan; for 
a corporation, this should be through a corporate resolution.
To be reimbursed under an accountable plan, the owner (whether a shareholder/employee of an S 
corporation or C corporation, or a member of an LLC) completes an expense report detailing all of 
the expenses and provides receipts for them. The expense report should be processed as is any 
other expense report handled by the business.
An accountable plan has one other benefit. Let’s assume that your business 
rents office space, which is where most of your work is done. You also 
maintain a home office that is used solely for your business. Expenses for the 
home office can be reimbursed under an accountable plan. The business 
expenses meet the ordinary and necessary criteria (if it’s a home office used 
exclusively for the business). Assuming the accountable plan allows for 
reimbursement in this situation, the expenses can be reimbursed.

c h a p t e r
7
The Car
The avoidance of taxes is the only intellectual pursuit that carries any reward.
—John Maynard Keynes
The second largest investment for most Americans is a car. For most business 
owners, an automobile is an essential investment; it’s used to meet potential 
clients, deliver products, and for business errands (going to the bank or the 
post office).
This chapter focuses on what can and cannot be deducted in relation to 
automobile expenses. There are very specific rules on recordkeeping that 
must be followed if you want to deduct the business use of your car.
Automobile Expenses: The Basics
Like any other expense, you are allowed to deduct the ordinary and necessary 
use of your car. Long ago, the IRS grappled with how this should be handled. 
How should the business use of an automobile be calculated? If I drive my car 
15,000 miles this year and I say I drove 10,000 miles for business use, is that 
enough to justify taking two-thirds of my automobile expenditures as a 
business expense?
Both Congress (through Section 6001 of the Tax Code) and the IRS (through 
Section 1.6001-1(a) of Income Tax Regulations) mandate that you keep 
sufficient records to justify the deductions. The Tax Court does have the 
ability to approximate a business deduction; this is called the Cohan rule.1 The 
Cohan rule does not apply for certain business expenses: travel, gifts, meals 
1 This rule was named after playwright George M. Cohan of Give My Regards to Broadway and 
Yankee Doodle Dandy fame. The Cohan rule is covered in depth in Chapter 17.

Chapter 7 | The Car
76
and entertainment, and “listed property.” Section 274(d) of the Tax Code 
requires that a taxpayer substantiate these expenses with adequate records 
or sufficient evidence corroborating the taxpayer’s statement.
Automobiles are a type of listed property; thus, you are required to maintain 
proper records to deduct car expenses. The easiest method of complying 
with the regulations adopted by the IRS under this section of the Tax Code2 
is to maintain a contemporaneous, written mileage log. Although other 
methods of proving the deduction exist,3 they are much more difficult and 
result in smaller deductions.
Recordkeeping Requirements
There are two methods allowed for deducting automobile expenses: standard 
mileage and actual expenses. Both methods require that you keep a 
contemporaneous, written mileage log.
The mileage log should note the date, starting mileage, ending mileage, where 
you went, and the business purpose of each trip. Only your business-related 
automobile expenses are deductible. The mileage log should note your 
business-related mileage. It should also note the odometer reading on January 
1 and December 31 (the beginning and end of the calendar year). Most mileage 
logs include only the business-related trips. 
Figure 7-1 is a portion of my own mileage log. I use a small spiral notebook 
that I keep in the center console of my car. Every business trip and the 
business purpose are recorded. The log is in ink, not pencil.  You can create a 
log using a small notebook or purchase a mileage logbook at most office 
supply stores.
I had a client who had two cars: He used one for business and used the other 
for nonbusiness driving. I told him to keep a written mileage log; he told me 
that it wasn’t needed because “all the mileage in the business car is for 
business.” I warned him that wasn’t the case, and if he were audited the IRS 
wouldn’t accept it. He was audited, and his invoices and other backup records 
could only substantiate about 70% of his actual business mileage. He lost the 
auto expense deduction for his meetings with potential clients, and much of 
the day-to-day driving that he did that was business-related.
2 Sections 1.274-5(c)(2)(iii) and 1.274-5T(c)(2) of Income Tax Regulations.
3 Section 1.274-5T(c)(3) of Income Tax Regulations and Temporary Income Tax Regulations, 
50 Fed. Reg. 46020 (Nov. 6, 1985) specify that substantiation by other sufficient evidence 
requires the production of corroborative evidence in support of a taxpayer’s statement 
specifically detailing how he or she met the requirements.

77
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Caution  Spreadsheets and smart phone apps might not be accepted by the IRS. We’re in 
the computer age, and my smart phone has more power than most computers from the 1970s. 
Unfortunately, that does not mean that the IRS will accept a mileage log from a smart phone or a 
spreadsheet showing your mileage. The problem is that it is far easier to falsify a computer 
spreadsheet or a smart phone app than it is to falsify a written mileage log. The institutional 
mentality of the IRS is such that a nonwritten mileage log has less credibility than a written one.
This does not mean that a log maintained on a smart phone will not be accepted by the IRS. One 
strategy that would likely validate a smart phone–based log is to keep monthly or weekly backups 
of your log. If the IRS were to question the log, you would be able to show that the log was 
contemporaneous through the backup copies.
Figure 7-1. Sample mileage log

Chapter 7 | The Car
78
Bad things can happen if you don’t keep adequate records. Consider the case 
of Jessica Solomon. She went to Tax Court, and one of the issues was her 
mileage log.4
Petitioner kept track of her automobile mileage using a daily mileage log. 
However, there are several problems with the mileage log. First, the mileage log 
simply notes the odometer reading on petitioner’s car at the beginning and end 
of each day and includes no information regarding where petitioner drove, the 
purpose of the trip, or petitioner’s business relationship to the persons she 
visited. Second, petitioner included in the mileage log the roughly 27 miles she 
drove each workday commuting to and from MV Marketing’s office. Finally, 
petitioner conceded that she may have included some personal trips in the 
mileage log. Petitioner did not present any evidence at trial, such as 
appointment books, calendars, or maps of her sales territories, to corroborate 
the bare information contained in the mileage log, nor did she testify with any 
specificity regarding her vehicle expenses in 2006. (notes omitted)
The Tax Court concluded that although she undoubtedly had business mileage 
in the year in question, she did not satisfy the adequate record requirement 
of Section 274(d). She also didn’t present any corroborating evidence that 
could have bolstered her claimed mileage.
The Standard Mileage Rate
The simplest method of deducting business mileage is to take the number of 
business miles driven and multiply that by a rate. That’s exactly what the 
standard mileage method is. Every year the IRS commissions a study that 
determines the rate for the coming year. The announcement is usually made 
in early December in a press release and in a notice released on the IRS 
website.5 
The standard mileage rate is not allowed in certain situations:
• 
You must not be operating five or more cars at the same 
time.
• 
You must not have used “bonus” depreciation, taken a Section 
179 depreciation deduction, or used MACRS (Modified 
Accelerated Cost Recovery System) depreciation on the car.
4 See US Tax Court, Solomon v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 2011-91, http://ustaxcourt.gov/
InOpHistoric/SOLOMON2.TCM.WPD.pdf, pp. 8–9.
5 IRS Notice 2012-1 (available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/n-12-01.pdf) lists the 2012 
standard mileage rates.

79
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
• 
You must not have leased the car and have taken actual 
expenses for the car in a prior year.
• 
You must not be a rural mail carrier who received a qualified 
reimbursement.
The only item that needs an explanation relates to the depreciation issues. As 
will be discussed in the “Actual Expenses” section, a major reason to use 
actual expenses is accelerated depreciation. When you acquire a car, you can 
take a combination of “bonus” depreciation, Section 179 deprecation, and 
MACRS to obtain a larger deduction than if you were to use the standard 
mileage deduction. 
■ Tip  Once you use actual expenses for a vehicle, you will almost always use actual expenses 
for the life of that vehicle. 
One other note on this: Once you use actual expenses for a vehicle lease, you 
must use actual expenses for all future years of that lease and any renewals. 
Using the standard mileage method does not relieve you from the requirement 
of maintaining a mileage log. It does relieve you from keeping track of all your 
expenses for your car (gasoline, maintenance, etc.) because those are not 
needed to calculate the deduction.
Actual Expenses
The alternate method of deducting automobile expenses is to deduct your 
actual expenses. To do this, multiply the total of your expenses for the year by 
the ratio of your business miles to your total miles driven for the year.
Your actual expenses are all of the expenses for driving the vehicle. These 
include:
• 
Gasoline
• 
Oil
• 
Maintenance and repairs
• 
Tires
• 
Vehicle license and registration fees
• 
Insurance
• 
Lease payments

Chapter 7 | The Car
80
• 
Interest expense on car payments
• 
Depreciation
Like all business expenses, you need to have proof of your expenditures. This 
means you need to keep your receipts if you’re using actual expenses.
Note that lease payments are considered an ordinary and necessary business 
expense. However, the principal portion of a car (loan) payment is not 
deductible. That’s because you get to depreciate the car over its useful life.
Depreciation
As mentioned earlier, automobiles are listed equipment. Cars last more than 
one year, so to recover the cost of the car—including sales tax and any 
options, handling fees, and so on—the car is depreciated. This recovers the 
expenditure over the life of the asset. (Depreciation is covered in Chapter 
10.) 
Years ago, depreciating an asset was simple because the only kind of 
depreciation allowed was straight-line depreciation. You took the cost of the 
asset, divided it by the useful life of the asset in years, and the result was the 
depreciation. Today, you basically need a computer to calculate the depreciation 
for a car. Between MACRS, Section 179, and bonus depreciation, it’s extremely 
difficult to calculate depreciation by hand. For cars, there are some simple 
rules that apply.
The More Than 50% Rule
This rule requires that you use your car more than 50% for business to take any 
Section 179 depreciation. Let’s say you drive your car 18,123 miles this year, 
and 5,892 of those miles are for business. You cannot take a Section 179 
depreciation deduction.
Limits on Section 179 Depreciation
Congress has imposed limits on Section 179 depreciation. The overall limit 
for 2012 is $500,000.6 The maximum first-year depreciation is $11,160 (except 
for certain “heavy” vehicles, as discussed next). Note that the maximum 
allowable depreciation decreases to $5,100 in the second year, $3,050 for the 
third year, and $1,875 in the fourth and all other years.7
6 This limit decreases to $139,000 once expenditures exceed $560,000 (2012 limits).
7 See IRS, Part III, Administrative, Procedural, and Miscellaneous, Rev. Proc. 2012-23, www.irs.
gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-12-23.pdf.

81
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Heavy Vehicles
Automakers have had good lobbyists. They have been able to get special rules 
for heavy sport utility vehicles (SUVs) (rated at more than 6,000 pounds gross 
vehicular weight) written into the Tax Code. In some years (e.g., 2011) you 
could write off 100% of the purchase price for these autos. For 2012, the limit 
is 50% of the purchase price through bonus depreciation.
Benefit of Actual Expenses
The reason that many business owners use actual expenses for automobile 
deductions is that they get a larger deduction sooner; this directly lowers 
their taxes. Most of this deduction comes from depreciation.
I have been representing taxpayers in audits (examinations) for more than 
thirteen years. Almost every one of these audits has looked at automobile 
expenses (if car expenses were taken on the tax return being examined). My 
clients with good records and a contemporaneous, written mileage log rarely 
had problems with automobile expenses in these audits.
■ Tip  If you’re taking actual expenses, you must have a contemporaneous mileage log. 
Changing from Actual Expenses to  
Standard Mileage (or Vice Versa)
The Tax Code allows for you to change from standard mileage to actual 
expenses (or vice versa). In practice, you can easily move from the standard 
mileage deduction to actual expenses. However, it’s almost impossible to 
move from actual expenses to the standard mileage deduction. This is because 
one of the major benefits of actual expenses is accelerated depreciation. The 
Tax Code specifically disallows moving from actual expenses to the standard 
mileage deduction if you have taken accelerated depreciation in any form.
Commuting Mileage
Section 262 of the Tax Code and Revenue Ruling 90-238 govern commuting 
mileage. If you commute from your home to your office, that mileage is not 
deductible. Personal expenses are not deductible; commuting to and from 
your office is considered a personal expense.
8 See, for example, www.bradfordtaxinstitute.com/Endnotes/Rev_Rul_90-23.pdf.

Chapter 7 | The Car
82
Now consider a business owner with his office in his home (whether it is a 
deductible home office is not relevant here). He or she doesn’t have commuting 
mileage because his commute is footsteps from his or her bedroom to the 
office. 
The trickier situation is when there are two or more offices. Another ruling 
(Revenue Ruling 99-79) addresses this case. Generally, as long as your home 
office is a “principal place of business” you can deduct your mileage driving 
from one office to another. Note that each case would be judged on its facts 
and circumstances. See Chapter 6 to see whether your home office qualifies 
as a principal place of business.
Mixed Trips
What if you drive from your office to the bank, and on the way back stop at 
the market to purchase something for your personal use? Is the trip deductible?
The answer to this lies in that business mileage is deductible, but personal 
mileage is not. Say you drive three miles to the bank to make a business 
deposit. Clearly, that’s an ordinary and necessary business expense. On the 
way back to your office, you stop at a supermarket to pick up dinner. That’s 
personal and not deductible. However, assume that you did not drive out of 
the way—the market was located on your drive back. Because the number of 
miles driven did not change, there’s no problem—there are no excess miles.
Consider a slightly different itinerary. You drive three miles to the supermarket 
to purchase your dinner. On the drive home, you stop at the bank (one-half 
mile from the market on the direct drive back to the office) to make that 
business deposit. You cannot deduct the one mile of excess mileage, as that 
mile is personal.
Ancillary Expenses
Certain car-related expenditures can be deducted no matter if you take actual 
expenses or the standard mileage deduction. These include parking fees and 
tolls that relate to business use of the car.
Reporting Car Expenses
For the most part, car expenses are reported on the specific line for these 
expenses. For a sole proprietorship, that’s on Schedule C (line 9 for 2011). 
9 See Internal Revenue Bulletin 1999-5, p. 4 at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-05.pdf.

83
.
Figure 7-2. Part iV of Schedule c (information on Your Vehicle)
.
Company Cars 
.

Chapter 7 | The Car
84
Calculating the value of those miles can be difficult. If the vehicle is leased, an 
IRS table can be used.10 If the vehicle is owned, the actual expenses must be 
calculated to determine the value of those miles. (An exception to this is 
available if the vehicle’s personal use is limited to commuting to and from 
work and de minimis personal use.11) Obviously, excellent record keeping is a 
must with company vehicles.
Other Kinds of Vehicles
There are other kinds of vehicles used by businesses besides cars, light-duty 
trucks, SUVs, and passenger vans. Panel trucks, large trucks, vans, and 
motorcycles are also listed equipment. You must use actual expenses for the 
business mileage of these vehicles. 
10 See IRS, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits (2011), Publication 15-B,   www.irs.gov/
pub/irs-pdf/p15b_11.pdf, “Lease Value Rule.”
11 There are other rules regarding this exception; generally, the vehicle cannot be driven by a 
“control employee”—for example, someone who earns $195,000 or more who owns 1% or 
more of the stock of the company.

c h a p t e r
8
Travel
You got to be careful if you don’t know where you’re going, because you might 
not get there.
—Yogi Berra
One of the perks I enjoyed in my younger years was traveling. I used to travel 
to glamorous locations (like Las Vegas) and the not so glamorous ones (such 
as Bakersfield, California). 
When you travel on business, the business-related expenses are deductible. 
This chapter focuses on these expenses, what can and can’t be deducted, and 
how to report these expenses on a tax return. We also examine the rules 
covering trips where you combine business with a vacation.
Business Travel
Clearly, business travel is deductible: It’s an ordinary and necessary expense. 
However, personal travel is not deductible. If you bring your spouse on a trip 
with you, his or her airfare is not deductible as a business expense (it’s not 
necessary). 
When you travel for business, all the expenses from the time you leave your 
home to the time you return are deductible. This includes ground 
transportation to the airport, airfare, ground transportation at the destination 
or a rental car, your hotel, and all the expenses of the return trip.
As noted in Chapter 4, Section 274(d) of the Tax Code makes travel deductions 
subject to more stringent backup requirements than other deductions. You 
cannot use the Cohan rule to estimate travel expenses. You need receipts or 
other proof of your expenses.

Chapter 8 | Travel
86
Tax Home
A key concept in travel is your tax home. The IRS defines tax home as your 
regular place of business, not necessarily your personal home. If you live and 
work in the same metropolitan area, your tax home is the same as your family 
home.
There are three factors used to determine your tax home:1
1.  You perform part of your business in the same local area as your 
main home and use that home for lodging while doing business 
in the area. For example, you are a consultant living in New York 
City. You take a consulting assignment in Stamford, Connecticut 
and commute to and from your residence each day.
2.  You have living expenses at your main home that you duplicate 
because your business requires you to be away from home. An 
example is: Assume you are a consultant residing in New York 
City. You take a long-term assignment in Chicago. You rent an 
apartment in Chicago, duplicating a portion of your living costs 
in New York.
3.  You have not abandoned the area where you have resided and 
called your main home; you have one or more members of your 
family living in your main home; or you often stay at your main 
home. Again, assume you are a consultant in New York who has 
taken a long-term assignment in Chicago. You’ve rented an 
apartment in Chicago. However, your spouse and children 
continue to reside in your New York home.
It is possible to have no tax home. Imagine you are a salesperson covering a 
large region in the western United States. You live with your brother and his 
family rent-free in San Francisco, but each month you are on the road for 
twenty-five days. You would not have a tax home. If you have no tax home, 
you cannot deduct travel expenses.
What Can Be Deducted
Though most of the travel expenses that are deductible are obvious, some are 
not. Here’s a list of the expense types that you are allowed to deduct. 
1 These rules are taken from IRS, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses, Publication 
463 (2011 edition), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p463.pdf. Revenue Ruling 73-529 has 
a more thorough description of the same test. 

87
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Transportation
Your costs to travel by plane, train, bus, or car from your home to your 
business destination are deductible. There are special rules for cruise ship 
travel (covered in the “What Can’t be Deducted” section).
Ground Transportation
Your ground transportation between your home and the airport/terminal and 
from your hotel to and from the airport/terminal is deductible. This includes 
public transportation, a taxi, or a rental car. Ground transportation in your 
destination city is also deductible as long as it is business-related.
Baggage and Shipping
Costs of shipping bags and materials from your regular work location to your 
other work locations are an ordinary and necessary business expense and are 
deductible.
Car
Your business-related car expenses while traveling are deductible. If you use 
your own car, this deduction is taken as an automobile expense, not a travel 
expense. If you use a rental car, the expense is taken as a travel expense. Note 
that only the business-related portion of your rental car expense is deductible.
Lodging
You business-related lodging is a deductible travel expense.
Meals
Your meals while traveling away from home on business are deductible. Note 
that meals are deducted as meals and entertainment, not as a travel expense. 
The specifics of how meals are deducted and the rules for meal deductions 
are covered in Chapter 9.
Cleaning
Dry cleaning and laundry expenses while traveling are deductible. Additionally, 
you can deduct dry cleaning and laundry of clothes worn while traveling once 
you return home. Note that this should be deducted as a travel expense.

Chapter 8 | Travel
88
Tips
Any gratuities you pay for any of the items already noted are deductible.
Other Expenses
Any other expense you have while traveling, as long as it is both ordinary and 
necessary (and you have records to support it), will be deductible.
What Can’t Be Deducted
Though most travel expenses can be deducted, there are some expenses that 
are exceptions. The most common of these are personal expenses: you can’t 
deduct a vacation as a business expense.
Most issues arise when business and pleasure are mixed. The general rule is if 
the primary purpose of the trip is business, your travel expenses are deductible; if 
the primary purpose of the trip is personal, your travel expenses are not deductible. 
Let’s look at some examples.
Example 1. You fly to Chicago to attend a friend’s wedding. While there, you 
need to fax documents to a client. The costs directly related to faxing the 
documents are deductible. Your transportation, hotel, meals, and so on, are 
not deductible.
Example 2. You and your family fly to Orlando to spend a week at Walt Disney 
World. While there, you use a rental car and spend a day with a client in 
nearby Kissimmee. You cannot deduct your travel expenses to Orlando or 
your hotel. You can deduct one day of your rental car expenses. If you take 
your client out to lunch, that would be a deductible business meal.
Example 3. You fly to Las Vegas for the annual convention of your industry on 
a Sunday (the convention runs Monday to Thursday). Your spouse flies to Las 
Vegas on Friday after the convention, and you spend the weekend together 
taking in shows and gambling before flying home on Sunday. Your travel 
expenses are deductible; your spouse’s travel expenses are not deductible. 
Your hotel room is deductible from Sunday through Thursday night (from the 
day before the convention to the day the convention ends). If the hotel 
charged you a double rate that was more expensive than the single rate, you 
can only deduct the single rate. Your meals from Sunday through Thursday are 
deductible. Your ground transportation costs in Las Vegas are deductible 
except for Friday and Saturday. Note that the cost for you to return to the 
airport in Las Vegas is deductible.

89
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Travel Outside of the United States
There are special rules for travel outside of the United States. Generally, you 
can deduct all of the travel expenses if the trip is entirely for business. If the 
trip is partially for business and partially for personal matters, you must 
allocate expenses based on the number of business days and personal days 
unless an exception exists (see the following list). As a rule, business days are 
the days you spend on business activities. If you are outside of the United 
States and have a business activity on both a Friday and a Monday, the weekend 
days in between will count as business days. However, if you have business on 
a Friday and choose to spend the weekend on personal matters and fly home 
on Monday, the weekend days do not count as business days. Travel days (days 
you are flying on business) count as business days.
There are four exceptions to these rules.
1.  No substantial control. If you are an employee and have no control 
over the travel, your trip is considered entirely business-related. 
Self-employed individuals are always considered to have 
substantial control.
2.  The trip lasts one business week or less. If you are outside of the 
United States for one week or less, your trip is considered 
entirely business for transportation expenses to and from the United 
States. Note that you do not count the day you travel from the 
United States as a day; however, the day you return is counted.
3.  You spend less than 25% of the time on personal activities. If you 
spend more than a week outside of the United States, but less 
than 25% of your time is spent on personal activities, you can 
deduct 100% of your transportation expenses. You can only 
deduct the business portion of your other expenses (lodging, 
meals, etc.).
4.  Vacation was not a major consideration. If you can show that a 
vacation was not a major consideration (even when you arrange 
the trip), your trip will be considered entirely business-related. 
This is determined based on the facts and circumstances.
If you travel outside of the United States for personal reasons but have direct 
business expenses, those expenses can be deducted. Suppose you travel to 
Paris for a vacation, but you spend a day visiting a customer in France. The 
costs directly related to visiting the customer are deductible.

Chapter 8 | Travel
90
Luxury Water Travel
There are specific limits to travel expenses if you take a trip on a cruise line 
or other luxury water transportation. You are allowed as a daily limit twice the 
maximum federal per diem rate at the dates of travel. You can find this rate in 
IRS Publication 463.
Let’s say you took a business-related ten-day cruise in June 2011 at a cost of 
$7,000. The maximum federal per diem during that time was $304 per day. 
Thus, the maximum deductible per-day expense was $608, or $6,080 for your 
cruise. You can only deduct $6,080 rather than the $7,000 you actually spent. 
If your cost of meals is separately stated, you must apply the 50% limit on 
meals and entertainment expenses (discussed in the next chapter) before 
applying the daily limit. Assume the same facts as before, except that meals 
represent $2,000 of the $7,000 that was spent. To determine the allowable 
deduction, you multiply the meal cost of $2,000 by 50% to obtain $1,000. You 
then add to that the $5,000 of other costs for the cruise to obtain $6,000. 
This is compared to the daily limit of $6,080. You are allowed the lesser of the 
daily limit or your expenses, so you take a $1,000 meal deduction and a 
$5,000 travel expense.
■ Note  Convention exception to luxury water travel. It wouldn’t be tax without exceptions to 
exceptions. If you attend a business-related convention, seminar, or meeting on a cruise ship, the 
daily limit does not apply.
However, there is a maximum allowable deduction of $2,000 per year on cruise ships. Additionally, 
there are very specific rules that must be met: The trip must be business-related; the cruise ship 
must be registered in the United States; all of the ports of call must be in the United States or be 
U.S. possessions; you must attach a written statement to your return that includes information on 
the total days of the trip, the hours each day spent on business activities, and a program of the 
business activities; you must attach a written statement signed by an organizer of the meeting that 
includes a schedule of the business activities and the number of hours you spent attending the 
scheduled business activities.
In practice, there are very few cruise ships with U.S. registry (these mainly cruise between Hawaii 
and California or on the Mississippi River). Thus, the ability to actually deduct a business meeting 
on a cruise ship is very limited.

91
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Conventions Outside of North America
Attending a business-related convention, seminar, or meeting outside of 
North America is generally deductible. However, it must be reasonable that 
the convention is held outside of North America rather than inside North 
America. The reasonableness test is based on the facts and circumstances of 
the event. Generally, the IRS can disallow seminars and meetings outside of 
the United States when you could have attended a similar meeting within the 
United States. Let’s look at an example.
You need to attend a specific continuing education conference on your field. 
The identical week-long seminar is being offered in Miami and Macau. Unless 
you can show there is a conflict with the seminar in Miami, the IRS could 
disallow travel expenses for attending the seminar in Macau. 
■ Note  Congress has an unusual view of North America. The rule on conventions outside of 
North America brings up an obvious question: What countries are within North America? Congress 
has decided which countries are and are not within North America for this purpose.
Consider the island of Hispaniola. There are two countries on this island: Haiti and the Dominican 
Republic. The Dominican Republic is included within North America, but Haiti is not.
There are numerous other oddities. Most of the islands of the Caribbean are included, but the 
Cayman Islands are not. Honduras in Central America is included, but Panama, Nicaragua, El 
Salvador, and Belize are not. Guyana, which is in South America, is included in North America for 
this purpose. The countries that border the United States, Canada and Mexico, are both considered 
to be in North America. 
You can find the full list of countries in the North American area in IRS Publication 463. 
Reporting Travel Expenses
Where and how travel expenses are reported depends on the type of business 
entity you have. The amount that is a deductible business expense does not 
change; however, where the deduction is taken will vary.
Sole Proprietor
This is the simplest situation. A sole proprietor reports his or her travel 
expenses on Schedule C. Remember, meal expenses are reported separately 
from travel expenses.

Chapter 8 | Travel
92
Partnerships (and LLCs Filing as Partnerships)
The travel expenses of the partnership are included in other deductions for 
the partnership. This leads to the obvious question: how does a partner either 
get reimbursed or take a tax deduction for the expenses?
Most partnerships will have an accountable plan for reimbursing partners and 
employees of the partnership for business expenses (see Chapter 6). The 
partner completes an expense report noting his or travel expenses and 
receives reimbursement from the partnership. The partnership deducts the 
travel expenses as an ordinary and necessary expense.
If there is no accountable plan but the partnership agreement (or LLC 
operating agreement) allows for unreimbursed partnership expenses, then 
the partner will deduct the travel expenses as an unreimbursed partnership 
expense. This deduction is taken in Part II of Schedule E (see Figure 6-4 for an 
example).
If the partnership agreement (or LLC operating agreement) does not allow for 
unreimbursed partnership expenses and there is no accountable plan, then 
neither the partner nor the partnership can take a deduction for travel 
expenses.
Corporations
Travel expenses can be reimbursed through an accountable plan (as discussed 
in Chapter 6). If there is no accountable plan, the expense must be taken as 
an unreimbursed business expense. That deduction is taken on Form 2106 
(or Form 2106-EZ) but is reduced by 2% of your adjusted gross income. 

a p t e r
9
Meals and 
Entertainment
.
Meal Expenses
.

Chapter 9 | Meals and Entertainment
94
Meal expenses cannot be lavish or extraordinary. This doesn’t mean you can’t 
eat at a fancy restaurant; however, it does mean if the facts and circumstances 
don’t justify the deduction, it will be disallowed.
In an examination (audit), you will be sitting across from an Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) auditor. When traveling, this auditor is subject to the government 
rules on expenses. As noted in Chapter 4, the meal allowance is currently $71 
a day in the most expensive cities in the country, such as New York City. If 
you attempt to justify a $710 per person meal in front of an auditor who must 
eat on $71 a day, I wish you good luck (you’ll need it). What this means is your 
expenses need to be normal for the situation. If you’re taking a potential client 
to lunch, eating at an upscale restaurant is normal for that situation and should 
be acceptable.
In addition to meals while traveling, meals when you meet with clients, 
vendors, business partners, and similar individuals will be deductible. However, 
you need to mark on the receipt whom you met with and the business 
purpose of the meeting. Figure 9-1 shows a sample receipt with this 
information.
The amount you can claim for meal and entertainment expenses is reduced 
by 50%.1 If your actual meal and entertainment expenses total $3,500, you are 
allowed a $1,750 deduction. 
■ Note  What are facts and circumstances? You have probably noticed the phrase “facts and 
circumstances” in the text and may be wondering why that phrase keeps recurring. The reason is 
that both the Tax Code and IRS regulations frequently use this phrase.
The idea behind this phrase is to note that the subjective issues of each individual’s (or business’s) 
facts and circumstances in regard to the subject at hand should be weighed in the decision of 
whether an expense is deductible. For example, large air conditioning expenses where I reside (Las 
Vegas, Nevada) are normal. However, an individual living in Seattle is unlikely to need to spend the 
same amount of money on air conditioning. What is normal for one set of facts and circumstances 
might not be normal for another. 
1 Section 274(n) of the Tax Code limits the deduction for meals and entertainment to 50% of 
the actual expense.

95
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Let’s examine another common situation. You drive to a business meeting at 
a potential client’s office (about an hour from your office). When the meeting 
concludes, it’s nearly noon, so you stop at a restaurant to eat lunch. Is that 
meal a deductible business expense?
Generally, that meal will not be deductible. If you are eating a meal in your tax 
home—generally considered for this purpose to be the metropolitan area in 
which you work—you cannot deduct the meal. The theory is you would have 
had to eat anyway.
If the area where you work is large (based on geography), this can be an issue. 
A literal reading of the law would say that even if you’re two hours from your 
office, you can’t take a meal deduction. However, this is an area where facts 
and circumstances might help you. Most IRS personnel understand that, given 
Figure 9-1. Sample receipt with meeting information

Chapter 9 | Meals and Entertainment
96
these facts, eating at a restaurant would be justified. However, if you are 
within an hour’s drive of your office (and are in the same metropolitan area), 
the meal will not be deductible.
Entertainment Expenses
You are allowed to deduct business-related entertainment expenses. There 
are very specific rules about what entertainment expenses can be deducted. 
Generally, the expense must meet one of two tests: the directly-related test or 
the associated test. 
Directly-Related Test
The directly--related test allows an entertainment expense to be deductible if 
it’s directly related to your business. There are two means of meeting this 
test. First, the entertainment can take place in a clear business setting. Examples 
of this include:
• 
Entertainment in a hospitality suite at a business meeting or 
convention. Goodwill (for your business) is created through 
your products being on display and/or possible discussion of 
selling your products to customers, and so on.
• 
Entertainment at the grand opening of your business. Here, 
the goal of the entertainment is obtaining good publicity for 
your business. This meets the directly-related test.
The directly-related test will not be met if you (or an employee) are not 
present. Additionally, if there are substantial distractions, the directly-related 
test will also not be met.
The IRS considers meetings at nightclubs, discos, cocktail parties, theaters, 
baseball games, and other sporting events to have substantial distractions. 
Additionally, meetings of a purely social nature where you are not meeting for 
a business purpose do not meet the directly-related test. This would include 
golfing with strangers, meeting with random people at a resort, and talking 
with people at the health club.
Associated Test
You can still deduct entertainment expenses if you meet the associated test. 
To pass this test, the expense must be:
1.  Associated with the active conduct of your business, and

97
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
2.  Directly before or after a substantial business discussion.
Let’s consider an example. You invite your client to a baseball game. He meets 
you at the ballpark. During the breaks in the game, you discuss your new 
products. Immediately after the game, you go off your separate ways.
The entertainment expense in this example would not be deductible. Though 
it clearly meets the first part of the associated test (it’s related to your 
business), it does not meet the second part of the test. Your discussion 
occurred during the game, not before or after. Because there are substantial 
distractions during the event, you would need to have talked with the client 
either before or after the game.
Let’s modify this example. You take your client out to dinner two hours 
before the baseball game. At dinner, you engage in a discussion of your new 
business products. You then go to the baseball game. After the game, you 
head your separate ways. Here, the entertainment expense would be deductible 
because you engaged in a substantial business discussion before the 
entertainment.
You must have adequate records to deduct entertainment expenses. You 
need to note the date, place, amount spent, the business purpose and benefit 
to be gained, and the relationship of the person being entertained to you (e.g., 
potential client). Either you or an employee must be present at the 
entertainment (the person present should be noted on the receipt or 
statement).
Meetings at conventions are presumed to be business-related. Note that you 
must have a business purpose for attending the convention. If you entertain a 
client following a business seminar, that entertainment generally meets the 
associated test.
Note that the associated test specifies that the entertainment must occur 
directly before or after the substantial business discussion. If it’s not the same 
day as the entertainment, then the facts and circumstances must be examined. 
In Publication 463, the IRS uses the example of entertainment the day before 
or the day after the business discussion. For those circumstances, “the 
entertainment generally is considered to be held directly before or after the 
discussion.” 
■ Caution  Make sure you note the business that was discussed. Meal and entertainment 
expenses are often a point of emphasis in audits. You will need adequate support to justify your 
expenditures. For entertainment expenses, you must list the content of the “substantial business 
discussion.” You can’t just state “our businesses.” That said, the IRS is not looking for a minute-by-

Chapter 9 | Meals and Entertainment
98
minute rehash of what you discussed. If you talked about a new product, include a notation, 
“Discussed new product and potential cost savings for client.” If you’re entertaining a potential 
new client, noting that fact and that you discussed how your business can help the potential client’s 
business should be sufficient. 
As with meals, entertainment expenses are limited to 50% of the actual 
amount spent.
Per Diem Expenses
What if I told you there is a way to deduct meal and entertainment expenses 
without saving any receipts? It’s true. You can either deduct actual expenses 
or use the per diem method.
Per diem expenses can be used when traveling for business. Let’s say you take 
a seven-day business trip. You can take either your actual meal and 
entertainment expenses, or you can use the per diem expenses. To determine 
the per diem, you consult official tables of per diem rates for your destination. 
If the travel is within the continental United States, you consult the General 
Services Administration’s per diem chart. For travel that is outside of the 
United States, you consult the State Department’s per diem table. If your 
travel is outside of the continental United States but is not foreign (Alaska, 
Hawaii, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, etc.), you use 
the Department of Defense’s per diem table. Table 9-1 shows where to find 
the per diem rates.
When you look at the per diem charts, you will see columns for lodging and 
for meals and incidental expenses. The only per diem expenses you are 
allowed to use are for meals and entertainment. You cannot use per diem for 
lodging.
Table 9-1. Where to Find Per Diem Rates
Destination
Agency
Website 
Within the 
Continental  United 
States
GSA
www.gsa.gov/portal/category/21287
United States, but 
Outside the 
Continental United 
States
Dept. of 
Defense
www.defensetravel.dod.mil/site/perdiemCalc.cfm
Foreign Countries
Dept. of State
http://aoprals.state.gov/web920/per_diem.asp

99
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Let’s look at an example of calculating the per diem. Assume you traveled to 
Las Vegas in March 2012 for six days. By clicking on Nevada on the GSA per 
diem web page, you can see the meals and incidental expenses for the current 
fiscal year (October 2011–September 2012) for Las Vegas is $71 a day. 
However, the per diem is not $71 × 6 = $426. You are only allowed 75% of 
the per diem rate on your first and last days of travel.2 So the allowed per 
diem is ($71 × 2 × 75%) + ($71 × 4) = $107 + $284 = $391.
■ Caution  The tables default to the current fiscal year. The default for the GSA per diem table 
is the current fiscal year. For example, FY2013 runs from October 2012 through September 2013. 
If you need the per diem for a different period, remember to change the fiscal year. Similarly, the 
State Department’s and Defense Department’s per diems default to the current month, so you may 
need to change the month to get the right rate for your travel. 
If you look at the tables, you will see that not every location is listed. Let’s say 
you traveled to Denton, Texas. Denton is not listed in the table for Texas, so 
you must use the standard rate. The standard rate is used for all cities without 
specific rates.
Let’s assume you have excellent records for all of your meals and entertainment 
expenses except for one business trip. So you calculate the per diem for that 
trip, add it to the rest of your actual meal expenses, and get your total for the 
year. You are not allowed to do this. You cannot mix per diem and actual expenses 
for the same year. You must use either per diem or actual expenses for the 
entire year.
This obviously limits the usefulness of the per diem deduction. I have found in 
my tax practice that the per diem method is useful for business owners with 
bad recordkeeping practices (at least a deduction can be taken, rather than no 
deduction). It is also useful for individuals whose only meal and entertainment 
expenses are incurred through traveling.  
The per diem method is especially useful for individuals who travel outside of 
the United States. The per diems allowed by the GSA are not generous; the 
current maximum per diem is $71 a day. In an expensive location like New 
York City, that might not be sufficient. The State Department per diems are 
more reflective of actual costs.
You are allowed to switch from per diem to actual expenses each year. If your 
actual expenses are $5,000 and your per diem is $4,500, you would normally 
2 Alternatively, you can use a different proration method if you apply it consistently and it is in 
accordance with reasonable business practice.

Chapter 9 | Meals and Entertainment
100
choose the actual expenses. If the following year the situation is reversed, you 
can use the actual expenses.
Like the other meals and entertainment expenses, the per diem that you 
calculate must be reduced by 50% to determine the deduction you can take.
Special Situations
There are a number of special situations that can impact meal and entertainment 
expenses. Here are some of the more common ones.
100% Deductible Meal and Entertainment
There are certain circumstances where providing meals to the office or a 
group is fully (100%) deductible. These include:
• 
Meal expenses for occasional large group in-office meetings. 
This would be categorized as an office expense.
• 
Meal expenses for large group meetings inside or outside of 
the office for promotional seminars or related events. This 
would be categorized as an advertising expense.
• 
Meal expenses for group meetings while attending a 
conference, seminar, or training, paid directly by the company. 
This would be expensed with the related conference, seminar, 
or training.
• 
Meal expenses for occasional in-office working meals 
(breakfast, lunch, or dinner) for the convenience of the 
employer. This would be considered an office expense.
• 
Meal expenses for buffets or continental breakfasts for 
meetings either inside or outside of the office. This would be 
expensed with the related meeting costs.
• 
Meal and entertainment expenses for social and recreational 
purposes, such as an annual holiday party, company picnic, 
and so on for non–highly compensated employees. Only meal 
expenses are deductible for social and recreational purposes 
for highly compensated employees. These expenses are 
typically office expenses.
• 
Meal and entertainment expenses for employee recognition 
and mentoring programs. These are normally expensed with 
the underlying program.

101
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
• 
Tickets provided to employees on a nondiscriminatory basis 
for sporting and cultural events. This would be considered as 
an employee benefit expense.
Business Gifts
Business gifts are deductible up to $25 per person per year. If your company 
gives de minimis gifts, such as a turkey to every employee, these are 100% 
deductible as a gift expense. Similar gifts to customers are also deductible, as 
gifts, up to $25 per customer per year. 
Coffee and Water Service
Food and drinks that are of de minimis value, such as coffee service, water 
service, or free soft drinks for the office, are considered office expenses and 
are 100% deductible.
Audiovisual and Room Charges
If you put on a seminar and have room and/or audiovisual equipment charges, 
these are 100% deductible. They are not meal or entertainment expenses; 
rather, they are expensed based on the reason for the meeting or seminar.
Dues for Professional Service Clubs
Dues for networking organizations, professional societies, and chambers of 
commerce are 100% deductible as dues. Note that the portion of the dues 
used for political or lobbying purposes (if applicable) is not deductible. The 
deductible expense is reported as dues and subscriptions.
You will notice that in all of these cases the cost is not reported as a meal and 
entertainment expense; it is reported as some other expense. Although these 
expenses certainly involve meals or entertainment, there is an underlying 
business activity that would make the expense fully deductible.
Section 162(a) of the Tax Code states that, “There shall be allowed as a 
deduction all the ordinary and necessary expenses paid or incurred during the 
taxable year in carrying on any trade or business.”
Each of the expenses just noted meets the definition of an ordinary and 
necessary business expense. The list is not complete; there are other business 
expenses involving meals and entertainment that are fully deductible based on 
the activity that is occurring.
There are three other special situations worth noting.

Chapter 9 | Meals and Entertainment
102
Charitable Sporting Events
The Tax Code (Section 274(l)(1)(B)) specifically allows a 100% deduction for 
any ticket to a sporting event that benefits a charitable organization. All of the 
net proceeds of the event must benefit the charity, and volunteers must 
perform substantially all of the work at the event.
Skyboxes and Luxury Suites
The Tax Code (Section 274(l)(2)) specifically limits deductions for renting a 
luxury suite to see a sporting or cultural event if the rental is for more than 
one event. In such a situation, the allowed deduction is limited to the face 
value of non–luxury box seat tickets for the seats in the luxury suite.
Transportation Workers
Transportation workers are allowed to use their own special per diem rate. 
That rate is currently $59/day within the United States and $65 outside of the 
United States.
Reporting Meals and Entertainment
Meals and entertainment expenses are reported in different places depending 
on the type of business entity you have. The amount that is a deductible 
business expense does not change; however, where the deduction is taken will 
vary.
Sole Proprietor
This is the simplest situation. A sole proprietor reports his or her meal and 
entertainment expenses on Schedule C. The amount reported as a deduction 
is 50% of the total expense incurred. If you use computer software, you will 
likely enter in the full amount rather than the deductible amount. Remember, 
travel expenses are reported separately from meals and entertainment.
Partnerships (and LLCs Filing as Partnerships)
The situation here is the same as it is for travel expenses. Partnerships with 
an accountable plan will reimburse partners when they complete expense 
reports noting their meal and entertainment expenses. The partnership will 
deduct the meal and entertainment expenses (reducing the amount spent by 
50%).

103
.
.

c h a p t e r
10
Fixed Assets 
and 
Depreciation
The income tax has made liars out of more Americans than golf.
 —Will Rogers
One of my favorite sayings about taxation in the United States is that it’s a 
combination of common sense and arcane rules. Most of this book emphasizes 
the common sense approach to taxation. Now we must move into an area of 
arcane rules.
Most businesses purchase items that are subject to depreciation. Depreciation 
is the decrease in the value of an asset over time; it’s the allocation of the cost 
of an asset to the periods in which it is used.
This sounds basic, and many years ago it was. However, now there are many 
different types of depreciation, including straight-line, ACRS, MACRS, Section 
179, “bonus” depreciation, and “economic stimulus” depreciation. Add to this 
two other issues: basis (generally, the purchase price of the item being 
depreciated) and the Uniform Capitalization Rules. For large entities, 
depreciation can be a truly bewildering area of tax law.
Luckily, for most small businesses, some general rules apply. This chapter 
begins by looking at basis and the Uniform Capitalization Rules. Then we look 
at what assets must be depreciated and the kinds of depreciation. We follow 

Chapter 10 | Fixed Assets and Depreciation
106
this by looking at leases and amortizable assets and the rules covering 
amortization. Finally, we look at the typical strategy used by small businesses.
Basis
Basis is the value of the asset being depreciated. The cost is what you pay for 
the asset. It doesn’t matter if you pay cash, use a credit card, take out a loan, 
or exchange another asset for that asset. Basis is the fair market value of the 
asset when you acquire it.
Basis includes ancillary costs of the asset:
• 
Sales tax,
• 
Shipping and handling,
• 
Installation and testing (if required),
• 
Recording charges and taxes (on real estate), and
• 
Other similar expenses.
The acquisition of real estate and what is expensed, what is depreciated, and 
what is amortized are complex. In the section within this chapter on real 
estate, I give examples of the costs that go in each category.
Uniform Capitalization Rules
The Uniform Capitalization Rules (Section 263A of the Tax Code) require 
that certain costs be capitalized. However, most small businesses will not be 
subject to these rules. The rules require that you capitalize direct costs and 
part of the indirect costs for production or resale activities. This includes the 
use of inventories, as discussed in Chapter 5. The rules apply if you are 
producing real or tangible personal property or acquiring property for resale.
However, under Section 1.263A-1(b) of Treasury Regulations, most small 
businesses will not have to deal with these rules. The rules do not apply to 
the following:
• 
Personal property you acquire for resale if the average annual 
gross receipts of your business are $10 million or less.
• 
Property you produce if either your indirect costs of 
producing the property are $200,000 or less or you use the 
cash-basis method and do not have inventory.

107
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
This section is included in this book because a few businesses that are small 
in size (as far as number of employees) will be subject to these rules. Luckily, 
most small businesses can ignore this portion of the Tax Code. 
■ Caution  Seek advice if you are covered by the Uniform Capitalization Rules. Though 
some areas of tax are straightforward, the calculations required under the Uniform Capitalization 
Rules can be complex. If you are covered under the Uniform Capitalization Rules, I strongly advise 
you seek the advice of a tax professional who specializes in this area. 
What Assets Must Be Depreciated?
Your business will have many assets, everything from $10 staplers to $100 
chairs to $1,000 computers to $10,000 machines. Which of these assets must 
be depreciated? Which should be depreciated? Which assets should not be 
depreciated?
Listed Equipment
Congress requires that certain assets called listed equipment be depreciated. 
Listed property includes:
• 
Passenger automobiles weighing 6,000 pounds or less;
• 
All other property used for transportation unless excepted;
• 
Property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement 
(including photographic equipment, audiovisual equipment, 
and communication equipment); 
• 
Computers and related peripherals except if used in a 
business and owned or leased by the person operating the 
business. This means that if a partnership or corporation 
owns a computer, it’s listed equipment. However, if a sole 
proprietor owns a computer, it is not listed equipment.
Listed equipment must be depreciated. If the business use of a listed equipment 
item is 50% or less, you cannot take Section 179 depreciation or special 
depreciation for that equipment (see later in this chapter). Additionally, if the 
business use is 50% or less in a year, you must use the straight-line depreciation 
method for that year.
You may also have to recapture depreciation for listed equipment. Depreciation 
recapture occurs when you use listed property for more than 50% in the 
prior year, but use it less than 50% in the current year. Under the Tax Code, 

Chapter 10 | Fixed Assets and Depreciation
108
the excess depreciation is “recaptured” as income. The excess depreciation is 
the allowed depreciation for the asset (including special depreciation and 
Section 179 depreciation) less the depreciation that would have been allowed 
in prior years if you had not used the property predominantly for business in 
the year it was put into service. If you have depreciation recapture, you also 
increase the adjusted basis of your property by the same amount.
Let’s say you purchase a computer and use it 100% for your business in the 
year of purchase. In the second year you own the computer, you only use it 
10% of the time for your business. In the second year, you would have 
depreciation recapture of the overall excess depreciation. 
Cars are the most likely asset where depreciation recapture will be an issue. 
Let’s say you use the actual expense method to determine your automobile 
expense (as described in Chapter 7). Your business use is 60% of your mileage. 
In the following year, your business use of your car is only 40%. You will have 
depreciation recapture. Here’s an example of recapture.
You purchase a pickup truck in 2007 for $18,000. The truck is used only for 
your business from 2007 through 2010. You claimed Section 179 depreciation 
of $10,000 in 2007. You claimed depreciation of $6,618 in 2007 through 2010. 
To determine the depreciation allowable when the truck wasn’t used 
predominantly for business, you generally use straight-line depreciation 
(rather than accelerated depreciation). The straight-line depreciation is 10% 
of $18,000 in 2007 ($1,800) and 20% of $18,000 in 2008-2010 ($3,600 each 
year), for a total recalculated allowable depreciation of $12,600. The total 
depreciation claimed was $16,618. The excess depreciation that is recaptured 
is $4,018. That amount would be reported as other income on the business 
return (Schedule C, Form 1065, Form 1120, or Form 1120S).
■ Note  The curious case of cell phones. On September 27, 2010, President Barack Obama 
signed the Small Business Jobs Act into law. Buried in this legislation was one section that made 
business owners and tax professionals happy: Cellular telephones were removed from the listed 
equipment rules for all tax years beginning after December 31, 2009.
Through 2009, business owners needed to keep excellent records of cell phone usage. The IRS in 
audits sometimes required calculations of personal versus business usage of cell phones (required 
under the listed equipment rules).
Today, a cell phone that’s for business use is a business expense. This does not mean a cell phone 
that’s for personal use where there’s an occasional business call can be taken as a business 
expense. However, it means you don’t have to break out the occasional cost of a personal call from 
a business cell phone.

109
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Additionally, the IRS considers an employer-provided cell phone to an employee for business 
reasons to be a de minimis fringe benefit and is not included in the employee’s wages. A cell phone 
that’s provided to promote goodwill, boost morale, or attract employees is includable as a taxable 
fringe benefit.
Large-Cost Items
The idea of depreciation is to recover the cost of an item over its useful life. 
Consider a stapler (an asset that costs a minimal amount). A stapler costing 
$10 might last ten years. It doesn’t make sense to allocate the cost of a $10 
asset over ten years.
Now consider a $10,000 machine used in a manufacturing process. The 
machine may also last ten years. Here, allocating all of the cost to the year of 
purchase doesn’t make sense. The machine will provide value over ten years, 
so its cost should be allocated over its ten-year life. This is done through 
depreciation.
(As will be noted later in this chapter, Congress allows through Section 179 
Depreciation and bonus depreciation for you to recover the cost of the asset 
in the year of purchase.)
Businesses generally get to decide where to draw the line for large-cost items 
for depreciation. Items that cost $1,000 or more are generally depreciated; 
items costing under $500 generally are not depreciated. Drawing the line 
somewhere between $500 and $1,000 is reasonable.
Other Depreciable Items
Most things that are depreciated are obvious. However, a few items are 
depreciated that you wouldn’t expect. Here are some of them.
Real Estate
Building and improvements are depreciated; however, land never depreciates.
■ Tip  Allocation for land. Suppose you purchase a commercial building for $200,000 that you 
plan on renting to a tenant. Your basis is $200,000 (plus costs of purchase), right?
Wrong. Land never depreciates, and the building sits on land. Unless you separately lease the land, 
you must allocate a portion of the purchase price to land. This is usually done by using the most 
recent property tax assessment.

Chapter 10 | Fixed Assets and Depreciation
110
Assume that the most recent assessment statement shows a total value (land and buildings) of 
$180,000 and that the land is worth $18,000. That equates to land being 10% of the value. It is 
then reasonable to allocate 10% of the purchase price, or $20,000, to land. The remaining 
$180,000 becomes the depreciable basis of the building.
Patents and Copyrights
Some intellectual property is depreciated. The value of a patent or a copyright 
you acquire is depreciated. A patent or copyright is depreciated using the 
straight-line method over the remaining useful life (the remaining term granted 
to it by the government). 
Computer Software
Most computer software is expensed. Say you purchase QuickBooks, a 
standard accounting package. The cost is generally not high enough to require 
it to be considered a capital asset.
However, some commercial software is quite expensive. That computer 
software will either be an intangible asset or a depreciable asset. Computer 
software is depreciated over a three-year life using the straight-line method if 
all of the following are true:
• 
It is readily available for purchase by the general public,
• 
It is subject to a nonexclusive license, and
• 
It has not been substantially modified.
Computer software that does not meet the foregoing conditions and is of a 
large cost is amortized. (Amortizable assets are discussed later in this chapter.)
Types of Depreciation
Many children’s stories begin, “Once upon a time . . .” So might the story of 
depreciation. Many years ago, there was only one kind of depreciation: straight-
line depreciation. In straight-line depreciation, you take the basis of the asset, 
divide that by the useful life of the asset, and you get the depreciation. Today, 
rental real estate, computer software, and intellectual property are the major 
types of assets that still use straight-line depreciation.
In 1971, Congress adopted class life asset depreciation ranges. Under this 
system (which went by the acronym ADR), you could choose between several 

111
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
different depreciation methods: straight-line, declining balance, and sum of 
years digits.
In 1981, Congress decided to make more changes. The Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (ACRS) was adopted. Only the declining balance system and 
straight-line depreciation were allowed for assets. The present Modified 
Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) was adopted by Congress in the 
Tax Reform Act of 1986. 
There are two types of depreciation under MACRS: the General Depreciation 
System (GDS) and the Alternative Depreciation System (ADS). You will 
probably want to use the GDS; you cannot take any special depreciation 
(bonus or Section 179) under ADS. The only cases where you must use ADS 
are:
• 
Listed property used 50% or less in a qualified business,
• 
Tangible personal property used outside of the United States 
during the year,
• 
Tax-exempt use property,
• 
Two other situations that are very rare.1
The benefit of MACRS over straight-line depreciation is that you get a larger 
amount of depreciation earlier. With straight-line depreciation, the 
depreciation is the same amount each year. With MACRS, you will get a larger 
depreciation expense sooner, lowering your income (and tax) today while 
increasing it in later years.
■ Note  You can elect to use ADS or straight-line depreciation. You may elect to use ADS 
instead of GDS for any class of property you wish. This election is made by completing line 20 on 
Part III of Form 4562.
You can also elect out of MACRS and take straight-line depreciation for any class of property. You 
do this by attaching a statement to your tax return indicating the election you are making and the 
class of property for which you are making the election. 
1 Specifically, these situations are (1) property used predominantly in a farming business and 
placed in service in a tax year during which an election not to use the Uniform Capitalization 
Rules to certain farming costs is in effect; and (2) property imported from a foreign country 
for which an executive order is in effect because the country maintains trade restrictions or 
engages in other discriminatory acts.

Chapter 10 | Fixed Assets and Depreciation
112
The actual method used in MACRS GDS is a combination of the double-
declining balance and straight-line depreciation methods. The double-declining 
balance method is like straight-line depreciation, except it is doubled. Assume 
that you have an asset with a ten-year life with a basis of $10,000. The 
depreciation in the first year would be $1,000 using the straight-line method. 
That’s 10% of the basis, or a factor of 0.1000 for the amount of the asset 
depreciated in the first year. For the double-declining balance method we double 
this factor to 0.2000, so $2,000 would be the amount of depreciation taken.2 
That’s the MACRS GDS result. It can also be represented by this formula:
	
Depreciation	
= [Basis] × 2 × (1/[Useful Life of Asset in Years])
Note that the basis here is the basis still left to be depreciated. In the example, 
the second-year depreciation would be:
	
Depreciation	
= [($10,000-$2,000)] × 2 × (1/[10])
	
	
	
= $8,000 × 2 × 0.1000
	
	
	
= $1,600
But what happens in future years? Eventually, the amount of depreciation 
taken using the double-declining balance method is less than the amount 
under the straight-line method. When that happens using MACRS, you switch 
to the straight-line method. Table 10-1 below shows how this works.
Table 10-1. Example of Depreciation Taken Under MACRS
Year
Beg. Balance
DDB Depr.
S-L Depr.
Depr. Taken
1
$10,000
$2,000
$500
$2,000
2
$8,000
$1,600
$889
$1,600
3
$6,400
$1,280
$800
$1,280
4
$5,120
$1,024
$731
$1,024
5
$4,096
$819
$683
$819
6
$3,277
$655
$655
$655
7
$2,622
$524
$655
$655
8
$1,967
$393
$655
$655
9
$1,312
$262
$655
$655
10
$657
$131
$657
$657
2 Note that depreciation factors are generally expressed to four significant decimal places.

113
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
As you may notice, the double-declining balance method does not allow an 
asset to ever be fully depreciated; that’s why there’s a switchover to straight-
line depreciation under MACRS.
Special Kinds of Depreciation
There are two special kinds of depreciation: Section 179 depreciation and 
bonus depreciation (currently also called economic stimulus depreciation). 
These special kinds of depreciation allow you to effectively expense the cost 
of a depreciable asset in the year of purchase.
Section 179 Depreciation
Section 179 depreciation is named for the section of the Tax Code that 
authorizes it. Initially, Section 179 depreciation allowed you to expense 
$25,000 of assets during a calendar year. Congress, however, has increased 
the dollar limits over the past few years. The maximum Section 179 
depreciation for 2012 is $139,000; the current limit for 2013 is $25,000.3 
Note that your ability to take this deduction begins to phase out on purchases 
of more than $560,000 of assets in 2012 and $200,000 in 2013.
Almost everything qualifies for Section 179 treatment. You can use Section 
179 for tangible personal property (including machines, furniture and fixtures, 
and livestock4), computer software, and certain real property.5 
It might be better to look at what does not qualify for Section 179: land and 
land improvements,6 and excepted property. The excepted property includes:
• 
Some property leased to others if you are not a corporation,7
• 
Certain property used for lodging (hotels/motels),
• 
Heating and air conditioning units.
3 I expect Congress to increase this limit for 2013 in either the 2012 “Lame Duck” session 
following the Presidential election or in early 2013.
4 Yes, livestock like cows and cattle are depreciated over their useful lives.
5 Qualified leasehold improvement property, qualified restaurant property, and qualified retail 
improvement property.
6 This includes swimming pools, parking lots, wharves, docks, bridges, and fences.
7 This does not include property you manufacture or produce and lease to others.

Chapter 10 | Fixed Assets and Depreciation
114
■ Caution State limits on Section 179 may be different. Some states have different rules and 
limits on Section 179 depreciation. For example, California does not conform to the increased 
amount of Section 179 depreciation. The limit for California tax returns has been and will likely 
remain at $25,000. 
.
Figure 10-1. illustration of electing Section 179 depreciation
.
.

115
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Special (Bonus) Depreciation
Congress has enacted various special, or bonus, depreciation rules from time 
to time. The most recent round of special depreciation is called the economic 
stimulus qualified property depreciation. For 2012, this allows 50% bonus 
depreciation on qualified property placed into service. 
Like Section 179 depreciation, almost everything qualifies for bonus depre-
ciation. The property must be new (used property does not qualify), with a 
twenty-year or less useful life. Almost all personal property, computer 
software, and most leasehold improvements qualify. However, qualified 
restaurant property and qualified retail improvement property are not eligible 
for special depreciation (though they are eligible for Section 179 depreciation).
The advantage of bonus depreciation is that you take 50% of the cost of the 
property as bonus depreciation (effectively expensed during the first year). 
This lowers your income and your tax for the year. There is no restriction on 
the amount of equipment you can purchase in taking bonus depreciation. You 
are eligible to take bonus depreciation if you purchase $1,000 or $1,000,000 
of capital assets during 2012.
■ Caution  Not all states recognize bonus depreciation. Just like with Section 179 
depreciation, not all states recognize bonus depreciation. For example, California does not conform 
to this portion of federal tax law. 
You can elect out of taking bonus depreciation. To do so, you attach a 
statement to your return indicating the election you are making and the class 
of property for which you are making the election.
Unlike Section 179 depreciation, there is no rule requiring that a business 
have positive income to take bonus depreciation.
Rules and Recordkeeping
We’re ready to look at the nitty-gritty of depreciable assets. You should keep 
a record of your fixed assets. Not only will you need it for your income tax 
return, you will probably need it for your personal property tax return. 
Property you own that is depreciated over time is taxed by most local 
jurisdictions. As usual, keeping good records is half the battle.

Chapter 10 | Fixed Assets and Depreciation
116
Property Class
The Tax Code divides property into different classes based on their useful 
lives. Property classes range from 3-year property to residential rental 
property with a life of 39 years. Table 10-2 gives examples of depreciation 
periods for various assets. Note that any asset type that does not have a class 
life and has not been designated by law as being some other class is considered 
to have a 7-year life.
Conventions and First-Year Depreciation
There are two further rules that determine how assets are depreciated in 
their first year. These are the half-year convention and the midquarter convention.
Half-Year Convention
Under the half-year convention, assets are considered to be put into service 
on July 1 no matter what day of the year they were actually put into service. 
This is the normal means of depreciation during the first year.
For example, say you purchase two machines, one on March 1 and one on 
September 22. To calculate depreciation, each would be considered put into 
service on July 1. You would get half the first-year depreciation for each asset.
Midquarter Convention
Congress wrote an exception into the law regarding the half-year convention. 
If you put into service 40% or more of your depreciable assets during the last 
three months of the year, you must use the midquarter convention. Under this 
rule, each asset is put into place during the middle of the quarter of purchase.
Table 10-2. Depreciation Periods for Various Types of Property
Depreciation 
Period
Types of Property
3 years
Computer software
Tractor units for over-the-road use
Race horses placed in service before January 1, 2014
5 years
Cars, taxis, buses, and trucks
Computers and peripherals
Office machines (e.g., copiers)
Research and development property
Appliances, carpets, furniture, etc. used in residential rentals
Most cattle

117
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Depreciation 
Period
Types of Property
7 years
Office furniture and fixtures (desks, files, etc.)
Agricultural machinery and equipment
Any property that does not have a class life and has not been 
designated by law as being in any other class
10 years
Vessels, barges, tugs, and similar water transportation equipment
A single-purpose agricultural or horticultural structure
Trees or vine-bearing fruits or nuts
15 tears
Land improvements (e.g., shrubs, fences, roads, sidewalks, and 
bridges)
Retail motor fuel outlets (including convenience stores)
20 tears
Farm buildings except single-purpose agricultural or horticultural 
structures
27.5 years
Residential rental property (e.g., an apartment building)
39 tears
Nonresidential rental property (e.g., office building or a home 
office)
Let’s assume you purchase two machines, one on March 1 and one on October 
22. Each machine costs $10,000. Because you purchased 40% or more of your 
depreciable assets during the last quarter of the year, you must use the 
midquarter convention. The first machine would be considered placed in 
service on February 15; the second machine would be considered placed in 
service on November 15.
■ Tip  Using Section 179 depreciation to avoid the midquarter convention. Assets 
depreciated using Section 179 depreciation do not count as being placed in service during the last 
three months of the year for purposes of determining whether you need to use the midquarter 
convention. In almost all cases, you want to use Section 179 depreciation with assets purchased 
at the end of the year to avoid the midquarter convention.
Mid-Month Convention
The half-year and midquarter conventions are used for tangible personal 
property. The mid-month convention is used for real property. Under this 
convention, property is considered put into service on the middle of the 
month of purchase.

Chapter 10 | Fixed Assets and Depreciation
118
Date of Purchase vs. Date in Use
We depreciate assets based on the date they are first put into use. Suppose 
you buy a computer on December 28. For whatever reason, you do not open 
the box containing the computer and put it into use until January 3. The 
computer will be considered put into service on January 3, not December 28.
Some assets require additional work put into them before being put into 
service. For example, one of my clients purchased a new truck on May 1. He 
then had a contractor install refrigeration equipment onto that truck on May 
15. The truck went into use on May 15, not May 1. The date put into service 
for the truck will be May 15.
Calculating Depreciation
If you take Section 179 depreciation, your depreciation will equal the cost of 
the asset. If you take bonus depreciation, the bonus (special) depreciation will 
equal half the cost of the asset. If you don’t take either method, what is the 
depreciation? (Or if you take bonus depreciation, what is the rest of the 
depreciation deduction?)
You can calculate this by hand. The IRS gives instructions on how to do this in 
Publication 946; I go through two examples below. However, this is an area in 
which computers and tax preparation software are especially useful.
If I tell my tax software I have a seven-year asset, with a basis of $100,000, put 
into service on July 17, with bonus depreciation of $50,000, and no Section 
179 depreciation, it will tell me that the depreciation deduction is $7,145 
(assuming that the midquarter convention does not apply). Why should I 
spend several minutes calculating depreciation when my computer will do it 
in several seconds?
It’s not only tax software that can calculate depreciation. Many versions of 
QuickBooks have a Fixed Assets Manager. The Fixed Assets Manager will 
calculate tax depreciation and even include the appropriate convention. The 
Fixed Asset Manager can use both Section 179 and bonus depreciation. Of 
course, if you have used either Section 179 depreciation, there’s nothing to 
calculate: Your depreciation deduction is the cost of the asset, although your 
state depreciation may vary.
Let’s go through a couple of calculations.
Example 1. You purchase a machine used in your manufacturing process on 
July 17 and it is immediately placed in service. This is the only fixed asset you 
purchase during the year. The machine costs $100,000. You elect full bonus 
(special) depreciation of $50,000. What is the first-year depreciation?

119
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
First, we must determine the class of asset purchased. It’s a machine, and from 
Table 10-2 we can see it has a seven-year life property. Because this is the only 
fixed asset purchased during the year, the half-year convention applies.
Next, we must determine the depreciable basis. To do this, we take the 
normal basis and subtract any Section 179 or bonus depreciation elected. We 
take $100,000 and subtract $50,000, so that the depreciable basis is $50,000.
If the machine is not used 100% for business, an adjustment would need to be 
made for the depreciable basis. That’s not necessary in our example.
We then look in the IRS table for the half-year depreciation of a seven-year 
asset in its first year of depreciation. (The tables are in Appendix A of IRS 
Publication 946.) The depreciation factor for such an asset is 0.1429. We 
multiply that factor by the depreciable basis of $50,000 and come up with 
depreciation of $7,145.
Example 2. You purchase an office building for $120,000, including the land 
valued at $20,000. The property is commercial (not residential). The sale 
closes on March 22 and the property is immediately placed in service. What 
would the depreciation be in the first and second years?
Here, we do not have tangible personal property—this is real property. This 
is 39-year property (again, refer to Table 10-2).
We next determine the basis for the building. Because land never depreciates, 
and 39-year property is ineligible for either Section 179 or bonus depreciation, 
the depreciable basis is $100,000.
Nonresidential real property is depreciated over 39 years using the straight-
line method. It doesn’t matter what day of the month the building went into 
service; under the mid-month convention, it will be considered to have gone 
into service for purposes of depreciation on the middle of the month. The 
depreciation factor from Publication 946 is 2.033%, or 0.02033. We multiply 
that by $100,000 to get the first-year depreciation of $2,033.
The factor for the second year (indeed, for all years except the first and last 
years, when the factor is the same) is 2.564%, or 0.02564. That will yield 
depreciation of $2,564.
■ Tip  If you do this by hand, check your work! Math errors are now very rare in tax preparation. 
Computers do an excellent job with math. Assuming you enter the correct class of fixed asset to be 
depreciated and the correct basis, as well as the correct date of purchase, the computer will 
calculate the depreciation accurately. It is very easy to misread a table or use the wrong table when 
calculating depreciation. Appendix A of IRS Publication 946 includes 25 tables on 28 pages.

Chapter 10 | Fixed Assets and Depreciation
120
Leases
Many times, property is rented, or leased, instead of being purchased. Some 
manufacturers do not sell certain products; they only offer them for leases. 
For example, shuffling machines used in casinos are currently only offered on 
lease by the manufacturer to casinos.
There are two kinds of leases: operating leases and capital leases. In an 
operating lease, there is no option at the end of the lease term for the lessee 
(the person or business renting the property) to acquire the property, or else 
the cost is the then-current fair market value of the property. Most automobile 
leases are operating leases: You must pay the lessor the fair market value of 
the car to acquire it at the end of the lease term. Under an operating lease, 
the lessor is only transferring the right to use the property to the lessee. 
There is no ownership interest granted to the lessee.
Capital leases are different. Here, the lessor gives the lessee the property at 
the end of the lease or offers it to him for a bargain purchase price, say $1 or 
$100. A business must capitalize anything acquired through a capital lease.
There are other formats of capital leases. The lease might specify that the 
lessor is paying interest, or that each payment made by the lessor gives him an 
increasing percentage of ownership in the asset.
Under an operating lease, the lessor is only transferring the right to use the 
property to the lessee and there are no ownership rights established. An 
operating lease causes an expense. Automobile leases were previously 
discussed (see Chapter 7). Other items that can be expensed through leases 
will be discussed in Chapter 11.
In a capital lease, the lessee assumes some of the risks of ownership. A capital 
lease will cause the asset (or a portion of the value of the asset) to be put on 
the balance sheet, with the asset being subject to the normal rules for 
depreciation for that class of asset.
Should You Buy or Lease?
It depends.
This really is a complex question, and what you should do for your business 
will depend on what is being acquired, the cost differential in buying or leasing, 
and the tax consequences. The right answer for your business might be to 
purchase item 1 but lease item 2. You must evaluate each item on a case-by-
case basis.

121
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
There are a few things that are always the same when looking at a purchase 
or an operating lease. I list these in Table 10-3.
Table 10-3. Leasing vs. Buying
Operating Lease
Purchase/Capital Lease
Initial payment
Usually small
Usually large (a much larger down 
payment is normally required than 
with a lease)
Ownership
None
You own it
Monthly payments
Lease payments are fully 
deductible
If bought with a loan, the interest 
paid is deductible; principal payments 
are not
Depreciation
None
Depreciable, with Section 179 or 
bonus depreciation depending on 
asset class of item
Amortizable Assets
The last portion of this chapter looks at assets that are amortized over their 
useful lives. We’ve already covered two such assets earlier in this book: start-
up costs and organizational expenses. There are many other such assets. 
Amortization is used to recover the cost of amortizable assets in the same 
manner as depreciation is used to recover the cost of fixed assets. Amortization 
is calculated by taking the cost of the asset and dividing by the useful life (in 
months). Amortization is always calculated on a straight-line basis.
Most amortizable assets are intangible assets. These are things you generally 
can’t touch or hold. The most common type of amortizable asset is a Section 
197 intangible asset.
Section 197 Intangible Assets
The Tax Code defines certain items as Section 197 intangible assets. Some of 
the more common intangible assets are:9
• 
Goodwill,
• 
Books and records,
9 You can find a complete list in IRS Publication 535.

Chapter 10 | Fixed Assets and Depreciation
122
• 
Patents, copyrights, formulas, and other intellectual property,10
• 
Government licenses and permits acquired,11 
• 
Covenant not to compete.
Section 197 intangible assets are amortized over 180 months (15 years), with 
an equal amount of amortization expense taken in each month.
When you purchase a home as your primary residence, you are allowed to 
take a tax deduction for the points paid to acquire the loan. However, you 
must amortize those points over the life of the loan for a rental property. This 
falls under Section 461 of the Tax Code. There is no one length of time for 
the amortization; an equal amount will be taken each month over the life of 
the loan.
Finally, here are some of the less common kinds of amortizable expenses: 
pollution control facilities (Section 169 of the Tax Code), some bond premiums 
(Section 171), some research and experimental expenditures (Section 174), 
the cost of acquiring a lease (Section 178), and certain forestation and 
reforestation expenses (Section 194).
A Typical Strategy Used by  
a Small Business
Most small businesses do not purchase large quantities of or very large dollar 
amount fixed assets. The strategy used by many small businesses is to use 
Section 179 depreciation to effectively expense most fixed asset purchases. If 
the business is losing money (or the owner is, if it’s a flow-through entity), 
then bonus depreciation is elected. This allows the maximum depreciation 
deduction to be taken in the year so that income (and tax) is lowered.
I need to point out that this may not be the best long-term strategy. Assume 
a sole proprietor has minimal profit this year, but will have large profits in 
future years. In this situation it may make sense to not elect any special 
depreciation. The marginal tax rate this year is going to be relatively low, 
whereas it will be larger in future years. By not taking special depreciation, the 
business will have an additional deduction in future years when the tax rate 
would be higher.
10 Except where the Tax Code specifically states that these should be depreciated. 
11 For example, a taxi medallion or a liquor license you acquire from a previous owner of the 
medallion or license.

III
pa r t
Employees, 
Payroll Taxes, 
and Benefit 
Plans
When you hire staff, have you hired an employee or an independent 
contractor? There’s a huge difference in how each is treated for taxes. Chapter 
12 looks at employees and independent contractors, and how each is reported. 
This chapter also covers the required compensation for an S-corporation 
shareholder-employee. Payroll taxes are covered in Chapter 13 (both employer 
and employee taxes). I examine medical expenses and retirement plans in the 
final two chapters of Part III.

a p t e r
11
Other 
Deductions
An income tax form is like a laundry list—either way you lose your shirt.
.
Advertising
clearly, advertising your business is a deductible expense. This includes almost 
any form of advertising:
• 
Brochures
• 
Business cards
• 
Broadcast advertising (radio and television)
• 
internet advertising
• 
Print advertising to the public (newspapers and magazines)

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
126
• 
Trade publication advertising
• 
Yellow Page advertising
• 
Billboards
Marketing expenses are usually included within advertising. Most marketing 
expenses are related to advertising and promoting your business and are 
included as advertising expenses. 
Promotional Expenses
Promotional expenses include a variety of costs your business is likely to 
incur. For example, promotional goods such as coffee mugs with your logos 
are part of advertising expenses. 
There are some rules regarding promotional items. They must be de minimis 
in cost ($4 or less), be “widely distributed,” and have your business’s name 
clearly and permanently displayed on the item. A coffee mug with your 
business name on it that you give away probably qualifies as a deductible 
advertising expense.
What about a polo shirt with your name on it? Because most shirts will cost 
more than $4 each, it will not qualify as a giveaway item. However, it may still 
qualify as an advertising expense if you use it for employees. Such a shirt can 
clearly be shown to help promote your business and therefore is an ordinary 
and necessary business expense.
Trade Shows
The costs of attending trade shows that promote your business are included 
in advertising expenses. However, the cost to travel to the trade show is 
included in travel expenses; the costs of meals are included in meals and 
entertainment expenses. Typical deductible costs include registration fees, 
booth rentals, labor cost for setting up the booth, shipping costs (for sending 
your booth or materials to the trade show), promotional materials (brochures, 
promotional items, and the like), audio-visual fees, and Internet connectivity 
charges. Almost any cost you have to maintain your presence at a trade show 
(except travel and meals and entertainment) will be deducted as an advertising 
expense.
Websites
The cost of your website can be an advertising expense. However, it might be 
more properly expensed in another category. The answer to where the cost 

127
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
of your website should be expensed depends on the purpose of your website 
and the kinds of expenses incurred.
What is the purpose of your website? If it is used to promote your business, 
the expenses for it are advertising expenses. That’s the case for most websites. 
All related costs, including hosting, maintenance, and search engine 
optimization (SEO) expenses, would be deductible under advertising.
However, some websites are used more for internal usage (an intranet). These 
costs would be categorized as either computer services and supplies or as office 
expenses. These categories are discussed later in this chapter.
Where do costs of developing a website go? I’ve seen website development 
costs both expensed and capitalized. The answer should be based on what is 
being developed and the amount of money spent. Relatively small amounts 
can be expensed; large expenditures should be capitalized. Remember, even if 
your website development is a capital expense, you can use Section 179 
depreciation to effectively expense it in the current year (see Chapter 10).
Bad Debts
What happens when a customer buys products or services from you but 
doesn’t pay? You should make collection efforts, but sometimes these are to 
no avail. When you end up with a deadbeat customer, you have a bad debt.
There is a major caveat to bad-debt expense: You must be an accrual-based 
business to have bad debt. Remember, a cash-basis business doesn’t recognize 
a sale until it is paid. Thus, there can’t be bad debt for cash-basis businesses.
For there to be bad debt, the debt must also be either completely or partially 
worthless. Let’s say your accrual-based manufacturing business sells $500 of 
widgets to a customer. The customer sends you a check for $100 and three 
months later goes out of business. You would have a $400 of bad-debt expense 
that would be deductible.
Bad-debt expenses are deducted when you have certainty that the debt should 
be written off. This could be from the customer going out of business, filing 
bankruptcy, or fruitless efforts at collection.
■ Note  Waiting on bankruptcy. Assume you’re an accrual-basis manufacturer. You’ve sold 
$500 of widgets to the Acme Company in December. In January, Acme files for Chapter 11 
bankruptcy. In September of the following year, Acme files a reorganization plan with the bankruptcy 
court, whereby your business would be paid 10 cents on the dollar for what they owe you. Can you 
write off $450 in September?

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
128
No. You must wait for the court to approve the reorganization. In September, there is no certainty 
that you will receive $50. The court could change the plan, and you might receive more or less than 
the proposed 10 cents on the dollar. 
Another form of business bad debts is loans. Let’s say your largest supplier is 
having financial difficulties, and you lend them $5,000. The supplier then goes 
out of business and the money is not repaid. You have a bad debt of $5,000. 
Note that bad-debt loans are deductible for cash-basis businesses. Similarly, if 
you guarantee a debt and it becomes worthless, it can become a bad-debt 
expense if: 
• 
The guarantee was part of your normal business operations,
• 
You have a legal requirement to pay the debt,
• 
You made the guarantee prior to it becoming worthless, and
• 
You had a business purpose for making the guarantee.
Bank Fees 
Bank charges for items such as wire transfers, account fees, overdraft charges, 
are deductible as ordinary and necessary business expenses. The question 
becomes: Where are these put on a tax return?
Figure 11-1 shows page 1 of Schedule C (used for a sole proprietorship). 
Figure 11-2 shows page 1 of Form 1065 (used by a partnership or an LLC filing 
as a partnership). Figure 11-3 shows page 1 of Form 1120 (used by a C 
corporation). And Figure 11-4 shows page 1 of Form 1120S (used by an S 
corporation). On all of these forms there is no specific line for bank charges. 
Clearly they are a deductible expense. So we return to the question: Where 
do these go on the tax return?

129
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Figure 11-1. Schedule C

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
130
Figure 11-2. Form 1065 (page 1)

131
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Figure 11-3. Form 1120 (page 1)

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
132
On each of these forms is a line labeled “Other Expenses” (Schedule C, line 
27a) or “Other Deductions” (Form 1065, line 20; Form 1120, line 26; and 
Form 1120S, line 19). This is where bank charges and any “other expense” or 
deduction without a dedicated line on an IRS form is placed.
Figure 11-4. Form 1120S (page 1)

133
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Caution  Using “other expenses” on a Schedule C can lead to an audit. One of the factors 
used by the IRS to select individual tax returns for examination (audit) is high amounts of other 
expenses on Schedule C. If at all possible, you should try to avoid large dollar amounts of other 
expenses. This is not a major issue with business entities filing a Form 1065, Form 1120, or Form 
1120S. As noted later in this chapter, you should use Office Expense for many of the charges you 
would consider as other expenses.
There is one other component of bank charges that should be noted: credit 
card fees. If you process credit cards, the merchant service charges by your 
processor are deducted as a bank charge. 
Casualty Losses
The Tax Code allows for deductions in the event of a casualty loss. That’s 
damage to your business property from fire, theft, vandalism, natural disasters, 
or some other unexpected or unusual event. A car drove into one of my 
client’s stores: That was a casualty loss.
Just because you suffer a loss, be aware that it may not be a deductible casualty 
loss. Any insurance proceeds you receive or expect to receive lessen the 
amount of the casualty loss. In the case of my client, his insurance covered 
him for his loss above his $500 deductible. (The driver who rammed into his 
store was uninsured.) Thus, his loss was $500.
Like a bad-debt expense, you need certainty to take a casualty loss. If you’re 
still negotiating with your insurance company, and you don’t know what your 
loss is, you can’t take the loss yet.
Make sure you keep excellent documentation of any casualty losses. If you are 
a victim of theft, file (and keep) the police report. If your insurance company 
sends you documentation, keep it. Casualty losses have been abused, so the 
IRS looks at these deductions carefully.
Business casualty losses are reported on Section B of Form 4684 (Casualties 
and Thefts). (The IRS has a workbook to help calculate the loss, Publication 
584-B.) Once noted on Form 4684, the deductible loss is then transferred to 
Form 4797 (Sales of Business Property). It will then flow from Form 4797 to 
your tax return (Form 1040, Form 1065, Form 1120, or Form 1120S).
Unlike with personal casualty losses, there is no reduction of the loss by 
either $100 or 10% of your adjusted gross income. 

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
134
Charitable Contributions
You decide to make a charitable contribution from your business. Do you get 
a deduction on your business tax return? The answer is a definite it depends.
For a sole proprietorship, you are the business. Thus, a charitable contribution 
made by your business is identical to you making the contribution. Such 
contributions are reported on Schedule A of Form 1040.
When a partnership (or LLC reporting taxes as a partnership) or an S 
corporation makes charitable contributions, the contributions are separately 
reported on the owners’ Schedule K-1’s. They are not considered a deduction 
for the business entity. However, they do flow through to the owners’ 
individual tax returns (onto Schedule A of Form 1040). If an owner itemizes 
deductions, he or she will get the benefit of the charitable contributions. The 
contributions themselves are noted on line 13a of Schedule K on page 4 of 
Form 1065 (Figure 11-5a) and on line 12a of Schedule K on page 3 of Form 
1120S (see Figure 11-5b).
For a sole proprietorship, partnership, LLC, or S corporation, the value of a 
charitable contribution is the fair market value of the contribution. 
A C corporation deducts charitable contributions on line 19 of Form 1120 
(Figure 11-3). Most charitable contributions by C corporations are valued at 
their fair market value. However, an exception exists for donations of 
inventory to a charity that uses the goods to care for the sick, needy, or 
infants. For such donations, you can add 50% of the difference between the 
tax basis1 and the fair market value of the goods (up to a maximum of twice 
the basis.) Here’s an example.
Example: Suppose you have excess inventory of toys you purchased for $2,000 
(they are carried on your accrual-basis business books at $2,000). You donate 
these toys, which have a fair market value of $3,500, to a local hospital, which 
is a 501(c)(3) charity. The donation would be valued at $3,500 plus 50% of the 
difference between the fair market value and the basis ($3,500 – $2,000), or 
0.5 × ($1,500) = $750, for a charitable donation of $4,250.2
1 The value of the donated goods on the books of the company for tax purposes.
2 There are four requirements for this special donation:
1. The donated property must be used solely for the care of the ill, needy, or infants, 
and in a manner related to the donee’s exempt purpose (§170(e)(3)(A)(i) and Reg. 
1-170A-4A(b)(2)). A third party cannot use the party unless the use is incidental to the 
primary use (Reg. 1.170A-44A(b)(2)(ii)).
2. Donated property cannot be transferred by the recipient in exchange for money, 
other property, or services (§170(e)(3)(A)(ii) and Reg. 1.170-A-44A(b)(3).

135
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
.
■ Caution Documentation requirements for charitable contributions. Backup documentation 
is required for all charitable contributions. If you make a donation, keep your canceled check, bank 
statement, credit card statement, and written receipt or acknowledgment letter from the charity. A 
written acknowledgment letter is required for all cash contributions of $250 or more. For noncash 
contributions of $5,000 or more, you will usually need an appraisal. The IRS details this in 
Publication 1771.
.
Figure 11-5a. report charitable contributions for a partnership or an llc on line 13a of 
Schedule K of form 1065 (page 4)
Figure 11-5b. report charitable contributions for an S corporation on line 12a of Schedule 
K of form 1120S (page 3)

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
136
Commissions
Commissions you pay to sales representatives are deductible. For a sole 
proprietorship, they are reported on line 10 of Schedule C; for business 
entities, they are reported as “other deductions.” 
■ Tip  Issue Form 1099-MISC to your representatives. The IRS requires that if you pay $600 
or more to an individual or business for most purposes, you must send the individual or business a 
Form 1099-MISC at year end to note the amount received. (You do not have to send a Form 1099-
MISC to a corporation or for purchases of goods. There are different threshold amounts and rules 
for royalties and legal fees.) 
Computer Services and Supplies
Computer services and supplies (also called computer supplies and services) is 
used for noncapital computer costs such as Internet, some computer 
peripherals, computer maintenance, and computer supplies. This is an “other 
expense” for a sole proprietorship (see the “Office Expense” section of this 
chapter) or an “other deduction” for an LLC, C corporation, or S corporation.
Continuing Education
If you are a professional and must attend continuing education, the costs for 
the continuing education are deductible. Note that any travel and meals for 
attending continuing education are reported as travel and meal expenses. 
Continuing education is included in “other expenses” (for a sole proprietorship) 
or “other deductions.”
Contract Labor
Amounts spent on contract labor related to your business are deductible. 
This will be covered in depth in Chapter 12. Contract labor for a sole 
proprietorship is reported on line 11 of Schedule C; it is reported in “other 
deductions” for other business entities.
Dues and Subscriptions
Dues you pay for professional, business, and civic organizations are deductible 
unless the organization’s primary purpose is providing entertainment facilities 

137
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
to its members. This includes dues paid to professional organizations, trade 
associations, and civic/public service organizations (such as the Exchange Club 
or Rotary). No deductions are allowed for dues to a country club or a gym/
athletic club. In addition, if any portion of the dues is used for political 
purposes, that portion is nondeductible.
Subscriptions to magazines (for your waiting room) or for business purposes 
are deductible. 
Dues and subscriptions are reported in “other expenses” (for a sole 
proprietorship) or in “other deductions” (see “Office Expense” section 
below).
Education
You have worked as, say, a nurse. You decide to become a tax professional; 
you take a course to become an Enrolled Agent (a federally licensed tax 
professional). Can you take a deduction for the cost of the course?
Most likely, the answer is no. You cannot take a deduction for a new business 
or profession, nor can you deduct the cost to meet the basic standards for a 
profession.
Let’s say you’ve had a business selling office supplies. You decide you want to 
start selling to your local government. You take a course on selling to 
government entities. That course would likely be deductible.
■ Tip  Education may be deductible as a personal deduction or credit. Under the Internal 
Revenue Code, you can take a tuition and fees deduction and the Lifetime Learning Credit (but not 
both in the same year). The Lifetime Learning Credit gives you a credit on your taxes for amount 
paid to “any college, university, vocational school, or other postsecondary education institution 
eligible to participate in a student aid program administered by the US Department of Education.” 
You can take the Lifetime Learning Credit for tuition, fees, and related expenses for courses that 
are part of a postsecondary degree program or taken to acquire or improve your job skills. A tax 
credit reduces your tax; a tax deduction reduces your income.
The tuition and fees deduction covers only tuition and fees (and related expenses) at an eligible 
institution (the same definition as for the Lifetime Learning Credit). However, the deduction is 
available for education expenses and not programs for job skills.
Note that there are income restrictions for both the Lifetime Learning Credit and the tuition and 
fees deduction.

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
138
Gifts
Gifts given for business purposes are deductible. However, the maximum 
deductible amount is $25 per person per year. Any gift in excess of this 
amount is not deductible.
What if you give a gift to a business and not a specific individual? Is that gift 
subject to the $25 limitation? If the company to whom you’re giving the gift 
has just one employee, the company and the individual are the same, and the 
$25 limitation applies. If you give a gift to a large (in number of employees) 
business and not to one specific individual, the $25 limitation does not apply.
Insurance
Insurance you purchase for your business is generally deductible. This includes:
• 
Property and casualty insurance
• 
Liability insurance
• 
Malpractice and errors and omissions insurance
• 
Medical insurance for employees
• 
Workers’ compensation insurance
• 
Business interruption insurance
• 
Key man insurance
What about your own medical insurance? If you have a sole proprietorship, 
your medical insurance premiums are deductible directly on Form 1040 (line 
29) subject to certain restrictions.3 
For partnerships and LLCs filing as partnerships, there are two choices for 
health insurance premiums for owners. If you have an accountable plan, your 
premiums can be either paid directly by the business or reimbursed. The 
premiums will be noted as guaranteed payments made on Schedule K-1. They 
will then be deductible as self-employed health insurance on Form 1040 (line 
29) just as for sole proprietors.
Medical insurance premiums are deductible by C corporations for both 
owners and employees. The deduction is taken as part of insurance expenses 
(other deductions).
3 The most important restriction is that you have enough net income from the business to 
pay for the premiums.

139
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
The situation is different for S corporation owners.4 As discussed in Chapter 
1, an S corporation must add the premiums to wages on Box 1 of the W-2 
(but the premiums are not included in FICA or Medicare tax). The S corporation 
owner then takes the health insurance premiums as a deduction on line 29 of 
Form 1040. The premiums must be paid for by the employee; however, the 
corporation can reimburse the employee for the cost.
Interest
Interest on business loans is deductible. This is true even for a sole 
proprietorship. This is an exception to the rule that only mortgage interest is 
deductible. Let’s look at an example.
Suppose you obtain a loan to purchase additional inventory for your business. 
You borrow $25,000 from your bank at a 5% interest rate. The interest you 
pay is deductible on Schedule C.
Note that a sole proprietor must split out the interest on Schedule C into 
mortgage interest and all other interest (see Figure 11-1). Other interest is 
scrutinized by the IRS—only business-related interest is deductible.
This means you should keep separate business accounts. There are rules 
regarding usage and timing of loans. Generally, anything you purchase within 
30 days of obtaining a loan will be considered paid for out of the loan proceeds.
If you do not keep separate business and personal accounts, allocations must 
be made between your business and personal usage of the loan. This can 
become quite complex. The easiest way of handling this problem is to avoid it 
in the first place by keeping separate accounts.
For all other business entities, interest related to the business is a deductible 
expense. Of course, interest that is related to personal expenses is not 
deductible. Prepaid interest for cash-basis taxpayers is also not deductible 
(but it can be deducted in the year it would normally be paid).
Legal and Professional Fees
Fees paid to attorneys and other professionals (such as tax professionals) are 
deductible business expenses (assuming, of course, that the expenses are 
business-related). For business entities other than a sole proprietorship, legal 
and professional fees are included in “other deductions.” A sole proprietor 
deducts this expense on line 17 of Schedule C.
4 Defined as someone who owns at least 2% of the stock of an S corporation.

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
140
Note that legal expenses related to the organization of a business are 
categorized as organizational expenses (see Chapter 3). 
Tax preparation expenses for a sole proprietor should be allocated between 
his business and his other activities. By doing this, a sole proprietor avoids the 
2% adjusted gross income limitation on tax preparation on Schedule A. Note 
that only in rare cases is it reasonable to assume that 100% of the cost of tax 
preparation relates to the business.
Office Expense
Office expenses are costs directly related to the general operation of the 
business. This includes postage, Internet expenses, furniture that is not 
capitalized, and water and coffee service. Office expenses are taken on line 18 
of Schedule C for a sole proprietorship and are included in “other deductions” 
for other business entities.
One thing that is not included within office expenses are office supplies. Items 
such as paper, printer toner, paper clips, and all the other necessary office 
supplies are included within supplies (discussed later in this chapter).
■ Tip  Use office expense for many miscellaneous expenses for a sole proprietorship. 
Given that the definition of an office expense includes costs directly related to the general operation 
of the business, this is the category of expense to use for many of the costs that would otherwise 
go as “other expenses” for a sole proprietorship. Bank fees, dues and subscriptions, computer 
supplies and services, and many other costs related to the general running of a business can be 
taken as an office expense.
It is important on a tax return to fully disclose your expenses. When I prepare a Schedule C with 
such costs within office expense, I include a subsidiary schedule that details the costs. It’s likely 
the IRS will not look at the schedule when the return is filed (see Chapter 17); however, should the 
IRS review the originally filed return, they will see that you provided the necessary details.
Note that this is not necessary for other kinds of business entities. The IRS does not generally use 
“other deductions” for a partnership return (Form 1065) or a corporation return (Form 1120 or 
Form 1120S) for audit selection.
Rent and Equipment Rental
As discussed in Chapter 6, office rent is deductible. Rent for a storage unit (if 
used for business purposes) is also deductible. 

141
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
If you rent office machines (such as a postage meter or photocopier) or rent 
equipment used in manufacturing, that’s also deductible. If the rented item is 
used to manufacture product, it will be noted within cost of goods sold. 
However, if it’s used anywhere else (such as the copy machine used in an 
administrative office), it will be noted as rental of machinery and equipment. 
For a sole proprietorship, it’s noted on line 20a of Schedule C; for other 
business entities, it’s included in “other deductions.”
Supplies
Office supplies and other supplies used generally within the office are part of 
supplies, not office expense. If it’s used on your desk, it’s usually part of 
supplies.
■ Note  What if you put office supplies within office expense? You filed your tax return last 
year and included office supplies within office expense instead of supplies. What should you do?
Most likely, nothing. Yes, your tax return should be complete and accurate. But consider what were 
to happen if your return were audited and the (say) $500 you deducted as office expense for your 
office supplies were moved to supplies. Both supplies and office expense are fully deductible 
“ordinary and necessary” business expenses. Your tax would not change. 
If you have not included your office supplies or if you double-deducted that expense, then you need 
to amend your return and correct the error. From a purely technical standpoint the return has an 
error, but from a practical standpoint the error is not particularly relevant.
Taxes and Licenses
Taxes that you pay as a required part of your business are almost always an 
ordinary and necessary business expense and are fully deductible. This 
includes business taxes, business licenses, payroll taxes, property taxes, and 
sales and use tax.
Income Taxes
You can’t deduct your federal income tax as a business deduction on your tax 
return. The tax you pay is generally not deductible on the same return. 
However, state income tax paid is deductible on a federal tax return. How 
this is handled depends on the form of business entity.

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
142
Sole Proprietorships
A sole proprietor cannot directly deduct the state (and/or local) income tax 
he pays on his Schedule C (with one exception, discussed next). Instead, the 
deduction is taken on Schedule A. 
The exception is for state and local income tax paid directly by the business 
entity and not by the sole proprietor. For example, a sole proprietorship 
operating in New York City must pay the New York City Unincorporated 
Business Tax. Because that tax is paid directly by the proprietorship, it is a 
necessary business expense. Another example is a California single-member 
LLC filing as a sole proprietor (a disregarded entity); the proprietor can take 
a deduction for the California LLC tax on her federal Schedule C. Of course, 
you can’t deduct state and local taxes on the state and local tax returns.
Partnerships and Corporations
Businesses filing partnership and corporation tax returns deduct the state and 
local taxes they pay as a tax expense. Again, these taxes will not be deductible 
on the state and local tax returns.
Self-Employment Tax
If you have earned income other than wages, you must pay the self-employment 
tax. This tax is calculated on Schedule SE. Sole proprietors and partners 
(including members of an LLC filing a partnership tax return) generally must 
pay self-employment tax. Half the self-employment tax paid is a deduction on 
Form 1040.
Self-employment tax is a separate tax that happens to be collected on income 
tax returns. It is not an expense of the business, so none of the tax is 
deductible by the business.
Payroll Taxes
Payroll taxes are an expense of the business and are fully deductible. However, 
only the employer’s portion of payroll taxes is deductible; you cannot deduct 
the employee’s portion that you remit to the IRS and state tax agencies. Payroll 
taxes are covered in depth in Chapter 13.
Business Taxes and Business Licenses
License fees (local, state, or national) are clearly deductible as ordinary and 
necessary business expenses. These are included within taxes and licenses.

143
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Business taxes (not income taxes) are another business expense. Many 
localities and some states collect business taxes from all businesses in their 
jurisdiction. These are generally based on gross receipts and/or number of 
employees. Examples of these taxes include Los Angeles’s business tax, 
Washington State’s Business & Occupation Tax, and New York City’s Unin-
corporated Business Tax. A business tax is a deductible tax included as part 
of taxes and licenses.
Property Tax
Property tax paid by your business is included within taxes and licenses. This 
includes real property tax and personal property tax.
For the sole proprietor, only taxes paid directly by the business can be 
deducted as a tax of the business. A sole proprietor operating out of his 
home who has a deductible home office (see Chapter 6) can take a pro rata 
portion of his property tax on Form 8821. Otherwise, a sole proprietor 
cannot deduct real property tax on his home as an expense of the business. 
(The deduction would be taken on Schedule A of Form 1040.)
Sales and Use Tax
Sales and use taxes that you pay are deductible. However, the deduction is 
normally taken with the item that’s purchased. Assume you purchase a case 
of paper; the sales tax you pay on the paper is expensed with the paper.
Sales tax that your customers pay to you cannot, of course, be deducted by 
you. You are collecting that money in trust for the sales tax agency. It’s not an 
expense of your business. 
■ Caution  Remember use tax. If you live in a state with sales tax, you are generally required to 
pay use tax on purchases where sales tax would be owed but was not charged (such as purchases 
on the Internet or from companies you normally purchase as a reseller). Most sales tax agencies 
audit businesses regularly, and use tax has become a point of emphasis.
Assume you purchase machines and resell them. You decide to purchase a machine to use as a 
demonstration model in your office. Because you won’t be reselling the machine, you will owe use 
tax. The use tax you pay will be treated as an additional cost of the machine.
Use tax may be paid separately from sales tax, or it may be paid with the sales tax. You generally 
must keep sales and use tax records for several years. Recordkeeping requirements are discussed 
in Chapter 17.

Chapter 11 | Other Deductions
144
Uniforms
If you purchase uniforms for your employees, the cost of the uniforms is a 
deductible business expense. This is included in “other expenses” for sole 
proprietors and “other deductions” for partnerships and corporations.
Utilities
The cost for utilities that your business purchases directly is deductible. But 
note the word directly. If you are operating the business out of your home, 
most (if not all) of your utility expenses are not direct costs of your business. 
Instead, they are home costs that can be apportioned to your business if you 
are eligible to take the home office deduction.
If you have a separate phone line for your business, that can be deducted. A 
mobile phone that’s used exclusively for your business can be deducted. 
However, a mobile phone that is used for both business and personal expenses 
must be apportioned. Courts have held that your first phone line in your 
home is not deductible as a business expense.
If you rent an office, all of your utility expenses for the office can be deducted, 
including gas, electricity, water, sewer, and telephone.
Anything Else
Some businesses have unusual expenses. Just because the expense isn’t found 
in most businesses doesn’t mean it can’t be deducted. Though the categories 
noted above cover most of the “other expenses,” anything that is both 
ordinary and necessary can be deducted. Many of these expenses will be 
categorized under office expense; other items will be included as “other 
expenses” (“other deductions” for partnerships and corporations).

a p t e r
12
Employees  
and Wages
I should fire you, but I don’t believe in mixing business with pleasure. 
.
What Is an Employee?
.

Chapter 12 | Employees and Wages 
146
Example 1. You hire an analyst for your business. You direct him to work from 
9 a.m. to 5 p.m. each day in your office. You give him the work he is supposed 
to analyze for you. The worker and you agree that you can fire him or he can 
quit at any time. The analyst is an employee.
Example 2. You hire Acme Consultants LLC to analyze a business project for 
you. Acme assigns George Jetson to do the work. Jetson comes to your office 
every day from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. He obtains much of the information from you 
that’s needed to perform the analysis. However, he uses a computer provided 
to him by Acme, and you can’t fire him (nor can he quit). In fact, Jetson is one 
of the owners of Acme. Jetson is not your employee.
Statutory Employees
There’s another type of employee, one created by Congress: statutory 
employees. Congress wrote laws (statutes) stating that individuals in certain 
professions are considered statutory employees. Statutory employees are 
independent contractors that Congress has said are treated as employees in 
some ways. To be considered a statutory employee, one must work in one of 
four professions: 
1.  A driver who distributes beverages (but not milk) or meat, 
vegetable, fruit, or bakery products. It could also be a driver 
who picks up and delivers laundry or dry cleaning, if he or she is 
your agent or paid on commission.
2.  A full-time life insurance sales agent whose principal business 
activity is selling life insurance or annuity contracts (or both), 
primarily for one life insurance company.
3.  An individual who works at home on materials or goods that 
you supply that must be returned to you or to a person you 
name. This is also the case if you also furnish specifications for 
the work to be done.
4.  A full-time traveling or city salesperson who works on your 
behalf and turns in orders to you from wholesalers, retailers, 
contractors, hotel operators, and so on. The goods sold must 
be merchandise for resale or supplies for use in the buyer’s 
business operation. The work performed for you must be the 
salesperson’s principal business activity.
Statutory employees must also meet all three of the following conditions:
1.  The service contract states or implies that substantially all the 
services are to be performed personally by them.

147
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
2.  They do not have a substantial investment in the equipment and 
property used to perform the services (other than an investment 
in facilities for transportation, such as a car or truck).
3.  The services are performed on a continuing basis for the same 
payer.
There are special rules used in reporting wages for statutory employees, 
discussed later in this chapter.
What Is an Independent Contractor?
Independent contractors are individuals who are not employees whom you 
hire to perform work for you. These are usually people working on specific 
self-directed projects.
Independent contractors do not include business entities you hire for project 
work. If you hire Acme Consultants, and Acme is a legal business entity (a 
corporation or an LLC), Acme is not an independent contractor. This is true 
even if Acme is just one individual who has formed a corporation. 
■ Caution  Get a W-9 form so you know what you’re dealing with. Form W-9 is a request for 
a taxpayer to provide you with his or her taxpayer identification number. Suppose you hire Acme 
Consultants. Have you hired a corporation, an LLC, or an individual who has filed a fictitious 
business name statement?
The solution is to have the business complete and return a Form W-9. The form is signed under 
penalty of perjury, so you’re allowed to consider the form accurate (unless told otherwise).1
Single-member LLCs are generally ignored for tax purposes. Assume you hire 
Acme Consultants, a single-member LLC. George Jetson, the principal of 
Acme, tells you that Acme is an LLC, so you assume it’s a partnership for tax 
reporting purposes. As my mother tells me, never assume. Unless Jetson 
elected a corporate status for Acme, for tax purposes Acme is equivalent to 
a sole proprietorship.
This is important because of reporting issues (discussed at the end of this 
chapter). Some independent contractors must be reported to state agencies. 
All independent contractors and LLCs are subject to information returns: If 
1 You can’t ignore your own personal knowledge. If you know the completed form is wrong, 
you must use your knowledge. Also, if you receive a name and taxpayer identification number 
mismatch notice from the IRS, you may have to make changes.

Chapter 12 | Employees and Wages 
148
you pay an individual or an LLC $600 or more during a calendar year, you 
must issue a Form 1099-MISC to the contractor.
Independent Contractor or Employee?
Sometimes the situation is murky on whether an individual is an employee or 
an independent contractor. The IRS uses a seven-factor test to determine if a 
worker is an employee or an independent contractor. The test is subjective, 
but it looks at the underlying factors of the relationship (from IRS Publication 
15-A):
1.  Training that the business gives to the worker. Businesses train 
employees; independent contractors use their own training 
methods.
2.  The extent to which the worker has unreimbursed business 
expenses. Most businesses reimburse employees for business 
expenses; independent contractors are responsible for their 
own expenses.
3.  The extent of the worker’s investment. Independent contractors 
tend to (but not always) have significant investment in their tools 
and/or facilities.
4.  The extent to which the worker makes his or her services 
available to the relevant market. Independent contractors 
generally look for multiple opportunities and will advertise or 
have a business location.
5.  How the business pays the worker. An employee is usually 
guaranteed a regular wage amount. This generally shows an 
individual is an employee (even if he also receives a commission). 
Independent contractors generally receive a flat fee or are paid 
for time and materials. (Certain professions are paid hourly even 
if they are independent contractors.)
6.  The extent to which the worker can realize a profit or loss. 
Employees can’t earn a profit, whereas independent contractors 
can.
7.  The type of relationship. Here, the IRS looks at whether there 
was a written contract, whether the business provides the 
worker with employee-type benefits (i.e., insurance, pension, 
vacation, sick pay), the permanency of the relationship, and the 
extent to which services performed by the worker are a key 
aspect of the regular business of the company. Permanency 

149
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
usually indicates an employer–employee relationship. If a worker 
performs key aspects of a business, that usually indicates the 
right to direct the worker (which would make the worker an 
employee).
The Tax Court uses a similar seven-factor test:2
1.  The degree of control exercised by the principal.
2.  Which party invests in work facilities used by the individual.
3.  The opportunity of the individual for profit or loss.
4.  Whether the principal can discharge the individual.
5.  Whether the work is part of the principal’s regular business.
6.  The permanency of the relationship.
7.  The relationship the parties believed they were creating.
Let’s assume you hire an independent contractor to assemble products in 
your plant. Other than the fact that you’re paying the individual as a contractor, 
that’s a position that would normally be considered an employee. The person 
files his tax return and is shocked to discover he owes significant tax (from 
the self-employment tax). He decides to tell the IRS (or the state labor 
department) about your employment practices. The government investigates 
and determines that the individual was an employee. Now you are subject to 
back taxes, penalties, interest, and possible fines from the labor department.
■ Note  A man scorned. A few years ago, I prepared tax returns for a man who worked at a local 
media company. He was paid as an employee the prior year. In the current year, he was paid as an 
employee until the company he worked at was bought out. He was then paid as an independent 
contractor. The following year, they switched and again paid him as an employee.
My client was confused about this. I asked him if his duties had changed at any time. They had not; 
he worked in the production department and was clearly an employee during the entire time. I 
explained what the law was: that he should have been treated as an employee. I advised him that 
we could note this issue to the IRS on his tax return. He could also complain to the Labor Board in 
his state. 
We marked the return, and he also complained to the Labor Board. He told me he was upset with 
his company because he had to pay taxes when he shouldn’t have had to do so. (If the proper tax 
2 See, for example, Blodgett v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 2012-298, http://ustaxcourt.gov/
InOpHistoric/BlodgettMemo.TCM.WPD.pdf.

Chapter 12 | Employees and Wages 
150
had been withheld, he would not have owed tax.) He may also have been annoyed that someone 
else received a promotion instead of him.
Both the federal and state governments investigated this firm and found their employment practices 
in the year in question were in violation of various laws. The company ended up paying a significant 
fine. As for my client, he ended up getting a new job with another, far more reputable employer.
Federal and State Rules Do Not Always Match
Some states have different rules defining the employer versus independent 
contractor issue. For example, California has significantly tighter rules on 
what an independent contractor is. California’s Employment Development 
Department has a publication (DE 38, available at www.edd.ca.gov/pdf_pub_
ctr/de38.pdf) that can be used to determine if an individual is an employee or 
an independent contractor. You can also ask for a written determination in 
California. 
It is possible (though unlikely) that an individual could be considered an 
independent contractor under federal rules but an employee under state 
rules. Anyone with a truly unclear situation should consider obtaining legal 
advice from an attorney specializing in labor issues.
Temporary Employees
It’s very common to hire temporary employees (“temps”) from an employment 
agency. These individuals are employees of the agency. You are hiring an 
agency to provide you with workers. Although you can remove an individual 
worker from a job, he or she will still be employed by the agency. Such 
individuals are not considered to be either employees or independent 
contractors of your business.
Leased Employees
Leasing of employees is a relatively new employment practice. The employee-
leasing company pays the employees and is responsible for benefits. The idea 
is that the “employer” doesn’t have to deal with the human resources issues, 
and the employee-leasing company handles all the back-office paperwork.
Unlike temporary employees, leased employees are generally long-term. 
Whether this is a viable relationship depends on state law. In some states, 
having a leasing company pay the employees while the “employer” makes the 
decisions on hiring or firing is allowed. However, in other states, if the leasing 
company does not have the right to hire or fire, the actual employer is 

151
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
considered to be the true employer rather than the employee-leasing 
company. Anyone considering using an employee-leasing company should 
carefully check your state law; you may need to consult with an attorney 
specializing in this area.
Reporting Independent Contractors
Many states now require businesses to report the independent contractors 
they hire. Generally, this is required at the same reporting level as for issuance 
of Form 1099-MISCs to the contractors ($600 or more in a calendar year).
■ Note  The law firm with no employees. It’s hard for me to imagine a law firm with no 
employees (except a one-person firm). However, such a firm exists. Well, that should be existed. 
In Baton Rouge, Louisiana, there is a law firm called Donald G. Cave, a Professional Law Corporation. 
The Cave firm had no employees. It was an S corporation (as you will see later in this chapter, the 
owner of an S corporation must be paid a reasonable salary). The three associate attorneys and the 
law clerk were considered to be independent contractors. The IRS felt these individuals should be 
classified as employees. The Cave firm lost with the IRS and went to Tax Court.
The Tax Court agreed that all involved were employees.3 Cave was held to be a statutory employee 
(as a principal stockholder of an S corporation). The associate attorneys and the law clerk were all 
held to be employees. “We conclude on the basis of all of the relevant facts and circumstances that 
the associate attorneys were petitioner’s common law employees. Three of the five specific 
factors—degree of control, investment in facilities, and permanence of the relationship—indicate 
an employer-employee relationship, and the remaining factors are neutral.” Similarly, the court felt 
that the factors all favored the law clerk being an employee.
The Cave firm appealed the case to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, which held that the Tax Court 
was correct in its decision.4
Statutory Nonemployees
There are some individuals who are never considered employees. That’s 
because Congress has written laws (statutes) stating that these individuals are 
3 Donald G. Cave, A Professional Law Corporation v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 2011-48, www.
ustaxcourt.gov/InOpHistoric/Cave.TCM.WPD.pdf.
4 Donald G. Cave, A Professional Law Corporation v. Commissioner, Fifth Circuit, No. 11-60390, 
www.ca5.uscourts.gov/opinions%5Cunpub%5C11/11-60390.0.wpd.pdf.

Chapter 12 | Employees and Wages 
152
not employees. There are three categories of such individuals: direct sellers, 
licensed real estate agents, and certain companion sitters. 
Direct sellers and real estate agents are considered to be self-employed for all 
federal tax purposes if:
• 
Substantially all payments for their services as direct sellers 
or real estate agents are directly related to their sales or 
output and not based on the number of hours worked; and
• 
Their services are performed under a written contract 
providing that they will not be treated as employees for 
federal tax purposes.
Direct Sellers
There are three categories of direct sellers:
1.  Persons engaged in selling (or soliciting sales of) consumer 
products in the home or business other than in a permanent 
retail establishment.
2.  Persons engaged in selling (or soliciting sales of) consumer 
products to any buyer on a buy-sell basis, deposit-commission 
basis, or a similar basis prescribed by regulations, for resale in 
the home or business other than in a permanent retail 
establishment.
3.  Persons engaged in the trade or business of delivering or 
distributing newspapers or shopping news (including services 
related to such delivery or distribution).
Note that direct selling specifically includes individuals who attempt to 
increase direct sales activities of their direct sellers (recruits) and who earn 
income based on the productivity of their recruits. This includes providing 
motivation and encouragement, imparting knowledge, and recruiting.
Licensed Real Estate Agents
Licensed real estate agents are statutory nonemployees. Also in this category 
are individuals who appraise real estate if their income is based on sales or 
other output.

153
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Companion Sitters
Companion sitters are individuals who furnish personal attendance, 
companionship, or household care services to children or individuals who are 
disabled or elderly. A companion sitting placement service will not be 
considered the employer if the service does not receive or pay the salary or 
wages of the sitters and is compensated by the sitters or the persons who 
employ them on a fee basis. Companion sitters who are not employees of a 
companion sitting placement service are generally treated as self-employed 
for federal tax purposes.
S Corporation Rules for Owners
S corporations are flow-through entities. One of the benefits of an S 
corporation is that the distributions from the company are not subject to 
employment taxes. However, there’s a caveat to this: S corporation owners 
who materially participate in the business must pay themselves a reasonable 
salary.
What’s a Reasonable Salary?
The Tax Code does not provide the definition of a reasonable salary. However, 
we can look at a few examples to help us determine what is and isn’t 
reasonable. (Note that the rule looks at total compensation, so it is possible 
that some fringe benefits will count toward salary. However, S corporation 
fringe benefits are limited.)
Example 1. Consider Unprofitable Widgets, Inc., an S corporation. Unfortu-
nately, Unprofitable Widgets lost money in their current tax year. The sole 
stockholder of the business materially participates in the business. What is a 
reasonable salary for a business that’s losing money?
Common sense applies here. A business that’s losing money should try to cut 
the losses. The Tax Code does not force Unprofitable Widgets to have a 
larger loss. In this situation, a reasonable salary is no salary at all.
Example 2. Consider John Doe, a certified public accountant (CPA). Doe is 
the 100% stockholder of his one-man CPA firm, an S corporation. His firm 
earns about $200,000 a year (net). He decides to pay himself $10,000 a year.
That’s not reasonable. Even large accounting firms, notorious for paying low 
starting salaries for new employees, can’t pay just $10,000. It also doesn’t pass 
the smell test. If I asked you whether 5% of the income of the business was 
reasonable, what would you think? 

Chapter 12 | Employees and Wages 
154
■ Caution  The IRS is looking at compensation. In a recent case, an Iowa CPA (who owned his 
own S corporation) paid himself $24,000 a year. The CPA firm made approximately $200,000 
during the year in question. The IRS investigated and felt that was not reasonable compensation 
and increased his compensation to $91,044 (total) for the year. The IRS assessed back taxes, 
penalties, and interest that the CPA paid. The CPA then sued the IRS in District Court and attempted 
to recover the taxes paid.
The CPA lost in both District Court5 and the Court of Appeals.6 Both courts held that $24,000 was 
not a reasonable amount of compensation; the IRS’s position that the compensation should be 
increased to $91,044 was upheld.
Today, the IRS has lots of low-hanging fruit from which to choose. There are 
many S corporations where principals are being paid nothing or a very small 
annual salary; the IRS has been concentrating its enforcement activities on 
those businesses. However, that doesn’t mean you can pay yourself a very 
small salary relative to the net income of your business. As the foregoing case 
illustrates, the IRS can go after businesses where 12% of the net income was 
paid as salary.
There are no hard-and-fast rules as to what is reasonable. This will always 
depend on the facts and circumstances. If your business makes $200,000 and 
you are paying yourself $100,000, that will likely be considered reasonable. 
But if your business makes $200,000 and you pay yourself $10,000, it will be 
hard to justify that as reasonable.
Employing Family Members
There is no prohibition in the law against employing family members. Other 
than general labor laws, you may employ your spouse or children.7 However, 
the employment tax rules can be different in this situation.
Child Employed by Parents
Payments for services of a child under age eighteen who works for his or her 
parent(s) in a trade or business are not subject to Social Security or Medicare 
5 David E. Watson P.C. v. United States, US District Court for the Southern District of Iowa, 
Central Division, 4:08-cv-442, http://ia700202.us.archive.org/4/items/gov.uscourts.iasd.37557/
gov.uscourts.iasd.37557.35.0.pdf.
6 David E. Watson P.C. v. United States, Eighth Circuit Court, No. 11-1589, www.ca8.uscourts.
gov/opndir/12/02/111589P.pdf.
7 Be aware that there are laws regulating the employment of minors.

155
.
.
.
Reporting Rules for Payroll
.

Chapter 12 | Employees and Wages 
156
Employees
You must provide every employee with a Form W-2 on or before January 31 
after the year of employment. Note that you cannot download this form from 
the Internet for your use. Employment tax forms are printed on special paper; 
you must order these forms from the IRS (www.irs.gov/Businesses/Online-
Ordering-for-Information-Returns-and-Employer-Returns) or other providers. 
Form W-2 is shown in Figure 12-1.
Figure 12-1. Form W-2
The W-2 reports an employee’s wages and taxes withheld, along with 
identification information for both the employer and employee.
Form W-3 summarizes all of the W-2s you have. Your Form W-3 and the 
Social Security Administration’s copies of the W-2 forms are due to the Social 
Security Administration on the last day of February (if filed by paper) or the 
last day of March (if filed electronically). Form W-3 is shown in Figure 12-2.
You may also have to file your W-2 forms with your state. Some states obtain 
this information directly from the Social Security Administration; some states 
do not. It may depend on whether you file by paper or electronically.

157
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
For example, California requires employers who file W-2 and W-3 forms 
electronically to also file with the state; however, those who file by paper with 
the IRS do not have to file with California.
Figure 12-2. Form W-3

Chapter 12 | Employees and Wages 
158
Independent Contractors
You must report payment to both independent contractors and LLCs of $600 
or more in a calendar year on Form 1099-MISC. Like employment tax forms, 
you cannot print this form off the Internet; you must order the form from the 
IRS. Form 1099-MISC is shown in Figure 12-3.
Figure 12-3. Form 1099-MISC
If you hire an independent contractor, his or her earnings are reported in Box 
7, Nonemployee Compensation. You also note your information (name, 
address, and taxpayer identification number) and the independent contractor’s 
personal information (name, address, and taxpayer identification number). 
You must send Form 1099-MISC to the recipients on or before the last day of 
January following the year-end.
As with Form W-2, a cover page is used when sending Forms 1099-MISC to 
the IRS. (This form is sent to the IRS, not the Social Security Administration.) 
The cover page form is Form 1096 (Figure 12-4). This form is used to transmit 
various information returns to the IRS. 
Form 1096 and the associated Forms 1099-MISC must be mailed to the IRS 
on or before February 28. The electronic filing deadline is March 31. Note 
that Form 1096 is used for a variety of information returns, including Form 
W-2G, Form 1098, Form 1099-DIV, Form 1099-INT, and many more.

159
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
You may or may not have to submit Forms 1099-MISC to your state. Each 
state handles these forms differently, so check with your state tax department 
to see if you must file these forms with your state.
■ Caution  The Deadlines are different for Form W-3 and Form 1096. You may have noticed 
that the government copy of Form 1096 is due on February 28 and the government copy of Form 
W-3 is due on the last day of February. In three of every four years, that’s the same date. However, 
in a leap year (such as 2016), Form 1096 is due on February 28 while Form W-3 is due on February 
29. 
If you’re wondering about the reason is for the difference, it’s because that’s how Congress wrote 
the law for these forms. If you’re wondering about the logic is behind this, unfortunately you’re 
asking the wrong person.
Other Reporting Requirements
As mentioned earlier, you may also have to report your independent 
contractors to your state when you hire them. Note that some states require 
you to report these contractors every year. 
Penalties
The federal government charges penalties for failing to file information returns. 
These penalties start at $30 per return and increase to $100 per return, with 
a maximum penalty of $1,500,000 per year ($500,000 for small businesses).

Chapter 12 | Employees and Wages 
160
Figure 12-4. Form 1096

161
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Statutory Employees
There are special rules on reporting statutory employees. Statutory 
employees’ wages are reported on Form W-2 (Figure 12-1). The box labeled 
“statutory employee” should be checked. Note that there are also special 
rules as to which payroll taxes statutory employees are subject to; this is 
covered in Chapter 13.

c h a p t e r
13
Payroll Taxes
For every benefit you receive a tax is levied.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson
Once you have employees and payroll, you have the obligation to collect, file, 
and pay payroll taxes. This is true for all businesses with wages, from a small 
two-person concern to a nonprofit to the largest corporations.
There are three kinds of taxes you will collect: taxes on employees, taxes on 
both employees and employers, and taxes on employers. Personal income 
taxes are a tax paid solely by the employee, but an employer collects and 
remits to the IRS and state tax agencies. FICA (Social Security and Medicare 
withholdings) is a tax paid by both the employee and employer; the employer 
collects this tax and remits it to the IRS. Unemployment insurance is a tax 
paid solely by employers to both the IRS and state tax agencies. This chapter 
looks at all of these taxes.
Before You Have Employees
Before you hire your first employee, you will have to have an employer 
identification number (EIN). This is true even if you are a sole proprietor. An 
EIN is a taxpayer identification number (TIN). EINs were first used solely for 
businesses with employees. EINs are nine digits, in the format 12-3456789.
Businesses besides sole proprietors must apply for an EIN when their business 
commences. The EIN will be used for tax filing. You do not need a new EIN 
for your business when you hire employees if you already have an EIN.

Chapter 13 | Payroll Taxes
164
You can obtain an EIN on the phone, by fax, by mail, or online.1 Information 
is available on applying for an EIN on the IRS website.
You may also need to apply for a state employment identification number. 
Some states use the EIN as the state identification number. However, many 
states assign their own number. Make sure you check with your state on how 
to apply for your state number.
Taxes on Employees
Each of your employees must pay federal (and state) income taxes. The 
government wants everyone to pay as they go. Income tax is withheld from 
their paycheck. You must then remit the withheld tax to the IRS and your 
state tax agency.
The amount of tax withheld out of each employee’s paycheck is based on how 
often you pay your employees (weekly, biweekly, semi-monthly, or monthly), 
their marital status (single or married), and the number of withholding 
allowances they claim. You must provide your employees with Form W-4, 
Employee’s Withholding Allowance Certificate. The employee completes this 
form and returns it to you. You then use this form to compute the withholding 
(or provide it to your payroll company for them to do so).
Most states piggyback off the federal form. However, some states (Alabama 
and California) have an equivalent state form that can be completed.
Federal income tax is reported on Form 941 or Form 944 (see the “Reporting 
Payroll Taxes” section later in this chapter).
Some states and localities have local taxes paid solely by employees. Examples 
of these include California’s state disability insurance and Pennsylvania’s 
unemployment tax.
Note that statutory employees (see Chapter 12) never have income tax 
withheld from their pay.
Trust Fund Taxes
Before we go further into payroll taxes, there’s a key point to understand. 
When you collect a tax that’s not on you (the business) but you are responsible 
for paying it, you become the government’s agent. Payroll taxes you collect on 
behalf of the government are called trust fund taxes.
1 For applying online, see www.irs.gov/Businesses/Small-Businesses-&-Self-Employed/Apply-for-
an-Employer-Identification-Number-(EIN)-Online.

165
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Federal trust fund taxes are personal income tax and the employee’s portion 
of FICA (discussed in the next section). The government considers this to be 
“their money.” When this money is not remitted in a timely fashion, the IRS 
always investigates. If you want to get in trouble with your taxes, simply don’t 
remit your trust fund taxes. That will almost guarantee you will soon have the 
IRS looking at your business.
Corporate officers and business owners can be held personally liable for 
payment of trust fund taxes. If you are an officer of a corporation that does 
not remit its trust fund taxes, the IRS and your state tax agency can force you 
to pay.
For the small business owner, this means there is no way to escape potential 
personal liability. As will be discussed later in this chapter, the key is to use a 
reputable payroll company.
■ Note  Owner of delivery business is held liable for nearly $700,000 of payroll taxes. 
Charles Colosimo, owner of a Des Moines, Iowa, delivery business, had a bookkeeper who likely 
got him into trouble. Back in 2004, Colosimo learned that the IRS was wondering where missing 
payroll tax returns were. He asked his accountant (who was not an employee of his company) to 
follow up on it. The accountant discovered that the outside bookkeeper apparently never filed the 
payroll tax returns and kept the money that should have been remitted to the IRS. Because his 
business made payments to other vendors, the district court held that Colosimo was personally 
liable for the taxes once he knew that money was owed to the IRS. Colosimo appealed; the Eighth 
Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the ruling of the district court.2
Taxes on Employees and Employers
There is one tax paid by both employees and employers: FICA. FICA stands 
for the Federal Insurance Contributions Act. This tax, introduced during the 
Great Depression, funds Social Security and Medicare.
Employees and employers pay equal amounts of FICA. Tax is withheld for 
Social Security until the employee reaches the Social Security wage base for 
the current year.3 For 2013, the wage base is $113,700. Both employees and 
2 Colosimo v. United States, Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, No. 10-1593, www.ca8.uscourts.
gov/opndir/11/01/101593P.pdf.
3 Although called a “wage base,” it really is a wage maximum. Once an employee has earned 
the wage base, there no longer is any withholding for Social Security.

Chapter 13 | Payroll Taxes
166
employers must pay 6.2% of the employee’s wages as the Social Security 
component of fica.4
additionally, 1.45% of an employee’s earnings are withheld for the medicare 
portion of fica. employers must match this, too. There is no maximum on 
medicare.
let’s look at a couple of examples of how fica is calculated.
Example 1. an employee earns $20,000 during the first payroll period of the 
year. what are the fica taxes for both employee and employer?
Because this is the first payroll of the year, the wage base has not been reached, 
and all of the pay is subject to both the Social Security and medicare 
components of fica. The Social Security component is $20,000 × 6.2% = 
$1,240. The medicare component is $20,000 × 1.45% = $290. The employer 
will need to withhold $1,530 from the employee’s pay ($1,240 for Social 
Security and $290 for medicare). The employer will match those amounts 
when he remits his or her payroll taxes.
Example 2. an employee earns $20,000 during this payroll period. he has 
already earned $103,400 of gross wages during the year (the Social Security 
wage base is $113,400). what are the fica taxes employee and employer?
The first $10,000 of the employee’s pay will be subject to Social Security tax.
once he reaches that, he or she will have earned the Social Security base 
wage. The Social Security component is $10,000 × 6.2% = $620. medicare is 
not impacted by reaching the Social Security wage base; thus, as in example 1, 
the medicare component is $290. The employer will need to withhold $910 
from the employee’s pay ($620 for Social Security and $290 for medicare).
The employer will match those amounts when he remits his or her payroll 
taxes.
one thing to note is that fica is not impacted by how frequently you pay 
employees. fica is based solely on the amount you are paying your employees.
The employees’ portion of fica taxes is considered a trust fund tax.
responsible individuals can be held personally liable for these taxes when not 
remitted to the irS.
There are a few groups that are exempt from fica: civilian federal government 
employees hired prior to 1984 (they pay the medicare portion of fica but 
are exempt from the Social Security component), some state and local 
.

167
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
government employees who are covered by state pension plans, and some 
college students who work for their universities.
Statutory employees are only subject to FICA if all of the following conditions 
apply:
1.  The service contract states or implies that substantially all of the 
services are to be performed personally by them.
2.  They do not have a substantial investment in the equipment and 
property used to perform the services (excluding transportation 
equipment such as a car or truck).
3.  The services are performed on a continuing basis for the same 
payer.
FICA taxes are reported on Form 941 or Form 944 (see the “Reporting 
Payroll Taxes” section later).
Taxes on Employers
There are some payroll taxes paid solely by employers. On the federal level, 
there’s the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA). On the state level are 
state unemployment taxes.
FUTA
FUTA is a tax on employers designed to help fund state unemployment 
programs. FUTA covers the federal portion of unemployment insurance and 
half the cost for extended unemployment benefits. States can also borrow 
from a FUTA fund if their unemployment insurance fund is short of money.
The FUTA tax rate is 6.0% on the first $7,000 of gross earnings of each 
employee per year. However, a credit is automatically applied; this is called the 
“FUTA credit reduction” and is based on the employer paying into the state 
unemployment insurance fund. This credit is normally 5.4%. Thus, the normal 
effective FUTA tax rate is 6.0% – 5.4% = 0.6%.
■ Caution  FUTA credit reduction reduced in some states. Many states have had to borrow 
from the FUTA fund to fund their own unemployment insurance funds. However, many states have 
not paid back the FUTA fund. Under the law, if a state has a loan balance for two consecutive years, 
and the full amount of the loan is not repaid by November 10 of the second year, the FUTA credit is 
reduced. The reduction is 0.3% of the credit for the first such year; the reduction is increased by 
0.3% for each subsequent year. The reduction decreases the credit, increasing the FUTA tax owed.

Chapter 13 | Payroll Taxes
168
In 2011, twenty-one states were impacted by the FUTA credit reduction. For 2012, eighteen states 
and the Virgin Islands will be impacted by the credit reduction. The list of states subject to a credit 
reduction is available on the Department of Labor’s website.5 The largest credit reductions are for 
the Virgin Islands (1.5%) and Indiana (0.9%).
FUTA does not apply on all wages. The following are exempt from FUTA:
  1.  Wages for services performed outside of the United States.
  2.  Wages paid to a deceased employee or his or her estate in 
any year after the year of the employee’s death.
  3.  Wages paid by a parent to a child under age twenty-one, paid 
by a child to a parent, or paid by one spouse to the other 
spouse.
  4.  Wages paid by a foreign government or international 
organization.
  5.  Wages paid by a state or local government, or by the US 
federal government.
  6.  Wages paid by a hospital to interns.
  7.  Wages paid to newspaper carriers under age eighteen.
  8.  Wages paid by a school to a student of the school.
  9.  Wages paid by an organized camp to a student.
10.  Wages paid by nonprofit organizations.
11.  Certain statutory employees.6
FUTA is reported annually on Form 940 (see “Reporting Payroll Taxes” later 
in this chapter).
State Unemployment Insurance
Once you have employees, you must pay into your state’s unemployment 
insurance fund. Some states base the tax on the first $7,000 of gross wages 
paid to each employee; however, other states have a much higher wage 
limitations. For example, Hawaii bases it on the first $38,800 of wages and 
Washington bases it on the first $38,200 of wages. Generally, you will be 
5 See http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/docs/reduced_credit_states_2012_final.xls  
6 Statutory employees of classes 2 and 3 (see Chapter 12) are not subject to FUTA.  However, 
statutory employees of classes 1 and 4 are subject to FUTA.

169
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
rated by your state based on how many unemployment claims are made 
against you. The more claims made, the higher the tax that will be paid.
Other State Taxes
Some states have other employer-only taxes that must be paid. California has 
an Employment Training Tax (the current rate is 0.1% on the first $7,000 of 
wages). You will need to check with your state to determine if you are liable 
for any other payroll taxes.
EFTPS
There are only two methods allowed for making federal payroll tax payments: 
the Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS) (http://www.eftps.gov) 
and using the payment voucher with Form 940, Form 941, or Form 944. Many 
businesses will have to make federal payroll tax payments prior to completing 
a quarterly Form 941 or an annual Form 940 or Form 944 (this is discussed 
later in this chapter in “Filing Your Taxes”). If your business is required to 
make such payments, the only way to do so is through EFTPS. 
EFTPS allows you to make almost all federal tax payments (not just payroll 
taxes) using the Internet. Once you enroll in EFTPS you can login and schedule 
your payments in advance. There is no charge to enroll in or use EFTPS.
EFTPS also allows you to verify that your payroll company is actually making 
your payroll tax deposits. This is another reason to enroll in this system.
■ Caution  Paying payroll taxes twice is no fun. What happens when you use the wrong 
payroll service provider? Many businesses in North Carolina found out in 2008.
James McLamb of Raleigh was chief financial officer of the Castleton Group, a payroll service 
company in the Research Triangle Park area. McLamb had a unique (and illegal) method of handling 
payroll taxes. He would calculate the correct amount of tax for the clients, accept those remittances, 
and then change the numbers to much lower figures. He used the lower figures when reporting the 
payroll to the IRS and the North Carolina Department of Revenue. This resulted in $8 million of 
payroll taxes that the IRS never received (with an additional amount owed to North Carolina).
McLamb received a sentence of two and a half years in prison and was ordered to pay restitution 
of $8 million.7 Although justice may have been served for McLamb, it didn’t help the clients of 
7 See, for example, “Ex-CFO of bankrupt benefits firm sentenced to prison” at www.wral.
com/news/local/story/5964918/. 

Chapter 13 | Payroll Taxes
170
Castleton. If McLamb doesn’t pay restitution (which is apparently what happened), the businesses 
that used Castleton will have to pay their payroll taxes again. 
This isn’t the only such occurrence. Unfortunately, I’ve written about several instances of payroll 
companies absconding with funds in my tax blog over the last few years. Here’s another example.
Vincent Mangione operated two payroll services near Buffalo, New York. He did the same scheme 
as McLamb—he filed fraudulent payroll tax returns without the knowledge of his clients.8 Mangione 
pleaded guilty to tax evasion and bank fraud, but the employers are still liable for the payroll taxes 
($800,000 in this case).
Should You Use a Payroll Service?
After I’ve just pointed out examples of payroll services that did anything but 
provide good service to your clients, you might come to the conclusion I’m 
against using a payroll service. On the contrary, I strongly suggest that if you 
have payroll you use a reputable service.
Note the emphasis on “reputable.” This is not an area in which to skimp. You 
are personally liable for the trust fund taxes. If you use a reputable payroll 
company and a mistake is made, the company will make good on the mistake. 
(This assumes you are paying for full payroll service, including having the 
payroll company make the payroll tax deposits.) 
The major issue with payroll is liability. You are liable if mistakes are made. A 
reputable payroll processing company will stand behind their work. They will 
correct their mistakes. If you pay for full payroll service (including having the 
payroll company make the tax deposits), and you can correctly report the 
hours worked by your employees, you should not have any major problems 
with your payroll.
Even if you use one of the two largest payroll processing companies in the 
United States, I recommend you verify that the deposits are made. The phrase 
“trust, but verify” holds well.
8 See the US Department of Justice press release at www.justice.gov/usao/nyw/press_releases/
Mangione.pdf. 

171
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Figure 13-1a. Form 940 (page 1)

Chapter 13 | Payroll Taxes
172
Figure 13-1b. Form 940 (page 2)

173
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Reporting Payroll Taxes
There are three forms used to report federal payroll taxes: Form 940, Form 
941, and Form 944. Your state tax agency will have its own forms that you 
must use. If you use a payroll service, your payroll service company will 
complete the forms on your behalf and may also file the forms and make any 
required tax payments.
Form 940
Form 940 is used for the annual FUTA tax return. All employers with payroll 
must complete this form. If your FUTA tax is more than $500 for the year, 
you are required to make payroll tax deposits (using EFTPS or deposits on 
your behalf by your payroll service company). If your FUTA tax is $500 or less, 
you can pay the full amount when filing the form. Form 940 is due on January 
31 (following the year you are reporting). You get ten extra days, until February 
10, if you deposited all FUTA tax when due. Form 940 is shown in Figure  
13-1.
Form 944
Form 944 is one of two forms used to report FICA and federal income tax 
withheld. Form 944 can only be used if the IRS notifies you in writing to use 
it. The form is designed so that the smallest employers—those with annual 
liability for Social Security, Medicare, and withheld federal income tax is 
$1,000 or less—will file and pay these taxes only once a year on a fee basis 
instead of every quarter. Form 944 is shown in Figure 13-2.

Chapter 13 | Payroll Taxes
174
Figure 13-2a. Form 944 (page 1)

175
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Form 941
Form 941 is used by most employers to report their FICA and federal income 
tax withheld. This form is filed for each quarter; the form is due on the last 
day of the month following the end of the quarter (e.g., April 30 for the first 
quarter).
Figure 13-2b. Form 944 (page 2)

Chapter 13 | Payroll Taxes
176
.
9 it must be a legal holiday in the district of columbia.  congress wrote the Tax code 
referencing that a holiday for federal tax purposes is a holiday recognized by the district of 
columbia.  for example, emancipation day is a holiday in the district of columbia (april 16, 
or the closest weekday if april 16 falls on a Saturday or Sunday).  emancipation day is not a 
recognized federal holiday, but it is for federal tax purposes. 

177
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Figure 13-3a. Form 941 (page 1)

Chapter 13 | Payroll Taxes
178
Figure 13-3b. Form 941 (page 2)

c h a p t e r
14
Medical 
Expenses
He’s the best physician that knows the worthlessness of the most medicines. 
—Benjamin Franklin
The cost of medical care and health insurance has ballooned over the last 
several years. The passage of the Affordable Care Act has put these issues 
into flux.
This chapter explores the tax impact of medical expenses: What can be 
deducted and how to deduct it. There are tax advantaged plans available for 
the small business owner; these are examined with the rules and restrictions 
noted. Finally, the effects of the Affordable Care Act on medical expenses for 
the small business owner are explored.
The Affordable Care Act
I am certain that every reader is at least somewhat familiar with the Affordable 
Care Act (ACA, also called Obamacare). The Supreme Court upheld the law 
in June 2012 based on the taxing authority of Congress. It’s definitely a tax; 
there are twenty items that I’ve identified in the legislation that are either 
direct taxes or major changes to tax regulations.
Republicans in Congress and presidential candidate Mitt Romney vowed to 
repeal the ACA at their first opportunity. Since Obama won reelection, it is 
highly unlikely that the ACA will be repealed. 

Chapter 14 | Medical Expenses
180
However, there are many more legal challenges to the ACA percolating 
through the courts. The law will return to the Supreme Court in the future, 
and the Court could strike it down entirely (or a portion of it). This makes 
planning for medical expenses for the small business owner difficult.
In the remainder of this chapter I reference the changes the ACA made in the 
law that affect small business owners. (Some of the new taxes affect specific 
industries and not small business owners.)
Medical Expense Deduction
Individuals are allowed to take an itemized deduction for medical expenses. 
All qualified medical expenses not deducted elsewhere on the return are 
eligible to be taken with this deduction. Medical expenses are defined by the 
IRS as: 
The costs of diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, 
and the costs for treatments affecting any part or function of the body. These 
expenses include payments for legal medical services rendered by physicians, 
surgeons, dentists, and other medical practitioners. They include the costs of 
equipment, supplies, and diagnostic devices needed for these purposes. . . . 
Medical expenses include the premiums you pay for insurance that covers the 
expenses of medical care, and the amounts you pay for transportation to get 
medical care. Medical expenses also include amounts paid for qualified 
long-term care services and limited amounts paid for any qualified long-term 
care insurance contract.1
There are limitations to this deduction. First, you must itemize your 
deductions. Second, the total deduction must be more than 7.5% of your 
adjusted gross income (AGI). Let’s say your AGI is $100,000 and you have 
$7,000 of qualified medical expenses. The AGI restriction on your deduction 
is $100,000 × 0.075 = $7,500. Because the AGI restriction is higher than your 
qualified medical expenses, you do not get a medical expense deduction.
If the ACA remains the law of the land, your ability to take a medical expense 
deduction will decrease. Under the ACA, the AGI restriction will increase to 
10%. However, for those aged 65 or older, the AGI restriction will remain at 
7.5% through 2016.
1 IRS, Medical and Dental Expenses. Publication 502, p. 2, http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p502.
pdf. 
o

181
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Health Insurance for the  
Sole Proprietor or Partnership
Section 162(l) of the Tax Code allows a deduction for health insurance 
premiums for the sole proprietor and a partner in a partnership (or a member 
of an LLC taxed as a partnership). This deduction is taken on line 29 of Form 
1040.
The sole proprietor (or an LLC treated as a disregarded entity) will simply 
note his premiums on this line. To take the deduction, the net income from 
the business must equal or exceed the premiums (you must be profitable to 
take this deduction). In addition, premiums that cannot be deducted directly 
on line 29 of Form 1040 can be taken as a medical expense on Schedule A.
The rules are similar for a partnership. A partner can deduct his or her health 
insurance premiums on line 29. If the partnership pays for the premiums 
(either directly or by reimbursing the partners), the premiums are deductible 
by the partnership as guaranteed payments. Guaranteed payments are 
includable as income for the partner. The partnership can deduct the premiums 
as a business expense.
The partnership rules make sense: There can be only one deduction taken for 
any expense. If the partnership gets the deduction, it can’t be deductible for 
the partner and vice versa.
Health Insurance for the S Corporation
The rules for an S corporation are similar to those for a sole proprietor or a 
partnership, but there is a key difference. A 2% owner of an S corporation can 
take a deduction for health insurance premiums, just as a sole proprietor or 
a partner would do. That’s where the similarity ends.
For several years it had been unclear exactly how a 2% shareholder in an S 
corporation handled health insurance premiums. In January 2008, the IRS 
issued Notice 2008-1 clarifying the rules that apply.2 The only way for a 
shareholder-employee to deduct health insurance pretax is that the premiums 
must be included as wages in Box 1 of the shareholder-employee’s W-2. These 
premiums are not included in taxable wages for either Medicare or Social 
Security.
The insurance can be paid directly by the S corporation or the S corporation 
can reimburse the shareholder-employee. Either way, the deduction is taken 
2 See IRS, Notice 2008-1, Special Rules for Health Insurance Costs of 2-Percent Shareholder 
Employees, http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/n-08-01.pdf. 

Chapter 14 | Medical Expenses
182
only once. (The wages on the shareholder-employee’s tax return will be offset 
by the deduction for health insurance premiums.)
If you have health insurance premiums in an S corporation and handle it in any 
other manner, the premiums will probably not be deductible. The IRS has 
prescribed only one method for handling health insurance premiums for an S 
corporation.
At least one state treats this situation differently. Pennsylvania considers S 
corporation health insurance premiums to be deductible by the corporation.
Health Insurance for the C Corporation
A C corporation pays its own tax. Generally, the health insurance premiums 
paid by a C corporation are deductible. One of the benefits of a C corporation 
is that it can have a discriminatory plan. The owners can have a “gold-plated” 
health plan, while employees could have a “bronze” plan. For example, the 
owners can have a plan with no deductible where they can go to any doctor 
while employees must use an HMO and pay a deductible.
■ Note  The ACA could have an effect on C corporation health insurance deductions. The 
ACA is nearly 3,000 pages in length, and there are numerous provisions affecting the tax treatment 
of health insurance and medical expenses. It appears that the ability to have a discriminatory plan 
continues with the ACA, but it cannot be guaranteed. 
Employing Your Spouse
One issue in obtaining medical insurance for the self-employed is preexisting 
conditions. The ACA is supposed to eventually ban the usage of preexisting 
conditions. However, today those conditions can be used to disqualify you 
from health insurance.
One solution to this dilemma is to have a group plan. In many states, two 
individuals are enough to be considered to be a group; many states also 
require all groups to be accepted for health insurance. Hiring your spouse to 
create such a group is a possible solution for many.
There are some caveats. First, there must be actual wages paid and actual 
duties performed by your spouse. The wages don’t have to be high or the 
duties taxing, but they both must exist. This means you will have payroll and 
payroll taxes.
r

183
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Second, employing your spouse will not work for an S corporation owner. 
The spouse of a more than 2% owner of an S corporation is automatically 
treated as a more than 2% owner of an S corporation. This forecloses almost 
all fringe benefits, including health insurance.
There can be an effect on other areas, including retirement plans. It’s possible 
that the owners might not qualify for certain retirement plans.
Medical Benefit Plans
There are a number of medical benefit plans available. Medical benefit plans 
function are types of plans written into the Tax Code; these include tax 
credits, Section 105 plans, Section 125 plans, health savings accounts, and 
other plans. These are generally another form of health insurance (except 
Section 125 plans).
Tax Credits
One part of the ACA is the small business health care tax credit. This credit 
is available if you have fewer than 25 full-time equivalent employees with 
average wages of less than $50,000 a year. The credit can go as high as 35% (it 
will rise to 50% in 2014).
Unfortunately, there are several issues with this credit. Besides the obvious 
wage limitations, for many employers, taking the deduction for medical 
expenses will give a better tax result than taking the credit! If you take this 
credit, you generally can’t take the deduction.
The calculations required for this credit are also complex. The credit is taken 
on Form 8941. Because the calculations can be complex, and the deduction 
for medical premiums paid can lead to a better result, few eligible employers 
are taking advantage of this tax credit.
Section 105 Plans
A Section 105 plan allows small business owners to pay for medical expenses 
tax-free. This plan is also known as a health reimbursement arrangement 
(HRA). Section 105 plans offer advantages to both employees and employers.
For the employer, the medical expense reimbursements are tax-deductible. 
The employer also has flexibility in designing the plan (setting maximum 
reimbursements, eligibility requirements, and so on). For employees, the 
biggest advantage is that reimbursements are not considered to be taxable 

Chapter 14 | Medical Expenses
184
income (as long as the employee doesn’t take a medical expense deduction 
for the reimbursement on his or her tax return).
Section 105 plans have some requirements:
• 
A written plan document.
• 
All participants must be employees.
• 
Expenses that will be reimbursed cannot be reimbursable 
under any other health insurance policy.
• 
The plan cannot discriminate in favor of highly compensated 
employees (including owners) in regard to either eligibility or 
benefits.
There are various other rules that apply under other laws. Generally, you will 
need to use an outside administrator if you adopt a Section 105 plan.
Section 125 Plans
Section 125 plans, sometimes called cafeteria plans, are fringe benefit plans. 
Generally, these are used for medical expenses and health insurance premiums. 
The Section 125 plans are pretax plans; money contributed into these plans 
lowers an employee’s taxable wages.
Section 125 plans allow for reimbursement of three types of expenses:
• 
Qualifying insurance premiums.
• 
Medical expenses.
• 
Dependent care expenses.
Not every Section 125 plan offers coverage for all three of these expenses to 
employees. However, this kind of plan must offer at least two of these benefits 
to employees.
Contributions by employees to this plan are fixed for the calendar year; 
reimbursements from the plan can be made until March 15 after the close of 
the year. One drawback is that these are “use it or lose it” plans, so the ability 
to obtain reimbursements into the next year is helpful.
The medical expenses that qualify under a Section 125 plan include all the 
expenses that would normally come to mind and numerous others that 
wouldn’t. For example, air-conditioning filters for allergy relief, dyslexia 
language training, and telephone equipment for the hearing impaired are 
considered medical expenses under a Section 125 plan.

185
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
The major advantage of a Section 125 plan for employees is that expenses are 
paid with pretax money. An employee participating in such a plan can receive 
a larger take-home pay based on paying his medical insurance premium with 
pretax money.
For employers, a Section 125 plan lowers their share of FICA taxes. For a 
business with twenty employees, each of whom contribute $1,000 into the 
plan, the savings would be $1,000 × 20 × 7.65% = $1,530.3
There is one caveat with a Section 125 plan: The Tax Code prohibits a sole 
proprietor, partner, most members of an LLC, and a more than 2% owner of 
an S corporation from participating.
Beginning in 2013, the maximum amount that can be put into a Section 125 
plan in a year is $2,500. This is a provision of the ACA.
Health Savings Accounts
Another medical benefit available is the health savings account (HSA). An 
HSA is a high-deductible medical plan. An HSA functions similar to an individual 
retirement account. Contributions into the HSA are tax-deductible. 
Withdrawals for qualified medical expenses are tax-free. Both sole proprietors 
and businesses can adopt an HSA. Note that contributions made by a business 
into an employee’s HSA are not tax-deductible for the employee.
Both single and family HSAs are available. Note that if married, each spouse 
can have their own HSA; however, one spouse cannot have a single HSA while 
the other has a family HSA.
Under the ACA, the cost of HSAs will increase. This is because of how the 
ACA regulates individual and small group markets. The exact effect is yet to 
be determined, but you can read a good synopsis on this from Avik Roy in 
Forbes.4 
Other Plans
Many small business owners get health insurance through their spouse’s plan 
(a spouse might be covered through another employer). That’s definitely one 
strategy that works.  Some employers do not offer health insurance. The 
rules of the ACA will impact this (see later in this chapter).
3 The 7.65% figure is the employer’s share of FICA.
4 Avik Roy, “How Obamacare Will Make Health Savings Accounts More Costly,” Forbes.com, 
April 27, 2012,  http://www.forbes.com/sites/aroy/2012/04/27/how-obamacare-will-make-
health-savings-accounts-more-costly/. 

Chapter 14 | Medical Expenses
186
Other Provisions of the ACA
.
.
.
.
.

187
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
New Unearned Income Tax
Another provision of the ACA adds a new 3.8% tax on “unearned income.” 
This tax is on singles with MAGI exceeding $200,000 ($250,000 if married 
filing jointly). Dividends, capital gains, interest, royalties, rents, and passive 
income from partnerships, S corporations, and trusts are taxed. Some 
taxpayers may wish to accelerate income into 2012 and postpone deductions 
into 2013 based on this new tax. (This topic is discussed in Chapter 18.)

c h a p t e r
15
Retirement 
Plans
I need to retire from retirement.
—Sandra Day O’Connor
As far as I know, clocks only move in one direction: forward. With every day, 
each of us moves toward retirement. One of the benefits of being a small 
business owner is the ability to tailor a retirement plan to your needs.
Of course, the Tax Code only allows some types of tax-advantaged plans. 
This chapter looks at those plans and the tax and retirement consequences 
of each. 
The Basics of Retirement Plans
When I first entered the workforce years ago, most employers offered pension 
plans. Most pension plans are defined benefit plans. Given the contributions 
into the plan by your employer (or by you, or both), a formula is used to 
determine the amount of your benefits. Pension plans are still offered by a few 
employers (mostly for government employees).
Today, most employers offer defined contribution plans. The most common of 
these is the 401(k) plan, named after the section of the Tax Code that allows 
the plan. Many employers offer these plans, which allow employees to take a 
portion of their salary and invest that toward their retirement. Some 
employers match some or all of these contributions, which gives an extra 
incentive for employees to make contributions.

Chapter 15 | Retirement Plans
190
Most retirement plans have the money in the plan growing tax-free until you 
start making withdrawals. When you make the withdrawals, you pay income 
tax on the withdrawn money. The theory is that you will either be in a lower 
tax bracket at retirement (so your tax will be lower) or the time value of the 
money will offset the tax (because you didn’t have to pay tax on the money 
until retirement).
There are a couple of retirement plans that work differently. These are after-
tax retirement plans. The Roth IRA and Roth 401(k) plans are such vehicles. 
For these, you invest after-tax money—money on which you’ve already paid 
income tax. The Roth plans still have the investment growing tax-free. At 
retirement, you do not pay tax on your withdrawals.
There are advantages and disadvantages to both pre-tax and after-tax 
retirement plans. There is no one right choice for everyone. You will need to 
weigh the advantages and disadvantages of each plan and choose the one or 
ones that are right for your situation. It may be that none of these plans is the 
right choice for you.
The Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA
Most people are aware of the traditional Individual Retirement Account (IRA). 
IRAs were introduced by the Tax Reform Act of 1986. These accounts allow 
you to take up to $5,000 of what would be taxable income ($6,000 if you are 
age 50 or older) and invest it. (The contribution limit increases for 2013 to 
$5,500. The $1,000 extra “catch-up” contribution expires after 2012. Of 
course, Congress could extend it; see Chapter 18 for discussion on extenders.) 
You can begin taking penalty-free withdrawals at age fifty-nine and a half; you 
must begin to take withdrawals at age seventy and a half.
You can take withdrawals earlier than the minimum age; however, if they are 
not for a prescribed reason, you will pay a 10% penalty tax.1 No matter when 
you withdraw money from an IRA, the withdrawal is subject to income tax.
Traditional IRAs are a tax-deferral retirement plan: Your tax is deferred until 
retirement. 
Both traditional IRAs and Roth IRAs are personal retirement accounts. These 
accounts are not related to your business. All Americans can have an IRA, 
whether they are employed or self-employed.
1 California also charges a 2.5% penalty tax on proscribed withdrawals.

191
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Table 13-1 presents the 2012 traditional IRA modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI)2 deduction limits if you are not covered by a retirement plan at your 
business. If you are covered by a retirement plan, Table 13-2 gives you the IRA 
MAGI deduction limits. The 2013 deduction limits are presented in Table 13-3 
(if you are not covered by a retirement plan) and Table 13-4 (if you are covered 
by a retirement plan).
Table 13-1. 2012 IRA MAGI Deduction Limits If Not Covered by a Retirement Plan at 
Work.
Filing Status
Full 
Deduction
Phase Out
No Deduction
Single, head of 
household
No limit
Not applicable
Not applicable
Married filing jointly 
(spouse not covered)
No limit
Not applicable
Not applicable
Married filing jointly 
(spouse covered)
$173,000 or less
$173,000 to $183,000
$183,000 or more
Married filing 
separately
Not applicable
$0 to $10,000
$10,000 or more
Table 13-2. 2012 IRA MAGI Deduction Limits If Covered by a Retirement Plan at Work.
Filing Status
Full Deduction
Phase Out
No Deduction
Single, head of 
Household
$58,000 or less
$58,000 to $68,000
$68,000 or more
Married filing Jointly
$92,000 or less
$92,000 to $112,000
$112,000 or more
Married filing 
Separately
Not applicable
$0 to $10,000
$10,000 or more
2 MAGI is your adjusted gross income (AGI) with any deductions for the foreign earned 
income exclusion, student loan deductions, IRA (and SEP IRA) contributions, and deductions 
for higher education costs added back.

Chapter 15 | Retirement Plans
192
Table 13-3. 2013 IRA MAGI Deduction Limits If Not Covered by a Retirement Plan at 
Work.
Filing Status
Full 
Deduction
Phase Out
No Deduction
Single, head of 
household
No limit
Not applicable
Not applicable
Married filing jointly 
(spouse not covered)
No limit
Not applicable
Not applicable
Married filing jointly 
(spouse covered)
$178,000 or less
$178,000 to $188,000
$188,000 or more
Married filing 
separately
Not applicable
$0 to $10,000
$10,000 or more
Table 13-4. 2013 IRA MAGI Deduction Limits If Covered by a Retirement Plan at Work.
Filing Status
Full 
Deduction
Phase Out
No Deduction
Single, head of 
household
$59,000 or less
$59,000 to $69,000
$69,000 or more
Married filing jointly
$95,000 or less
$95,000 to $115,000
$115,000 or more
Married filing 
separately
Not applicable
$0 to $10,000
$10,000 or more
■ Caution  You can be covered by a retirement plan at work when you’re not contributing 
to it. What does “covered by a retirement plan” mean? It does not mean that you are contributing 
into a retirement plan; rather, it means that you can contribute into the plan. If your employer offers 
you a retirement plan to which you are eligible to contribute, you are considered covered by it 
regardless of whether you contribute. 
A Roth IRA is different from a traditional IRA. With a Roth IRA, you are 
contributing after-tax money. As mentioned previously, your contributions 
grow in a Roth IRA tax-free until retirement. Unlike a traditional IRA, when 
you withdraw money from a Roth IRA, no tax is due. Table 13-5 lists the AGI3 
contribution limits for 2012 to a Roth IRA; Table 13-6 gives the 2013 limits.
3 These income limits are also based on your MAGI.

193
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Table 13-5. 2012 Roth IRA Income Limits.
Filing Status
Full 
Contribution
Phase Out
No 
Contributions
Single, head of 
household
$110,000 or less
$110,000 to $125,000
$125,000 or more
Married filing jointly
$173,000 or less
$173,000 to $183,000
$183,000 or more
Married filing 
separately
Not applicable
$0 to $10,000
$10,000 or more
Table 13-6. 2013 Roth IRA Income Limits.
Filing Status
Full 
Contribution
Phase Out
No 
Contributions
Single, head of 
household
$112,000 or less
$112,000 to $127,000
$127,000 or more
Married filing jointly
$178,000 or less
$178,000 to $188,000
$188,000 or more
Married filing 
separately
Not applicable
$0 to $10,000
$10,000 or more
There is one other very important rule about IRAs and Roth IRAs: You can 
only contribute to either a Roth IRA or a traditional IRA in the same year; you 
cannot contribute to both.
Self-employed individuals can contribute to IRAs or Roth IRAs if they meet 
the income restrictions. However, there are other retirement plans that allow 
larger contributions.
You have until the tax filing deadline of the year in question (without 
extensions) to make your contributions to a traditional or Roth IRA (generally, 
April 15 of the following year).
Finally, you cannot take a loan from a traditional or Roth IRA. Loans are 
allowed from some other kinds of retirement plans.
The SEP IRA
The Simplified Employee Pension Individual Retirement Account (SEP IRA) is 
similar to a traditional IRA. As with a traditional IRA, a SEP IRA allows you to 
defer income until retirement. The withdrawal rules are identical to traditional 
IRAs. SEP IRAs allow you to contribute far more toward your retirement than 
a traditional IRA: up to $50,000 for 2012 and $51,000 for 2013.

Chapter 15 | Retirement Plans
194
The rules are different for a SEP IRA compared to traditional IRAs. There are 
also two types of SEP IRAs: for the self-employed (without employees) and 
for businesses with employees.
Self-Employed (No Employees)
A SEP IRA is a simple retirement plan for a business owner who will never 
have employees. For 2012, you are allowed to contribute up to the lesser of:
• 
20% of net self-employment income,4 or
• 
$50,000.
For 2013, you are allowed to contribute up to the lesser of:
• 
20% of net self-employment income, or
• 
$51,000.
SEP IRAs can be established for business owners of a sole proprietorship, 
partnership, or LLC taxed as a sole proprietorship or partnership. (Corporation 
owners can also establish SEP IRAs. However, the SEP IRA for a corporation 
owner follows the rules for employees. See the next section.)
A SEP IRA has a different deadline than that for a traditional IRA. You have 
until the latter of your timely filed return, including extensions, or the normal 
tax deadline to establish and fund your SEP IRA. That gives you until October 
15 of the following year to fund your SEP IRA.
In a traditional IRA, you designate the year your contribution is for. In a SEP 
IRA, you do not designate the tax year for the contribution. However, you 
must keep your own records showing to which year a contribution relates. 
Generally, you can make a larger contribution to a SEP IRA than a traditional 
IRA. The exception will be if your business does not earn much money in a 
given year. Because a SEP IRA restricts you to 20% of the net self-employment 
income, a traditional IRA may allow for a larger contribution.
There is one major negative with SEP IRAs: You must treat employees 
identically. If you have employees and you contribute 20% of your net income 
toward your SEP IRA, you must contribute 20% of their net income toward 
their SEP IRA (if they are eligible). This is covered in depth in the next section.
Like traditional IRAs, loans are not allowed from SEP IRAs.
4 Your net self-employment income is your business income minus the deduction for 50% of 
the self-employment tax.

195
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Employees
SEP IRAs can be established by corporations (S corporations and C 
corporations) and any other business with employees. It’s important to note 
that you must treat all employees identically when you have a SEP IRA.
The SEP IRA contribution limits are different for employees. For 2012, you 
can contribute up to the lesser of:
• 
25% of an employee’s salary, or
• 
$50,000.
For 2013, you can contribute up to the lesser of:
• 
25% of an employee’s salary, or
• 
$51,000.
SEP IRAs have three additional rules that can apply for employees. Employers 
can make their plans less restrictive, but the maximum restrictions are:
1.  Employees must be twenty-one years of age or older.
2.  Employees must have three years of service in the past five years.
3.  Employees must have earned at least $550 in compensation.
Remember that all eligible employees are treated identically. If you make (say) 
25% contributions to the SEP IRA for yourself, you must make 25% 
contributions for all of your eligible employees. However, you do not have to 
make the same contribution to a SEP IRA every year. You could make 20% 
contributions in one year, none in the next year, 12% in the following year, and 
so on.
SEP IRA contributions are made solely by the employer. The contributions 
made are a business expense for the employer.
SEP IRAs are relatively easy to administer. Unlike many other retirement 
plans, there are no special filings required.
Keogh Plans
Keogh plans, named for Congressman Eugene J. Keogh, are another type of 
retirement plan. These are similar to traditional pensions. Keogh plans have 
the same limits as SEP IRAs. Unlike SEP IRAs, Keogh plans have a relatively 
high administrative burden. Keogh plans generally require a third-party 
administrator to set up the plan and administer it. The major benefit of a 

Chapter 15 | Retirement Plans
196
Keogh plan is that a participant can also contribute to either a traditional or 
Roth IRA.
There are two types of Keogh plans. You can have a defined-contribution plan. 
In a defined-contribution plan, the amount contributed per paycheck (either 
a percentage or a fixed sum) is identical. A defined-benefit plan is similar to a 
traditional pension plan. With a defined-benefit plan, an IRS formula is used to 
calculate the contributions. A defined-benefit plan can be set up as a profit-
sharing plan, in which employees can contribute.
The contribution limits for a defined-contribution Keogh plan is the same as 
a SEP IRA for employees: up to the lesser of 25% of compensation or $50,000 
for 2012 ($51,000 for 2013).
The contribution limits for a defined-benefit Keogh plan is based on the 
amount needed to eventually produce an annual pension payment of the 
lesser of $200,000 (for 2012, $205,000 for 2013) or 100% of your average 
compensation for your three highest-paid years.
As mentioned previously, Keogh plans have a much higher administrative 
burden. Keogh plans must file either Form 5500 or Form 5500-EZ every year. 
(Form 5500 must be electronically filed through the Department of Labor, 
not the IRS. Form 5500-EZ can be paper filed.) Only one-participant plans can 
file a Form 5500-EZ.
Solo 401(k) and Solo Roth 401(k) Plans
Another type of retirement plan is the solo 401(k) and its cousin, the solo 
Roth 401(k) plan. These are also called individual 401(k) and individual Roth 
401(k) plans. These can only be used by one-person businesses. However, you 
can generally contribute to a solo 401(k) or solo Roth 401(k) no matter what 
type of business entity you are.
The annual maximum contribution to solo 401(k) plans is similar to the SEP 
IRAs maximum: $50,000 for 2012, $51,000 for 2013. For the self-employed, 
you must subtract your deduction for half the self-employment tax when 
calculating the maximum contribution.
There is a major difference, though, in how the maximum contribution is 
calculated. First, you calculate the salary deferral. That contribution is 
considered the “employee’s deferral option” and has a maximum of $17,000 
for 2012 ($17,500 for 2013). Like IRAs, a “catch-up” deferral for those aged 
50 or older is also allowed. That contribution has a maximum of $5,500 (for 
both 2012 and 2013). There’s also the employer’s contribution. This can be up 

197
.

Chapter 15 | Retirement Plans
198
The withdrawal rules for solo 401(k) plans are the same as with IRAs (the 
solo Roth 401(k) withdrawal rules are the same as for Roth IrAs.)
401(k) Plans
If you have employees, you can set up a 401(k) plan. Many brokerage houses 
and other financial institutions specialize in providing these plans to smaller 
employers.
A 401(k) plan for a small employer follows the exact same rules as a 401(k) 
plan for a large business. Employees can elect to have a portion of their pay 
(up to $17,000 in 2012 and $17,500 in 2013) contributed into the plan. 
Employers can choose to match a portion of the contributions if they wish. 
(Matching must be done equally for all employees). There are possible 
restrictions on contributions for “high-earning” employees. Business owners 
are always included as high-earning employees. Employer matching 
contributions are a deductible business expense of the company. Employee 
contributions reduce employees’ taxes (income tax and FICA).
401(k) plans must be administered by a third-party administrator. There are 
annual testing requirements, administrative filings (such as Form 5500), and 
rules that must be followed.
SIMPLE IRAs
A simpler version of a 401(k) plan is the Savings Incentive Match Plan for 
Employees Individual Retirement Account. Thankfully, that mouthful is 
normally referred to as a SIMPLE IRA. SIMPLE IRAs share some features with 
the better known 401(k) plans. Employees can make a pretax salary reduction 
(just like 401(k) plans). However, the contribution limits are lower for SIMPLE 
IRAs than for 401(k) plans. Employees can defer $11,500 for 2012 and $12,000 
for 2013. A $2,500 catch-up deferral is allowed for employees 50 years of age 
or older for 2012 and 2013. Unlike 401(k) plans, SIMPLE contributions defer 
only income tax, not FICA taxes (Social Security and Medicare).
Employers are required to also make contributions on behalf of their 
employees. An employer can make either matching contributions (where the 
employer matches the employee’s contribution dollar for dollar) or nonelective 
contributions (where the employer contributes 2% of each employee’s 
compensation). If you make matching contributions, the employer must match 
the first 3% of each employee’s deferrals.
Salary reduction contributions (the employee’s share) must be made into the 
SIMPLE IRA within thirty days after the month of the deferral. Employer 

199
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
contributions must be made by the due date of the tax return, including 
extensions.
SIMPLE IRAs do have some rules. Only employers with 100 or fewer employees 
can set up a SIMPLE IRA. Employees are not required to make contributions, 
but the employer is required to do so. The withdrawal rules are similar to 
those of traditional IRAs and 401(k) plans. However, the penalty for an early 
withdrawal made within two years of the first contribution into a SIMPLE IRA 
can be up to 25%. SIMPLE IRAs must be formed on or before October 1. If 
your business comes into being after October 1, the SIMPLE IRA must be 
formed as soon as “administratively feasible.”
SIMPLE IRAs lack the administrative paperwork of 401(k) plans; in that sense, 
they are far easier than many retirement plans.
■ Caution  SIMPLE 401(k)s should be avoided. In addition to SIMPLE IRAs, you can form a 
SIMPLE 401(k). But unlike SIMPLE IRAs, which are easy to administer, SIMPLE 401(k)s combine the 
administrative features of a 401(k) plan with the rules of a SIMPLE IRA. The major advantage of a 
SIMPLE IRA is the administrative ease of the plan. By forming a SIMPLE 401(k), you throw away 
that simplicity. 
Other Retirement Plans
There are many other types of retirement plans; the ones listed in this chapter 
are the most common kinds. This book is not meant to be a primer on 
retirement plans (I would need to write a separate treatise to do that). 
Instead, this chapter is designed to expose you to many of the retirement 
plans that are available.
There is no one right plan for everyone. Like most things in the tax world, the 
answer to the question, “What’s the correct retirement plan for me?” is: “It 
depends.” Most retirement plans offer tax deferral of current income, but 
some are after-tax plans that give you the benefit of not paying taxes on the 
withdrawals. The right retirement plan for you will depend on your situation, 
your goals, your assets, and your other retirement plans. I strongly recommend 
you discuss retirement plans with a financial advisor who specializes in this 
field. 

IV
pa r t
Other Items
Chapter 16 examines the other taxes a small business owner may have to pay. 
Some states and localities tax flow through business entities (partnerships 
and S corporations); some also have minimum taxes that a business losing 
money must pay. These are all detailed in this chapter.
Notices from tax agencies, audits, and how to communicate to tax agencies 
are covered in Chapter 17. The entire audit process, from how returns are 
selected for examination through the audit, into appeals, and audit 
reconsideration, is covered.
Chapter 18 covers other topics that don’t fit neatly into another chapter. 
These include tax planning based on the Affordable Care Act, what happens 
when a business loses money, net operating losses, foreign issues, should you 
file by paper or electronically, obtaining tax help, whether you should use a 
tax professional, and selling your business.

c h a p t e r
16
Other Taxes
There is no such thing as a good tax. 
—Winston Churchill
If federal income tax were not enough, most small business owners will pay 
many additional taxes, licenses, and user fees. Some of these are paid as part 
of other costs (such as the telephone excise tax). Most are separately filed 
and paid for.
In this chapter I cover many of the other taxes that business owners must file 
and pay. For state income taxes (and local income taxes), the focus is on the 
differences between the federal tax return and the state and local returns. I 
examine the basics of how these returns are prepared, the backup docu-
mentation required, and other significant rules, regulations, and procedures.
Unfortunately, the list of taxes in this chapter cannot be complete. Our 
legislators continue to find new and inventive ways of taxing us.
State Income Tax
Most states have a state income tax. If you are lucky enough to reside in 
Nevada or Wyoming, you can skip this section. These are the only two states 
that have no state income tax on individuals or businesses. Everyone else has 
a state income tax return that must be filed.
How this functions depends on the kind of business entity (sole proprietorship, 
partnership, S corporation, or C corporation) and the tax system of the state. 
Most states use the federal income tax as the starting point of their tax 
system in calculating the tax due; a few do not.

Chapter 16 | Other Taxes
204
Sole Proprietors
A sole proprietor in Alaska, Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, 
Washington, and Wyoming can relax regarding state income tax.1 These 
states do not have an income tax that affects sole proprietors (including LLCs 
that file as disregarded entities).
Unfortunately, the residents of the other forty-three states and the District 
of Columbia must file state income tax returns on their businesses. Generally, 
the preparation of a sole proprietor’s state income tax return is similar to the 
preparation of his or her federal tax return. The key areas where differences 
can apply are depreciation, state income taxes, and apportionment of taxes.
Depreciation
Many states conform to federal depreciation rules completely. In those states, 
your federal depreciation and state depreciation will be identical. However, 
some states do not conform. In those states, your state depreciation will be 
different. Where differences exist, generally you will not get the full federal 
depreciation early in an asset’s life; however, you will usually get a larger 
depreciation deduction later in an asset’s life. Here are some states that have 
differences and how they work.
Table 16-1 lists the states that allow and do not allow “bonus” depreciation. 
Table 16-2 notes which states do and do not conform with federal Section 
179 depreciation. Note that most states that do not conform to the extra 
2012 Section 179 depreciation allow the original $25,000 of Section 179 
depreciation.
1 South Dakota’s financial institution tax impacts solely financial institutions. Any business that 
must pay this tax should consult a tax professional. Tennessee does have a state income tax, 
but it is solely on interest and dividends. Washington’s Business & Occupation Tax is covered 
in “Gross Receipts Taxes.”

205
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Table 16-1. State Conformity with Bonus Depreciation
Allows Bonus Depreciation
Does Not Allow Bonus Depreciation
AL, AK,a CO, KS, LA, MN,b MO, MT, 
NE, NM, ND, OH,c OK, UT, WV
AZ, AR, CA, CT, DC, FL,d GA, HI, ID, IL, IN, 
IA, KY, ME, MD, MA, MI, MS, NH, NJ, NY,e 
NC, OR, PA, RI, SC, TN,f TX,g VT, WI
aNot allowed for an oil and gas corporation.
bAllowed, but taken over five years.
cAllowed, but taken over six years.
dFor business entities; sole proprietors do not have a FL tax filing requirement.
eAllowed only if in the Resurgence Zone or New York Liberty Zone.
fFor business entities; sole proprietors do not have a TN tax filing requirement.
gFor business entities affected by the TX margin tax. Sole proprietors do not have a TX 
tax filing requirement.
Table 16-2. State Conformity with Section 179 Depreciation
Allows $139,000 Section 179 
Depreciation
Does Not Allow $139,000 
Section 179 Depr.
AL, AR,a CO, CT, DE, FL,b GA,c IL, KS, LA, 
MA, MI, MN,d MS, MO, MT, NE, NM, NY, ND, 
OK, OH,e SC, TN,f TX,g UT, VT, VA, WV
AZ, CA, DC, HI, ID, IN, IA, KY, ME, MD, 
NH,h NJ, NC, OR, PA, RI, WI
aAR allows $133,300 Section 179 depreciation.
bFor business entities; sole proprietors do not have a FL tax filing requirement.
cExcept for certain real property that is depreciated.
dAllowed, but taken over five years.
eAllowed, but taken over six years.
fFor business entities; sole proprietors do not have a TN tax filing requirement.
gFor business entities affected by the TX margin tax. Sole proprietors do not have a TX 
tax filing requirement.
hSection 179 limit is $20,000.
These tables are accurate as of the time of this writing, but state tax laws can 
and do change. You should verify these figures with your state tax department.
Additionally, as of this writing it is unclear if either “bonus” depreciation or 
the extra Section 179 depreciation will be extended into 2013 by Congress. 
An extender legislation package is expected to be introduced during the lame 
duck session following the November election. What tax deductions will be 
included in that package and the ultimate fate of the legislation are unknown.

Chapter 16 | Other Taxes
206
State Income Taxes
State income taxes that are deductible on the federal income tax return 
cannot be deducted on the state income tax return. The most common of 
these will be California’s mandatory LLC tax on an LLC that is a disregarded 
entity (filing as a sole proprietor).
Apportionment
Most businesses are conducted in one state. However, some businesses will 
have business conducted in multiple states. If you have nexus (a connection) 
to more than one state, you will need to file a tax return for the other states.
For sole proprietors, this generally means filing a nonresident state income 
tax return for the other state. Let’s look at an example.
Assume your consulting business is in Chicago. You take a four-month 
assignment in Oklahoma City. Your client in Oklahoma pays you $25,000. The 
client reimburses you for all of your business expenses in Oklahoma, so the 
$25,000 is your net business income from Oklahoma. Overall, your business 
earns $100,000 of net income during the year.
You will need to file an Oklahoma Nonresident/Part-Year Income Tax Return 
(form 511NR).2 The income and deductions attributable to Oklahoma will be 
included on the return. In addition to the $25,000 of business income, 25% of 
the deduction for self-employment tax3 and any other Oklahoma-source 
income will need to be included on the return. (Any other deductions based 
on business income, such as health insurance premiums, must also be included 
on a pro rata basis on the Oklahoma return.)
On the Illinois tax return, you can take a credit for the tax paid to the other 
state. This credit is taken on Schedule CR.4 Overall, you end up paying the 
higher of the two states’ marginal tax rates.
There can be many complexities when a sole proprietor has to file multiple 
tax returns. Because state tax laws are not identical across states, treatment 
of certain kinds of income and deductions can differ. Any business owner 
facing such a situation should consult with a tax professional.
2 Available from the Oklahoma Tax Commission, http://www.tax.ok.gov/. 
3 Because 25% of the business’s income is Oklahoma-source, 25% of the deduction for self-
employment tax is Oklahoma-source.
4 See Schedule CR at http://www.revenue.state.il.us/TaxForms/IncmCurrentYear/Individual/
Schedule-CR.pdf. 

207
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Caution  Not all tax credits are taken on your state’s tax return. In most cases, the credit 
for paying taxes to another state is taken on the taxpayer’s “home” state tax return. However, in 
some cases the credit is taken on the other state’s return. For example, a taxpayer who is a 
resident of Oregon and pays California income tax (and vice versa) will take the tax credit on the 
other state’s income tax return. Generally, the instructions to your state’s other state tax credit form 
should list any states where you take the credit on the other state’s return.
Partnerships and LLCs Filing as Partnerships
Most partnerships and LLCs filing as partnerships will not owe any tax. 
However, a few states tax partnerships and LLCs directly. Most states do 
require a partnership tax return (in some cases, a flow-through entity return) 
to be filed. Generally, no tax will be due with the filing of the return.
However, a few states directly tax partnerships and LLCs. Table 16-3 lists 
these states and the tax they impose. The table is based on what is believed 
to be accurate information as of the date of writing. However, state taxes can 
change, so you should check with your state tax agency to verify this 
information.
Table 16-3. State Taxes Imposed Directly on Partnerships and LLCs
State
Tax
California
$800 minimum tax on LLCs. Also must pay a gross receipts tax if 
receipts are $250,000 or more. Partnerships are not subject to this 
tax.
Connecticut
Must pay $250 business entity tax.
Illinois
Must pay 1.5% personal property tax replacement income tax.
Kentucky
Limited liability entities subject to minimum $175 tax (increases with 
gross receipts of more than $3 million). Partnerships are not subject 
to this tax.
New Hampshire
Subject to 8.5% tax on business profits.
New Jersey
Filing fee tax of $150 per owner if more than two owners.
New York
Subject to filing fee tax from $25 to $4,500 based on gross receipts 
($25 if gross receipts are $100,000 or less).
Oregon
Filing fee tax of $150.

Chapter 16 | Other Taxes
208
State
Tax
Texas
Business margin tax applies to LLCs (including single-member LLCs) 
and LLPs but not partnerships owned by “natural persons.” Filing 
requirement exists for all impacted entities but tax begins at $600,000 
of gross income.
Vermont
Must pay business entity tax of $250.
Wisconsin
Has $25 minimum economic surcharge tax on partnerships and LLCs. 
Tax is greater of $25 or 0.2% of net Wisconsin business income.
Most states require withholding of nonresident partners’ portion of state 
income tax. Let’s look at an example of how this is calculated.
Assume you have a New York LLC taxed as a partnership with a member 
from North Carolina. The LLC has net income of $20,000 each quarter. The 
North Carolina member has 25% ownership of the LLC. What should the 
LLC withhold and remit to New York?
Like most states, New York requires withholding at their top individual tax 
rate. That’s currently 8.82%. The North Carolina partner’s share of the LLC’s 
income is $5,000 each quarter (25% of $20,000). Thus, the withholding is 
$5,000 × 0.0882 = $441. This withholding is due to New York on April 15, 
June 15, September 15, and January 15 (of the following year). New York 
requires that the appropriate information be entered on Form IT-2658.
Other than these exceptions (the few states that directly tax partnerships 
and nonresident withholding of partnerships), state tax returns of partnerships 
tend to be straightforward.
S Corporations
As with partnerships, S corporations are flow-through entities. Generally, 
there is no direct taxation of S corporations by states. However, there are 
exceptions to this as noted in Table 16-4.
Table 16-4. State Taxes Imposed Directly on S Corporations
State
Tax
California
$800 or 1.5% tax (whichever is greater) on S corporations. The 
minimum tax is waived in the S corporation’s first year.
Connecticut
Must pay $250 business entity tax.
f

209
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
State
Tax
district of 
columbia
DC.
georgia
.
illinois
.
Kentucky
S corporations must pay the limited liability entities tax (minimum 
$175; increases with gross receipts of more than $3 million). 
massachusetts
.
missouri
.
new hampshire
.
new Jersey
.
new York
.
north carolina
.
oregon
.
Texas
.
Vermont
.
wisconsin
.
.

Chapter 16 | Other Taxes
210
C Corporations
Because C corporations pay their own tax, generally a business that owes 
federal corporate tax will also owe state corporate tax. Additionally, many 
states have minimum corporate taxes. These are noted in Table 16-5.
Table 16-5. States with Minimum Taxes on C Corporations
State
Tax
California
$800 minimum tax on C corporations. The minimum tax is waived in 
the C corporation’s first year.
Connecticut
Must pay $250 business entity tax.
District of 
Columbia
There is a $250 minimum tax for all businesses in DC.
Georgia
Georgia has a net worth tax on corporations. This is based on the 
equity (stock, additional paid in capital, and retained earnings) of the 
business within Georgia. The minimum tax is $10.
Kentucky
C corporations must pay the limited liability entities tax (minimum 
$175; increases with gross receipts of more than $3 million). 
Massachusetts
Minimum tax of $456. 
Mississippi
Minimum tax of $25.
Montana
Minimum tax of $50.
New Jersey
Minimum tax of $500.
New Mexico
Minimum tax of $50.
New York
Subject to minimum tax from $25 to $5,000 based on gross receipts 
($25 if gross receipts are $100,000 or less).
North Carolina
Minimum franchise tax of $35 or 0.15% of largest of equity (capital 
stock, surplus, undivided profits), investment in NC tangible property, 
and appraise value of NC tangible property.
Ohio
Minimum tax of $50.
Oregon
Minimum tax of $150.
Rhode Island
Minimum tax of $500.
South Carolina
Minimum license fee tax of $25.
Tennessee
Minimum franchise tax of $100.
Utah
Minimum tax of $100.

211
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
State
Tax
Vermont
Minimum tax of $250 (small farm corporations, $75).
West Virginia
Minimum tax of $50.
Wisconsin
Has $25 minimum economic surcharge tax on corporations. Tax is 
greater of $25 or 0.2% of net Wisconsin business income.
Most states begin with federal taxable income to calculate a C corporation’s 
state taxable income. However, there are exceptions (such as Iowa). Business 
owners operating as C corporations in those states may wish to consider 
using a tax professional.
Local Income Taxes
Some areas of the country are subject to local income taxes. These can be on 
the city, county, or regional level. Here are states where you might be subject 
to local income taxes:
• 
Indiana (county tax paid as part of state income tax filing)
• 
Kentucky (Lexington and Louisville regions have separate 
income tax filings)
• 
Michigan (several cities, including Detroit, Grand Rapids, and 
Saginaw have city income taxes)
• 
Missouri (Kansas City and St. Louis have city income taxes)
• 
New York (New York City and Yonkers have individual 
income taxes collected on the state income tax return; New 
York City has separate business tax returns required for all 
businesses; the Metropolitan Commuter Transportation 
Mobility Tax (MCTMT) is also due from business owners and 
the self-employed in the New York City metropolitan area)
• 
Ohio (almost every city in Ohio has a city income tax; some 
school districts have school district income taxes)
• 
Pennsylvania (many cities and counties have income taxes)
Most city and local income taxes are based on federal income tax. Generally, 
preparation of the returns themselves is straightforward.
I spotlight two cities for their income taxes: New York City and Philadelphia.

Chapter 16 | Other Taxes
212
Business owners in New York City must pay New York City income tax on 
their state tax returns. They must also file an MCTMT return. An individual 
conducting a successful business in New York City can easily have a marginal 
tax rate in excess of 50%.
In Philadelphia, a business owner must pay three additional taxes. There’s the 
school district income tax (on interest and dividends), the business privilege 
tax, and the net profits tax. A business owner in a nearby suburb might have 
to pay a county tax, but would avoid the other three taxes.
■ Tip  Make sure you look at local taxes when you locate your business. Make sure you 
check out all the business taxes, licenses, registration fees, and gross receipts taxes you may be 
subject to before you decide on a location. 
Excise Taxes
From time to time, Congress has imposed excise taxes on various industries. 
The most famous of these is the telephone excise tax. It was originally 
designed to pay for the Spanish-American War of 1898. Like most taxes, once 
it started it wasn’t stopped even after the war ended.
Many excise taxes are on the retail cost of an item. For example, cigarette and 
other tobacco taxes are a form of excise tax. Both the federal and state 
excise taxes are based on a package of cigarettes being sold. Some excise 
taxes are taxes on gross receipts. 
Generally, the information you need to prepare the return will be a portion 
of the information needed to prepare your federal tax returns. Depending on 
the tax, you may also need exact sales figures (e.g., number of packages sold). 
Depending on the tax, returns are due monthly, quarterly, or annually.
Gross Receipts Taxes
Several states and many local governments have gross receipts taxes. These 
are taxes on the receipts of your business. Gross receipts taxes exist in 
Delaware, Hawaii, Texas, and Washington. You will find them in many cities 
(usually called a “business tax”), such as Los Angeles.
Delaware Gross Receipts Tax
Delaware imposes a gross receipt tax on sellers of goods and service providers. 
The tax rate depends on business activity and range from 0.1037% to 2.0736%. 

213
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
However, there is an exclusion in most categories of $80,000 per month; 
thus, most small businesses will not owe any tax. Note that there is an annual 
fee for most businesses of $75.
Hawaii General Excise Tax
Hawaii’s general excise tax is commonly thought of as the state’s sales and use 
tax. It’s also a tax on income from most types of business activities within the 
state. The tax is a gross receipts tax, and depending on the business activity 
the tax rate is 0.15%, 0.5%, or 4%. The 0.15% rate is on commissions from 
insurance sales. The 0.5% rate is on wholesaling, producing, and manufacturing. 
Most other business activities, such as retailing, services, and contracting, are 
taxed at 4%.
The tax is commonly passed on by retail outlets to consumers as a sales tax. 
However, the tax is on the seller, not the consumer. More information on the 
Hawaii general excise tax is available from the Hawaii Department of Taxation.5
Texas Franchise Tax
Texas does not have personal income tax. However, it does have a business 
tax (the Texas franchise tax). That tax is based on the least of three calculations:
• 
Total revenue minus cost of goods sold;
• 
Total revenue minus compensation;6 or
• 
Total revenue times 70%.
Unless your business has significant gross revenue ($600,000 or more) you 
will not owe this tax. However, you still need to file a tax return. The tax rate 
varies from 0.5% (most wholesalers and retailers) to 1.0% (most other 
entities). There is a 0.575% rate for entities with less than $10 million in 
revenue.
Washington Business & Occupations Tax
Washington state does not have a state income tax. Instead, there is the 
Business & Occupations (B&O) tax. This on the gross receipts of a business. 
Almost all businesses must pay this tax. Each business activity has its own tax 
rate. The most common rates are 0.471% for retailing, 0.484% for wholesaling 
and manufacturing, and 1.8% for service industries.
5 See the FAQ at http://www6.hawaii.gov/tax/a7_faq.htm#get. 
6 “Compensation” is defined as wages and benefits but does not include contract labor.

Chapter 16 | Other Taxes
214
Businesses in Washington must register with the Washington Department of 
Revenue (DOR). Based on the information in the application, the DOR will 
assign the business to a category, and determine the required frequency of 
filing returns (monthly, quarterly, or annually). 
Other Gross Receipts Taxes
Many cities have gross receipts taxes. Often, these are called “business license 
fees.” However, when you look at the paperwork you discover that the cost 
is based on your gross receipts. Locations with gross receipts taxes include 
Los Angeles; Bellevue, Washington; and many cities in West Virginia.
Sales and Use Taxes
If you are a wholesaler or in retail, it’s likely you will need to collect your 
state’s sales tax. If you are in Alaska,7 Delaware, Montana, New Hampshire, or 
Oregon, you can skip this section; your state does not have a sales tax.
States with sales tax also have use taxes. A use tax is identical to a sales tax; 
it’s on goods you purchase for your own use that were not charged sales tax. 
Suppose you purchase a machine from out of state. As discussed in Chapter 
2, the seller will probably not charge you sales tax. However, you owe the 
equivalent of sales tax—use tax—on the purchase. If you have a sales tax 
license, you usually report the use tax on the sales tax return.
Some states also tax services. New Mexico’s gross receipts tax functions as 
the state’s sales tax; most services in New Mexico are subject to the tax. 
Other states that charge sales tax on services include Florida, Hawaii (as part 
of the general excise tax), and South Dakota.
The starting point in preparing a sales tax return is your total sales. You then 
generally subtract sales for resale and out-of-state sales. (There are some 
other adjustments, too.) Note that you must have the correct documentation 
to justify not charging sales tax on any transaction. Most state tax agencies 
require a form of resale certificate. For example, California requires a resale 
certificate signed by the purchaser. Florida, though, requires a copy of the 
sales tax license of the purchaser. Since the Florida license is annual, a reseller 
must obtain a copy of the license each year. Make sure you obtain the correct 
documentation for your state.
How often you file and pay sales tax depends on your state and the size of your 
business. It could be monthly, quarterly, or annually. Also, in some states you 
may file every twelve months, but the filing is not based on a calendar year.
7 Some local governments in Alaska do levy sales taxes.

215
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Caution  Sales tax audit rates are high. Most sales tax agencies have high audit rates. In a 
sales tax audit, you will need to justify all nontaxable transactions. You will need to show you either 
paid sales tax on all purchases of goods and machines for your own use or paid use tax on those 
items. In Florida, this includes paying use tax on rent if your landlord doesn’t charge you sales tax.
Real Property Taxes
If your business owns real property, you will probably pay property tax on 
that property. Your local assessor (usually a county-level function) will assess 
your land and buildings. You will then receive a property tax bill. Depending 
on the location, the bill can be paid in one to four installments.
Some jurisdictions assess properties annually. If you believe an error has been 
made in assessing your property, you need to file an appeal of the assessment. 
Depending on the locality, you may have as few as thirty days to challenge an 
assessment. Most of the time when you receive the tax bill, it will be too late 
to challenge the assessment.
For the most part, there is little work involved for the business owner with 
regard to real property taxes.
Personal Property Taxes
In most jurisdictions you also have to pay personal property taxes. These are 
due on machinery, equipment, supplies, and in some locations, inventory. 
These are generally administered on the local level. However, in Maryland the 
state Department of Assessments and Taxation is responsible for personal 
property tax.
Generally, you self-report the personal property on hand. If you have multiple 
locations, you need to submit a separate report for each location. Most 
jurisdictions list the personal property you have from prior years. You note 
items added and disposed.
Some states (such as Maryland) charge a filing fee for the report. Most 
locations do not charge anything for the filing. However, you will receive a 
personal property tax assessment that must be paid.
Local Business Licenses
Most local jurisdictions charge for business licenses. Generally, there is a 
nominal charge for the license. However, some locations charge more than 

Chapter 16 | Other Taxes
216
$1,000 for a business license—in some cases, much more. The 2011 Kosmont-
Rose Institute Cost of Doing Business Survey8 noted that a retail business 
license in Akron, Ohio, costs $112,500. Chicago and Naperville, Illinois, are 
also expensive; they cost $125,000 and $100,000, respectively.
Most jurisdictions charge a standard fee; some also charge based on the 
number of employees. You should check with your local government agencies 
to determine the costs and other requirements.
Some locations mandate an occupancy permit. Others may require a visit by 
a zoning employee. If you are opening a restaurant, the local health district 
will probably inspect your premises. If your business involves hazardous waste, 
the fire department or hazardous waste agency may require you to purchase 
a permit. The local licenses can add up. Make sure you budget accordingly.
User Fees
You probably pay user fees every day without realizing it. Tacked on to utility 
bills you will see a potpourri of fees; these are examples of user fees. My 
telephone bill contains a “local telecommunications tax.” That’s a user fee I’m 
paying to use my phone.
Generally, these fees are small. However, if you need a government permit, 
you may find yourself paying a much higher user fee. Where a building permit 
used to be, say, $100, it might now be $500. You don’t have a choice but to 
pay these fees. The key is to include such fees in your budget for your business.
Other Taxes
Although the list in this chapter contains the major taxes and government 
fees you will pay, it is by no means complete. Legislators are always looking to 
expand revenue, so no activity is safe from taxation.
Many taxes are hidden; this is especially true if you travel. Your hotel room 
might be $100 per night, but that’s before taxes. Besides the ubiquitous sales 
tax, you might see a hotel destination tax, a resort zone tax, a building zone 
tax, a stadium tax, an airport user fee tax, and many others. It’s rare when you 
see a tax cut or eliminated. Unfortunately, like the excise tax that paid for the 
Spanish-American War and continued for more than 100 years after the end 
of the war, most taxes live forever. 
8 See “2011 Kosmont-Rose Institute Cost of Doing Business Survey Report,” at http://www.
reuters.com/article/2011/11/28/idUS186751+28-Nov-2011+BW20111128. 

c h a p t e r
17
Dear Valued 
Taxpayer: 
When You Hear 
from the IRS
The nine most terrifying words in the English language are, “I’m from the 
government and I’m here to help.”
—Ronald Reagan
One of the most terrifying events for a business owner (or for any taxpayer) 
is receiving mail from the IRS. Perhaps the scariest possible Halloween 
costume is that of an IRS auditor. If you really want to put fear into someone, 
just say, “I’m from the IRS and I’m here to help.”
As will be discussed in this chapter, the more successful you are, the more 
likely you are to be audited. The IRS is a collection agency. If you make 
$100,000 and your neighbor makes $1 million, and you both cheat on your 
taxes by underreporting your income by 10%, the IRS should get a better 
result by auditing your neighbor—there’s more tax to potentially recover. The 
IRS knows that’s the case; generally, if you earn more money, you are more 
likely to be audited.

Chapter 17 | Dear Valued Taxpayer: When You Hear from the IRS
218
No one can give you a strategy to completely prevent your returns from being 
audited, and that’s because some examinations are truly random. This chapter 
looks at what you should do if you are audited, and the best way to survive 
an audit with the least possible amount of pain.
What to Do When You Get  
an IRS Notice
The most important thing to do when you get a notice from a tax agency is 
to open it. Perhaps you would be surprised to find out that many taxpayers 
don’t open notices from tax agencies because they are scared. Not opening 
the mail won’t make the notice go away! The IRS will send you a second 
notice. If the notice involves assessment of tax, after two notices the IRS will 
assess the tax. If you don’t file a Tax Court petition within ninety days of the 
IRS assessing the tax, your options become paying the tax and filing a lawsuit 
after waiting six months or going through audit reconsideration. (All of these 
will be discussed later in this chapter.) It’s always easier (and cheaper) to 
timely respond to an IRS notice.
■ Note  The IRS never initiates emails to taxpayers. If you receive an email supposedly from 
the IRS, it is almost certainly spam or a phishing email. Unfortunately, emails in the name of the IRS 
(or other tax agencies) in an attempt to obtain personal information are now common. You can 
forward the email, including headers, to phishing@irs.gov. Whatever you do, do not click on any 
links or attachments in the email. After forwarding the email, you should permanently delete it. 
You should read the notice and see what the IRS wants. (In the later sections 
of this chapter I’ll go over the more common types of IRS notices.) If you use 
a tax professional, immediately send him or her a copy of the notice. Your 
professional should be able to give you advice on what you need to do.
Some IRS notices are benign. If you amend your return, you will receive a 
notice letting you know that your amended return has been processed. Some 
notices may ask for additional information. Others will state that you’ve made 
a math error on your return. Another set of notices allege that you’ve left one 
or more items off your return. Most of the other notices relate to examinations 
and collection activity.
You have a limited amount of time to respond to an IRS notice. Depending on 
the kind of notice, it can be as few as ten days. It is very important that you 
respond on a timely basis; if you don’t, you may lose rights that you have.

219
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Tip Make sure you keep your address current with the IRS. When you move, notifying tax 
agencies of your new address likely won’t make your list of things to do. However, it should. The 
IRS mails all notices. As long as the IRS sends the notice to the address of record for you (generally, 
the address you used on your last tax return), the notice will be considered received whether or 
not you actually receive it! You can use Form 8822 to change your address with the IRS. As 
discussed later in this chapter, you should mail the form by certified mail, with a return receipt 
requested so that you have proof the IRS received it.
.
Types of Audits
when the irS sends you a notice, it can be for many different reasons. we 
now look at the common types of notices and audits that you might encounter.
Math errors are exactly what they are called: The irS believes you made a 
mistake involving math on your return. These notices are different from all of 
the other types of notices. if the error results in a change to your return, the 
irS immediately assesses the additional tax (or sends you a refund). as with 
all notices, the irS assumes it is correct. with a math error, the irS is allowed 

Chapter 17 | Dear Valued Taxpayer: When You Hear from the IRS
220
to immediately make the change. Unlike other notices, generally you do not 
have to respond to this kind of notice.
The next kind of notice is an Automated Underreporting Program (AUR) 
notice. The IRS computer system has flagged your return; it believes that you 
left something out or there is some other error. You are given thirty days to 
respond to the notice. If you don’t respond, the IRS will send you a second 
notice giving you thirty more days to respond. If you continue to ignore the 
notice, the IRS sends you a notice of deficiency. The IRS has now assessed the 
additional tax; you generally have ninety days to file a case in Tax Court or the 
tax is permanently assessed. (There are ways of fighting the IRS even after tax 
has been assessed; those are covered later in this chapter.)
The remaining kinds of notices are notices of audit. There are three types of 
audits: correspondence, office, and field.
Correspondence audits are generally limited. The IRS asks you to mail 
documentation on a few items. You mail the information to the IRS; the IRS 
then sends you a response in the mail.
Office exams are also limited, usually dealing with one to five items. The IRS 
will have helpfully set up a day and time for you to come into their local office 
(hence, “office audit”), though you can change the day and time. You will bring 
the backup documentation for the items the IRS is examining. 
Field exams are the most searching kinds of audits; these are the audits that 
most individuals think of when they hear the words “IRS audit.” A field exam 
is an audit usually conducted at a taxpayer’s place of business—in the “field” 
rather than in the office (hence, field audit). Most audits are now done by 
correspondence rather than being performed in the field. Field audits are the 
most expensive for the IRS; they are usually reserved for difficult returns, 
complex issues, and project work. (Project work is discussed later in this 
chapter.)
In a field audit, the examiner can expand the audit to other issues on the 
return or other years that are open. These audits are the riskiest for taxpayers.
The goal of the IRS in an examination (audit) is for you to have paid the 
correct amount of tax for the year in question. It is possible to obtain a refund 
in an audit. It is also possible for you to owe substantial amounts of tax, 
penalties, and interest.

221
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Math Errors
Many years ago, math errors on tax returns were common. When I graduated 
from college, computers occupied whole rooms; today, my cell phone is more 
powerful than those computers.
If you prepare your return by hand, it’s relatively easy to make a math error. 
Tax forms are complex, and if the instructions tell you to add lines six and ten 
and you add lines seven and ten, you have made a mistake.
Math error notices are different than all of the other notices in this chapter. 
Unless you owe additional tax because of the error, the IRS does not expect 
you to respond. In almost all cases, the IRS’s correction will be accurate.
However, occasionally the IRS computers will make a mistake with a math 
error notice. I’ve seen this happen with negative numbers: The IRS changed 
the negative number to a positive and a “math error” was created. 
If you believe there was no math error, you will need to provide proof that 
the original calculations were correct. Usually, you need to print a copy of the 
form in question. Write out an explanation of why the originally submitted 
return was correct. Mail the explanation, along with a copy of the notice and 
supporting data using certified mail, return receipt requested, to the IRS office 
that sent you the notice.
■ Tip  Always mail your response using certified mail, return receipt requested. The IRS 
gives you the option of faxing a response. Unfortunately, you have no proof that the IRS received 
the fax. Although you can print a report showing that you sent something via fax to the IRS, there’s 
no proof that the agency received it. I’ve sent responses via fax only to have the IRS state that they 
were never received. Unless I’m actually speaking with an individual from the IRS (or it is a field 
examination matter; see later in this chapter), I always send my responses using certified mail. 
With certified mail, you have proof that courts will accept that whatever you sent to the IRS was 
received. Unless you use the tracking information off the US Postal Service’s website, you should 
use return receipt requested. The USPS purges the online information after one year.
■ Note  Why is the IRS sending me a notice from a different service center than the one 
that processed my return? The IRS balances its workload among nine service centers. Only four 
service centers currently process individual returns (Atlanta, Austin, Fresno, and Kansas City); two 
others (Cincinnati and Ogden) process business returns. Although it is possible that an IRS notice 
will come from the same service center that processed your return, it is also possible it will come 
from any of the service centers. The IRS service centers that no longer process returns are in 
Andover, Massachusetts; Holtsville, New York; and Philadelphia.

Chapter 17 | Dear Valued Taxpayer: When You Hear from the IRS
222
AUR Notices
You can identify IRS notices by the notice number. These are usually shown in 
the top right corner of the notice. Notice labels begin with “CP.” This stands 
for “computer paragraph”; each IRS CP notice is tied to a specific issue.1 
The most common kind of notice is an AUR notice: a CP2000. 
Before we get into how to respond to an AUR notice, here’s why the IRS has 
this program and why it’s been expanded: It’s a huge profit center. Many 
individuals receive a notice from the IRS and simply pay it without determining 
whether the IRS is correct. Don’t do that! Many notices are wrong; if you sign 
the notice and pay the tax, you’ve agreed to the change(s) made by the IRS 
and most likely will have no further recourse.
When you read an AUR notice, you will be the first human to read it. These 
notices are sent out through a completely automated process. Generally, 
these notices involve “matching” issues. For example, you are a sole proprietor 
and have received a 1099-MISC regarding work you’ve done. However, you 
didn’t include that 1099-MISC on your return. Or the IRS thinks you didn’t 
include it on your return. The IRS sends you a CP2000 noting the error that 
the computer has identified.
The first thing you should do is identify the issue(s) in the notice. The notice 
will state them, usually listing forms they think weren’t included (such as 
1099s, K-1s, etc.). This is listed in the Explanation Section. The IRS names the 
documents, noting “Information Reported to IRS that differs from the 
amounts shown on your return.” The IRS then notes the reasons for the 
changes. This section references the tax law. The reasons may note that the 
IRS just needs more information. The IRS will then note the changes to your 
return. This section shows the recomputation of your return based on the 
changes made. Sometime the IRS includes additional information.
You should review all of this information and determine if it’s accurate. If it is 
not, print backup paperwork that would show the IRS why the computer is 
wrong. The IRS includes one or two response forms with the notice. 
(Sometimes they include two response forms, one if you are sending a payment 
and one if you are not sending a payment. In some cases the IRS includes only 
one response form.) Complete the response form. If you believe the IRS is 
incorrect, write out a letter of explanation. In the letter, make sure you 
include your name, taxpayer identification number, the tax year, and the AUR 
number (this will be on page one of the notice in the top-right corner). Mail 
the response using certified mail, return receipt requested. 
1 You can find a list of some of the more common IRS CP notices at http://www.irs.gov/
Individuals/Understanding-Your-IRS-Notice-or-Letter. 

223
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
The IRS will respond in one of several ways. First, the agency may reply stating, 
“Thank you for your response. We were able to close the matter with the 
information you provided.” That means the matter is closed, and the IRS 
agrees with you. This will usually be labeled a CP2005 notice.
The IRS may reply they need additional information (this usually is sent as a 
new CP2000 notice). If so, provide the IRS with whatever has been requested.
The IRS can respond that they disagree with what you’ve written and they still 
believe the computer is correct. If so, you will either have to respond again 
showing why you are correct and the IRS is wrong. This can come as a new 
CP2000 notice; it may also come as an IRS letter.2 If you now believe the IRS 
is correct, you can respond by paying the tax.
If you still disagree with the IRS, you can take the case to their Appeals 
Department (discussed later in this chapter). You also have the right to file a 
case in Tax Court (also discussed later in this chapter).
Note that it is possible when you receive an AUR notice that you will agree 
in part and disagree in part. In that case, you can send a response noting that 
fact and paying just the amount of additional tax (and interest and penalties, if 
applicable) with which you agree.
■ Tip  Ask the IRS if you need additional time to respond. If you receive a notice from the IRS 
and need additional time to respond, ask for it. In most cases, the agency will give you thirty 
additional days to respond. The IRS is aware that it can take time to gather needed information.
How Returns Are Selected for Audit
There are many ways returns are selected for audit. The most common relates 
to the differential score (DIF score) of the return.
All tax returns are given a DIF score. This generally relates to how different a 
return is from normal. Suppose you are a consultant filing as a sole proprietor. 
You have $50,000 of gross income. You note travel expenses of $2,345 and 
meal and entertainment expenses of $44,000 (after the 50% reduction for 
meals and entertainment). It’s hard to believe that a consultant with $50,000 
of gross income has $88,000 of meals and only $2,345 of travel. Such a return 
is likely to receive a high DIF score and be selected for audit.
There are other reasons returns are selected for examination. Every year, the 
IRS conducts research projects. Some are annual: the agency takes a random 
2 The most likely form is Letter 2257C, a balance due notice to a taxpayer.

Chapter 17 | Dear Valued Taxpayer: When You Hear from the IRS
224
sample of all returns to see what forms and schedules are leading to the 
largest nonpayment of taxes.
The IRS also conducts specific research projects. For example, a few years ago 
they examined random samples of S corporation returns. The IRS was looking 
to see how big the issue of S corporation owners not taking reasonable 
salaries was.
Some audits are based on the kind of work in which you are involved. Recently, 
the IRS began a project in Las Vegas, looking at various service industry 
personnel to see if all the gratuities they received were being reported on 
their returns.
Another set of audits relates to a tax professional. Assume that the IRS 
examines a taxpayer, and discovers that the return had errors that could be 
the result of malfeasance by a tax professional. The IRS will then select fifteen 
to thirty additional returns prepared by that tax professional to see if it was 
an isolated incident or a pattern of fraud.
Generally, the more money you make, the more likely your return is to be 
examined. The “sweet spot” for audits are sole proprietors who make more 
than $300,000 a year from their businesses. The highest audit rate, excluding 
large corporations, is for sole proprietors who make more than $1.2 million.3
Any tax professional who tells you he can prevent your return from being 
audited is lying. Some audits are truly random, and unless that professional has 
access to the IRS’s random number generator, we all have an equal chance of 
winning that lottery.
Correspondence Audits
The first kind of audit is the correspondence examination. In a correspondence 
examination, the IRS sends you one of two types of notices. In the first, the 
agency asks you for additional information regarding something on your tax 
return. For example, the IRS may ask for proof of your meal and entertainment 
expenses. You will then have to print backup documentation of the expenses 
and send that to the IRS.
In the second kind of notice, the IRS sends you the results of the examination. 
The IRS will have looked at your return and changed various items on it. You 
are given (generally) thirty days to respond. If you don’t respond, the tax is 
assessed and you receive a notice of deficiency. Tax professionals do not like 
this form of IRS correspondence audit because of the accusatory nature of it.
3 The very largest corporations are audited for every tax year.

225
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
The keys when responding to a correspondence audit are listed below.
1.  Respond in a timely way. There will be a deadline. Make sure 
your response is mailed by the deadline. If you need additional 
time, ask for it.
2.  Send only the information the IRS has requested. If the IRS asks 
for information on meals and entertainment but not travel 
expenses, send them the information on meals but not travel. 
This seems basic, but according to the IRS, taxpayers routinely 
send the wrong information.
3.  Make your response easy to follow. Most of the personnel 
involved in correspondence audits are former clerk-typists. In 
days gone by, the IRS needed thousands of typists to transcribe 
returns. Today, electronic filing has negated the need for legions 
of typists. The IRS has retrained these former workers; many 
now handle correspondence audits. Your response should be 
simple to follow. If needed, label your documentation so that 
the IRS can easily follow along with your letter.
4.  Write your name, taxpayer identification number, and tax year 
on every document you send in. The IRS separates packages even 
though all the material is supposed to stay together.
Once you send your response in, the IRS will respond as with an AUR notice. 
The agency may agree with your response, disagree with your response, or 
ask for additional information. Once you and the IRS agree, you should pay 
the additional tax (if applicable). If you and the IRS cannot come to an 
agreement, you have the right to appeal.
■ Note  Should you use a tax professional for an examination? When you receive a notice of 
examination, the IRS will include with the notice two publications, Your Rights as a Taxpayer4 and 
a publication on the examination process.5 One of the rights you have is to be represented by a tax 
professional: an attorney, a certified public accountant (CPA), or an Enrolled Agent.6 
4 IRS Publication 1, “Your Rights as a Taxpayer,” http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p1.pdf. 
5 Either IRS Publication 3498, “The Examination Process,” http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/
p3498.pdf, or IRS Publication 3498-A, “The Examination Process (Examinations by Mail), 
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p3498a.pdf. 
6 Only attorneys, CPAs, and Enrolled Agents have the right to represent any taxpayer in an 
examination with the IRS or other tax agency.

Chapter 17 | Dear Valued Taxpayer: When You Hear from the IRS
226
There is a cliché among attorneys, “A lawyer who represents himself has a fool for a client.” If the 
matter is simple—say, you need to provide copies of all of your meal and entertainment expenses—
you probably do not need representation.
However, if the matter is complex or you are facing an office or field audit, you should consider 
representation. It is far too easy to say the wrong thing to the IRS and find what you thought to be 
a simple matter has expanded into an unholy mess. If I faced an examination, I would get 
representation for myself, even though I am an Enrolled Agent.
If you do use a tax professional, it’s likely you will not be at the examination. As noted above, you 
might say the wrong thing; if you’re not at the audit, you can’t say the wrong thing. You also are 
hiring a professional so that you do not have to be at the examination. While the IRS may insist that 
you must be there, the law says that you do not need to attend.
Office Examinations
The second type of examination is the office exam. These are conducted at 
an IRS office: You’ve received an invitation you can’t refuse.
Generally, office exams are limited to a few issues. Common office exams 
look at a sole proprietor’s automobile expenses, travel expenses, and meals 
and entertainment expenses. However, an office exam can target anything on 
a return.
Office examiners have experience within their areas. Many have worked for 
the IRS for years. Today, all office examiners have heavy workloads.
Here are the keys to surviving an office examination.
1.  Call the examiner and set up an appointment as soon as practical. 
If you are going to need forty-five days to obtain some of your 
backup information, let the examiner know. Most are reasonable 
as long as you are upfront with them.
2.  Prepare full and complete documentation covering just the areas 
noted on the exam notice. Most office exams cover just a few 
areas for one tax year. Make copies of all documentation so that 
you can provide them for the examiner. Make life easy on the 
examiner, and cross-reference items where needed.
3.  Get to the appointment early. If you live in an area like Los 
Angeles where traffic can be an issue, plan appropriately. You do 
not want to be late.
y

227
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
4.  Treat the examiner as a person, not as a bureaucrat. Employees 
at the IRS all have jobs to do. Follow the golden rule: Treat them 
how you would want to be treated.
5.  If you have strong documentation in some areas and weak in 
others, try to start with the areas in which you are strong. As 
previously noted, office examiners are overworked. If it looks as 
if you have excellent documentation throughout, the examiner 
may stop the exam before it reaches your weak areas.
Once the exam is concluded, the examiner will either print the result for you 
or mail it to you shortly thereafter. If you and the examiner do not agree, you 
can request a meeting with the examiner’s manager. You also have the right to 
appeal.
Field Examinations
A field examination is the most far-reaching kind of audit. The field examiner 
is allowed to expand the audit to anything on the tax return.7 The examination 
can be expanded to any year that is open, both forward and backward.8
The IRS puts its most experienced examiners in field audits. Most have upward 
of ten years of experience. With the exception of project work, most field 
exams are the result of a return having a high DIF score (see the discussion 
earlier in this chapter). Given that these audits have an almost unlimited 
scope, I strongly advise anyone facing a field audit to obtain professional 
representation. To have representation, you need to sign an IRS Power of 
Attorney (Form 2848). Note that if the audit is of a married couple filing 
jointly, both spouses must sign separate powers of attorney.
You can tell you are facing a field exam when the initial letter asks you to call 
to make an appointment, or there’s a reference to seeing your premises, or 
there’s a reference that the scope of the exam may be expanded.
As always, prepare full and complete documentation of the information 
requested. If the information requested is of a complex nature and you need 
additional time, let the examiner know.
When you hire a representative, he or she should meet with you. The 
representative will review the documentation and determine if it is everything 
7 The examiner’s manager does have to approve the audit expansion. However, I’ve never 
seen an audit where the manager objected to an audit expansion.
8 There is generally a three-year statute of limitations on tax returns (three years from the 
due date of the return or date of filing, whichever is later). Years where the statute of 
limitations has not expired are considered open years.

Chapter 17 | Dear Valued Taxpayer: When You Hear from the IRS
228
that’s needed. If not, he or she will let you know what else is needed. A bank 
account analysis may be conducted (see later in this section). Most likely, the 
representative will not want you to appear at the examination. With the 
power of attorney, the representative becomes “you.”
■ Tip  There’s nothing wrong with saying, “I don’t know.” You’re at an IRS audit, and the 
auditor asks for a piece of information about which you’re unsure. There’s nothing wrong with 
saying “I don’t know.” In fact, in such situations that’s the best and only response you should 
provide! Lying to an IRS employee is a felony. 
If you don’t know the answer, let the examiner know that you’ll investigate and get back to him or 
her with the answer. The IRS appreciates candor, and as long as it’s a matter where it’s reasonable 
that you might not know the answer, the examiner should be fine with, “I don’t know, but I’ll get 
you the answer soon.”
I am generally upfront when I am representing a client in a field audit. First, I’m 
dealing with auditors who usually know the rules. They have seen almost 
everything that’s possible. You generally can’t pull the wool over their eyes. If 
they don’t know the tax rules about something, they know whom to ask to 
get the information.
I also prefer cooperation to confrontation. Audits can involve give and take. 
If you are completely confrontational in a field exam, the auditor will not be 
willing to compromise.
■ Note  When you find yourself sitting across from Attila the Hun. In my fourteen years as a 
tax professional, only once have I sat across from a completely confrontational individual from a 
tax agency. The auditor violated various rules (among them, he contacted my client directly instead 
of calling me). When I spoke with him, he denied this.
I spoke with his manager and explained the situation to her. The manager said she would talk with 
him, and the situation would change or she would reassign the examination. The situation improved, 
and the audit progressed normally.
As mentioned earlier, most IRS employees are hardworking and conduct themselves in a highly 
professional manner. Unfortunately, the IRS is a large agency and it’s inevitable that there will be 
some unprofessional employees.
In a field examination, unreported income is almost always looked at. 
Generally, the IRS reviews all of your bank accounts. The agency will conduct 

229
.
■ Note Privilege in audits. There is no privilege between a tax professional and a client in tax 
preparation. You are probably familiar with the attorney-client privilege. If you hire an attorney, 
generally anything you tell that attorney is confidential; the attorney can never reveal any of that 
information to anyone. There is a limited accountant–client privilege in representation (including 
examinations). However, there’s a problem when you assert privilege.
When privilege is asserted, a tax professional will, of course, comply with a client’s request. The 
problem is that when privilege is asserted, the IRS can refer the matter to their criminal 
investigations unit.
The IRS criminal investigations unit has highly trained accountants who are also federal agents 
(accountants with guns). Criminal investigators have subpoena power (just like all police agencies). 
CPAs and Enrolled Agents must answer questions when faced with a lawful subpoena.
If an individual is facing a potential criminal tax matter, he or she should hire a tax attorney. These 
are attorneys who specialize in tax matters. As with all attorneys, there is attorney–client privilege 

Chapter 17 | Dear Valued Taxpayer: When You Hear from the IRS
230
when speaking with a tax attorney. Tax attorneys then can hire a CPA or Enrolled Agent to assist 
them under a Kovel letter.9 However, the applicability of a Kovel letter has recently been limited, 
and it may not always be applicable. Your attorney may elect to just provide information to the CPA 
or Enrolled Agent.
When an Audit Concludes
When the examination concludes, the examiner will give you a closing letter 
for the audit. It can take one of a several forms.
If you agree with the results, you sign the letter, and tax is assessed (if 
applicable). If you disagree, the first step would be to discuss the differences 
with the examiner’s manager. 
Audits can involve compromising. I’ve had conversations with managers where 
we note our disagreements, and we elect to my position on travel expenses 
but take the IRS’s position on meals and entertainment.
If after meeting with the manager you still don’t agree with the results, the IRS 
will send closing documents. If you believe the tax law has been misinterpreted, 
you can then take the case to IRS Appeals.
IRS Appeals
The mission of IRS Appeals is “to resolve tax controversies, without litigation, 
on a basis which is fair and impartial to both the Government and the taxpayer 
in a manner that will enhance voluntary compliance and public confidence in 
the integrity and efficiency of the Service.” Almost any IRS matter where 
there’s a dispute can be taken to Appeals.
Appeals is not the place for rehearing an audit. This is where you go if there’s 
a dispute over the tax law, rules, and regulations.
The IRS has set up service center appeals groups. Generally, tax professionals 
prefer to have appeals hearings heard on the local level. The IRS’s most 
experienced personnel are at local appeals. In most cases, you have the right 
to have the appeal heard at the local level. At your first opportunity, you need 
to ask for the case to be moved to the local level. 
Here’s an example of why tax professionals prefer local appeals. One of my 
clients was examined (a correspondence audit) for reporting gambling 
winnings by session (which is allowed). The issue related to him receiving a 
9 Named for United States v. Kovel, 296 F.2d 918 (2nd Cir., 1961).

231
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
W-2G for a larger amount than his total gambling winnings from the session. 
Was he liable for the amount of the win on the W-2G or for his actual win? 
The IRS had held that my client was liable for the full amount of the W-2G.
The first year he was examined, the appeal was heard at the service center. 
The service center appeals officer agreed with the IRS. My client was examined 
for the same issue the next year. The case was moved to local IRS appeals. 
The appeals officer called me, and I explained the issue. The appeal was never 
heard; the appeals officer agreed with our view, and we never had to argue 
the case.
After Appeals hears the case, a decision will be sent. (Sometimes you will be 
told the decision at the appeal, but paperwork is always issued.) If you agree 
with the appeals decision, you sign the documentation (if necessary) and pay 
the tax (if applicable). If you still disagree, you can, at that time, take your case 
to Tax Court.
Court
You’ve gone to appeals and lost, or you received a notice of deficiency and 
disagree with it. There are three methods available to take a tax case to 
court. You can pay the tax, wait six months, and file a claim for refund. If the 
claim is denied, you can then file a lawsuit to recover the tax in either federal 
district court of the Court of Federal Claims. 
The alternative that most pursue is to file a case in Tax Court. The major 
benefits of Tax Court are you do not have to pay the tax until the case is 
resolved, there’s a “small case” option with relatively looser rules (somewhat 
similar to small claims court), and it is possible to represent yourself (called 
pro se).
Most cases filed in Tax Court are never heard: Most are settled. There are 
several reasons for this. First, all cases that are filed in Tax Court are referred 
to IRS appeals (if they have not already been heard by IRS appeals). Second, 
the court encourages both the IRS and the petitioner to settle. Finally, IRS 
attorneys judge a case based on the hazards of litigation. There is almost 
always a risk with litigation. In the end, less than 10% of cases filed in Tax 
Court proceed to a trial.
There is no appeal from a small case Tax Court case (no matter which side 
wins). All other cases can be appealed to the circuit courts of appeal. If your 
case is appealed, you will need an attorney (even if you represented yourself 
at Tax Court). Cases can be appealed from a circuit court of appeals to the 
Supreme Court.

Chapter 17 | Dear Valued Taxpayer: When You Hear from the IRS
232
The main reason the Supreme Court hears a tax case is when two of the 
circuit courts of appeal reach opposite conclusions on the same issue. When 
that happens, the Supreme Court grants a writ of certiorari and hears the 
matter. Once the Supreme Court rules on an issue, it is resolved; the Supreme 
Court is the highest court in the United States.
The two other methods of fighting the IRS in court (district court and the 
Court of Federal Claims) involve paying the IRS first and then filing a lawsuit 
against the IRS. Although this can be done, you will almost always need to hire 
an attorney.
Audit Reconsideration
What happens if your return is examined by the IRS, and you can’t find your 
documentation proving some of your deductions? You lose that portion of 
the audit and pay the IRS the additional tax. Sometime later, you discover all 
of the receipts. Do you have any recourse?
You do; the IRS allows for audit reconsideration. In audit reconsideration, you 
must prove that the original conclusion(s) of the examination were incorrect. 
When you file audit reconsideration, you note the result of the audit, why the 
result was wrong, and the evidence showing that the conclusion was wrong.
Audit reconsideration can be done if you don’t respond to an IRS notice. 
Assume you receive a CP2000 and ignore it. The IRS assesses the tax. Three 
months after the tax was assessed, you realize what happened. The CP2000 
notes that you supposedly didn’t include a 1099-MISC from a vendor on your 
Schedule C. You look at your return, and you see that you did include it and 
that you can prove it. This is an excellent example of when audit reconsideration 
can be used.
Be aware that it can take from three to twelve months (and longer) for your 
audit reconsideration to be resolved by the IRS. You will receive a letter after 
your request has been received giving you an estimated timeframe for 
response. Unfortunately, that estimate is likely to be exceeded.
Finally, audit reconsideration is not the place to refight an audit when you 
don’t have new evidence. You may not like an examiner’s conclusions, but 
unless you have proof the examiner was wrong, you should not file audit 
reconsideration. Such a filing might be deemed frivolous; the IRS can assess a 
frivolous filing penalty in such a situation.

233
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
State Audits
State and local tax agencies can and do conduct examinations. Though these 
audits are rare (in comparison to IRS examinations), they can be more difficult 
for the taxpayer. Many states have budgetary difficulties; states have become 
far more aggressive with examinations to drum up some funds.
One area where states examine returns where the IRS does not is residency. 
If you move, you may find yourself facing such an exam. The state will look at 
whether you have cut your ties to your old state. Be aware that rules on 
residency vary among the states.

c h a p t e r
18
Other Topics
His ignorance is encyclopedic. 
—Abba Eban
There are several topics that need to be discussed but don’t fit neatly into  the 
other chapters. This chapter focuses on these miscellaneous subjects. Just 
because they’re not in a chapter of their own doesn’t make them any less 
essential. 
The final matter discussed here is whether you should use a tax professional 
for preparation, and if you do, what should you tell him or her. 
Tax Planning for 2012 Based on the ACA 
and Expiring Tax Legislation
In most years, tax professionals tell their clients to accelerate deductions into 
the current year and postpone income. Generally, tax rates are stable; by 
doing this most individuals decrease their tax in the current year. (The advice 
is general; there are definitely situations in which it is normally correct to 
accelerate income and postpone deductions.)
The end of 2012 is different. Tax rates are going up in 2013, perhaps by even 
more than the Affordable Care Act (ACA) increases (see Chapter 14). In this 
situation, for the average individual income should be accelerated into the 
current year and deductions postponed (where possible). This will hold for 
sole proprietors, partnerships, and S corporations.
It is also unclear whether “extender” tax legislation will pass in the lame duck 
session of Congress. The Bush Tax Cuts expire at the end of 2012. Republicans 
want to extend all of the cuts; Democrats and President Obama want the 

Chapter 18 | Other Topics
236
cuts to expire to those earning $250,000 or more. There are a number of 
other tax measures that likely will be considered; among these are a patch for 
the alternative minimum tax (AMT), an extension of the Estate Tax limitation, 
and the ability to deduct sales tax as an itemized deduction.
C corporation tax rates are not changing. Thus, there is no special tax planning 
for the end of 2012 based on the ACA.
When a Business Loses Money
Not every business makes money each year. In fact, most new businesses lose 
money in their first year. This makes sense: A new business is looking for 
customers (marketing) more than servicing existing customers. It’s not just 
new businesses that lose money. A business might move into a new product 
line, and until that line succeeds the business as a whole could lose money.
What is the tax impact of a loss? As usual, the response is “it depends.” The 
factors that will determine the results are your basis and the type of business 
(sole proprietor, partnership, S corporation, or C corporation). There is one 
certainty: A business that loses money will not owe tax. Tax is always a 
percentage of income; anything times zero is zero.1 
Basis
Basis is a measure of your investment in your business. For a sole proprietor, 
you always have basis in your business; that’s because the business and a sole 
proprietor are one and the same. As long as a sole proprietor is materially 
participating in his business, the loss will be taken on the tax return.
There are two types of basis for all other entities: stock (or partner’s capital 
contribution) and loan. Stock basis is the contributions of owners into the 
business. This includes contributions to purchase the original stock and 
additional paid-in capital. For partnerships (and LLCs treated as partnerships), 
it includes all contributions of capital.
The second source of basis is loans to the entity. A loan provides capital to 
the business. Of course, as the principal of the loan is paid back, the loan basis 
drops. All loans require interest to be paid, so it is important that interest is 
charged (and that the business is either paying interest or accruing interest). 
Note also that a loan must be a loan to the business. Let’s say your uncle loans 
you money, and you invest a portion of that money into the business. You 
1 As noted in Chapter 16, you may owe state income tax. Some states charge minimum taxes 
for business entities regardless of income.

237
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
have increased your capital contribution (and your stock basis will increase). 
However, that’s not a loan to the business, and you do not have an increase in 
your loan basis.
You can only take losses up to the amount of your basis. Losses lower your 
loan basis first, and then lower the stock basis. Let’s say you are one of two 
members of an LLC taxed as a partnership; each of you has an equal percentage 
ownership of the LLC. Your capital (stock) basis is $50,000. The partnership 
has no debt, so there is no loan basis. During the current year, the partnership 
loses $120,000. Your share of the loss is $60,000. However, you are limited by 
your basis to reporting a $50,000 loss.
■ Caution  Tax software and basis restrictions. Suppose the scenario just described applies 
to you, and you have a $60,000 loss, of which you are limited to $50,000 because of your basis. 
You receive a Schedule K-1 noting your $60,000 loss; this is the only paperwork you receive from 
the LLC for the tax year. Can you take the additional $10,000 of loss?
You can’t. Basis is controlling; because you have no basis, the deductible loss is limited. 
There are two issues related to this. First, it’s very important that you receive basis statements 
each year for partnerships and S corporations. This is especially true if different tax professionals 
prepare the business and personal returns. There’s probably no way for the person preparing your 
individual return to know of the basis issue without the basis schedule.
Second, there is no form to note the basis restriction on the individual’s return. What most tax 
professionals do to note this limitation is attach a subschedule for the K-1 entry, noting the amount 
shown on the K-1 and the amount of loss unable to be taken due to the basis restriction.
C corporations pay their own taxes. Thus, although the basis does apply to 
the C corporation, it applies to the overall corporate entity and not each 
stockholder. For a C corporation to take a loss, the entity must have positive 
basis between owners’ equity and loans.
Material Participation
A second issue that affects the ability to take a loss for a sole proprietorship, 
partnership, or S corporation is material participation. To take a loss, the 
owner must be materially participating in the activities of the business. 
Section 469(h)(1) of the Tax Code defines material participation to be when 
one “works on a regular, continuous and substantial basis in operations” of 
the activity. Temporary Reg. §1.469-5T(a) states that a taxpayer materially 
participates in an activity if any of the following seven tests are met:

Chapter 18 | Other Topics
238
(1)The individual participates in the activity for more than 500 hours during 
such year; 
(2) The individual’s participation in the activity for the taxable year constitutes 
substantially all of the participation in such activity of all individuals (including 
individuals who are not owners of interests in the activity) for such year; 
(3) The individual participates in the activity for more than 100 hours during 
the taxable year, and such individual’s participation in the activity for the 
taxable year is not less than the participation in the activity of any other 
individual (including individuals who are not owners of interests in the activity) 
for such year; 
(4) The activity is a significant participation activity (within the meaning of 
paragraph (c) of this section) for the taxable year, and the individual’s 
aggregate participation in all significant participation activities during such year 
exceeds 500 hours; 
(5) The individual materially participated in the activity (determined without 
regard to this paragraph (a)(5)) for any five taxable years (whether or not 
consecutive) during the ten taxable years that immediately precede the taxable 
year; 
(6) The activity is a personal service activity (within the meaning of paragraph 
(d) of this section), and the individual materially participated in the activity for 
any three taxable years (whether or not consecutive) preceding the taxable 
year; or 
(7) Based on all of the facts and circumstances (taking into account the rules in 
paragraph (b) of this section), the individual participates in the activity on a 
regular, continuous, and substantial basis during such year. 
If none of these tests are met, the activity is a passive activity. Losses from 
passive activities can only offset income from other passive activities. Let’s 
look at an example of how this works.
You contribute $25,000 to the funding of Acme LLC (taxed as a partnership); 
you have a 25% share of the income, losses, and capital. You are otherwise 
uninvolved in Acme’s business activities. In its first tax year, the LLC loses 
$10,000. What portion of the $2,500 loss shown on your K-1 can you take 
on your personal tax return?
You have basis in the LLC; however, you are not materially participating in it. 
You cannot take any of the loss.
Passive activity loss limitations are noted on Form 8582. This form is quite 
complex and contains several worksheets. I strongly advise a business owner 
with passive losses to consult a tax professional.

239
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
If you have passive losses, these losses carry forward to your next tax year. If 
you have income in the following year from passive activities, the passive 
losses you have in prior years offset the income.
Type of Business Entity
The type of business entity will determine how a deductible loss is taken on 
your tax return. The impacts are different for flow-through entities and 
entities that are directly taxed.
Sole Proprietors
The loss from a Schedule C will flow to the taxpayer’s Form 1040. There, it 
will offset other income items on the tax return. If the taxpayer has no other 
sources of income, or if the loss is large enough to offset all of the other 
sources of income, the taxpayer will have a net operating loss (NOL). As 
discussed in the next section, an NOL can generally be carried back exactly 
two years (say, from 2012 to 2010) or carried forward for up to twenty years.
Partnerships and S Corporations
Flow-through entities do not take the loss themselves. Instead, the loss is 
shown on Schedule K-1 and taken on the beneficial owners’ returns. Assuming 
the owners meet the basis and material participation tests, the loss will flow 
to the owners’ Form 1040. This loss, like a loss from a sole proprietorship, 
will offset other sources of income and can lead to an NOL.
C Corporations
C corporations pay their own taxes. A loss by a C corporation leads to an 
NOL for the corporation. As discussed in the next section, a C corporation 
NOL is treated differently than an individual’s NOL in the Tax Code.
Net Operating Losses
When an individual or C corporation loses money, an NOL is generated. The 
Tax Code gives an individual two choices when he or she has an NOL. The 
loss can be carried back exactly two years, or it can be carried forward for up 
to twenty years.2 To carry the loss forward, an irrevocable election must be 
2 There are some exceptions to the two-year carryback rule.  A farming loss NOL can be 
carried back five years.  An NOL due to a theft or casualty can be carried back three years.  

Chapter 18 | Other Topics
240
.
NOL
if the loss is carried back, a taxpayer has two available methods for claiming 
the loss. an amended tax return can be filed for the year in question (form 
1040x). The taxpayer needs to attach to the form 1040x all forms and 
schedules that show the generation of the loss (including any Schedule K-1s) 
and any tax forms recalculated for the carryback year.
alternatively, a taxpayer can file an application for Tentative refund (form 
1045). generally, the same documentation must be attached to the form 
1045 as would be attached to the form 1040x, including Schedule a of form 
1045. 
The benefit of using form 1045 over form 1040x is that the irS is required 
to process a form 1045 within ninety days of its receipt; there is no guaranteed 
processing time for form 1040x. if the irS does not process a form 1045 in 
a timely way, it must pay interest.
an individual should evaluate his or her marginal tax rate in the possible 
carryback year and the carryforward year. This is to determine whether to 
carry the loss backward or forward. generally, you choose to take the loss 
.

241
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
where the marginal tax rate is higher, so you will get a larger benefit. If the 
decision is believed to be close, then the loss is normally carried back.
C corporations carry the losses forward, not backward. The carried-forward 
losses offset income in future tax years. Like losses for individuals, a C 
corporation can carry an NOL forward for up to twenty years.
■ Note  States have different rules regarding NOLs. Each state treats a net operating loss 
differently. Some states conform to federal law and allow carrybacks; some only allow 
carryforwards. California, at times, has prohibited using NOLs (though they carryforward for an 
additional year for each year that taking the NOL was prohibited). 
Foreign Issues
There’s nothing illegal about having a foreign bank account. However, there 
are numerous reporting requirements if you have foreign bank accounts. 
These apply to both individuals and businesses.
Noting You Have a Foreign Financial Account
If you have a foreign financial account, you will need to check a box on your 
tax return noting that fact. For individuals, this box is located on the bottom 
of Schedule B (see Figure 18-2). Business entities do not have to answer this 
question (though partnerships must disclose on Form 1065 no matter 
whether they must file a Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts).
Figure 18-2. Foreign account questions of Schedule B (Part III)

Chapter 18 | Other Topics
242
Report of Foreign Bank and Financial  
Accounts (FBAR)
Foreign bank and financial accounts must be reported if certain criteria are 
met. This dates back to the Bank Secrecy Act of 1970. The scope and breadth 
of the law have been changed and expanded several times since then, most 
notably by the USA PATRIOT Act.
You need to report all of your foreign financial accounts if you have US$10,000 
or more in one or more such accounts. This is determined by taking the 
maximum balance of each account at any time during the year, summing the 
maximums, and comparing the sum to $10,000. If it’s $10,000 or more, all 
such foreign accounts must be reported. Note that all amounts in foreign 
currencies must be converted to US dollars.
The reporting is done on a Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts 
(Form TD F 90-22.1). This form, called an FBAR, asks for basic information on 
every foreign account you have. You must report the financial institution name 
and address, account number, and the maximum balance at any time during 
the year. Once you must report one account, you must report all accounts, 
even an account with a zero balance.
The requirement to file an FBAR exists for both individuals and business 
entities. Be aware that if a business entity (a partnership or corporation), has 
to file an FBAR the signatories of the business account can also have an FBAR 
filing requirement. 
If you have an FBAR filing requirement, you will also need to check a box on 
your tax return (if you file as an individual or a partnership). This box is 
located just below the box you check to note that you have a foreign financial 
account for individuals (see Figure 18-2).
There are severe penalties for not filing an FBAR when required to do so. 
Penalties for willfully not filing an FBAR start at a $100,000 fine and six months 
in prison. Nonwillful violators can face up to a $10,000 fine and up to six 
months in prison.
Note that the FBAR is not filed with your tax return; it is filed separately. It 
can be either mailed to the Department of the Treasury or filed electronically 
through the BSA E-File System.3 Currently, tax professionals are not allowed 
to file FBARs on behalf of clients. The FBAR filing deadline is June 30 following 
the year-end. Unlike tax forms, this is a receipt deadline. Additionally, there are 
no extensions for filing an FBAR. 
3 The BSA E-Filing System (BSA stands for Bank Secrecy Act) is operated through the 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network of the Department of the Treasury.

243
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
A sample FBAR is shown in Figure 18-3. Note that all amounts are reported 
in US dollars. The form must be signed and dated. If the form is for an 
individual, the title of the signer is left blank.
Form 8938
Beginning with the 2011 tax year, a new law went into effect for those with 
foreign financial accounts. The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FACTA) 
was passed by Congress in 2010. The net result of this law is that individuals 
who maintain large balances in foreign financial accounts will have a new tax 
form that must be completed, Form 8938. Generally, an individual residing in 
the United States will need to file Form 8938 if he or she has $50,000 in one 
or more foreign financial accounts on December 31 or $75,000 on any other 
day of the year. (If filing a joint return, the amounts are $100,000 on December 
31 or $150,000 on any other day of the year.) Like the FBAR, you need to 
convert all amounts in foreign currencies into US dollars. You generally are 
required to use the official Department of the Treasury Reporting Rates of 
Exchange.4
Investing in a Foreign Business
There are strict reporting requirements for individuals who invest in a foreign 
business, be it a partnership, LLC (or the foreign equivalent), or a corporation 
(or the foreign equivalent). The rules and reporting requirements are beyond 
the scope of this text. If you invest in such a business, I strongly advise you 
consult with a tax professional.
4 Available at http://www.fms.treas.gov/intn.html.

Chapter 18 | Other Topics
244
Paper or Electronic?
Should you file your returns electronically or use paper? The IRS has an 
electronic filing mandate; most tax professionals are required to electronically 
file your returns unless you tell them not to (or the return cannot be 
Figure 18-3. Sample completed FBAR

245
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
electronically filed for some reason). Many states also have an electronic filing 
requirement. New York is the most aggressive; most tax professionals are 
required to file all returns electronically unless it cannot be electronically filed 
for some reason. Even if a client asks me not to file electronically, I have no 
choice but to do so. 
Years ago, electronic returns were more likely to be audited than paper 
returns. That would be a good reason not to file electronically if that’s still the 
case.
However, it’s not the case. Let’s look at the path a paper return takes when it’s 
sent to the IRS. After payment is separated and deposited, the return goes to 
a clerk-typist who transcribes the return into the IRS computer system—the 
same computer system that electronic returns are downloaded into. After 
returns reach this system, the DIF score (see Chapter 17) for the return is 
created. 
What this means is that rather than a paper return having less chance of an 
audit, it actually has a greater chance of audit. That’s because it’s always 
possible for there to be a transcription error made by the clerk-typist.
I’m a fan of electronic filing. It’s easy, you don’t have to deal with lines at the 
post office, and it works. You can also pay electronically (either through your 
return filer or with Electronic Federal Tax Payment System, EFTPS).
If you don’t file electronically, I strongly advise that you mail your returns using 
certified mail, return receipt requested. You get proof of filing when you do 
this. Some post offices have automated postal centers where you can purchase 
certified mail. My supermarket has that machine, too. You can find locations 
with automated postal centers on the US Postal Service’s website (www.usps.
com).
Obtaining Tax Help
There’s an old saying: You get what you pay for. This can be the case when 
you’re searching for tax information. Although Google and other search 
engines may be helpful, not everything you read on the Internet is accurate.
When I’m looking for information, my first stop is the IRS’s website (www.irs.
gov). It has a wealth of information, every federal tax form that exists, and 
generally sound advice on tax issues. My only quibble with the website is that 
on issues that are not settled (as far as tax law), the IRS will state that their 
position is fact, when it is, for now, just a position.
Similarly, if I’m researching a state tax issue, I’ll check the state’s tax website. 
Most states have excellent websites, and these have the forms for each state.

Chapter 18 | Other Topics
246
If you use a tax professional (see the next section), he or she should be the 
first person to whom you turn. If you’re paying for advice, you should be 
listening to the individual giving it to you.
Many court decisions are available on the Internet. All of the recent decisions 
of the Tax Court can be found on its website (www.ustaxcourt.gov). You can 
also find decisions of the courts of appeal and the Supreme Court on the 
Web.
You can also do a search on the Internet. Be careful about what you see on 
the Internet. Court decisions, law, and regulations promulgated under the law 
are binding; however, even a court decision you read online may no longer be 
valid. The law (the Tax Code) could have changed or a higher court may have 
issued a decision that invalidates a lower court ruling.
You should be especially careful reading “advice” on the Internet. It’s free, and 
it’s worth exactly what you pay for it. I have a tax blog (http://www.taxabletalk.
com). There is a disclaimer on my blog that states: “All of the items below are 
for information only and are not meant as tax advice. Please consult your own 
tax advisor to see how each item impacts your own situation.”
That’s the problem with general advice: It’s general. Your situation is based on 
your facts and circumstances, not average or general facts and circumstances. 
Unless I know all of the facts and circumstances of your situation, I can’t give 
correct advice.
There’s another, more important issue with what you may read on the 
Internet: A lot of what is purported to be true is false. Anyone can say he is 
an expert. Some people are, and some are not.
Be especially careful of anyone who says “there is no income tax” or any 
variation thereof. If you use any of these kinds of arguments, you will find 
yourself in very deep trouble.
■ Note  How to turn $1 million into nothing. I don’t watch much television, but one show that 
has had a long and successful run is Survivor. The very first winner on Survivor was Richard Hatch. 
He won $1 million back in 2000.
When you win $1 million, it’s time to seek tax advice. Hatch did so. The first accountant he went to 
told him he would owe about $300,000. He didn’t like that, so he went to a second accountant, who 
told him he would owe slightly under $300,000. Hatch asked the accountant what he would owe 
if he hadn’t won Survivor; the accountant told him he would receive a $4,700 refund. Hatch asked 
the accountant for a copy of that return. The accountant provided Hatch with that, though it was 
stamped “Do Not File.” The accountant also told Hatch not to file the return.

247
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Hatch filed that return. After the IRS caught him, he unwisely decided not to accept a plea bargain. 
He served more than three years in prison and ended up paying the $300,000 of tax, plus penalties 
and interest. After legal bills and fines, Hatch’s winnings from Survivor are exhausted. He unwisely 
ignored the advice of two accountants.
Whatever you do, don’t fall for one of the tax-avoidance schemes that are 
rampant on the Internet. The IRS has a webpage that debunks most of these 
schemes.5 Another site that shows the fallacies of these frivolous arguments 
is the Tax Protester FAQ.6 If you try one of these snake oil schemes, only bad 
things will result.
Should You Use a Tax Professional?
There are many thousands of tax professionals in the United States. Some are 
enrolled preparers; they are in one of the three professions with full rights of 
representation in front the IRS. Those are attorneys, CPAs, and Enrolled 
Agents. Many tax professionals are unenrolled. The IRS is in the process of 
requiring all unenrolled tax professionals to obtain a license as a Registered 
Tax Return Preparer (RTRP). Initially, these preparers will take a test 
authorizing them to prepare basic tax returns.
Tax professionals provide two major benefits to the public. First, we offer our 
expertise. Many are skilled in specific areas of tax law. For example, I specialize 
in two areas: small businesses and gambling. A tax professional operating in 
his or her area of expertise should know most of the tax information in that 
area. The result should be that the client will pay the least amount of tax 
legally possible.
The second benefit is saving time. You do not have to prepare the return. 
However, you (or a bookkeeper) will have to organize your paperwork for the 
return to be prepared.
Unfortunately, the US Tax Code is far too complex. Though I and most tax 
professionals wish for a simpler Tax Code, the reality is the day we will be able 
to prepare returns on a postcard is years (likely decades) away. Until that day, 
any taxpayer with a complex return likely has to use a professional.7
5 See “The Truth About Frivolous Tax Arguments” at http://www.irs.gov/Tax-Professionals/
The-Truth-About-Frivolous-Tax-Arguments-1. 
6 See “The Tax Protester FAQ” at http://evans-legal.com/dan/tpfaq.html. 
7 I really would prefer a simple and straightforward Tax Code. Though it would cut down on 
some of my business, today’s Tax Code is so complex that the majority of taxpayers are 
forced to use a professional.

Chapter 18 | Other Topics
248
Not everyone needs to use a professional. If your return is simple and 
straightforward, and you have few or no deductions, a tax professional is not 
going to find any additional deductions. A good example is an individual who 
does one or two consulting engagements a year. The only deductions that 
would be available are the expenses of the engagements, the home office 
deduction (if the individual qualifies for it), and itemized deductions on 
Schedule A. For such a person, widely available tax software is likely sufficient.
A fellow tax blogger calls all tax software “flawed.” I disagree. The software 
does what you tell it to do. The issue is that if you tell it the wrong thing, the 
software doesn’t know that you’ve made a mistake. A mistake you make can 
cascade through a return, causing multiple errors. While the “TurboTax 
defense” worked for Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, it won’t work for 
you or me in an audit with the IRS.
■ Note:  The TurboTax defense. Timothy Geithner used the popular tax software TurboTax to 
prepare his own 2001 and 2002 tax returns. He did not pay $34,000 of self-employment tax he 
was supposed to have for those two years. This would have been just another story except for one 
thing: Geithner was nominated for Secretary of the Treasury in 2009. During his confirmation 
hearings, the issue of his mistake came out, but he took full responsibility. His “TurboTax” defense 
became the butt of jokes on late night television.
For the rest of us, the TurboTax defense rarely works in court. You are responsible for your return. 
For example, in Bartlett v. Commissioner,8 the petitioner blamed TurboTax for the errors. The court 
came up with a different conclusion: “It is apparent that a portion of the information petitioner 
entered into the TurboTax program was incorrect; hence the mistakes made (which resulted in the 
underpayment) were made by petitioner, not TurboTax. TurboTax is only as good as the information 
entered into its software program. See Bunney v. Commissioner, 114 T.C. 259, 267 (2000). Simply 
put: garbage in, garbage out.”
If You Use a Tax Professional
There are many things that tax professionals wish all clients did. Here’s a 
partial list of the things that you should know.
1.  Submit all of your government paperwork. We usually need to 
see all of your tax paperwork. That means every Form 1099, 
1098, K-1, W-2, and W-2G.
8 See Bartlett v. Commissioner, T.C. Memo 2012-254 at http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/
InOpHistoric/BartlettMemo.TCM.WPD.pdf.

249
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
2.  Make sure you let your professional know about any significant 
tax events in your life. Most tax professionals will provide clients 
with an organizer. One of the questions in my organizer is “Did 
your marital status change during the year?” Another question 
is, “Are there any new dependents or children this year?” I’ve 
had clients forget to tell me about marriages, divorces, and 
children. When they review the draft of their return and ask, 
“Where’s my spouse?” I have a puzzled look on my face and say, 
“You got married?” If you don’t tell your tax professional about 
these items, he or she won’t know.
3.  Complete the organizer. Tax law changes and the questionnaire 
helps your professional correctly complete your return.
4.  If you have an appointment, keep it and be prepared for it; if 
you’re not ready, change your appointment. Tax professionals 
are incredibly busy in the weeks prior to the April 15 filing 
deadline. Be considerate of your professional’s time.
5.  Keep good records! During the preparation of your return, your 
professional may need to look at some of your records. This will 
likely include records for fixed assets purchased during the year, 
issues related to possible misclassifications, and any timing issues 
(whether an item should be in the current tax year or a future 
year). If your professional is asking for an item, there’s usually a 
good reason behind it.
6.  Tell your professional about significant business issues. Tax 
professionals aren’t clairvoyant. If you don’t tell your professional 
about the issue, it will remain unknown to the professional.
7.  It’s better to extend than amend. If you are not going to be ready 
by the tax deadline (March 15 for calendar year corpora-tions, 
April 15 for individuals and partnerships), let your profes-sional 
know as early as possible. Provide your best guess of your 
income so that an extension can be prepared for you. Your 
professional can probably electronically file the extension for 
you, too.
■ Caution  An extension is just an extension of time to file, not pay. An extension allows you 
more time to prepare your return. You need to prepare an estimate of your income to determine 
whether you owe any tax. With the estimate, your professional will prepare an estimate of tax you 
owed, so that you can pay the tax by the original tax deadline and avoid penalties.

Chapter 18 | Other Topics
250
.
■ Caution State extension rules vary. Some states give an automatic extension, and no 
paperwork need be filed. Some states require an extension to be filed. Some states require not only 
a filed extension but also that 80% or 90% of the tax due be paid for the extension to be considered 
valid. 
.
Selling Your Business
.

251
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
■ Tip  Get professional help if you are selling your business. The advice in this section is 
general. Selling a business isn’t general; it’s very specific based on your situation. This is an area 
where you almost always should consult an attorney and a tax professional.
There are two methods (generally) for selling a business: sale of stock and sale of assets. The facts 
and circumstances will determine which is right for you. It’s probably also something that will be 
negotiated. (Most sales end up being sales of the assets of the business. This is because the 
purchasers rarely want the liability for the past actions of the business.) An attorney should give 
you advice so that your liability for the business ends with the sale. There will be legal documents 
(from the sale itself, a nondisclosure agreement, an agreement to stay on as a consultant, and 
potentially more). Your tax professional can tell you the ramifications of the deal depending on how 
it is structured.
You may also need a business broker to market the sale of your business. Business brokers can 
market a business. Not all business sales need a broker, but it is something to be considered. 
Estate Planning Considerations
“Bad things happen to good people,” goes the cliché. Most individuals have a 
written will. If you don’t have one yourself, your state has one already for you; 
every state has a law governing inheritances of individual who die intestate 
(without a will). If you have children or will have a complex business, you 
should see an estate planning attorney immediately if you don’t have a will (or 
other estate plan). Estate law varies from state to state, so this is an area 
where you need to find a local professional. Do it properly today, and should 
an unforeseen event happen, things will go far smoother.
Capital Gains, Installment Sales, and Assets
When a business is sold, it can be a sale of the business or a sale of the assets. 
Either way, the business owner will have a capital gain. The gain is dependent 
on the value on the books of what is being sold.
Assume I am selling the assets of my business for $100,000. Those assets have 
a value of $50,000 (after depreciation). In this simple example, I would have a 
capital gain of $50,000. Assuming I’ve owned the business (and the assets) for 
more than one year, the gain would be taxed as a long-term capital gain.
Many sales of businesses are structured as installment sales. There are other 
rules for installment sales, too; generally, each year’s payments will be 
attributed partially to interest and partially to the sale. Interest income is 
taxed as ordinary income. If you have an installment sale, you will need to 

Chapter 18 | Other Topics
252
complete Form 6252. More information on installment sale rules is available 
in Publication 537.9
When a business is sold, in most cases the IRS requires an Asset Acquisition 
Statement (Form 8594) be completed. Both the buyer and seller complete 
the form; the information on the assets should be identical on both forms. 
There are seven classes of assets that are noted, including cash (Class I), 
personal property (Class II), mark-to-market assets10 and accounts receivable 
(Class III), inventory (Class IV), Section 197 intangibles (Class VI), and goodwill 
(Class VII).11 All other assets are Class V assets. Allocations are very important, 
because the sale of a business increases the risk of audit.
Sole Proprietors
When a sole proprietor ends a business, sometimes he or she will sell the 
business; other times, the business just closes. If you close the business, there 
are generally no tax consequences because you are the business. If you sell 
the business, capital gains and/or installment sales will apply.
Partnerships
If the partnership (or an LLC taxed as a partnership) is sold, there will be 
capital gains and possibly installment sales considerations. If the partnership 
dissolves, the assets of the partnership must be distributed. There can be 
potential tax consequences from the distribution.
If a sale is designed as a sale of the assets, the partnership might live on for 
some time. This is especially true in an installment sale. The assets are 
transferred to the purchaser in exchange for cash and a note. The partnership 
likely won’t dissolve until the note is paid off. Once the final payment is made, 
the partnership can be dissolved.
A partnership (or an LLC taxed as a partnership) should consider having a 
buy/sell agreement among the partners (or members). What happens if in a 
two-person partnership the partners no longer get along? Having a buy/sell 
agreement ahead of time allows for the orderly dissolution of the partnership. 
It also can cover the buyout of the heirs of a partner.
9 IRS, Installment Sales, Publication 537,  http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p537.pdf. 
10 Mark-to-market assets are assets that have been adjusted to the their current value at the 
end of each year: marked (adjusted) to the market (current value).  This will be found in 
banks and other financial institutions.  Few other entities use mark-to-market accounting.
11 This list is not complete; see the instructions for Form 8594 at http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-
pdf/i8594.pdf for the complete list.

253
Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner
Corporations
When the stock of a C or S corporation is sold, it’s like selling any other 
stock. There will be a capital gain reported (and possibly an installment sale). 
If the assets are sold, the corporation may continue until the final payment is 
made on the sale.
If a corporation dissolves, the assets of the corporation will be distributed. If 
the assets are not fully depreciated, this can result in a taxable event for those 
receiving the assets (a deemed asset sale). 
Conclusion
About every twenty-five years, tax law goes through a major change. The last 
such occurrence was the Tax Reform Act of 1986. We’re due for that major 
change, and I expect it to occur by the end of this decade. I’m hopeful we will 
see a major simplification of the Tax Code, but until that happens we have to 
live with the code as it is.
I’ve emphasized one thing repeatedly in this book: Keep good records! It is by 
far the most important thing you can do. If you have good records, it will be 
relatively easy to recover from a tax mistake. Also, an audit will likely be an 
annoyance rather than a costly annoyance.
As I said at the beginning of this book, tax law is a combination of common 
sense and arcane rules. If you use common sense regarding your taxes and 
keep good records, your tax returns won’t be taxing events.
A democratic government is the only one in which those who vote for a tax can 
escape the obligation to pay it. 
—Alexis de Tocqueville

I
Index
A
ACA. See Affordable Care Act (ACA)
Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS), 
111
Accountable plan, 72, 73, 103
Accrual vs. cash basis accounting, 31
Acme Consulting LLC, 38
ACRS. See Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (ACRS)
Adjusted gross income (AGI), 180
ADR. See Asset depreciation ranges (ADR)
ADS. See Alternative Depreciation System 
(ADS)
Advertising, deductions in, 125
promotional expenses, 126
trade shows, 126
websites, 126
Affordable Care Act (ACA), 179, 235
provisions, 186
employer mandate tax, 186
health insurance on W-2s, 186
individual mandate tax, 186
medicare payroll tax hike, 186
unearned income tax, 187
AGI. See Adjusted gross income (AGI)
Alternative Depreciation System (ADS),  
111
Alternative minimum tax (AMT), 236
Amortizable, Section 197 intangible assets, 
121
AMT. See Alternative minimum tax (AMT)
Ancillary expenses, 82
Asset Acquisition Statement, 252
Asset depreciation ranges (ADR), 110
Assets
amortizable, Section 197 intangible 
assets, 121
selling, 251
Associated test, entertainment expenses, 96
Audit(s), 219
AUR notice, 222
conclusion, 230
correspondence, 224
math errors, 221
office examinations, 226
reconsideration, 232
returns, selection of, 223
state audits, 233
Automated Underreporting (AUR) notice, 
220, 222
Automobile expenses, 75
actual expenses, 79
benefit, 81
depreciation, 80
to standard mileage, changing from, 81
ancillary expenses, 82
commuting mileage, 81
company cars, 83
mixed trips, 82
recordkeeping requirements, 76
reporting car expenses, 82
standard mileage rate, 78
vehicles, used for business purpose, 84
B
Bad debts, deductions for, 127
Baggage expenses, 87
Bank fees, deductions for, 128–133

Index
256
Bonus depreciation, 115
B&O tax. See Business & Occupations 
(B&O) tax
Business
cost of goods sold in, 53
ending, 250
assets, 251
capital gains, 251
corporations, 253
estate planning considerations, 251
installment sales, 251
partnerships, 252
sole proprietors, 252
entity. (see Business entity)
expenses, 41, 50
license fees, 214
license taxes, 28
loss in
basis, 236
business entity, 239
material participation, 237
miles, 83
organizational expenses, 37
profits tax, 24
record keeping requirements, 40
computer accounting systems, 42
electronic records, 42
expenses, 41
income, 40
timeframe, 43
start-up expenses, 34
start-up phase, 33
travel expenses, 85
Business entity, 3
choice, 17
corporations
C corporations, 9, 239
LLCs, 13
LLP, 15
PSC, 15
S corporations, 12
entity change, need for, 15
partnerships, 7, 239
advantages, 8
disadvantages, 8
S corporations, 239
sole proprietor, 239
advantages, 5
disadvantages, 6
hobby loss test, 4
strengths, 17
weakness, 17
Business & Occupations (B&O) tax, 24,  
213
Business-related expenses, 41
Business taxes and business licenses, 
deductions for, 142
Buying vs. leases, 120
C
Cafeteria plans, 184
CAM charges. See Common area 
maintenance (CAM) charges
Capital expense, 33
Capital gains, 251
Capital leases, 120
Car expenses, 87
Car expenses, reporting, 82–83
Cash basis inventory, 60
Cash basis vs. accrual accounting, 31
Casualty losses, and deductions, 133
C corporations, 72, 210, 239
advantages, 10
business structure, 11
charitable contribution deductions, 134
disadvantages, 11
health insurance for, 182
Charitable contributions, and deductions, 
134
Charitable sporting events, 102
Cleaning expenses, 87
Cohan rule, 75
Commissions, and deductions, 136
Common area maintenance (CAM) charges, 
64
Commuting mileage, 81
Companion sitters, 153
Computer accounting systems, 42
Computer services and supplies, and 
deductions, 136
Continuing education, and deductions, 136

257
Index
Contract labor, and deductions, 136
Conventions and first-year depreciation
half-year convention, 116
mid-month convention, 117
midquarter convention, 116
Copyright, and depreciation, 110
Corporations
C corporations, 9
advantages, 10
business structure, 11
disadvantages, 11
income taxes deductions, 142
LLCs, 13
LLP, 15
meal and entertainment expenses, 103
PSC, 15
S corporations
advantages, 12
disadvantages, 13
Correspondence audits, 220, 224
Cost accounting, 55
Cost, and inventory valuation, 56
Cost of goods sold
expenses included, 60
cost of labor, 60
fixed assets, depreciation of, 61
freight in, 61
materials and supplies, 61
overhead expenses, 61
production and selling goods, 61
purchases, 60
shipping containers, 61
in business, 53
inventory, 54
calculation, 55
cash basis, 60
content, 55
inventory valuation, 56
and physical inventory, 59
D
Deductible expense, 48
Deductible travel expenses, 86
baggage, 87
car, 87
cleaning, 87
gratuity, 88
ground transportation, 87
lodging, 87
meals, 87
shipping, 87
transportation, 87
Deductions
advertising, 125
promotional expenses, 126
trade shows, 126
websites, 126
bad debts, 127
bank fees, 128–133
business taxes and business licenses,  
142
casualty losses, 133
charitable contributions, 134
commissions, 136
computer services and supplies, 136
continuing education, 136
contract labor, 136
dues and subscriptions, 136
education, 137
for unusual expenses, 144
gifts, 138
income taxes, 141
partnerships and corporations, 142
sole proprietorships, 142
insurance, 138
interest, 139
legal and professional fees, 139
office expense, 140
payroll taxes, 142
property tax, 143
rent and equipment rental, 140
sales and use tax, 143
self-employment tax, 142
supplies, 141
uniforms, 144
utilities, 144
Defined-benefit plan, 189, 196
Defined-contribution plan, 189, 196
Delaware gross receipts tax, 212
Depreciation, 69, 204, 205
automobile expenses, 80

Index
258
Depreciation (cont.)
of fixed assets, 61, 105
ADS, 111
amortizable, Section 197 intangible 
assets, 121
basis, 106
bonus depreciation, 115
computer software, 110
GDS, 111
large-cost items, 109
leases vs. buying, 120
listed equipment, 107
patents and copyrights, 110
real estate, 109
calculation, of depreciation, 118
conventions and first-year 
depreciation, 116
date of purchase vs. date in use, 118
property class, 116
Section 179 depreciation, 113
small business strategy, 122
straight-line depreciation, 110
Uniform Capitalization Rules, 106
meaning of, 105
Differential score (DIF score), 223
Direct expenses, 66
Directly-related test, entertainment 
expenses, 96
Direct sellers, 152
Double-declining balance method, 112
Dry cleaning and laundry expenses, 87
Dues and subscriptions, deductions for,  
136
E
Economic stimulus depreciation. See Bonus 
depreciation
Education expenses, deductions for, 137
EFTPS. See Electronic Federal Tax Payment 
System (EFTPS)
EIN. See Employer identification number 
(EIN)
Electronic Federal Tax Payment System 
(EFTPS), 169, 245
Electronic records, 42
Electronic returns, 244
Employees
and employers, taxes on, 165
contribution limits, 195
hiring, 145, 163
leased, 150
meaning, 145
payroll, reporting rules for, 156
statutory, 146
stautory, 161
taxes on, 164
temporary, 150
vs. independent contractor, 148
Employer identification number (EIN), 163
Employer mandate tax, 186
Employers, taxes on, 167
FUTA, 167
state taxes, 169
state unemployment insurance, 168
Employment, of spouse, 182
Entertainment expenses
associated test, 96
audiovisual and room charges, 101
business gifts, 101
charitable sporting events, 102
coffee and water service, 101
100% deductible, 100
directly-related test, 96
professional service clubs, dues for, 101
reporting
corporations, 103
LLC operating agreement, 102
partnerships, 102
sole proprietor, 102
skyboxes and luxury suites, 102
transportation workers, 102
Estate planning considerations, 251
Excise tax, 28, 212
Expenses. See also Specific Expenses
ancillary, 82
automobile. (see Automobile expenses)
business, 41, 50
capital, 33
deductible, 48
determination, 30
documentation requirements, 48

259
Index
entertainment. (see Entertainment 
expenses)
indirect, 66, 69
meal. (see Meal expenses)
necessary standard, 50
nondeductible items, 52
ordinary standard, 49
organizational, 33, 37
overview, 47
per diem. (see Per diem expenses)
record keeping requirements, 41
start-up, 34
travel. (see Travel expenses)
F
FACTA. See Foreign Account Tax 
Compliance Act (FACTA)
Fair market value, 106, 134
Family members, employment of, 154
child employed by parents, 154
parent employed by child, 155
spouse working for other spouse, 155
FBAR. See Foreign Bank and Financial 
Accounts (FBAR)
Federal income tax, 20–23, 203
Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA), 
163, 165
Federal Register, 21
Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA), 
155, 167
FICA. See Federal Insurance Contributions 
Act (FICA)
Field examination, 220, 227
FIFO. See First-in, first-out (FIFO)
First-in, first-out (FIFO), 57
Fixed assets, and depreciation, 61, 105
ADS, 111
amortizable, Section 197 intangible 
assets, 121–122
basis, 106
bonus depreciation, 115
computer software, 110
GDS, 111
large-cost items, 109
leases vs. buying, 120
listed equipment, 107
patents and copyrights, 110
real estate, 109
rules and recordkeeping, 115
calculation, of depreciation, 118
conventions and first-year 
depreciation, 116
date of purchase vs. date in use, 118
property class, 116
Section 179 depreciation, 113
small business strategy, 122
straight-line depreciation, 110
Uniform Capitalization Rules, 106
Fixed Assets Manager, 118
Flow-through entity., 7
Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act 
(FACTA), 243
Foreign bank account
FBAR, 242
foreign financial account, 241
Form 8938, 243
Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts (FBAR), 
242
Foreign financial account, 241
401(k) plan, 198
FUTA. See Federal Unemployment Tax Act 
(FUTA)
G
General Depreciation System (GDS), 111
General excise and use tax, 24
Gifts, deductions for, 138
Gross margin tax, 24
Gross receipts taxes
business license fees, 214
Delaware, 212
Hawaii general excise tax, 213
Texas franchise tax, 213
Washington B&O tax, 213
Ground transportation expenses, 87
Guaranteed payments, 138
H
Half-year convention, 116

Index
260
Hawaii, general excise and use tax in, 24, 213
Health insurance
for C corporation, 182
for S corporation, 181
for sole proprietor/partnership, 181
on W-2s, 186
through spouse’s plan, 185
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA), 
183
Health savings account (HSA), 185
Hidden taxes, 216
Hiring employees, 145
Hobby loss test, 4–5
Home office, 64
C corporations, 72
deduction
calculation, 67
depreciation, 69
direct expenses, 66
for partners and LLC members, 70
home office expenditures, 70
indirect expenses, 66, 69
mortgage interest, 68
for two activities, 66
S corporations, 72
HRA. See Health reimbursement 
arrangement (HRA)
HSA. See Health savings account (HSA)
I, j
Income
determination, 29
record keeping requirements, 40
Income tax deductions, 141
partnerships and corporations, 142
sole proprietorships, 142
Income Tax Regulations, 59
Independent contractor, 148
meaning, 147
payroll, reporting rules for, 158
reporting, 151
vs. employees. (see Employees)
Indirect expenses, 66, 69
Individual mandate tax, 186
Individual Retirement Account (IRA), 190
Installment sales, 251
Insurance deductions, 138
Intangible assets, 121
Interest deductions, 139
Internal Revenue Bulletin, 22
Internal Revenue Code, 12, 22, 35, 114
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 4, 20, 34, 94, 
217
Appeals, 230
audit(s), 219
AUR notice, 222
conclusion, 230
correspondence, 224
math errors, 221
office examinations, 226
reconsideration, 232
returns, selection of, 223
credit card statements, 41
field examinations, 227
notice from, 218
state audits, 233
Tax Court, 231
Inventory, 54
calculation, 55
cash basis, 60
contents in, 55
physical, 59
turnover, 56
valuation, 56
and cost, 56
FIFO, 57
LIFO, 56
lower of cost/market, 58
and physical inventory, 59
IRA. See Individual Retirement Account 
(IRA)
IRS. See Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
K
Keogh plans, 195
L
Last-in, first-out (LIFO), 56
Leased employees, 150

261
Index
leases vs. buying, 120
legal fee deduction, 139
licensed real estate agents, 152
lifo. See last-in, first-out (lifo)
limited liability company (llc), 8, 13
filing, and partnerships, 207
members, home office deduction for, 70
operating agreement, 92
meal and entertainment expenses, 102
limited liability partnership (llP), 15
listed equipment, 107
llc. See limited liability company (llc)
llP. See limited liability partnership (llP)
loan basis, 236
local business licenses, 215
local income taxes, 26, 211
lodging expenses, 87
loss, tax impact of, 236
lower of cost/market, 58
luxury water transportation expenses, 90
M
macrS. See modified accelerated cost 
recovery System (macrS)
magi. See modified adjusted gross income 
(magi)
material participation, and business, 237
math errors, on tax returns, 219, 221
mcTmT. See metropolitan commuter 
Transportation mobility Tax 
(mcTmT)
meal expenses, 93
audiovisual and room charges, 101
business gifts, 101
charitable sporting events, 102
coffee and water service, 101
100% deductible, 100
professional service clubs, dues for, 101
reporting
corporations, 103
llc operating agreement, 102
partnerships, 102
sole proprietor, 102
skyboxes and luxury suites, 102
transportation workers, 102
meals and entertainment expenses, 87, 90
medical benefit plans
health insurance, through spouse’s plan, 
185
hSa, 185
Section 105 plan, 183
Section 125 plans, 184
tax credits, 183
medical expenses
aca, 179
employer mandate tax, 186
health insurance on w-2s, 186
individual mandate tax, 186
medicare payroll tax hike, 186
unearned income tax, 187
provisions of, 186
c corporation, health insurance for,  
182
deduction, 180
medical benefit plans
health insurance, through spouse’s 
plan, 185
hSa, 185
Section 105 plan, 183
Section 125 plans, 184
tax credits, 183
S corporation, health insurance for,  
181
sole proprietor/partnership, health 
insurance for, 181
spouse, employment of, 182
medicare payroll tax hike, 186
merchandise. See cost of goods sold
metropolitan commuter Transportation 
mobility Tax (mcTmT), 26
mid-month convention, 117
midquarter convention, 116
mlm. See multilevel marketing (mlm)
modified accelerated cost recovery System 
(macrS), 78, 79, 111
modified adjusted gross income (magi), 186, 
191
monthly schedule depositors, 176
mortgage interest, 68
multilevel marketing (mlm), 5

Index
262
N
Necessary expenses, 50
Net operating loss (NOL), 239
Nexus, definition of, 26
NNN leases. See Triple-net leases
NOL. See Net operating loss (NOL)
Nondeductible expenses, 52
Nondeductible travel expenses, 88
luxury water transportation, 90
North America, conventions outside of, 
91
United States, travel outside of, 89
North America, conventions outside of, 91
O
Obamacare. See Affordable Care Act (ACA)
Office, 63
examinations, 220, 226
home, 64
C corporations, 72
direct expenses deduction, 66
for two activities, 66
indirect expenses deduction, 66
S corporations, 72
rented, 63
Office expense, deductions for, 140
Operating lease, 120
Ordinary expenses, 49
Organizational expenses, 33, 37, 140
sample election for amortization, 39
P
Paper returns, 244
Partners and LLC members, home office 
deduction for, 70
Partnerships, 7, 239, 252
advantages, 8
disadvantages, 8
health insurance for, 181
income taxes deductions, 142
and LLCs filing, 207
meal and entertainment expenses, 102
travel expenses of, 92
Patent, and depreciation, 110
Payroll, reporting rules for, 155
employees, 156
independent contractor, 158
Payroll service, usage of, 170
Payroll taxes, 27, 163
deductions, 142
EFTPS, 169
employees
and employers, taxes on, 165
hiring, 163
taxes on, 164
employers, taxes on
FUTA, 167
state taxes, 169
state unemployment insurance, 168
payroll service, usage of, 170
reporting
Form 940, 173
Form 941, 175
Form 944, 173
trust fund taxes, 164
Peachtree, 42
Penalties, 159
Per Diem expenses, 98
Personal miles, 83
Personal property taxes, 27, 215
Physical inventory, 59
Professional fee deduction, 139
Professional service corporation (PSC), 15
Promotional expenses, 126
Property tax deductions, 143
PSC. See Professional service corporation 
(PSC)
Q
Qualified nonprofit health insurance issuers 
(QNHIIs), 22
QuickBooks, 42, 110, 118
R
Real property taxes, 27, 215
Reasonable salary, 153

263
Index
Record keeping requirements
automobile expenses, 76
in business, 40
computer accounting systems, 42
electronic records, 42
expenses, 41
income, 40
timeframe, 43
Registered Tax Return Preparer (RTRP), 247
Rent and equipment rental deductions, 140
Rented office, 63
Reporting requirements
penalties, 159
statutory employees, 161
Retirement plans
401(k) plan, 198
basics, 189
choice, 199
Keogh plans, 195
SEP IRA, 193
employees, 195
self-employed, 194
SIMPLE IRA, 198
solo 401(k) plan, 196–198
solo Roth 401(k) plan, 196–198
traditional IRA vs. Roth IRA, 190–193
Revenue rulings, 22
Roth IRA vs. traditional IRA, 190–193
RTRP. See Registered Tax Return Preparer 
(RTRP)
S
Sales and use taxes, 214
Sales tax, 25
Sales tax deductions, 143
S corporations, 12, 72, 208, 239
advantages, 12
disadvantages, 13
health insurance for, 181
rules for owners, 153
Secondary records, 41
Section 105 plan, requirements of, 183, 184
Section 125 plans. See Cafeteria plans
Section 179 depreciation, 113
Section 197 intangible assets, 121
Selection of returns, for audit, 223
Self-employment tax deductions, 142
Semi-weekly schedule depositors, 176
SEP IRA. See Simplified Employee Pension 
Individual Retirement Account 
(SEP IRA)
Shell corporation, 20
Shipping expenses, 87
SIMPLE IRA, 198
Simplified Employee Pension Individual 
Retirement Account (SEP IRA), 
193
employees, 195
self-employed, 194
Sole proprietors, 204, 239, 252
advantages, 5
disadvantages, 6
health insurance for, 181
hobby loss test, 4
meal and entertainment expenses, 102
state income tax
apportionment, 206
depreciation, 204, 205
travel expenses of, 91
Sole proprietorships, income tax deductions, 
142
Solo 401(k) plan, 196
Solo Roth 401(k) plan, 196
Sport utility vehicles (SUVs), 81
Spouse, employment of, 182
Spouse’s plan, health insurance through, 185
Standard mileage rate, 78
Start-up expenses, in business, 34
Start-up phase, in business, 33
State audits, 233
State income tax, 24, 203
C corporations, 210
partnerships and LLCs filing, 207
S corporations, 208
sole proprietors
apportionment, 206
depreciation, 204, 205
state income taxes, 206
State taxes, 169
State unemployment insurance, 168
Statutory employees, 146, 161

Index
264
Statutory nonemployees, 151
companion sitters, 153
direct sellers, 152
licensed real estate agents, 152
Stock basis, 236
Straight-line depreciation, 80, 110
Summon, 229
Supplies, and deductions, 141
SUVs. See Sport utility vehicles (SUVs)
T
Taxation, 19
business license taxes, 28
cash vs. accrual accounting, 31
excise taxes, 28
expenses, 30
federal income tax, 20–23
Hawaii, general excise and use tax in, 24
income, 29
local income taxes, 26
payroll taxes, 27
personal property taxes, 27
real property taxes, 27
state income taxes, 24
Texas, gross margin tax in, 24
user fees, 29
Washington, Business and Occupation 
tax in, 24
Tax Code, 30, 34, 64, 65, 72, 81, 93, 102, 
121, 133, 185, 239
Tax Court, 231, 246
Tax credits, 183
Taxes. See Specific Taxes
Tax help, 245
Tax home determination, 86
Tax impact, of medical expenses. See Medical 
expenses
Taxpayer identification number (TIN), 163
Tax planning, 235
Tax professional
benefits, 247
usage, 248
Tax Reform Act (1986), 111, 253
Tax returns, math errors on, 221
Tax treaties, 21
Temporary employees, 150
Texas franchise tax, 213
Texas, gross margin tax in, 24
TIN. See Taxpayer identification number 
(TIN)
Trade shows, and advertising expenses, 126
Traditional IRA vs. Roth IRA, 190–193
Transportation expenses, 87
Travel, tax home, 86
Travel expenses
business, 85
deductible, 86
baggage, 87
car, 87
cleaning, 87
gratuity, 88
ground transportation, 87
lodging, 87
meals, 87
shipping, 87
transportation, 87
nondeductible, 88
luxury water transportation, 90
North America, conventions outside 
of, 91
United States, travel outside of, 89
reporting
corporations, 92
partnerships, 92
sole proprietor, 91
Triple-net leases, 63
Trust fund taxes, 164
TurboTax defense, 248
U
Unearned income tax, 187
Uniform Capitalization Rules, 106
United States, travel outside of
special rules for, 89
User fees, 29, 216
Use tax, 24, 25, 214
Use tax deductions, 143
US Tax Code, 247
US tax system, 20, 219
Utilities cost deductions, 144

265
Index
V
Valuation, of inventory
and physical inventory, 59
at cost
FIFO, 57
LIFO, 56
lower of cost/market, 58
W, X, Y, Z
W-2s, health insurance on, 186
Washington B&O tax, 24, 213
Websites, and advertising expense, 126

Tax Strategies for the 
Small Business Owner
Reduce Your Taxes and  
Fatten Your Profits
Russell Fox

Tax Strategies for the Small Business Owner: Reduce Your Taxes and Fatten Your Profits
Copyright © 2013 by Russell Fox
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or 
part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illus-
trations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or 
by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this 
legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material 
supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for 
exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is 
permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its cur-
rent version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use 
may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to 
prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-4842-2
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-4843-9
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark 
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, 
and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no inten-
tion of infringement of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even 
if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or 
not they are subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of 
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal respon-
sibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express 
or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
President and Publisher: Paul Manning
Acquisitions Editor: Jeff Olson
Developmental Editor: Robert Hutchinson
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, Louise Cor-
rigan, Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, Michelle 
Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pepper, Douglas 
Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan Spearing, Matt Wade, Tom 
Welsh
Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando
Copy Editor: Laura Poole
Compositor: Bytheway Publishing Services
Indexer: SPi Global
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 233 
Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, e-mail 
orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is a California 
LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance Inc (SSBM Fi-
nance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation. 
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit www.apress.com. 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promo-
tional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, 
reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text is avail-
able to readers at www.apress.com. For detailed information about how to locate your book’s 
source code, go to www.apress.com/source-code/.

To Brett Fox
for his support throughout the years.

About the Author
Russell Fox is an Enrolled Agent, a federally 
licensed tax professional. He’s the founder and a 
principal at Clayton Financial and Tax and has 
been in the business since 1999. His tax practice 
(both preparation and representation) serves 
nearly 1,000 clients with emphases in small 
business and gambling. His tax blog, taxabletalk.
com, has been named one of the ten best 
accounting and tax blogs. Previously, he was in 
financial and operations management for fifteen 
years working in various industries, including 
agriculture, telecommunications, and high tech-
nology. Co-author of three books on poker, he 
resides in Las Vegas, Nevada.

Acknowledgments
My thanks to my business partner,  Aaron Lion, for taking up some of the slack 
while I was writing this book.
I also want to thank everyone whom I have dealt with at Apress. From Jeff 
Olson’s initial inquiry to the editing by Robert Hutchinson, Rita Fernando, and 
Laura Poole, and the marketing efforts of Sadhika Salariya, I’ve been impressed 
with the professionalism and talents of everyone at Apress. In addition, they 
made this process as close to painless as possible.

